URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/85.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Howarth v Adey [1996] VicRp 85; [1996] 2 VR 535 (9 February 1996)
HOWARTH v ADEY
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, BROOKING and CALLAWAY JJA
11 December 1995, 09 February 1996
The appellant, Bradley Howarth, is presently 12 years old. On 1 February 1984 he was born at the Royal Women's Hospital after a protracted
and difficult labour for his mother, Alison Ruth Howarth. When born, the appellant was found to be suffering from severe cerebral
palsy caused by lack of oxygen. He remains intellectually retarded to a significant degree and, in all probability, will be unable
to enjoy an independent existence.
The respondent, Douglas Adey, is and was a specialist obstetrician and gynaecologist who was, at all material times, consultant to
the mother and responsible for her management and care during the pregnancy, labour and delivery.
By writ, issued in July 1988, the appellant sued the respondent and the hospital for damages, alleging that his disabilities were
occasioned by the respondent's negligence in the care, conduct and management of the mother's confinement and the birth of the appellant.
The statement of claim delivered with the writ alleged (inter alia) that the respondent had, in breach of his duty:
(i) failed to exercise any reasonable care and control in the confinement of the mother;
(ii) failed to exercise any or any reasonable care to preserve the health of the appellant during the confinement; -
(iii) knowing that the mother's pregnancy was "high risk" failed:
(a) to ensure that the condition of the mother and the appellant was properly monitored during confinement;
(b) to adequately carry out inspections and examinations of the mother during confinement, and particularly between the hours of 7.20pm
on 31 January 1984 and the time of birth of the appellant on 1 February 1984;
(c) to ascertain that the foetus was distressed and in difficulty prior to 7.20pm on 31 January 1984;
(d) to perform a "Caesarean section" at 7.20pm on 31 January 1984 or thereafter;
(e) to regulate or cease the administration of high doses of oxytocin without ensuring that the condition of the mother and the foetus
was adequate to cope;
(f) to attend or examine the mother at any time between 7.20pm on 31 January 1984 and the time of birth.
On 10 August 1988 the respondent delivered a defence in which he denied negligence and otherwise joined issue with the allegations
made by the appellant.
The trial commenced on 17 May 1994 before Harper J and a jury of six. Before the jury was empanelled an amendment was made, by consent,
to the particulars of negligence, to allege against the respondent the following:
(n) failing to inform and/or advise the plaintiff's mother that she required a Caesarean section. At the same time the claim against
the hospital was discontinued. No further applications were made to amend the pleadings by or on behalf of the plaintiff. On the
pleadings as they then stood, counsel for the plaintiff opened the case to the jury alleging that the disabilities suffered by the
plaintiff were the consequence of intra-partum hypoxia (ie an insufficiency of oxygen being supplied to the child during the "birth
process"). This, so it was alleged, was due to the mismanagement of that process by the respondent. The mismanagement was said to
stem from the use of inappropriate procedures being adopted in circumstances where it was known that this was a "high risk" birth
due (inter alia) to the fact that the plaintiff/child was in the "breech position". It was alleged that such a breech presentation
(combined with problems presented by premature rupture of membranes and retardation of foetal growth) posed particular risks to the
foetus because of the possibility of "delay" complications arising whilst the baby was passing from the uterus through "the birth
canal". It was said that to allow a "high risk birth" such as this to proceed without electronic monitoring of the foetal heart beat
amounted to a breach of duty by the respondent.
It was further alleged, on the plaintiff's behalf, that when the respondent carried out a vaginal examination at 7.20pm on the evening
of 31 January 1984 the progress of the labour was such and the circumstances were such, that the respondent should then have determined,
in accordance with proper practice, to abandon any prospect of a vaginal delivery in favour of abdominal delivery by Caesarean section.
It was said that his decision to opt for a vaginal delivery, in circumstances where the delay carried significant risks for the child,
amounted to negligence on his part.
It follows from the foregoing that the case which was being mounted against the respondent was a case of negligent management of
the birth in one of two alternative ways. Either he should, by 7.20pm on 31 January, have decided to -
deliver the child by Caesarean section or, alternatively, he should have kept a closer watch over the condition of both mother and
child. It was alleged that his failure to do either of these things amounted to a breach of the duty which he owed to the plaintiff.
Towards the end of his opening address, counsel for the plaintiff said:
Now, members of the jury, of course the fact is this: that you will hear the evidence that there was no foetal electronic heart monitoring
AND INDEED THE PLAINTIFF'S MOTHER WAS NOT CONSULTED AT ANY TIME AS TO WHAT THE OPTIONS WERE. This is what this case is all about
in terms of liability. [Emphasis added.]
This was the first time that it had been directly suggested that a case was being mounted against the respondent going beyond negligent
management and involving a failure to advise the mother of the risks inherent in that management so as to enable her to make an informed
choice as to whether she would accept them: cf Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
(1992) 175 CLR 479.
Counsel for the defendant did not, at that time, object to this statement by plaintiff's counsel or suggest that it was broadening
the case which had been made against the defendant on the pleadings. However, on 19 May 1994 (after the case had been running for
a day, and whilst Dr Renou, one of the plaintiff's witnesses was giving evidence), counsel for the plaintiff informed the judge that
he wanted "leave to add a number of words to one of the particulars in the statement of claim". The words which he sought leave to
add were to the effect that the respondent was negligent in failing to inform or advise the plaintiff's mother that she "had the
option of a Caesarean section".
This seemingly "simple" amendment provoked strong objection from the respondent's counsel on the basis that it sought to make a quite
different case from the one which had been raised on the pleadings. Counsel contended that, for the first time, the plaintiff wanted
to found a case based upon what the doctor "failed to inform or advise" as opposed to what he did (or did not do) in the management
of the birth process. The grounds of the objection included the following:
(a) that the defendant had had no notification of such a claim and had not addressed the issue in preparing the case, and was not
in a position to do so;
(b) the plaintiff's practitioners had failed to make any reference to this aspect of the claim in the "statements of expert witnesses"
required to be exchanged prior to trial by O44 of the Rules of Court;
(c) the amendment, and admission of evidence pursuant to it, would amount to a frustration of the "court management procedures" within
which the case had been brought to trial, because, if permitted, the trial would have to be adjourned.
It was not suggested that the amendments were "futile" in the sense that they raised a case which could not succeed at law or that
they raised a case which was barred by relevant limitation statutes.
On 19 May, after discussion, the learned trial judge made a "provisional ruling". During the course of it he said: The rules have
a very real and important purpose. They are fundamentally designed to ensure that the opposite party knows what case it has to meet
and is not taken by surprise by the calling of evidence which the opposite party might have the opportunity to meet given proper
notice. In my opinion, the O44 statement of Dr Renou fails to indicate fairly to the defendant the likelihood that Dr Renou will
be asked to comment -
upon the propriety in medical terms of the defendant's failure, if it be such, to discuss with the plaintiff's mother the option
of having a caesarean section.
These comments were directed to the intimation given by plaintiff's counsel that he wished to ask the witness (Dr Renou) questions
going to "the appropriate practice for an obstetrician in terms of advising or discussing with the ... mother, the options available
to her during the course of labour ...".
In the event his Honour said that he was not in a position to assess the effect which the proposed amendment would have on the presentation
of the defendant's case. He expressed the view that the suggested amendment might not "sufficiently cover the point" which the plaintiff
wanted to raise. He therefore said he would "defer a final resolution of this application" until the following morning.
On the following morning, 20 May, the debate on the proposed amendment continued. Counsel for the defendant doctor referred to the
decision in Rogers v Whitaker and persisted in his objections to the amendment. His objection was based on the fact that the amendment
sought would allow the plaintiff to "raise a new claim based on an informed consent" which would permit the jury to find that the
doctor was negligent "not for anything that he did or failed to do in relation to the management but by failing to give (the mother)
the option of a Caesarean section". He went on to say that this raised a "new cause of action" and that, at the very least, he would
need an adjournment to consider his position. He then raised, as a point of prejudice, that the respondent had never been able to
consider the question of "offer of compromise" in the light of a "Rogers v Whitaker claim" and that such amounted to a prejudice
which "cannot be redressed". He further submitted that, although his client had been asked (before trial) an interrogatory as follows:
Did the (defendant) discuss with the mother the option of a natural birth and induced birth by caesarean section?, such interrogatory
had not alerted his client to the type of claim which was now sought to be introduced, because of the form of the pleadings. Counsel
submitted that: ... by asking an interrogatory that is not open on the pleadings, the plaintiff has not properly put its case against
the defence here. We submit that it is recognised by the fact that none of the O44 statements directed themselves to the question
of informed consent ... If it be said that subpara(n) of the particulars of negligence embraced that, then the plaintiff is conceding
that the O44 statements are sufficient [sic]. For that reason alone we are embarrassed and we would want an adjournment for that
reason alone. But we say the basis of it is more fundamental than that. We say that the pleadings do not properly put this part of
the case, a very important part, and because of the prejudice that flows, an adjournment alone with an order for costs, would not
compensate the defendant.
In response to these arguments counsel for the plaintiff took issue with the point made by defendant's counsel that the proposed
amendment raised "a new cause of action". He said that the former amendment by consent to particular (n) had raised the issue in
any event and that such amendment, coupled with the interrogatory formerly mentioned, had given clear notice of the allegation which
the plaintiff wished to raise.
At the conclusion of this debate, the learned trial judge then announced what he described as "tentative conclusions". He again expressed
the view that the proposed amendment would "not sufficiently plead what I understand to be the -
head of negligence which the plaintiff now seeks to put forward". He said that what the plaintiff was intending to plead "has, within
it, the seeds of an entirely fresh head of claim" and that the plaintiff ought to plead it "as a substantive pleading and not as
part of his particulars". His Honour concluded by saying: For these reasons, as at present advised, I would not allow the proposed
amendments without aborting the trial. The decision is obviously of such consequence to both parties that it should only be taken
after the most careful consideration which is consistent with the efficient conduct of the trial. ... since the consequences of my
getting the decision, which is presently before me, wrong are so serious, the best course ... is to reserve the final decision until
after the parties have further considered their positions and until after I have had myself an additional opportunity for reflective
consideration of all the matters which must impinge upon my judgment.
On the next sitting day, 23 May, counsel for the plaintiff informed the learned trial judge that he had formulated further proposed
amendments in the light of his Honour's "tentative rulings" and went on to add: We ... have formed a view that, concomitant with
our obligations as acting on behalf of the plaintiff, particularly in the light of the fact that the plaintiff is an infant and/or
other reasons associated with that, we have taken the view that we cannot properly present this action on behalf of the plaintiff
unless those amendments are made. The further proposed amendments were then handed to his Honour. They added further particulars
of negligence after subpara(n). These alleged (inter alia):
(p) failing to advise and/or inform the mother of the options in relation to the manner of delivery of the plaintiff.
(q) failing to advise and/or inform the mother of the risks to the plaintiff of a vaginal delivery having regard to the breech presentation
of the plaintiff.
(r) failing to advise and/or inform the mother of the nature and extent of the risk to the plaintiff of a continued attempt at vaginal
delivery; namely the real risk of hypoxia to the plaintiff. The proposed amendments went on to allege that, if the mother had been
properly advised, she would have requested and consented to a Caesarean section and further that, in that event, the plaintiff would
not have suffered the disabilities which he in fact suffered.
Again counsel for the defendant objected to the amendments being allowed submitting that: I remind your Honour of the prejudice we
say we have suffered which cannot be redressed by an adjournment, even with costs, and particularly in relation to an incapacity
to make an offer of compromise over the last six years. Counsel for the defendant submitted to his Honour that the fact that the
plaintiff was "legally aided" suggested to the defendant "something about the capacity of the defendant to recover any award for
costs made". Counsel also referred to the potential hardship caused by "continued publicity" and that the plaintiff would have available
to him "other remedies". Counsel added that there was a further prejudice to the defendant in the fact that the plaintiff and his
advisers had now had the advantage of seeing and hearing two of their witnesses being cross-examined and would be able to "tailor
their case" on the next occasion, accordingly, if the trial were to be aborted.
His Honour then delivered a final and formal ruling in which he rejected the plaintiff's application to amend the pleadings. The
reasons which he gave, when distilled from his ruling, were as follows: -
(1) The proposed amendments raised a head of claim ("if not a new cause of action") which was so different from the case, as pleaded,
to require aborting the trial. The amendments would require a number of new issues to be canvassed so that it would be unfair to
the defendant to allow the trial to continue;
(2) It would not be possible for a new trial to commence "this year". The defendant would therefore have the matter "hanging over
(3) If the trial "went off" the court might entertain an application for dismissal even if the "limitation period" had not expired;
(4) There were aspects of prejudice to the defendant which could not be redressed; that is "prejudicial publicity". Furthermore his
Honour said that "were I to allow the amendments and ... abort the trial there would be no opportunity for the defendant to appeal
(5) The effect of allowing amendments "at this stage" would cause great difficulty in the "administration of the business of the court".
He said that, in February, the parties had been cautioned to ensure that their cases were "in order" and that "the Long Cases List
cannot function effectively unless warnings of the kind given ... are noted and ... followed by action"; His Honour went on to note:
"The effect of my aborting this trial would be to place at least one judge of this trial on the unattached list while other cases
have been sent away for want of a judge to hear them."
(6) The defendant would suffer prejudice in the form of the "possible compromise of the proceedings";
(7) It would be difficult to calculate the prejudice to the defendant, given that "he has filed and served O 44 statements on the
basis that the pleadings as they presently stand will be the pleadings on which the trial will be conducted".
It is apparent from this summary of his Honour's reasons that he was, in large measure influenced to reject the plaintiff's application
because, to allow it, would cause the trial to "go off" with consequential prejudice to the defendant and disruption of the court's
management processes. Very little emphasis, if any, was given to the prejudice which would be suffered by the plaintiff in the event
of him losing his right to have his alternative claim determined on its merits. In so far as any stated consideration was given to
the plaintiff's position, it would seem to be contained in the learned trial judge's expressed reason that "if I were to refuse the
application and if the trial thereafter were to proceed on the pleadings as they presently stand, then the plaintiff will retain
a real right of appeal". I will return to this aspect of his Honour's reasoning hereafter.
Following his Honour's ruling, the trial then proceeded for some 17 days. The jury returned a verdict in favour of the defendant
on 9 June 1994.
The plaintiff has now appealed against the verdict and the judgment entered upon it in favour of the defendant on the grounds that
the learned trial judge was in error in refusing the proposed amendment and in excluding evidence from the trial which would have
been given in support of it.
In the course of the trial the plaintiff was (inter alia) not permitted:
(a) to tender the defendant's answer to interrogatories by which the defendant admitted that he had not discussed with the mother
the options which were available to her for the delivery of the plaintiff; -
(b) to lead evidence of the fact that there were no discussions with the mother as to the risks which might be occasioned to the foetus
if the labour was prolonged to allow a vaginal delivery;
(c) to lead evidence upon which a submission could be founded that the mother had been denied the right to have a say in the manner
of delivery of her child;
(d) to lead any evidence in support of a case based on the principles stated in Rogers v Whitaker, supra.
On the hearing of this appeal, counsel for the appellant submitted that, in refusing the amendments, the learned trial judge had
erred in the exercise of his discretion and that, as a consequence, the plaintiff was occasioned a serious injustice in that he was
unable to present a legitimate aspect of the case which he wanted to make against the defendant. For the respondent, on the other
hand, it was contended that the exclusion of the amended claim was an appropriate exercise of the trial judge's discretion, having
regard to the circumstances which then confronted him. Furthermore counsel for the respondent emphasised before us that an appellate
court should be slow to interfere with a discretionary ruling of a trial judge, particularly where such ruling related to a matter
of practice and procedure. He referred us to a line of authority of which Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd v Philip Morris Inc
[1981] HCA 39
(1981) 148 CLR 170
is, perhaps, the most frequently cited. In this respect it is, I think, appropriate to point out that there is a material difference
between the exercise of a judicial discretion which affects a mere matter of practice and procedure and the exercise of a discretion
which prevents a party from making a case which he or she desires to make on the merits. In the latter sense the discretionary exercise
has the capacity to affect substantive rights as distinct from procedural ones: In re the Will of FB Gilbert
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
at 323. In this case the appellant's appeal is on the basis that a miscarriage of justice has occurred because of an erroneous ruling
which has been made in the course of the trial. The appeal is thus one against the verdict of the jury and judgment given upon it.
Because the verdict and judgment are adverse to the interests of the appellant, such an appeal is one of right. Although appellate
courts will always be slow to interfere with a ruling made by a trial judge in the exercise of his discretion (eg admission or rejection
of evidence), it is nonetheless their duty to do so if they are of the opinion that the discretion has miscarried and injustice has
resulted. (See Tzouvelis v Victorian Railways Commissioners
[1968] VicRp 13
[1968] VR 112
With due respect to the learned trial judge, I have come to the conclusion that he was in error in refusing the amendment, thereby
denying to the appellant the opportunity of presenting the case which he wanted to make against the respondent in its entirety. The
fundamental principle which, I think, should guide a trial judge upon an application by a party to amend his pleadings so as to plead
a new or alternative claim or defence is that such an application should ordinarily be allowed provided that any injustice arising
to the other party from so doing can be compensated by the imposition of terms. This principle is, I think, clearly implicit in O36.01
of the Rules of Civil Procedure, which (in so far as relevant) provides that "[f]or the purpose of determining the real question
in controversy between the parties to any proceeding ... the Court may at any stage order ... that any party have leave to amend
any document in the proceeding". For the purposes of this rule "'document" includes "pleading". The principle has been -
recently restated by Dawson and Toohey JJ, in Commonwealth v Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 at 456, 464. Dawson J expressed the principle
in these terms at 456: The rules of court have always provided that leave to amend pleadings may be given for the purpose of determining
the real question in controversy between the parties ... and an amendment should ordinarily be allowed if any harm arising from so
doing can be compensated for by the imposition of terms upon the party asking for the amendment .... The usual terms which are imposed
are an order for costs or an adjournment. In granting leave to amend, a court is concerned with the raising of issues and not with
their merits. Of course, an amendment which is futile because it is obviously bad in law will not be allowed. But it is no ground
for refusing an amendment that it raises a claim or defence which ought not to succeed. That will be an issue upon trial. An amendment
may, however, be refused because it is made at such a late stage that neither costs nor an adjournment can compensate the other side
for failure to raise the issue at an earlier stage.
In respect of this last proposition Dawson J referred to Ketteman v Hansel Properties Ltd
[1987] AC 189
, which was a case where the defendant had made an application to amend his defence to plead a "limitation defence" during the final
speeches of counsel. Brooks v Wyatt
[1994] NTSC 90
(1994) 99 NTR 12
was another case where a defendant was refused leave to amend where the application had been made after the trial judge had delivered
his reasons for decision. (I pause to point out that this case is very different from the facts of the cases to which I have just
referred. Here the application to amend was made at a very early stage in the trial and without any suggestion being made of want
of faith on the part of the plaintiff.) In Beoco Ltd v Alfa Laval Co Ltd [1994] 4 All ER 464 at 471 the English Court of Appeal has
also accepted that in applications to amend pleadings, the principles as stated by Dawson J are the "guiding principles".
There is, of course, nothing new in the principle. In Black v City of South Melbourne
(1964) 38 ALJR 309
, where the plaintiff, at the start of the trial, had sought to recast his case for damages against a defendant occupier (although
not thereby changing his cause of action), Barwick CJ (with the support of the majority of the court) said at 310: It would, in my
opinion, have been an improper exercise of judicial discretion for the trial judge in this case to have refused the plaintiff the
opportunity to present his proofs of that cause of action differently to the manner in which he had originally proposed. Questions
of surprise and disadvantage because of a change of course in proof can almost always be met by adjournment and appropriate orders
as to costs.
I recognise, of course, that time has not stood still since the decision in Black's case. The increase in the volume and complexity
of litigation has led to increasing demands on the time of the courts and to the development of new methods of managing cases, often
times in specialised lists. The courts have rightly expected litigants and their professional advisers to prepare and present their
cases in accordance with time schedules which the courts have laid down for the parties. These management practices have not been
introduced for the benefit of the courts. They have been carefully devised, in response to public demand, to ensure the orderly and
expeditious disposal of business in the interests of all litigants.
It was therefore quite legitimate for the learned trial judge to give emphasis, as he did, to the impact which the exercise of his
discretion favourably to the appellant might have on the overall disposition of the court's business. Such a factor, in a case which
calls for it, might loom as a large (or even dominant) factor -
governing the exercise of the discretion: see, for example, United Motors Retail Ltd v Australian Guarantee Corporation Ltd
(1991) 53 SASR 156.
However, notwithstanding the potential impact which an application to amend the pleadings might have upon the court's management
practices, the court must, nevertheless in my view, be cautious to ensure that the rules and practices of the court are used in aid
of doing justice to the parties rather than become an inflexible barrier to its achievement: see Boyle v Ford Motor Co Ltd (1992)
2 All ER 228 at 233-4 per Donaldson MR; GSA Industries Pty Ltd v NT Gas Ltd
(1990) 24 NSWLR 710
The reasons which his Honour gave in this case for refusing the plaintiff's application to amend appear to me to accord little or
no weight to the legitimate interests of the plaintiff whilst over emphasising the perceived prejudices said to flow to the defendant.
The amendment which the plaintiff sought to make did not involve the introduction of a new cause of action nor indeed did it seek
to raise a claim the ultimate resolution of which was going to solely depend upon views entertained by a responsible body of the
medical profession: see Rogers v Whitaker. An over-emphasis, therefore, upon perceived prejudice said to flow from a deficiency in
"O44 statements", seems to have been misplaced. However, be that as it may, it would appear that his Honour was led into the error
of over-emphasising the potential prejudice to the defendant and to the court's own processes by failing to have due regard to what
I have referred to as the "governing principle". The reasons given by the learned trial judge suggest to me that he was led into
this error because of a belief on his part (to which he gave substantial weight) that, if he was wrong in the exercise of his discretion
the plaintiff would have a "real right of appeal". His Honour said: On the other hand, if I were to refuse the present application
and, if the trial were thereafter to proceed on the pleadings as they presently stand, then the plaintiff will retain a real right
of appeal, in the sense that if I am wrong, the Court of Appeal can set the matter right and order a new trial.
This circumstance seems to me to be one that I ought to weigh very heavily in the difficult balancing exercise which presently confronts
The learned trial judge's view that the plaintiff would have a "real right of appeal" if he decided the application unfavourably
to the plaintiff seems to have assumed a dominant role in his decision. That this is so can, I think, be inferred from his following
statement that: Where one side has the opportunity to appeal and to obtain real relief on appeal if the trial judge is wrong and
where, if the trial judge comes to the other conclusion, the party adversely affected has no real right of appeal, in the sense of
a right to appeal in circumstances where the mistake can be corrected, the trial judge should, I think, be very careful before taking
the unappealable option.
The existence, or otherwise, of a right of appeal cannot, I think, be allowed to affect the exercise of the discretion in that way.
The plaintiff was entitled to have his application decided on its merits in the circumstances as they then stood, even if the defendant
could not appeal the decision. It was an application made in the early stages of the trial when the costs were manageable and capable
of being accommodated in conditional orders and when the full impact of "litigation strain" had barely had time to impose itself
upon the litigants. Even if the plaintiff's amendment could be categorised as a "new claim" based on a "fresh set of ideas" (as to
which see Golski v Kirk
(1987) 14 FCR 143)
, and thus required an adjournment to enable the defendant to reconsider his position, the -
competing interests of the parties were capable of being adjusted far more readily at that stage in the trial than they would be
at the time at which his Honour was contemplating that any injustice could be redressed. By placing the emphasis which he did upon
the plaintiff's right to appeal, it seems to me that his Honour was distracted from his task of balancing the competing interests
of each party and confined his attention almost exclusively to the interests of the defendant.
The plaintiff was entitled to have the court consider the prejudice which he would suffer if his application was denied. He stood
to lose forever his right to make a claim against the defendant which was conceded to be a bona fide and legitimate one, in the sense
that it was not "futile". Because the nature of the claim was logically interwoven with the claim which the plaintiff already had
on foot, the denial of the right to present it carried with it, as counsel pointed out to the trial judge, the prospect of not being
able to present the case in a coherent fashion.
The loss to the plaintiff of the opportunity to present on its merits the case which he desired to make against the defendant was
a significant prejudice to him: McColl v Lehmann
[1987] VicRp 46
[1987] VR 503
at 506; Maxwell v Keun [1928] 1 KB 645 at 653. However the reasoning of the learned trial judge suggests that he gave little or no
weight to the prejudice which was likely to flow to the plaintiff but, rather, took comfort from the fact that, as he put it, the
plaintiff would have a "real right of appeal"; whereas the defendant would have none. Notwithstanding the argument of the respondent
to the contrary, the fact that the trial judge proceeded in this way explains the lack of focus in those reasons upon the plaintiff's
rights and potential prejudices and the concentration upon the prejudice to be suffered by the defendant should the amendment be
I am accordingly of the view that the decision of the learned trial judge to refuse the appellant's application for leave to amend
his claim was vitiated by fundamental error. I am further of the view, subject to the matters to which I shall refer, that the plaintiff
was wrongly deprived of the right to present his claim against the defendant on its merits.
Before us respondent's counsel contended that no injustice had been occasioned to the appellant even if his Honour's ruling was found
to be wrong. Firstly it was submitted that the claim which the appellant sought to raise by his amendment was not a claim which the
law would entertain; secondly it was contended that, in any event, it was clear from the jury's verdict that such a claim would not
have succeeded.
In my opinion neither of the submissions is sound. The first was founded upon the proposition that the negligent failure by the respondent
to inform and advise the mother of the risks to the unborn child involved in permitting, in the circumstances, the labour to continue
until vaginal delivery, was not a breach of the duty which the respondent owed to the child. Thus it was contended the proposed amendment
was, and is, futile.
This argument was not addressed to the learned trial judge and was only raised in the course of the appeal during argument and in
response to questions from the court. The contention was that although a medical practitioner has a duty to warn his patient of risks
inherent in proposed treatment, the scope of that duty does not extend to the circumstances existing in this case where the person
suffering the loss was the unborn child. Those circumstances, it was said, distinguished this case from cases such as Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
(1992) 175 CLR 479
(1983) 33 SASR 189.
However it seems to me that, once it is accepted that a medical practitioner in the position of the respondent owes a duty of care
both to the mother and to the child (see Whitehouse v Jordan [1981] 1 WLR 246), the scope of that duty must extend to providing advice
and information to the mother as to material risks affecting the potential well being of the infant, inherent in the proposed treatment
and management of the delivery. In the circumstances the mother is the only person in the position to make the relevant decision
in the interests of the infant: cf Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
at 239-40 ("Marion's case"); cf also Hinch v Director of Public Prosecutions [1996] 1 VR 683 per Phillips JA and McDonald AJA at
Accordingly I am of the opinion that the claim which the appellant desired to raise against the respondent by the amendment was one
sustainable at law and not "futile" in the sense contended for by the respondent.
The respondent's second contention in support of his submission that no injustice has flowed to the appellant was that, even if the
amendment had been allowed, it would not have altered the result of the trial. It was contended that the jury's verdict demonstrated
that proposition because the jury must have concluded either that the respondent's management of the labour was not the cause of
the appellant's injuries and/or that the respondent was not negligent in opting for a vaginal delivery rather than a Caesarean section.
It does not seem to me that the proposition being contended for by the respondent necessarily follows from the jury's verdict. A
review of the evidence given at the trial demonstrates that there were two issues which were much in dispute between the parties:
(a) Whether, in the circumstances of what was accepted to be a "high risk" labour, the respondent's management of it fell below the
accepted standard of care.
(b) Whether the injuries suffered by the appellant, and resulting in what was conveniently called "cerebral palsy", were suffered
as a consequence of the "birth process" or whether those injuries were the consequence of some other unknown cause (such as infection)
occurring at some stage earlier in the pregnancy (what was called a "development abnormality").
The evidence given on these issues differed. The evidence called by the appellant favoured the view that the injuries suffered were
the result of (or aggravated by) "birth asphyxia", directly flowing from the decision to prolong the birth process to await vaginal
delivery. The plaintiff's evidence also favoured the view that it was inappropriate medical practice in the circumstances of this
labour to have prolonged the process beyond 7.20pm or thereabouts on the night before the birth. At that stage proper practice, it
was said, dictated an abdominal delivery in order to avoid what were described as the unacceptable risks inhering to the infant in
a decision to await vaginal delivery.
The evidence called by and on behalf of the defendant favoured the view that the plaintiff's injuries and abnormalities were just
as likely to have been caused by some developmental abnormality unassociated with the birth process. Furthermore that evidence supported
the acceptability of the respondent's management of the labour and birth process and suggested that the risks inhering to the mother
in performing a surgical delivery offset those which would accrue to the infant in pursuing a vaginal delivery. -
The manner in which the jury's verdict was taken does not enable me to determine on what basis the jury found for the respondent.
I agree with respondent's counsel that, if the jury found that the injuries to the plaintiff occurred "developmentally" and pre-dated
the labour and birth process, then the amendments which the plaintiff desired to make to the claim would not have affected the result.
However the jury's verdict is equally consistent with a finding that the injuries were, indeed, inflicted during the birth process
but that the evidence had not established negligence on the part of the respondent in the management of the labour because it was
in accordance with practices followed by a responsible body of the medical profession: see Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee
[1957] 1 WLR 582. A verdict based on the latter finding would not, as it seems to me, be necessarily inconsistent with a finding
in favour of the plaintiff based on the claim which was the subject of the desired amendments. That claim depended for its success
upon proof of a breach of duty constituted by a failure to inform and advise the mother of risks inherent in the proposed management
of her labour so as to permit her to have some input into her management and that of her child; that is a breach of duty the scope
and content of which depends upon principles which are not co-extensive with the principles which govern and inform a decision of
negligent treatment and management: see Rogers v Whitaker at 484.
In the case of negligent treatment and medical management, the principles explained and defined in the Bolam case apply; the applicable
standard of care is a matter for medical judgment in the sense that a doctor is not negligent if he acts in accordance with a practice
accepted at the relevant time as proper by a responsible body of medical opinion, even though other doctors adopt a different practice:
Sidaway v Governors of Bethlem Royal Hospital
[1985] UKHL 1
[1985] AC 871.
However, in the area of alleged negligence by reason of failure to disclose material risks or of providing relevant information and
advice, the applicable principle is that, whilst accepted medical practice is a useful guide, it is ultimately for the tribunal and
not the medical profession to decide what conduct the appropriate standard of care required: Rogers v Whitaker at 487-9; Sidaway's
case at 881, per Lord Scarman.
For these reasons I cannot accept the contention made on behalf of the respondent that the jury's verdict absolving the respondent
of negligence in the management of the mother's labour and the delivery of the appellant necessarily disposes of the issues which
the appellant desired to raise and have determined on the amended pleadings.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that it has not been demonstrated that the learned trial judge's denial of the proposed amendments
could have made no difference to the result of the trial and that, therefore, no miscarriage of justice has been occasioned to the
appellant as a result of his Honour's ruling: cf Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
(1986) 161 CLR 141
It was further submitted on behalf of the respondent that, if the court should come to this conclusion, then it should order a new
trial limited only to the issues which the appellant desired to raise on the amended pleadings. Although this court has the power
to order a new trial on "any question" (see r64.16(5) of the Rules of Civil Procedure) , in this case (as I have previously indicated)
the issues which the appellant desired to raise on his amended pleadings are "logically interwoven" with the issues raised on his
existing pleadings; furthermore, for the reasons previously stated, it is not possible to discern from the jury's verdict what -
the underlying basis for that verdict is. Accordingly I am of the view that justice requires that the entire issue of liability be
tried afresh.
Consistent with these reasons I would propose to allow the appeal and order that the jury's verdict, and the judgment entered in
accordance with it, be set aside. I would further direct that the appellant be at liberty to amend his pleadings to raise the claim
which he desired to raise at the former trial, and that a new trial be had on those amended pleadings.
Brooking JA
I agree with the President that the judge took into account an irrelevant consideration in a way which vitiated the exercise of his
discretion, by having regard, and indeed giving great weight, to the consideration that the erroneous discharge of a jury is, once
effect has been given to it, an irrevocable step and an irremediable error. This was no doubt one of the circumstances which made
it appropriate to give the application for leave to amend very careful consideration, but it was not a circumstance which told either
in favour of or against the granting of the application. I find it unnecessary to say anything about the other criticisms made by
counsel for the plaintiff (as I shall call the appellant) of the judge's reasons expressed in the ruling. I will say that I reject
the contention that the outcome of the application was so unreasonable or plainly unjust as to show that there had been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion.
I further agree with the view expressed by the President that the principle laid down in Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
(1992) 175 CLR 479
is capable of application in a case concerning an unborn child, and I join with him in rejecting the contention that the amendment,
if allowed, would not have affected the outcome of the trial.
I turn now to more general considerations.
Most of the decisions relied on by Mr Galbally - they begin with Maxwell v Keun [1928] 1 KB 645 - concerned the refusal of an adjournment
in circumstances in which that would prevent the applicant from presenting his case or defence. But the present case is not one of
the refusal of an adjournment. The application refused was for leave to amend the statement of claim, although it was necessary to
consider whether the granting of the application would necessitate an adjournment and, if so, what the consequences of the adjournment
would be. Moreover, the refusal of the application would prevent the plaintiff, not from presenting his case, but from enlarging
it. The significance of an amendment to a pleading by way of enlarging a party's case is, of course, a matter of degree.
As regards amendments, we were all brought up on the view of Brett MR that:
[H]owever negligent or careless may have been the first omission, and, however late the proposed amendment, the amendment should
be allowed if it can be made without injustice to the other side. There is no injustice if the other side can be compensated by costs;
but, if the amendment will put them into such a position that they must be injured, it ought not to be made. Clarapede and Co v Commercial
Union Association
(1883) 32 WR 262
at 263. But when that was said the pressure of business in the courts was much less than it is today and in consequence no-one thought
in terms of case management. About 100 years later it was accepted by the House of Lords that the laissez-faire approach of Clarapede
was not suited to the needs of the late 20th century and that, in the words of Lord Griffiths: -
Whether an amendment should be granted is a matter for the discretion of the trial judge and he should be guided in the exercise
of the discretion by his assessment of where justice lies. Many and diverse factors will bear upon the exercise of this discretion.
I do not think it possible to enumerate them all or wise to attempt to do so. But justice cannot always be measured in terms of money
and in my view a judge is entitled to weigh in the balance the strain the litigation imposes on litigants, particularly if they are
personal litigants rather than business corporations, the anxieties occasioned by facing new issues, the raising of false hopes,
and the legitimate expectation that the trial will determine the issues one way or the other. Furthermore to allow an amendment before
a trial begins is quite different from allowing it at the end of the trial to give an apparently unsuccessful defendant an opportunity
to renew the fight on an entirely different defence. Another factor that a judge must weigh in the balance is the pressure on the
courts caused by the great increase in litigation and the consequent necessity that, in the interests of the whole community, legal
business should be conducted efficiently. We can no longer afford to show the same indulgence towards the negligent conduct of litigation
as was perhaps possible in a more leisured age. There will be cases in which justice will be better served by allowing the consequences
of the negligence of the lawyers to fall upon their own heads rather than by allowing an amendment at a very late stage of the proceedings.
Ketteman v Hansel Properties Ltd
[1987] AC 189
Lord Keith of Kinkel adhered to Clarapede and Co v Commercial Union Association
(1883) 32 WR 262
Clarapede, but his was the minority view.
In the following year the new approach was considered by two members of the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in Nominal Defendant
v Cameron (unreported, 1988) Nominal Defendant v Cameron (unreported, 2 August 1988). That case concerned a trial judge's refusal
to allow an amendment to the pleadings in a running down case which he was trying without a jury. Kirby P preferred the approach
of Lord Keith and Samuels JA was disposed to doubt the soundness of the approach of Lord Griffiths. In 1990 the Court of Appeal of
New South Wales gave further consideration to the question in printW. Dazenko Structural and General Engineering Pty Ltd v Fraser
Hrones and Co Ltd (unreported, 1990) W Dazenko Structural and General Engineering Pty Ltd v Fraser Hrones and Co Ltd (unreported,
5 October 1990). All three members of the court accepted that the public interest was a relevant consideration in deciding whether
an adjournment should be granted. In reaching his conclusion on this point Handley JA (with whom Meagher JA agreed) relied on the
decision of the Full Court of Victoria in Apex Pallet Hire Pty Ltd v Brambles Holdings Ltd (unreported, 1988) Apex Pallet Hire Pty
Ltd v Brambles Holdings Ltd (unreported, 8 April 1988), where McGarvie J (and accordingly Marks J, if not also Ormiston J) observed
that when an adjournment was sought there were interests other than those of the parties to be considered and that these included
the need to conduct the business of the courts as efficiently as possible and the interests of litigants waiting for a hearing. Two
months later the question came before the New South Wales Court of Appeal once again, in GSA Industries Pty Ltd v NT Gas Ltd
(1990) 24 NSWLR 710
, where an adjournment had been refused of a matter in the Construction List. In refusing the adjournment Cole J had mentioned that
the administration of the list depended upon adherence to timetables. The Court of Appeal was unanimously of the view that the appeal
should be dismissed. Kirby P considered that the judge was entitled to take into account the establishment of a special list and
the presence of the matter in that list. His Honour adhered, however, to what he had said in Nominal Defendant v Cameron [1988] NSWJB
135 Nominal Defendant v Cameron. Samuels JA, on the other hand, said that the doubts which he had expressed in Nominal Defendant
v Cameron had been resolved and that he accepted as correct the statement by Lord Griffiths. -
The new, wider approach now has the approbation of the High Court. In Sali v SPC Ltd
[1993] HCA 47
(1993) 67 ALJR 841
Brennan, Deane and McHugh JJ observed that propositions in Maxwell v Keun were formulated at a time when court lists were not as
congested as they are today and case management had not become sophisticated. Their Honours continued at 843-4: In determining whether
to grant an adjournment, the judge of a busy court is entitled to consider the effect of an adjournment on court resources and the
competing claims by litigants in other cases awaiting hearing in the court as well as the interests of the parties ... What might
be perceived as an injustice to a party when considered only in the context of an action between parties may not be so when considered
in a context which includes the claims of other litigants and the public interest in achieving the most efficient use of court resources.
Toohey and Gaudron JJ, at 849, referred to Ketteman v Hansel Properties Ltd
[1987] AC 189
Ketteman and said: The contemporary approach to court administration ... has put another consideration onto the scales. The view
that the conduct of litigation is not merely a matter for the parties but is also one for the court and the need to avoid disruptions
in the court's lists with consequent inconvenience to the court and prejudice to the interests of other litigants waiting to be heard
are pressing concerns to which a court may have regard.
Thus it is recognised that the consequences of an adjournment will often not be confined to the parties and that the claims of other
litigants to be heard and the public interest in achieving the most efficient use of court resources are relevant considerations.
The weight to be given to them depends upon all the circumstances. They may be given greater weight where the case is in one of the
controlled lists, where an adjournment is particularly undesirable and where the undesirability of adjournments both reflects and
is reflected by the practices adopted in the management of the list. The interests of other litigants and the public interest in
the best possible use of court resources are a relevant consideration whether or not the case is in one of the controlled lists.
The pressure of business which is largely responsible for the great developments in recent years in case management techniques has
required and resulted in a change in judicial attitudes to all litigation. The authorities bear this out. In particular, in Sali
[1993] HCA 47
(1993) 67 ALJR 841
Sali the application for an adjournment related not to the trial of an action but to the hearing of an appeal, so that no question
of the proper ordering of the business of a controlled list arose. The words used by members of the High Court make it clear that
the new approach is not to be confined to controlled lists or commercial litigation. For example, Brennan, Deane and McHugh JJ referred
to "the judge of a busy court" while Toohey and Gaudron JJ spoke of "the conduct of litigation". The weight to be given to what might
be regarded as considerations extraneous to the parties may be affected by the nature of the litigation and the fact that the proceedings
are in a controlled list, but that is another matter. So Ormiston J said recently in Geelong Building Society v Encel [1996] 1 VR
594 at 610: Nevertheless the complexity of modern litigation has required courts to take a more strict view as to amendments, and
particularly this has been exemplified in the Commercial Courts, Divisions and Lists in particular jurisdictions.
The action out of which this appeal arises was in a controlled list, the Long Cases List, the establishment of which is dealt with
by the practice note in [1994] 1 VR 208. I need not summarise what appears there, beyond referring to the -
statements that the efficient conduct of the trial without avoidable interruptions necessitates the earliest possible elucidation
of the issues and to the statement that save in exceptional cases no earlier trial will be permitted to interfere with the commencement
of a later trial on the day fixed for its commencement or within a short time thereafter.
One of the cherished tenets of those who adhere to the Clarapede and Co v Commercial Union Association
(1883) 32 WR 262
Clarapede school of thought was laid down by Bowen LJ in Cropper v Smith
(1884) 26 Ch D 700
at 711: I have found in my experience that there is one panacea which heals every sore in litigation, and that is costs. I have very
seldom, if ever, been unfortunate enough to come across an instance, where a person has made a mistake in his pleadings which has
put the other side to such a disadvantage as that it cannot be cured by the application of that healing medicine.
Proceeding in forma pauperis had not been replaced by legal aid, which nowadays frequently enables those of exiguous means to maintain
long and very costly litigation. The present case is an example. The argument below proceeded upon the basis that the plaintiff,
or the plaintiff's litigation guardian, was legally aided. An order for costs may be made against the litigation guardian, but realism
requires one to accept that any order that might have been made in the present case, in allowing the amendment and aborting the trial,
would have been of no practical use to the defendant except in the event that the plaintiff recovered damages on the retrial. This
trial began on 17 May 1994. The original application for leave to amend, that made on 19 May, was only an application for leave to
amend para(n) of the particulars of negligence by adding the words "or had the option of". That application, if granted, would not
have been sufficient to raise the new case. It was not until 23 May, on the sixth day of the trial, that application for leave to
make more extensive amendments was made. The defendant was in no way responsible for the fact that it was not until the sixth day
of the trial that the ultimate ruling was given; the contrary has not been suggested. If the leave to amend had been given it would
have been necessary to abort the trial, and the only proper order would have been one which required the plaintiff, or his litigation
guardian, to pay the defendant's costs thrown away as a result of the amendment of the statement of claim and the aborting of the
trial. The costs of a six day trial, with senior and junior counsel, would themselves have been very substantial. One can only form
an impression of what other costs would have been thrown away. I see no reason why, in performing the balancing exercise, one should
not have regard to the probable amount of the total costs thrown away as between solicitor and client, for this will reflect the
actual pecuniary loss. Judges do retain some familiarity with the current cost of litigation. Where an amendment which will necessitate
an adjournment is sought and the applicant, who will be ordered to pay costs, is impecunious, the "balancing exercise" may require
the court to make some rough estimate of the likely amount of the costs that will be thrown away. Judges and juries are often required
by the law to make the best estimate they can where estimation is very difficult. Recognising that my own estimate may well be erroneous
to a substantial extent, I would estimate a sum of the order of $50,000 as the likely total costs of the defendant as between solicitor
and client thrown away in consequence of the making of the amendment and the aborting of the trial.
This is a large sum. It may be said that it is small in relation to the damages which the plaintiff might hope to recover if successful.
Nevertheless it is in itself -
a very substantial sum. A Rhadamanthine indifference must be displayed to the strong probability that the defendant's costs will
be borne by an insurer.
The plaintiff was born on 1 February 1984. The writ was filed in 1988. The trial began in May 1994. It is apparent from the transcript
that it attracted a good deal of media publicity; just how much we do not know. The debate before the judge on whether the amendments
should be allowed proceeded on the sensible and legally correct basis that his Honour was entitled to take notice of the extent of
the publicity given to the trial. In Ketteman v Hansel Properties Ltd
[1987] AC 189
Ketteman Lord Griffiths spoke of ... the strain the litigation imposes on litigants, particularly if they are personal litigants
rather than business corporations, the anxieties occasioned by facing new issues, the raising of false hopes, and the legitimate
expectation that the trial will determine the issues one way or the other. It is well settled that, in applications to dismiss for
want of prosecution, the prejudice to a defendant facing allegations of professional negligence which results from delay may include
prejudice which reflects the nature of the allegations made. In the present case, the judge was of opinion that if the trial was
aborted a retrial in 1994 would not be possible having regard to the state of the Long Cases List. A retrial would thus mean the
probability of considerable further media publicity in 1995.
In my opinion a serious question arose whether these amendments should be allowed. The judge's exercise of discretion cannot stand,
as I said at the outset of these reasons. The discretion must now be re-exercised. To my mind, the principal considerations against
the allowing of the amendment were the heavy costs that the consequential order for a retrial would inflict upon the defendant and
his practical inability to enforce an order for costs in his favour unless the plaintiff succeeded on the retrial; the strain upon
the defendant and the additional damage to his reputation resulting from a second trial; and the considerations relating to case
management to which the trial judge referred. As it seems to me, the other members of the court regard the outcome of this appeal
as more clear than I do, but having had the benefit of reading what the President has written I am in the end persuaded, although
with some hesitation, that the amendment sought ought to have been allowed, notwithstanding the unfortunate consequences of that
course, and I therefore agree that this appeal should be allowed. The new trial should not be limited to the new issues to be raised
by amendment.
Callaway JA
I agree with the President.
Appeal allowed; new trial ordered.
Solicitors for the appellant: McSwineys.
Solicitors for the respondent: John W Ball and Sons
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter