URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/254.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DFFH v JKL & Ors [2025] VSCA 254 (17 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2024 0138
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILIES, FAIRNESS AND HOUSING
to the attached Schedule)
Respondents
NIALL CJ, RICHARDS and KENNY JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
25 August 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
17 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 254
JUDGMENT APPEALED
JKL (a pseudonym) v Secretary,
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
[2024] VSC 645 (K
APPEAL – Judicial review – Permanent
care order granted – Whether failure to consider mandatory principles
Whether failure to consider need to give widest possible protection to
parent/child relationship – Whether misapplication of
relevant principle
– Removal of child from parent where unacceptable risk of harm established
– Construction of ‘parent’–
No error of law established
– Leave to appeal granted – Appeal allowed.
Youth and Families Act 2005
Department of Human Services v DR
[2013] VSC 579
LPDT v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Mia Harris (a pseudonym) and Adam Jackson (a
pseudonym) v Secretary to the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
[2023] VSC 228
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24.
Ms K Foley SC with Ms J Davidson
First respondent:
Dr A McBeth
Second & third respondent:
Fourth respondent
No appearance
Child Protection Litigation Office, Department of Families, Fairness and
First respondent:
TP Legal and Associates
Second & third respondent:
Fourth respondent
No appearance
RICHARDS JA
Introduction
proceeding concerns the care of a 5 year old child (‘VWX’ or the
‘child’) — the daughter of the
first respondent, JKL (the
‘mother’), and the fourth respondent, STU (the
her short life, VWX has been the subject of various care orders made in the
Children’s Court under the
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
’). On 2 December 2020, the Children’s
Court made an Interim Accommodation Order placing VWX in the care of the second
and third respondents in this proceeding, MNO and PQR (the
‘carers’). On 23 April 2021, the Children’s Court made
by Secretary order for a period of two
care by Secretary order is limited by time and confers parental responsibility
for the child on the Secretary to the exclusion of
The Secretary of the
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (‘DFFH’) exercised that
responsibility by placing the
child with the carers. Subsequently, the Secretary
applied to make the care arrangement permanent by seeking a Permanent Care Order
(‘PCO’) in respect of the child which, once made, would have the
effect of giving the carers parental responsibility
1 March 2024, the Children’s Court granted the DFFH’s application
for a PCO to the carers.
appear, the order was subject to some conditions, including that the carers
preserve the child’s identity and connection
to her culture of origin and
her relationship with her birth
October 2024, pursuant to s 329 of the
a judge in the Trial
Division allowed an appeal on a question of law brought by the mother, set aside
the PCO and remitted the matter
to the Children’s
It is from those orders that
the Secretary of DFFH (the ‘Secretary’) seeks leave to appeal.
the reasons that follow, leave should be granted and the appeal allowed. As
there was no error of law in the decision of the Children’s
proceeding in the Trial Division should be dismissed.
the day following her birth, VWX was placed into emergency care pursuant to s
The Secretary filed a protection application citing
concerns that the parents were unable to care for the child. A day later, the
Children’s Court made an Interim Accommodation Order which placed VWX in
kinship care with a friend of the mother, but permitted
the mother to live with
them. Following the breakdown of that arrangement in March 2020, the
Children’s Court made a further
Interim Accommodation Order, placing VWX
in foster care.
a further Interim Accommodation Order of 2 December 2020, the care by Secretary
order of 23 April 2021 was made in accordance
with ss 274–76A and 289 of
The Children’s Court found that VWX was a child in
need of protection on the grounds contained in ss 162(1)(c) and (e). VWX
remained in the care of the carers, pursuant to the care by Secretary order.
The Children’s Court
proceedings
application for a PCO, which was initiated in late 2022, was heard in the
Children’s Court over five days, commencing on
5 February 2024. Among
other things, the Secretary contended that the parents were unable or unwilling
to resume parental responsibility
for the child; and that it would not be in the
best interests of the child for the parents to resume parental responsibility
mother opposed a PCO and sought to have VWX placed in her care under a family
preservation order or under no order. The father
supported the granting of a
PCO, but sought contact with
1 March 2024, the magistrate made the PCO to the carers (the
‘Children’s Court Order’), subject to the conditions
(a) must preserve the child’s identity and connection with the
child’s culture and origin; and
(b) must preserve the child’s relationship with the child’s birth
family; and
(c) must facilitate contact between the child and her mother on up to 4
occasions each year; and
(d) may facilitate contact between the child and her father on up to 4 occasions
each year if they consider it in her best interests
Statutory framework
following provisions of the
are relevant:
3 Definitions
(1) In this Act—
in relation to a child, means the daily care and
control of the child, whether or not involving parental responsibility for the
out of home care
means care of a child by a person other than a
parent of the child;
in relation to a child, includes—
(a) the father and mother of the child; and
(b) the spouse of the father or mother of the child; and
(c) the domestic partner of the father or mother of the child; and
(d) any person who has parental responsibility for the child, other than the
Secretary; and
(g) a person in respect of whom a court has made a declaration or a finding or
order that the person is the father of the child.
parental responsibility
in relation to a child, means
all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law or custom,
parents have in relation
to children;
8 Decision makers to have regard to principles
(1) The Court must have regard to the principles set out in this Part (where
relevant) in making any decision or taking any action
under this Act.
9 Role of principles
(1) The principles set out in this Part are intended to give guidance in the
administration of this Act.
10 Best interests principles
(1) For the purposes of this Act the best interests of the child must always be
(2) When determining whether a decision or action is in the best interests of
the child, the need to protect the child from harm,
to protect his or her rights
and to promote his or her development (taking into account his or her age and
stage of development)
must always be considered.
(3) In addition to subsections (1) and (2), in determining what decision to make
or action to take in the best interests of the child,
consideration must be
given to the following, where they are relevant to the decision or action—
(a) the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the parent
and child as the fundamental group unit of society
and to ensure that
intervention into that relationship is limited to that necessary to secure the
safety and wellbeing of the child;
(b) the need to strengthen, preserve and promote positive relationships between
the child and the child’s parent, family members
and persons significant
to the child;
(c) the need, in relation to an Aboriginal child, to protect his or her
Aboriginal cultural and spiritual identity and development
by, wherever
possible, maintaining and building their connections to their Aboriginal family
and community;
(d) the child’s views and wishes, if they can be reasonably ascertained,
and they should be given such weight as is appropriate
in the circumstances;
(e) the effects of cumulative patterns of harm on a child’s safety and
development;
(f) the desirability of continuity and permanency in the child’s care;
(fa) the desirability of making decisions as expeditiously as possible and the
possible harmful effect of delay in making a decision
or taking an action;
(g) that the child is only to be removed from the care of his or her parent if
there is an unacceptable risk of harm to the child;
(h) if the child is to be removed from the care of his or her parent, that
consideration is to be given first to the child being
placed with an appropriate
family member or other appropriate person significant to the child, before any
other placement option
is considered;
(i) the desirability, when a child is removed from the care of his or her
parent, to plan the reunification of the child with his
or her parent;
(j) the capacity of each parent or other adult relative or potential care giver
to provide for the child’s needs and any action
taken by the parent to
give effect to the goals set out in the case plan relating to the child;
(k) contact arrangements between the child and the child’s parents,
siblings, family members and other persons significant
to the child;
(l) the child’s social, individual and cultural identity and religious
faith (if any) and the child’s age, maturity,
sex and sexual identity;
(m) where a child with a particular cultural identity is placed in out of home
care with a care giver who is not a member of that
cultural community, the
desirability of the child retaining a connection with their culture;
(n) the desirability of the child being supported to gain access to appropriate
educational services, health services and accommodation
and to participate in
appropriate social opportunities;
(o) the desirability of allowing the education, training or employment of the
child to continue without interruption of disturbance;
(q) the desirability of siblings being placed together when they are placed in
out of home care;
(r) any other relevant consideration.
319 When Court may make permanent care order
(1) The Court may make a permanent care order in respect of a child if—
(a) the child’s parent or, if the child’s parent has died, the
child's surviving parent has not had care of the child
for a period of at least
6 months or for periods that total at least 6 months of the last 12 months;
(b) it is satisfied that—
(i) the parent is unable or unwilling to resume parental responsibility for the
(ii) it would not be in the best interests of the child for the parent to resume
parental responsibility for the child; and
(c) it is satisfied that the person or persons named in the application as
suitable to have parental responsibility for the child
is or are suitable having
(i) any prescribed matters; and
(ii) any wishes expressed by the parent in relation to those prescribed matters;
(d) it is satisfied that the person or persons named in the application is or
are willing and able to assume responsibility for the
permanent care of the
child by having parental responsibility for the child; and
(e) it is satisfied that, so far as is practicable, the wishes and feelings of
the child have been ascertained and due consideration
given to them, having
regard to the age and understanding of the child; and
(f) it is satisfied that the best interests of the child will be promoted by the
making of the order.
(2) Any period that the child is in the care of a person or body under a child
care agreement within the meaning of Part 3.5 must
be disregarded in calculating
any period under subsection (1).
The magistrate’s
magistrate noted the procedural history including the various protection orders
that had been made in respect of the child. It
was noted that her father was
incarcerated and that her mother lived with her partner (the
‘stepfather’) and two half-siblings:
an older sister, aged 19, and
younger sister, aged 20 months. The initial protection application in relation
to the child was based
on protective concerns relating to the older sibling who
had been sexually abused while in the care of her mother. This occurred
context of the mother’s substance abuse and ‘engagement in high risk
association, including [with] men who have
been convicted with sexual
reciting those matters of background, the magistrate said:
... I have regarded the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration and I have considered the need to protect her
from harm, to
protect her rights and to promote her development.
... I have considered in particular the minimum interventions necessary to
ensure the child’s safety; the desirability of continuity
and permanency
in the child’s care; the effects of cumulative patterns of harm on her
safety and development; the capacity
of the mother and/or father to provide for
her needs; the desirability of making decisions as expeditiously as possible and
the possible
harmful effect of delay in making a decision; the capacity of a
potential caregiver to provide for the child’s needs; and the
child being
supported to gain access to appropriate educational services, health services
and accommodation and to participate in
appropriate social
opportunities.
a sentence that assumed some importance in this Court, the magistrate said that
she had ‘considered and applied the
mandatory threshold test
the child is only to be removed from the care of a parent if there is an
unacceptable risk of
In support of the
phrase ‘mandatory threshold’, the magistrate referred to the
decision of Elliot J in
Department of Human Services v
magistrate then continued:
In relation to the ‘unacceptable risk of harm’ test, I find there
is an unacceptable risk of harm to [VWX] if she were
to be removed from the
[carers], who are, save for the first 12 months of her life, the primary and
only parental figures she has
known, and placed with her mother, with whom she
has no evident attachment and her stepfather, who to [VWX] at the time of this
remains a complete
magistrate then considered the protective concerns relating to VWX that had
initially been raised by the Secretary.
magistrate noted the evidence-in-chief given by the DFFH’s Seymour Office
Team Manager, that, as at January 2023, there
was no evidence suggesting that
the mother’s past substance use was an ongoing concern; there was evidence
in respect of the
mother’s lack of supervision of her eldest daughter; the
relationship between VWX and the mother was ‘not strongly emotionally
based’ but that this did not constitute ‘emotional neglect’
and was not considered an ongoing protective concern;
there was no evidence
provided in relation to any ongoing concern relating to basic needs not being
met nor that the mother had failed
to engage with any specific
the end of the hearing, counsel for the Secretary had conceded that the mother
had the capacity to care for VWX and that the court
could not be satisfied,
pursuant to s 319(1)(b)(i) of the
that the mother is unable
or unwilling to resume parental responsibility. That left s 319(1)(b)(ii) of the
— that it would not be in the best interests of VWX for the
mother to resume parental responsibility for her — as the
sole basis for
the application.
respect of the mother, the magistrate accepted the evidence from DFFH staff that
interaction and communication between VWX and
her mother during contact sessions
was limited. The magistrate noted that VWX may have difficulty in interactive
engagement and that
her interactions may have been impacted by
‘DFFH’s lack of support, facilitation, and/or promotion of
[VWX]’s relationship
The magistrate
[VWX]’s relationship with her mother and the meaningfulness of that
relationship is demonstrably limited and with reference
to [VWX]’s best
interest I consider it would be unacceptably harmful to place her into her
mother’s care, with whom she
has not developed a meaningful bond and of
whom she has very little, if any, actual
familiarity.
magistrate accepted the evidence given by a Divisional Principal Practitioner,
Goulburn Child Protection — East Division,
‘practitioner’). That evidence, based on a case plan review, spoke
of the strong attachment that had formed
between VWX and the carers and which
the magistrate regarded as a ‘determining
Specifically, the
practitioner acknowledged that the mother had made
‘progress’,
removing VWX from the carers ‘would be as close as it gets’ to
removing her from her parents and
Given her age, such
removal could cause harm he described as ‘traumatising for [VWX] at this
time’ and ‘significant
enough to disrupt her
development’.
practitioner also noted that VWX’s contact with the mother had been
‘consistently facilitated’ by the carers
and that there was no
evidence suggesting that this would
respect of the father, the magistrate found that Seymour DFFH staff
made no attempt to facilitate the father’s participation in [VWX’s]
life nor did they make any attempt to facilitate
his participation in the
decision-making processes affecting and determining his daughter’s care
and wellbeing.
This was contrary to the mandatory decision making principles contained in ss
11(a), (c), (d), (f), (g), and (h)(i) and (iii) of the
Notwithstanding this,
the magistrate found that, as the father is a ‘stranger’ to VWX,
not be of benefit to
Her Honour left the issue
of future contact between VWX and the father to the discretion of the carers,
‘in the exercise of
their parental responsibility for her care, welfare,
and development’.
respect of the carers, the magistrate found that
they understand the importance of and do provide [VWX] with family, stability,
safety and love and that they have a practical and
demonstrable understanding of
the importance of [VWX]’s birth mother and family
The appeal proceedings below
already observed, the mother appealed on a question of law under s 329 of the
on four grounds; two of which succeeded. The judge upheld the
following grounds:
(1) failing to consider the mandatory principles specified in s 10(3)(a) of the
or misconstruing one or more of those provisions; and
(2) misconstruing the
by treating the carers as VWX’s
parents for the purposes of considering the principles mandated by the
in relation to the removal of a child from her parents.
Reasons of the
upholding ground 1, the judge found that the magistrate had failed to have
regard to s 10(3)(a) of the
. The judge said that the overall
approach of the magistrate in making the PCO failed to give consideration to the
need to give the
widest possible protection and assistance to the parent and
child as the fundamental group unit of society as required by s 10(3)(a)
. The judge accepted that the magistrate correctly identified that
‘the best interests of the child must always be paramount’
those interests included a consideration of the existing relationship between
VWX and the mother. This consideration was
evident in the magistrate’s
conclusions about the lack of attachment between VWX and the mother, and that
the carers were the
‘only parental figures [VWX] has
the harm of removing VWX from the carers and the harm of returning her to her
parents as ‘part of the same side of
the judge found
that the magistrate failed to go on to consider the need to give the widest
possible protection and assistance to
the parent and child as the fundamental
group unit of society, as reflected in the ‘first part’ of s
She described the
principle in s 10(3)(a) as a relevant ‘mandatory’ consideration,
notwithstanding that VWX had been
in the care of the carers for more than 24
judge said that the best interests of VWX required an analysis of both short and
long term considerations, including that the
relationship between VWX and the
mother was not irreparable, and the psychological impact on a child in later
years when he or she
has been placed in care away from their
The judge went on to say
that notwithstanding the conditions imposed on the PCO were aimed at preserving
VWX’s relationship
with her birth family, it was necessary for the
magistrate to consider this factor when determining whether it was in the best
of VWX to make the PCO. Accordingly, the judge found that the
balancing exercise failed to incorporate this
to ground 2, the judge held — and it is not now in dispute — that
the definition of ‘parent’ does
not extend to the carers, but
rather, is limited to ‘natural’ or ‘legal’ parents and
step-parents.
The judge went on
to find that, on a plain reading of paragraphs [21] and [22] of the
magistrate’s reasons,
magistrate erred in treating the carers as the parents of VWX for the purposes
of s 10(3)(g) and by asking whether there would
be an unacceptable risk of harm
to VWX, were she removed from the care of the carers — rather than from
the care of the mother
This error arose, the
judge found, notwithstanding that the magistrate also had to take into account
the harm that would be caused
to VWX if she were to be removed from the
Honour was not persuaded that the magistrate’s error was immaterial
because the decision that was made in fact ‘
have been different had the error not
Proposed grounds of appeal
Secretary seeks leave to appeal on the basis that the judge erred in:
(1) finding that the magistrate failed to consider ‘the need to give the
widest possible protection and assistance to the parent
and child as the
fundamental group unit of society’ as specified in s 10(3)(a) of the
(ground 1); and
(2) finding that the magistrate committed a material error by treating
VWX’s carers as her parents for the purposes of s 10(3)(g)
(ground 2).
Secretary accepted that to succeed on appeal she must succeed on both of the
proposed grounds.
mother filed a notice of contention, contending that the judge’s decision
should be affirmed on the following grounds that
were not decided:
(a) the magistrate misconstrued s 10(3)(a) of the
alia, by interpreting the principle as requiring consideration of the minimum
intervention into the status quo, as opposed
to minimum intervention into the
relationship between parent and child; and
(b) the magistrate made a material error of law in purporting to consider and
apply s 10(3)(g) of the
as a mandatory threshold test in
circumstances where the child had already been removed from her parents and the
application before
the court would not have the effect of removing the child
from her parents.
issues raised by the first ground of contention will be considered together with
the Secretary’s first ground of appeal,
and the issues raised by the
second ground of contention can be dealt with in considering the
Secretary’s second ground of
Ground 1: s 10(3)(a) of the CYF Act
The Secretary and
carers’ submissions
Secretary submitted that the magistrate’s reasons expressly identified s
10(3)(a) as a principle that the magistrate took
into account ‘in
particular’, noting the magistrate’s statement that she
‘considered in particular
the minimum interventions necessary to ensure
the child’s
counsel for the Secretary submitted that the magistrate was not required to
set out a detailed analysis of each of the considerations
contained in s
but rather to bear such principles in mind when undertaking the
synthesising process of balancing or weighing required under the
Counsel also noted that
some of the principles contained in s 10(3) are framed in non-mandatory,
aspirational or qualified
Secretary further submitted that it cannot be inferred, as the judge found, from
the magistrate’s referral to the second
part of s 10(3)(a) that she did
not consider the first part, because the principle contained in s 10(3)(a)
cannot be separated into
two distinct parts. Rather, the second part of the
provision follows naturally from the first.
Secretary submitted that the magistrate had regard to the evidence characterised
by the judge as two ‘important considerations’:
relationship between VWX and the mother was not irreparable, and the long-term
psychological impact on a child placed in
care away from the family,
particularly where other siblings remain in the parents’
In particular, the
magistrate found that if VWX was returned to the care of her mother, she would
face harm that, although not irreparable,
would be significant enough to disrupt
her development; that the engagement between VWX and the mother was limited; and
long-term psychological impact on a child in care is mitigated where
magistrate’s focus on the minimum intervention into the parent/child
relationship is also reflected in the findings
in relation to the role of the
father, his circumstances and his possible future relationship with VWX.
The carers’
submissions
carers submitted that s 10 of the
operates as a statutory
hierarchy for decision-makers, in which the best interests of the child is a
mandatory and paramount consideration,
pursuant to s 10(1); the need to protect
the child from harm, protect their rights and promote their development must
always be considered,
pursuant to s 10(2); and the considerations contained in s
10(3) operate ‘in addition’ to the considerations contained
10(1) and (2), and must be considered ‘where they are relevant to the
decision’. They submitted that the court
must balance the factors
contained in s 10(3) and accord them greater or lesser weight depending on the
facts of the case, in its
paramount consideration of what is in the best
interest of the child. The carers submitted that decision-making under s 10 is
to a synthesis, in which there is no requirement for the court to undertake
a distinct analysis of each relevant factor contained
in s 10(3). The carers
relied upon the observation in
Mia Harris (a pseudonym) and Adam Jackson (a
pseudonym) v Secretary to the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
that consideration of the principles contained in s 10(3), where relevant to
decision-making, very often involves simply bearing any
such principles in mind
when synthesising and weighing the evidence relevant to the determination of the
questions presented by the
operative provisions of the
this basis, the carers submitted that the magistrate was not required to make
findings on what ‘protection and assistance’
might be available to
the parent and child, before considering what intervention into that
relationship might be ‘necessary’.
Instead, s 10(3)(a) required the
magistrate to consider the
between ‘protection and
assistance to the parent/child’ and ‘necessary intervention into
that relationship’
as part of the ‘synthesis’ of what is in a
child’s best interest in each case.
The mother’s
submissions
that the principle contained in s 10(1) of the
paramount, the mother submitted that ss 10(1), (2) and (3) all form part of a
single statutory task of determining the best interest
of the child, when
deciding ‘what decision to make or action to take in the best interests of
the child. Rather than being
‘subordinate’ to the paramountcy
principle, the mother submitted that the considerations contained within
s 10(3) operate
to give content to sub-s (1), and that sub-ss (1)–(3)
each operate as part of the same statutory task. In this way, where they
relevant, consideration of the principles contained within s 10(3) is a
precondition to the valid exercise of the power conferred
Therefore, where a relevant consideration contained within s 10(3) is
misconstrued, misapplied or not considered, the decision will
be affected by an
error of law.
mother submitted that the judge did not proceed on the basis that a magistrate
must expressly refer to and conduct an analysis
of each of the principles
contained within s 10(3). Rather she submitted that while the magistrate
did consider the relationship
between VWX, her mother and the carers, the judge
correctly found that the magistrate had failed to give substantive consideration
to what she described as the ‘other side of the coin’, namely,
consideration of the widest possible protection and assistance
to the parent and
child as the fundamental group unit of society, including both short and
long-term considerations.
the mother’s submission, the long-term considerations relevant to the
magistrate’s determination included that the
lack of attachment between
VWX and her mother was, in part, the consequence of DFFH’s failures to
facilitate that relationship;
that the relationship could be remedied with
sufficient support and time; and that children removed from the care of a parent
experience negative psychological harm in their teenage years,
particularly where the child’s siblings have remained in the
care of the
mother submitted that the magistrate confined her consideration to the minimum
interventions necessary to ensure the child’s
safety, at best making a
finding about the current degree of attachment and connection between VWX and
the mother. In oral argument,
counsel for the mother characterised this as an
erroneous assessment of the minimum intervention into the status quo, rather
the minimum intervention necessary into the parent-child relationship
— which, it was submitted, is the relationship that s
10(3)(a) is intended
to protect.
magistrate’s failure to properly construe and consider this principle
undermined the clear intent of the provision and
for that reason the judge was
correct to find that the magistrate erred in this way.
submitted that the lack of consideration of alternative forms of orders that
could be made, such as a family preservation
order (as contended for by the
mother), or an extension of the care by Secretary order, further suggest that
the magistrate applied
an erroneous construction of s 10(3)(a) of the
— one focussed on the minimum intervention into the status quo of
VWX being in the care of the carers.
Consideration
judge held that the magistrate had failed to have regard to s 10(3)(a) for two
principal reasons. The first is that the magistrate
did not expressly recite the
whole of that paragraph in her reasons. The magistrate did refer to the
‘minimum intervention
necessary to ensure the child’s safety’
but did not set out in her reasons the ‘need to give the widest possible
protection and assistance to the parent and child as the fundamental group unit
of society’.
Second, the
judge said that the magistrate’s analysis did not grapple with the need to
protect the family unit where the evidence
showed that the relationship between
VWX and her mother was not irreparable and that there was a risk of harm by
reason of the separation
from a natural parent particularly where there are
siblings remaining in the care of the parent.
have come to a different conclusion to that reached by the judge.
magistrate expressly referred to s 10(3)(a) in her reasons. Having done so, it
ought not lightly be inferred that the magistrate
ignored the provision. It must
be remembered that the Children’s Court is a very busy court, and that the
magistrate’s
reasons must be construed fairly and as a whole.
the magistrate said she took into account, ‘in particular the minimum
interventions necessary to ensure the child’s
The reference to
interventions reflects the language in s 10(3)(a), further pointing to an
awareness of the need to have regard to
that provision. It is true that the
magistrate had a very keen focus on the effect of breaking the existing
relationship between
the child and the carers, who the magistrate observed were
the ‘only parental figures [VWX] has
That said, the
detailed assessment of the position of the mother and father does not betray any
suggestion that the magistrate failed
to appreciate the parent/child
relationship as the fundamental group unit of society. Given the lack of actual
attachment, it was
the foundational importance of the relationship between
parent and child that explained the detailed considerations that the magistrate
gave to the position of the mother, the father and the child in this case.
can be no doubt that the magistrate recognised the importance of the
relationship between VWX and her mother. That relationship
is a central focus of
the reasons and is reflected in the conditions that were attached to the order.
It would be wrong to consider
the conditions as only having arisen after the
magistrate had decided to make the PCO; rather they form part of the overall
of the circumstances disclosed in the evidence before her.
magistrate placed some emphasis on the lack of support both the mother and the
father had received from DFFH in maintaining their
relationship with VWX. In
relation to the father, the magistrate found that DFFH had failed to facilitate
his participation in the
child’s life. The magistrate found that this
amounted to a failure to comply with s 11 of the
, including the
obligation that a child’s parent should be assisted and supported in
reaching decisions and taking actions to
promote the child’s safety and
magistrate was also critical of the support given to the mother, noting that
DFFH’s involvement did not include any type
of parenting support, advice
or practical assistance to improve or enhance the contact between the mother and
the child. In reaching
her conclusion, the magistrate did not discount the
adverse impact on the mother and the child’s relationship resulting from
the lack of Departmental support for and facilitation of that
relationship.
lack of support given to the parents would not have assumed the prominence that
it did, if the magistrate was not proceeding on
the basis that a parent and
child is the fundamental group unit of society. What the magistrate did was go
on to test the practical
content of the relationship in that context.
the face of this lack of support, and the limited connection between the mother
and the child that resulted, the magistrate concluded
‘meaningfulness’ of the relationship between mother and child was
‘demonstrably
Against that,
the magistrate had very powerful evidence about the strong bond between the
child and her carers. In this respect,
the magistrate made express findings as
to the harm that would be caused to the child were she to be placed in the care
of her mother.
fairly, the reasons disclose that the magistrate gave very anxious consideration
to the position of the mother and the institutional
importance of the
relationship between a mother and her child. It is not possible to discern from
the reasons any failure on the
part of the magistrate to understand the
importance that the
places on a relationship of parent and child
and the need to put protective measure in place. In part, the reasons reveal the
consequences occasioned to parent/child relationships when those
protective supports are not put in place.
magistrate carefully evaluated the attachment between VWX, the mother and
VWX’s half siblings and the nature of relationship
they would likely have
under a PCO, as well as the carers’ attitude to supporting and preserving
VWX’s relationship with
her birth family. As the carers submitted, the
conditions imposed on the PCO relating to the preservation of the relationship
VWX and her birth family are indivisible from the magistrate’s
decision as to whether she was satisfied that VWX’s best
interests would
be promoted by the making of the PCO. The findings reflect the
magistrate’s detailed consideration of the protection
and assistance
available to support VWX’s relationship with the mother. This was critical
in determining whether the statutory
preconditions for the making of the PCO
were satisfied.
did not require that the magistrate give primacy to the
relationship between the parents and the child. In determining the nature
protection to be given to that relationship, the magistrate was required to
consider the best interests of the child, including
the child’s safety,
rights and developmental needs (bearing in mind age and developmental stage).
The statement of best interests
principles in s 10 and the orders authorised by
plainly show that there will be circumstances where the best
interests of the child will require intervention in that relationship.
magistrate considered that the present case was one such occasion. In doing so,
the magistrate had regard to s 10(3)(a) of the
1 is made out.
Ground 2: whether the magistrate
treated VWX’s carers as parents for the purposes of s 10(3)(g) of the CYF
The Secretary’s
submissions
cover of ground 2, the Secretary submitted that the judge erred in finding that
the magistrate committed a material error by
treating VWX’s carers as her
parents for the purposes of s 10(3)(g) of the
Secretary submitted that three issues are raised under this ground:
(1) whether s 10(3)(g) is properly characterised as a ‘mandatory threshold
test’ or ‘mandatory requirement’
on the basis of its
‘absolute terms’, as described by Elliot J in
Department of Human
Services v DR
or whether it is a matter to be considered amongst all of the
circumstances;
(2) whether s 10(3)(g) is relevant to the determination of an application for a
PCO under s 319 of the
where, by reason of the preconditions in s
319(1)(a), the child is not in the care of their parent;
(3) whether the magistrate treated the carers as VWX’s parents for the
purposes of considering s 10(3)(g).
the Secretary submitted that s 10(3) of the
does not contain
‘mandatory’ or ‘threshold’ principles, but rather, is
subordinate to the paramount principle
contained in s 10(1) of the best
interests of the child and must be balanced against other relevant factors.
Therefore, the weight
and relevance necessary to be accorded to the principle
contained within s 10(3)(g) will vary. For example, in applications for interim
accommodation orders, which are concerned with whether a child should be removed
from the care of a parent prior to the determination
of a protection
application, s 10(3)(g) will be highly relevant and must necessarily be afforded
substantial weight; whereas in matters
where the child has not been in the care
of a parent for significant period prior to the proceeding — as is the
case here —
the relevance and weight to be given to the principle
diminishes over time. The Secretary submitted that following a period of
months in which the parent has not had care of the child, provisions
such as ss 167, 287A and 294A of the
operate to give greater
weight to maintaining continuity and permanency in a child’s care.
the instant case, the Secretary submitted that, in determining whether the grant
of a PCO was in the best interests of VWX, the
magistrate was required, pursuant
to s 10(2) to consider the harm that would be caused to VWX if she were returned
to the care of
her mother and removed from the care of the carers. As VWX had
already been removed from the care of the parents, s 10(3)(g) was
‘mandatory threshold test’ nor directly relevant to the
magistrate’s determination. The Secretary submitted
that, if the
magistrate did err, her Honour fell into error by incorrectly attributing her
consideration of the principle in ss 10(2)
or 10(1) to s
This, they submit
would be an immaterial error.
Secretary also submitted that the judge was wrong to find that the magistrate
inverted the test contained in s 10(3)(g) of the
by treating the
carers as VWX’s parents. The Secretary noted that neither party sought a
finding in the Children’s Court
proceedings that the carers were parents
within the s 3 definition of the
and the magistrate did
not make any finding to that effect — referring to the carers as
‘parental figures’, but
same paragraph, the magistrate referred to the mother and the
stepfather.
This, they submitted
in oral argument, demonstrates a clear recognition that the carers were not
parents and were not being treated
as parents — merely as ‘parental
The carers’
submissions
that the magistrate applied s 10(3)(g) as a ‘mandatory threshold’
test, the carers submitted that the magistrate’s
finding that VWX would be
at an unacceptable risk of harm in the mother’s care was, nonetheless, a
relevant consideration under
s 10(2) or s 10(1) in deciding whether or
not to make a PCO. On this basis they submitted that there is no realistic
possibility
that the magistrate would have made a different decision about
whether it was in VWX’s best interests for the mother to resume
responsibility and whether the PCO would promote VWX’s best interests,
regardless of whether she had applied s 10(3)(g)
as a mandatory threshold or
not. They submitted that it is not ‘improper speculation’ to say
that the evidence in this
case would inevitably lead to the same decision about
VWX’s best interests. Therefore, they submit, the materiality threshold
not satisfied.
The mother’s
submissions
mother agreed with the Secretary that s 10(3)(g) was inapplicable on the
facts of the case, was not directly relevant to the determination
application for a PCO, and was not a ‘mandatory threshold test’ to
the making of a PCO. She emphasised that making
a PCO would not have the effect
of removing VWX from the care of her parent, because she had been removed from
the mother’s
care as a newborn baby and was living with and being cared
for by the carers.
her written submissions, the mother submitted that the Secretary’s
contention — that any error by the magistrate was
immaterial — is
plainly untenable. She noted that the reasons of the magistrate plainly
characterised s 10(3)(g) as a ‘mandatory
threshold test’, and that
the finding that there was an unacceptable risk of harm to the child if she was
to be removed from
the carers was a finding made by applying the test in s
10(3)(g). This, she submitted, were critical parts of the magistrate’s
mother submitted that the judge was correct to find the errors to be material
errors. Citing the High Court in
LPDT v Minister for Immigration
she noted that the threshold of materiality for jurisdictional error was
neither ‘demanding’ nor ‘onerous’,
whether the decision that was in fact made
‘realistically’ have been different had there been no
Accepting that it is not necessary for the error of the magistrate to be
of materiality applies
in the instant case, further referring to the High Court’s statement in
It would involve improper speculation to attempt to discern how the Tribunal
would have reasoned if it had not departed from the
required process of
reasoning in these respects. It follows that there is a possibility, not
fanciful or improbable, that the decision
that was made in fact
have been different if the error had not occurred. The threshold of materiality
was met. None of the facts before the Court provided
a basis to consider that
the outcome would inevitably have been the same had the error not been made. The
error was jurisdictional.
mother submitted that it is not relevant to the issue of whether the
magistrate’s error was material that, as part of the
required statutory
inquiry, the magistrate was also required to consider the harm caused to VWX
were she to be removed from the carers.
This does not cure the
magistrate’s misconstruction and misapplication of s 10(3)(g). In oral
argument, counsel went further
to submit that, as all parties to the appeal
agreed that none of the orders open to the Children’s Court would have had
effect of removing VWX from the care of a parent, it must follow that s
10(3)(g) was not relevant and it would be an error of law
to purport to apply it
as if it was.
mother further contended that the judge was correct in finding that the
magistrate treated the carers as parents for the purposes
of s 10(3)(g). She
noted that, having identified the test in s 10(3)(g) as applying to the removal
of a child from her parents, the
magistrate incorrectly applied that test in
terms of whether VWX should be removed from the care of the carers, who her
Honour described
as ‘the primary and only parental figures she has
This application
is contrary to what the principle contained in s 10(3)(g) requires.
Consideration
sets out a series of ‘principles’
including those principles in s 10 entitled ‘Best interests
principles’.
Section 8(1) provides that the court must have regard to the
principles set out in pt 1.2 ‘where relevant’ in making
any decision
or taking any action under the
statutory obligation to have regard to the principles in pt 1.2 is further
explained in s 9 which provides that the principles
are intended to give
‘guidance’ in the administration of
. The use of the
word ‘guidance’ does not diminish the significance of the
principles. Rather, it emphasises that, in
what will often be a process of
multifactorial decision-making with a variety of competing factors, the
principles will guide the
resolution of any such competition. In that way, s
10(1) makes it explicit that the best interest of the child
must always
regard to ss 8 and 9 of the
, it is evident that the requirement
that the best interests of the child be paramount
must always
guiding principle in the making of any decision or the taking of any action
under that Act. It is not merely a guideline that
the decision-maker can depart
from in some circumstances. In this sense, it is akin to but different from a
statutory obligation
to have regard to a matter in the making of a decision. In
such a case, the decision-maker must take the consideration into account
condition of validity and treat the matter as important in the decision-making
exercise. Under the
, however, it is not enough for the
decision-maker simply to have regard to the best interests of the child and
treat these interests
as important. Rather, in conformity with ss 8 and 9 of the
, the decision-maker must always give the greatest weight to this
consideration over any other consideration.
decision-maker’s obligation to treat the best interests of the child as
the paramount consideration is further developed
in ss 10(2) and (3) of the
. It is clear from its language that s 10 will require a
determination as to whether a proposed decision or action is in the best
interests of the child. In making that determination ss 10(2) and (3) require
the decision-maker to consider a variety of matters.
The matters in s 10(2) must
always be considered: they are the need to protect the child from harm, to
protect his or her rights,
and to promote his or her development. The obligation
is one that seeks not only to avoid harm, but also to protect the child’s
rights and further the realisation of his or her potential; it should not be
viewed as simply adopting the least harmful decision
10(3) stipulates a number of matters that must be considered ‘where they
are relevant’
to the decision-making. It is implicit from this that
the matters mentioned in ss 10(3)(a), (b) or (c) will not be relevant in every
case. Where, however, such a matter is relevant in the circumstances of the
case, then it must be considered in determining ‘what
decision to make or
action to take in the best interests of the child’. For example, where the
relevant decision or action
is the removal of a child from the care of his or
her parents, ss 10(3)(g), (h) and (i) will be clearly relevant, but equally, a
number of other subsections contained in s 10(3) will also be engaged.
need to protect a child from harm will always be a necessary consideration to be
taken into account in determining whether a decision
or action is in the best
interests of the child.
10(3)(g) qualifies that consideration by expressly providing that a decision to
remove a child from the care of a parent
is only to occur if there is an
unacceptable risk of harm to the child.
10(3)(g) presents some interpretational challenges because it is expressed as a
criterion to be satisfied before a decision
to remove can be made, yet it
appears in a list of matters that must be taken into account, rather than a list
of qualifying conditions.
In the context of relevant considerations that must be
taken into account, courts have often said that the weight to be given to
consideration will be a matter for the decision-maker. Indeed, in
for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
Brennan J said that a
decision-maker could take a consideration into account by having regard to it
but ultimately giving it no or
Section 10(3)(g) is
evidently not of that kind.
said, in the context of s 10(3)(g), there is, at most, a very fine distinction
between treating s 10(3)(g) as a matter to be
considered or as a criterion
that must be satisfied for the making of a decision. In every case, the best
interests of the child
must be paramount. In every case there is a need to
protect the child from harm. Whether to take the serious step of removing a
from his or her parents will require an assessment of the risk of harm
should that step be taken or not taken. In many cases, none
of the options
available to the court will be free from risk to the child.
10(3)(g) makes it clear that a risk of harm in keeping a child with his or her
parents does not mean that the child must be
removed. The relevant matter to be
considered is whether the risk of harm is unacceptable. That entails a difficult
qualitative exercise,
assessing both the level and likelihood of harm should the
decision to remove be made or not made. If the Court is satisfied that
of harm in keeping the child with the parents is unacceptable, including having
regard to any means of reducing the risk
short of removing the child, then it is
difficult to conceive of a case where removal would not result. Placing or
keeping a child
in an environment where there is an unacceptable risk of harm is
hardly likely to be compatible with the best interests of the child.
that whether the risk of harm is unacceptable will always be relevant and often
determinative in deciding whether to remove
the child. That empirical
observation may slide into expressing sub-s (g) as a ‘threshold’
that must always be satisfied
before the power to remove is available. It is
unnecessary to take that step.
to express s 10(3)(g) as a threshold does not reflect the text. Although an
unacceptable risk will usually dictate removal,
it is conceivable that where the
risk of harm is not itself unacceptable, nevertheless a decision to remove might
be in the best
interests of the child. As already noted, the paramount principle
is not just the avoidance of harm but the pursuit of what is in
interests of the child.
second issue of construction that arises from s 10(3)(g) is whether that
consideration only applies to an initial decision to
remove the child from the
care of his or her parents. In the
, ‘care’, in
relation to a child, is defined as
the daily care and control of the child, whether or not involving parental
responsibility for the child.
As already adverted to, VWX had been the subject of a protection application
and a number of orders that had the effect of giving
parental responsibility to
the Secretary and placing her in out of home care. In physical terms, VWX had
been removed from the care
of her parents long before the making of the PCO.
But, in our view, it would be wrong to treat the word ‘removed’ in
10(3)(g) in purely physical terms, such that the section is spent once the child
leaves the care of the parent.
many cases, the care arrangements of a child who is the subject of a protection
application will be considered by the Children’s
Court at various stages
and on the basis of evidence of varying degrees of strength. For example, an
interim accommodation order
might be made very quickly, without relevant
material being tested in any comprehensive way. To regard the removal as
complete at
this stage would ignore the integrated and ongoing role of the court
in the welfare of the child and the legal and practical effect
of future orders
that might be made. In the present case, the making of a PCO is a final order
that determines where, and by whom,
the child is to be cared for. The effect of
the order is to remove the child permanently from the care of his or her
parents. In
our opinion, making a PCO constitutes a decision to remove the child
from the care of his or her parents and s 10(3)(g) is engaged.
There was no
error by the magistrate in considering that provision.
issue then is whether the magistrate erred in treating s 10(3)(g) as a
‘mandatory threshold’. In our opinion, for
the reasons already
in the circumstances
of the case, although describing s 10(3)(g) as a ‘threshold’ may
have overstated the role of that
provision, the error was purely semantic. That
is because the magistrate was obliged to assess the harm to the child that might
from the taking of any proposed action, including the harm that would
result from taking the child away from the carers. Whether
or not considered at
the threshold, the matters that were taken into account were relevant, and in
the light of the finding that
the identified harm would be unacceptable, it was
open to the magistrate to regard that issue as one of the determinative
answer to the central complaint in ground 2, we are not persuaded that, in
making the PCO, the magistrate treated the carers as
the parents of the child
for the purpose of the
. As already observed, assessing the harm
of taking VWX from the carers was important and concluding that the risk of such
be unacceptable did not carry with it any conclusion that the carers
were being treated as the parents. Indeed, the magistrate’s
phrase ‘parental figures’ to describe the carers would have been
incongruous if the magistrate considered
them to be the parents.
magistrate appreciated that the mother was seeking to have VWX returned to her.
The magistrate described the effect of this outcome
as removal of the child from
the carers. The use of the word ‘removed’ merely described the
proposed change in care arrangements;
it did not carry with it any conclusion
that the carers were the child’s parents under the
this is confirmed by the qualified language used by the magistrate, in noting
that removal from the carers ‘would be
as close as it gets’ to
removing the child from ‘her parents and family’. The magistrate was
clearly alive to the
legal distinction between the child’s carers and the
parents. The strength of the bond between the child and the carers did
the magistrate to elide the carers with parents.
would uphold ground 2.
the reasons we have given, neither ground of appeal to the Trial Division should
have been upheld. It follows that the Secretary
succeeds on both grounds. Leave
to appeal should be granted and the appeal must be allowed.
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILIES, FAIRNESS AND HOUSING
To ensure that there is no
possibility of identification, this judgment has been anonymised by the adoption
of a pseudonyms.
VWX was born on 6 January
Children, Youth and
Families Act
289(1)(a)–(b).
Ibid s 320.
Secretary, Department of
Families Fairness and Housing v [VWX]
(Magistrate R Hamilton,
Children’s Court of Victoria, 1 March 2024) [17] (‘Reasons
(Children’s Court)’).
JKL (a pseudonym) v
Secretary, Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
[2024] VSC 645 (K
Judd J) (‘Reasons (Trial Division)’).
319(1)(b)(i)–(ii).
The father has not
participated in these proceedings. By the affidavit dated 18 August 2025, Ms
Sarah Masters, Special Counsel,
Child Protection Litigation, Legal Services
Branch of the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (‘DFFH’),
that DFFH has been unable to locate the father and has not received any
to serve him with
material in these proceedings, or in respect of his contact with VWX. This Court
dispensed with the service requirements
for the father on the basis of that
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [12].
Ibid [19]–[20]
(citations omitted).
Ibid [21] (emphasis added),
s 10(3)(g).
[2013] VSC 579
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [22].
Ibid [72]–[73].
Reasons (Trial Division),
[23], quoting Reasons (Children’s Court), [22].
Ibid [27], citing
Secretary to Department of Health and Human Services
(2020) 61 VR 436
[76] (Incerti J);
[2020] VSC 400.
Reasons (Trial Division),
Ibid [27]–[28].
Ibid [43]–[44].
See [25] above.
Reasons (Trial Division),
Ibid [47], citing
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
, 328–9 [14] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ, Beech-Jones J agreeing at 335 [38]);
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [20] (emphasis added).
TSH v Department
of Families, Fairness and Housing
[2022] VSC 390
, [57]–[58]
(Tsalamandris J);
Mia Harris (a pseudonym) and Adam Jackson (a pseudonym) v
Secretary to the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
[2023] VSC 228
[113]–[117] (O’Meara J) (‘
Harris (a pseudonym) v
pseudonym) v DFFH
[2023] VSC 228
, [113] (O’Meara J).
Reasons (Trial Division),
[2023] VSC 228
(O’Meara J).
Department of Human Services v Sanding
[2011] VSC 42
(2011) 36 VR 221
, 229 [20]–[21]
[2011] VSC 42.
Reasons (Trial Division),
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [20].
[2013] VSC 579
(Elliot J) (‘
Secretary to the
Department of Human Services v Children’s Court of Victoria & Ors
[2014] VSC 609
, [23] (Macaulay J);
Purcell v R
[2004] VSC 14
(Gillard J).
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [21].
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Ibid 328–9 [14]
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ);
[2024] HCA 12.
Ibid 335 [36] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ);
[2024] HCA 12.
Reasons (Children’s
Court), [22].
(1986) 162 CLR 24
[1986] HCA 40.
See [76] above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (599 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter