URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1306.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alan Carroll Pty Ltd v Port Phillip CC Alan Carroll Pty Ltd v Port Phillip CC [1998] VICCAT 1306 (22 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/046863
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 1560/97
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 22ND DECEMBER 1998
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION
GROUNDS OF OBJECTION
Ashley & Amanda Tonkin-Hill
A. Kyriakou
Sue Galley and Des Ford
APPEARANCES
PRELIMINARY MATTER
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
REASONS FOR THE ORDER
The Appeal Site and Locality
Planning Controls
Planning Approval Procedures
10 December 1997
26 March 1998
3 June 1998
The Objectors' Concerns
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/046863
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 1560/97
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 22ND DECEMBER 1998
Struan Gilfillan, Member
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant Alan Carroll Pty Ltd
Responsible Authority City of Port Phillip
Respondent/Objectors Amanda Tonkin-Hill and Ors
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
18A St Vincent Street,
Albert Park
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
The land is zoned Residential 1 under the Port Phillip Planning Scheme and lies
within a Heritage Overlay, HO24 area.
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The roof deck will detract from the amenity of the area.
2. The roof deck is out of character with the scale and height of existing
buildings of the area.
3. The roof deck does not contribute positively to the heritage value of the
neighbourhood.
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION
1. The proposal is in keeping with the function of the existing building.
2. The proposal will not detract from the amenity of the area.
3. The proposal is not out of character with the scale and height of existing
buildings of the area.
4. The proposal does contribute positively to the heritage value of the area.
GROUNDS OF OBJECTION
Ashley & Amanda Tonkin-Hill
1. The roof deck will detract from the amenity of the area.
2. The roof deck is out of character with the scale and height of existing
buildings of the area.
3. The roof deck does not contribute positively to the heritage value of the
neighbourhood.
4. The roof deck will substantially erode the privacy presently enjoyed by the
residents of my property.
5. There may be significant cost to me as the present tenants of my property
have advised that they may not wish to continue residing
in the property if
approval is granted for the construction of the roof deck.
6. The proposal significantly alters the function of the existing building.
A. Kyriakou
1. The proposal is not in keeping with the function of the existing
2. The roof deck would give them a clear vantage point over all the homes in
Nelson Road, St Vincent Street and Brooks Street.
3. The proposal will detract from the amenity of the area.
4. The existing proposal is totally out of character as it stands.
5. The proposal absolutely does not contribute to the heritage value of the
6. To further add to its height would devalue all homes, as no person would
purchase knowing that one can build to such height.
One's privacy factor would
Sue Galley and Des Ford
1. The proposal is not in keeping with the already existing tall building and
would greatly interfere with the privacy of both us
and our neighbours.
2. The proposal will detract from the amenity of the area. It will be visually
unacceptable, noisy, and may well open the flood
gates for similar plans.
3. The proposal will be out of character.
4. The proposal certainly does not contribute to the area's heritage value.
Moreover it would significantly reduce the value of all
nearby property being
so intrusive and out of character.
APPEARANCES
Ms Louise Johnston, Urban Planner, appeared for the Responsible Authority.
Ms Fiona Cotter, B.App.Sc. (Planning), MRAPI, Town Planner of Fulcrum Town
Planners Pty Ltd, appeared for Mrs Kyriakou, an objector.
Ms Amanda Tonkin-Hill appeared on her own behalf and that of Mr Ashley
Tonkin-Hill, objectors.
Mr Mark Naughton, Solicitor of Minter Ellison, Solicitors, appeared for the
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant and called Mr Andrew
B.App.Sc.(Planning), Town Planner of Contour Consultants, as an expert.
The parties presented oral argument based on written submissions. These
together with the photographs and other material tendered
in the course of the
review have been retained on the Tribunal's file.
PRELIMINARY MATTER
Mr Naughton on behalf of the Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant sought the
substitution of plans for those submitted with the
application. There being no
objection, I allowed this course under Schedule 1 Clause 64 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The drawings considered at the
review were numbered:
TP.01A to TP.05A inclusive, dated 15 December 1998.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
This proceeding was lodged with the former Administrative Appeals Tribunal of
Victoria. Following the coming into operation on 1st
of July 1998 of Section
Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
"Miscellaneous Amendments Act"
), that Tribunal has
been replaced by the newly created Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Clause 9(1) of Schedule 2 of
Miscellaneous Amendments Act
that where the Administrative Appeals Tribunal had not begun to hear a pending
proceeding, the proceeding is to be heard
and determined by the Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal.
REASONS FOR THE ORDER
This application for review is one brought by the Permit Applicant against a
decision of the City of Port Phillip to refuse to grant
a planning permit for a
deck on a two storey house at 18A St Vincent Street, Albert Park.
The Appeal Site and Locality
Ms Johnston has described the site and surrounds as follows:
"The subject site is located on the north-east corner of St Vincent and
Nelson Road, between Nelson Road and Brooke Streets, Albert
Park. The subject
site currently contains a two storey building which covers the whole of the
site which is being used for the purpose
of an office on the ground level and a
residence on the first floor level.
The area within the vicinity of the site comprises residential dwellings.
The only double storey buildings within vicinity of the
site are the three
sites opposite and adjacent on the sites fronting Moubray Street and Nelson
Road. The buildings north of the
subject site are all single storey. The
architectural styles in St Vincent Street are predominantly Victorian."
Planning Controls
As previously stated the land is situated in a Residential 1 Zone and a
planning permit is required to extend a dwelling on a lot
. A permit is also required because the land is in an Heritage
Overlay HO24 for external alterations.
The objectives of Council's Municipal Strategic Statement relevant to this
proposal have been selected by Ms Johnston as:
"* By ensuring new development is sympathetic to the local streetscape
character of the city's residential neighbourhoods.
* Protection of established residential neighbourhoods from inappropriate
new development.
* New buildings and works which are good neighbours to others in the
street by making a positive contribution to local character
and the public
* New buildings complement the existing streetscape and character of the
area from immediate, intermediate and distant vantage points.
* New development should be sited so to minimise adverse impacts on the
streetscape character of an area and on nearby properties.
* Heights of new buildings should not generally exceed one storey above
the predominant built form in the area."
Amendment C5 to the Port Phillip Planning Scheme, said to be a
entertained"
planning proposal proposes changes to the Port Phillip
Planning Scheme by improvements to the Municipal Strategic Statement,
introduction
of local neighbourhood policies, new heritage overlay maps and
schedule of heritage places and new design and development overlay
design objectives.
The subject land is located within Area 1 - Established Residential Areas under
the South Melbourne, Albert Park, Middle Park Local
Neighbourhood Policy
(1998). The objectives of this area are:
"* To retain the architectural diversity and integrity of the South
Melbourne, Albert Park and Middle Park established residential
protecting and conserving individually significant heritage buildings and
streetscapes including small streets and laneways;
* To ensure that new development complements or reconstructs/replicates
the identified heritage qualities of the neighbourhood;
* To ensure that new development in non-heritage areas is compatible with
its surroundings and the identified neighbourhood character
Ms Johnston has noted in her submission that
"The application to construct a roof top deck on the existing building must
be consistent with the Port Phillip Manual (1998) and
reflect the prevailing
scale, orientation and setbacks of existing buildings adjacent to and in the
immediate vicinity of the site."
Amendment C5 also provides for the
"City of Port Phillip Neighbourhood and
Urban Design Policy (1998)"
and the site may be considered to exist in an
"Identifiable"
streetscape under that policy.
The New House and Extensions Guidelines apply throughout the City of Port
Phillip, particularly in the established residential areas
and the following
critical factors apply to this application:
The prevailing street rhythm of building scale and height should be
maintained. Heights of new buildings should not generally exceed
above the predominant built form in the area.
The form of alterations to existing buildings should relate to the form of
the existing dwellings in the Street.
The materials used for alterations to an existing dwelling should be
selected to compliment traditional materials evident in the streetscape.
walls, either brick or cement render.
Planning Approval Procedures
10 December 1997
Application for planning permit lodged with Port Phillip City Council.
26 March 1998
Council issued Notice of Refusal.
3 June 1998
Permit applicant appealed to Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
Mr Rodda described the proposal as follows:
"It is proposed to create a roof deck of approximately 45m
size above the roof towards the rear of the existing building. The deck would
be screened by 1.5 metre high fixed louvered screens
set back 1 metre from the
northern and southern parapet and erected in line with the existing first floor
roof (4.5 metres from the
eastern boundary). The western face of the screen is
to be set back approximately 13 metres from the Nelson Road frontage.
The existing parapet is proposed to be extended along the eastern edge of
the roof deck to match the height and line of the existing
southern facades of
the building.
The roof deck is to be accessed via a screened stair which leads from first
floor living room doors and terrace.
The screen to be used for the roof deck comprises metal posts with oiled
hardwood slats. The use of timber is intended to match timber
balconies and garage door previously approved by the Council as part of the
renovation of the building and its use for a
dwelling and office."
The Objectors' Concerns
Ms Tonkin-Hill is concerned that the deck is out of character with the scale
and height of existing buildings in the area.
From the drawings it appears that the proposed fence around the deck extends
1.5m above the deck level all around the deck. However,
the building parapet
on the west side is level with the deck and the parapet on the east side is
500mm high. The fence is set 1.0m
from east and west boundaries and 13m from
the south boundary. The north end is on the north edge of the roof of the two
section of the building.
The deck fence if clearly visible to neighbours or passers-by is out of
character with existing buildings and therefore unacceptable.
However, the
setting back of the fence is designed to make the fence less obtrusive and the
Tribunal finds that it almost does so
from west, south and east sides.
However, this is not so from the north, north-east or north-west since the
north fence will be clearly
visible and out of character with the area.
Added to this problem is the unsightly and dominating structure of the access
stairs and its screening.
Ms Tonkin-Hill and Ms Cotter are concerned about loss of amenity, and loss of
on the deck. To meet
the Good Design Guide technique the fence should be raised to 1.6m above the
deck, making it more visible to
the neighbourhood.
Since the deck is attached to an office building it affords ideal entertainment
potential and clearly noisy entertainment would be
unacceptable for neighbours
to have to bear.
A further concern is the potential for overlooking to the north from the stair
landing at deck level since the stair balustrade follows
The concern re loss of tenants to the adjoining building should a permit be
granted, if due to the construction process is not of
consequence. However, if apprehension re loss of amenity is due to loss of
concern to be taken into
account and given some weight.
The Tribunal finds that the north fence of the deck and the access stair are
unacceptably out of scale and the bulk will dominate
the adjoining properties
to the north and west.
The 1.5m high fence should be 1.6m high to provide a screen in accordance with
the Good Design Guide technique and as such the fence
will further dominate.
A design solution may be possible which provides for a smaller deck and hence a
lesser number of people can utilise it. The deck
should have greater setbacks
from east and west and similarly from the north end of the two storey section
and the access stair should
access the deck from below with perhaps a sliding
hatch cover so that the present unsightly and unacceptable stair is not
On the basis that the present proposal is out of character with the area and
will result in loss of amenity for adjoining occupants,
no permit should issue.
The order of the Tribunal is that the application for review is disallowed and
it is instructed that no permit shall issue.
K. STRUAN GILFILLAN
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter