URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1645.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Di Matteo v Victorian WorkCover Authority [2025] VCC 1645 (14 November 2025)
THE COUNTY COURT OF
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
SERIOUS INJURY
Case No. CI-25-00353
SOULA DI MATTEO
VICTORIAN WORKCOVER AUTHORITY
HIS HONOUR JUDGE GOSTENCNIK
DATE OF HEARING
9 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
14 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Di Matteo v Victorian WorkCover Authority
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1645
REASONS FOR
Subject: ACCIDENT COMPENSATION
Catchwords: Serious injury application – crush injury to the right
hand, pain and suffering
Legislation Cited:
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
Cases Cited:
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2008] VSCA 260
Haden Engineering Pty Ltd v McKinnon
[2010] VSCA 69
v DHL Express (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 26
Humphries and Anor v
[1992] VicRp 58
[1992] 2 VR 129
Sabanovic v Atco Controls Pty Ltd
[2009] VSCA
Sejranovic v Berkeley Challenge Pty Ltd
[2009] VSCA 108
Judgment: Application for leave to bring proceedings for
pain and suffering damages is refused.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr C Woolacott
Slater & Gordon Lawyers
For the Defendant
Ms S Manova
IDP Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
plaintiff, Soula Di Matteo, seeks leave under s 335 of the
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
2013 (Act) to commence a common law
proceeding for the recovery of pain and suffering damages in respect of a crush
injury to the
plaintiff’s right hand. The plaintiff sustained the injury
in an industrial accident on 24 January 2019 while working as a
technician for Affinity Health Pty Ltd (Affinity) at the Warringal Private
Hospital. The plaintiff was also subsequently
diagnosed with Complex Regional
Pain Syndrome (CRPS).
The issues and relevant legal
defendant accepts that the plaintiff suffered a crush injury in the form of a
fracture to the fifth or little finger of her right
hand and closed mallet
injuries to the third or index and fourth or ring fingers of that hand in the
industrial accident. The contested
issues raised by the application concern
range – namely whether the consequences of the plaintiff’s injury,
objectively in comparison with other comparable cases can properly be
described as at least very considerable for the purposes of
assessing serious
injury. There is also a related contest about whether the plaintiff’s CRPS
has resolved. The plaintiff contends
that the consequences of her injury meet
the “at least very considerable” test. For its part, the defendant
issue whether the plaintiff’s CRPS has resolved or not is neither
here nor there, as the result is the same – the consequences
of the hand
injury alone or in combination with CRPS is not very considerable.
succeed, the plaintiff must satisfy the Court, on the balance of probabilities,
that she has sustained a “serious injury”
within the meaning of s
325(1) of the Act, namely and relevantly:
(a) permanent serious impairment or loss of a body function; or
whether the injury claimed is a “serious injury” is undertaken at
the time the application is heard. Here, the
plaintiff says the injury the
subject of the application is a serious injury because it is a permanent serious
impairment or loss
of a body function and so the term “serious” is
satisfied by reference to the consequences to the plaintiff of any impairment
loss of body function with respect to pain and suffering, when judged by
comparison with other cases in the range of possible
impairments or losses of
body function.
impairment or loss of a body function or a disfigurement will not be serious for
the purposes of s 335(2) of the Act unless, relevantly
here, the pain and
suffering consequence is, when judged by comparison with other cases, in the
range of possible impairments or
losses of a body function, or disfigurements,
as the case may be, fairly described as being more than significant or marked,
as being at least very
considerable.
an injury is a “serious injury” within the meaning of s 325(1)
of the Act is assessed by applying the “narrative
This involves a
two-stage process. The first requires assessing whether the nature and symptoms
of the injury and the consequences
of the injury are, subjectively for the
plaintiff, "serious". The second requires a determination whether the injury as
so assessed
is objectively "serious" or, in the case of mental or behavioural
disturbance or disorder, "severe" when compared with the range
"spectrum" of comparable
As to any physical
injuries, the second stage involves a consideration whether the injury is, when
compared with other possible
impairments, losses of body function or
disfigurements, at least ‘very considerable’, and more than
‘significant
the plaintiff’s “pain and suffering consequences” resulting
from an injury, requires the Court to consider
both the plaintiff’s
experience of pain in addition to the disabling effect of the pain on the
plaintiff’s physical capabilities
and enjoyment of
It may be necessary to
consider the intensity, frequency and duration of the plaintiff’s pain by
reference to the plaintiff’s
account of the pain, what he or she does
medical opinions
on the extent and intensity of the plaintiff’s pain, and
what the objective evidence indicates about the disabling effect of
Assessing the extent or
degree to which pain from a physical injury impacts the plaintiff’s
physical capacity and enjoyment
of life includes considering the effect of pain
on the plaintiff’s sleep, mobility, cognitive functioning, capacity for
and self-management, performance of household and family duties,
recreational activities, social activities, sex life, and enjoyment
The disabling effects of pain
may also be shown by considering whether the plaintiff has resumed employment
and, if so, what, if
any, limitations there are on the plaintiff’s
employment.
8 The weight
that is ascribed to the plaintiff’s account of pain will in part depend on
the Court’s assessment of the
plaintiff’s credibility or
reliability.
An assessment of
credibility or reliability depends on the plaintiff’s evidence and the
views expressed by the examining medical
practitioners’ and any opinions
plaintiff is now 61 years old. She completed the equivalent of Year 11 at
secondary school and went on to work in various retail
jobs before commencing
employment with Epworth Hospital as an orderly in about 2005. She lives in
Reservoir with her husband and
commenced working for Affinity as a theatre technician at Warringal Private
Hospital in around July 2011. She was employed on
a full-time basis; on occasion
she would also work shifts at the Mercy and St Vincent’s Hospitals. She
also attained Certificates
III and IV in Operating Theatre Technical Support
whilst employed by Affinity and
plaintiff said that before suffering the crush injury, her favourite hobby was
tenpin bowling which she played regularly with
her friends. She said she loved
tenpin bowling and played in social competitions each week and had her own
bowling gear. The plaintiff
said that she was also a gym regular attending
fitness classes and that she enjoyed long power walks. She said she also enjoyed
painting and home maintenance and she considered herself as the
“handyman” and took pride in keeping the house and garden
The plaintiff said that
she also enjoyed scrapbooking each month and using colouring books each week.
She said that she enjoyed spending
time cutting up photographs and filling up a
photo album for her family and that each week she would spend a few hours
drawing and
colouring in books to relax after
plaintiff has had health issues and injuries before the crush injury she
sustained in 2019. In about 2009, the plaintiff suffered
a right middle finger
injury whilst working at the Epworth Hospital. She made a WorkCover claim and
subsequently underwent a right
middle finger trigger release procedure.
Following surgery, the plaintiff commenced hand therapy and reports that she
made a good
recovery and resumed her preinjury hours and
fingers” whilst employed with Affinity. The
fracture was said to have
healed without the need for treatment. A WorkCover claim was made but the
plaintiff did not require much
time off work and was said to have made a full
recovery thereafter.
plaintiff suffered a right-hand haematoma injury whilst employed with Affinity
in about 2015. She said that no treatment was
required as the haematoma resolved
the years, the plaintiff has also suffered from recurrent kidney stones. On
occasion, she has visited hospital because of the
In early 2025, she
attended her GP because she was experiencing kidney pain. The plaintiff was
referred for scans and then to a specialist
and was diagnosed with kidney
stones. Panadeine Forte was prescribed for pain management and the plaintiff
reports that she made
accident and injury
wall whilst pushing a malfunctioning operating table
to the maintenance team
with the assistance of a
After moving the
table some distance, it became stuck on a door track. The plaintiff said that
she was expecting her colleague to
pull the table to dislodge it, but the
colleague instead pushed the table causing the plaintiff’s right hand to
be pinned against
a wall. The plaintiff said that the pain was immediate and
that she was reviewed by a nurse at Warringal Private Hospital before
directed to attend the emergency department at the nearby Austin Hospital where
she underwent an x-ray scan. She was diagnosed
with an open fracture and
haematoma of her right little finger and closed mallet injuries to her right
ring and middle fingers.
plaintiff was told that she would require surgery to repair the fracture injury
but that the Austin Hospital was experiencing
surgery delays. She was told that
the surgery could be undertaken by plastic surgeon Mr Derek Neoh at St
Vincent’s Hospital
and on about 25 January 2019, she had surgery to insert
a K-wire into her right little finger and had a back-slab positioned in her
and middle fingers.
the surgery, the plaintiff was discharged and subsequently attended her GP at
Coburg Family Medicine on 4 February 2019
for review. She made a WorkCover Claim
in respect of the hand injury.
This was accepted, and she commenced receiving weekly payments for the period
she was off work.
On 5 February
2019, she returned to see plastic surgeon Mr Derek Neoh who referred her to Ms
Elaine Naughton at Melbourne Hand Therapy
to commence rehabilitation. The
plaintiff returned to work in March 2019 on light and modified
She says that following
the accident she struggled with her mental health. As such, she was referred to
psychologist Leigh Parkin
in May 2019 whom she saw on “only a few
occasions”.
receiving hand therapy, the plaintiff said she continued to experience ongoing
right-hand pain leading her to overcompensate
with her left arm resulting in
left shoulder pain. She was referred for physiotherapy in July 2019 and
prescribed Lyrica and Norspan
patches for pain by Dr Maher Luka, her general
practitioner. In October 2019, Dr Luka referred the plaintiff for a further
scan of her right hand which detected an acute fracture or dislocation.
She was referred to Mr Barry Slon, pain physician, for review.
Mr Slon referred
the plaintiff for a further surgical opinion and prescribed Venlafaxine and
Nortriptyline for pain.
December 2019, Mr James Thomas, plastic surgeon, diagnosed the plaintiff with
CRPS in her right hand and opined that she would
benefit from a steroid
injection. She returned to Dr Luka seeking to explore other treatment options
and was referred to Mr Damon
Thomas, plastic surgeon, who recommended a
cortisone injection. The cortisone injection was administered in early 2020,
however the
plaintiff reports that she did not feel much
14 April 2020, she underwent a right ring finger trigger release procedure,
which she says had a reasonable result, but she continued
to have right hand
pain. A further steroid injection was administered by Mr Damon Thomas in July
June 2020, the plaintiff commenced psychology treatment with Melissa Donati and
continued to see her periodically until February
The plaintiff suffered an
unrelated laceration to “the finger” on her right hand in November
2020, which she says healed
without the need for treatment.
Damon Thomas administered a final cortisone injection in January
The plaintiff said that
she continued to have ongoing issues with her left shoulder and right hand
throughout 2020 and into 2021.
She had returned to work with Affinity following
the second procedure and had almost resumed working preinjury hours and duties
she accepted a full-time position as a theatre technician at North Park
Hospital, leaving Affinity in late 2021 to commence the new
The plaintiff had further
physiotherapy and an ultrasound in November 2021, and she undertook hand therapy
treatment in early 2022.
This continued until about January 2023 when the
plaintiff says she was told that “there was little more that could be
on her hand.
Consequently, the plaintiff says she has had little treatment on her right hand
or left shoulder since 2023.
pain relief, the plaintiff rubs her hand regularly and uses topical ointments
and Dencorub, takes Panadeine Forte, Mersyndol Forte
or Maxigesic as needed when
the pain flares up, uses Nurofen sparingly and wears a compression glove in
colder months which she says
assists with circulation and
Plaintiff’s
employment and work history
earlier noted, the plaintiff worked as a full-time theatre technician at
Warringal Private Hospital and on occasion, she would
also work shifts at the
Mercy and St Vincent’s Hospitals. She was working at Warringal Private
Hospital when she sustained
the crush injury to her right hand. She had time off
work following the injury, returning to light or modified duties in March
plaintiff returned to work with Affinity after her second procedure (right ring
finger trigger release procedure on 14 April 2020)
and had “almost”
resumed her preinjury hours and duties when she was offered a position with
Healthscope Operations Pty
Ltd at North Park Hospital as a full-time theatre
technician, which she accepted in late 2021. After several months with North
Hospital, the plaintiff commenced a medical sales role with Device
Technologies Australia Pty Ltd in March 2022 on a full-time basis.
approximately 10 months, her role was “transferred” to Steris
Australia Pty Ltd, and she remained in the sales
position until January 2024.
The plaintiff accepted a sales position with DON Smallgoods in January 2024
resigning in about November
2024. Next, the plaintiff commenced employment with
InCare Health Services as a customer service/business development manager and
continued in that role until the position was made redundant and her employment
ended consequently. Since August 2025, the plaintiff
has been employed by Adeney
Private Hospital as a full-time theatre technician, a job in which she plans to
continue working for
as long as she
plaintiff said she was happy in her current job, which she described as
relatively light and manageable, compared to her previous
theatre technician
role because the place of work is a smaller facility, the surgeons are younger
and more ‘hands on’
which made her job easier, and they are more
mindful of safe work practices and use modern
and suffering consequences claimed
plaintiff’s evidence concerning the pain and suffering sequelae of her
hand injury was to the following effect.
plaintiff said that since her injury, she has experienced constant pain in her
right hand. She wakes most nights and sleeps with
her hand elevated whilst on
the couch, and her sleeping on the couch has impacted her relationship with her
husband. She has trouble
with dexterous movements such as using tongs, pushing
buttons and tying laces. She reports finding household tasks difficult,
those involving repetitive movements. She says that she used to enjoy
gardening, painting and home maintenance and took pride in
keeping the house and
garden neat and tidy. Since the injury, she relies on her husband and son for
assistance in these duties.
During cross-examination, the plaintiff clarified that she was not suggesting
that she does not engage in any of these activities
any longer and that she has
tried things such as house painting involving painting under her veranda and the
columns of her house.
She said that she remembered applying two coats and that
when she was painting, she used her dominant right hand but also sometimes
plaintiff also accepted that she had told her hand therapist at the Melbourne
Institute of Plastic Surgery in 2021 that she had
been using the hand at home
cooking and painting and though the hand felt sore sometimes at the end of the
big day, but it was generally
better. The plaintiff accepted that on other
occasions in 2021, she told the therapist that she was doing well and was using
right hand at home and at work almost as normal with no issues, although had
a fairly constant ache but not flaring up with use as
much as it used to; that
she had a busy weekend cooking and cleaning and that her hand was coping well;
and that she reported that
after undertaking an orthopaedic list as a theatre
technician, she thought she was able to do all of the tasks at preinjury level
and that she experienced no flareups but a background ache
earlier noted, the plaintiff says that prior to her injury, she enjoyed her
hobby of tenpin bowling, playing with friends and family
and in social
competitions. She says that she attempted to return to tenpin bowling, but she
was unable to tolerate the pain. She
also used to attend gym classes and take
long power walks but can no longer do so because of her
cross-examination, the plaintiff clarified that before suffering the crush
injury, in around July 2018 she suffered pain in
her left pectoralis muscle and
pain in over the shoulder level movements for which she was prescribed
medication and referred to
physiotherapy and that she required some time off
work. She agreed that she would not have gone bowling or attended the gym from
experienced.
The plaintiff said
that, although not recently, she had resumed power walking to attain a level of
fitness, but she would suffer
pain later. She said that, although not every day,
she would go for power walks of about 1.5 hours in duration but could not
how many times per week. She said that since she began work as a
technician again, she has not been for a power walk because she
get home until after 6 pm.
injury is said by the plaintiff to have caused a decline in her mental health
characterised by loss of confidence, low mood, low
motivation and feeling flat.
She says that she has experienced depressive thoughts and at times has been
She spends less time
with her family and friends and finds herself spending more time at home and
cross-examination, the plaintiff appeared to accept that her work commitments,
particularly coming home after 6 pm, affects
her ability to see her friends but
that she still sees her friends on weekends although not as much as before her
injury. She said
that a significant part of the reason is because of lowered
mood, that she feels down and sometimes she cannot be
plaintiff’s son, Trent Di Matteo, swore an affidavit on 4 September 2025
deposing to some of the pain and suffering consequences
he says he observed in
respect of the plaintiff’s workplace injury. He described his mother as
“active, confident and
social” prior to the injury and said that she
played tenpin bowling and attended the gym with him about two times a
As to household duties, Mr
Di Matteo deposed that the plaintiff would take care of the household including
cooking, cleaning, washing,
gardening and projects around the house. He deposed
that since the injury, the plaintiff leaves the house significantly less,
to undertake household tasks and has lost interest in her hobbies. Mr
Di Matteo’s affidavit, though supportive of the plaintiff,
is generalised
and adds little to the plaintiff’s narrative already discussed.
plaintiff’s friend of 36 years, Anna Occhiuzzi, swore an affidavit on 5
September 2025 deposing to her observations of the
plaintiff’s lack of
energy, difficulty engaging in social events and daily activities including home
maintenance.
Ms Occhuizzi
described the change in the plaintiff’s mood as “stark”, that
she was “always very confident
and outgoing and always busy going out and
doing things” but now presents as “withdrawn and
retreated”.
Again, though
supportive of the plaintiff, Ms Occhuizzi’s affidavit is also very
generalised and adds little to the plaintiff’s
plaintiff was by and large a truthful witness making appropriate concessions
during cross-examination. The plaintiff struck me
as stoic – by which I
mean she appeared accepting of and willing to endure her fairly constant
background pain (to which reference
is later made) – earnest and not prone
to exaggeration. Moreover, there was no attack nor criticism of the
plaintiff’s
credit or the reliability of her evidence.
Reports of treating doctors
Mr Damon Thomas, plastic surgeon
his letter to Dr Maher Luka dated 13 December
Mr Damon Thomas stated
that the plaintiff, as a result of a crush injury to the right hand sustained in
the course of her employment
as a theatre technician, presented with
“trophic changes” around her fingers, a “reduced range of
and an “inability to make a full
Despite receiving
treatment, Mr Thomas considered the plaintiff’s condition had been
complicated by “chronic regional
pain syndrome” and
“triggering of the ring finger”. Mr Thomas recommended a steroid
injection to the ring finger
flexor sheath to address the
Steroid injections were
administered on 21 January 2020
and 24 July 2020.
Thomas reported on 9 April 2025
that the plaintiff presented on 13 December 2019 with a right-hand crush injury
and his diagnosis was “right little finger
fracture and nailbed
laceration”.
noted the plaintiff had secondary issues which are triggering of the ring finger
requiring steroid injections and operative
intervention. And he opined that she
also has an element of pain syndrome. Mr Thomas last saw the plaintiff on 23
April 2021 and
noted that at that point she still had issues with reduced range
of motion, pain and reduced grip
Kate Sleep, occupational therapist
her report of 1 May 2025,
Kate Sleep stated that the plaintiff’s last appointment was on 25 January
2023. She noted that on this occasion the plaintiff
had reported that her pain
and hand function was unchanged over the previous several months, that she
experienced hand and forearm
pain during heavy lifting and that she had a
“fairly constant background
Ms Sleep opined
that the plaintiff had suffered “crushed right little and ring fingers
involving fractured 5
metacarpal and fractured little finger”
with a secondary diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome and right ring
trigger. Further, Ms Sleep opined that an x-ray taken in January 2023
showed arthritic changes in the right 5
MCP joint and finger
interphalangeal joints. Ms Sleep administered a Disability of the Arm, Shoulder
and Hand Questionnaire, the
result of which “suggests a severe impairment,
significantly affecting daily activities, and may necessitate adjustments to
work or other functional aspects of
Barry Slon, specialist pain medicine physician
his report dated 1 May 2025,
Barry Slon, a pain medicine physician, said that he saw the plaintiff on four
occasions in November 2019, December 2019, January
2020 and finally in April
2020. As to diagnoses, Dr Slon considered the plaintiff had a “complex
regional pain syndrome of
the right hand” and “mallet finger
developing in the right ring finger and trigger finger developing through other
in the right
Maher Luka, general practitioner
Maher Luka reported on 21 July
that the plaintiff suffered
a “compound fracture of the distal phalanx of the right little finger,
together with damage to
the nail bed and damage to the right index finger”
as a result of a crush injury to her right hand in the course of her
employment.
Dr Luka opined that
her recovery has been complicated by the “development of complex regional
pain syndrome”, “a
finger trigger” and degenerative arthritis
which he considers to be moderately
widespread.
On examination, the
plaintiff exhibited “persistent stiffness and functional limitations in
her right hand” and complained
of a constant baseline pain rated 3/10,
which intensifies to 7/10 at night depending on activity
In respect of
prognosis, Dr Luka considered that the chronicity of her condition and limited
response to previous treatments to indicate
that the “complete resolution
of symptoms is
Plaintiff’s
medicolegal reports
Dr Avanthi Mandaleson, orthopaedic surgeon
her report of 18 June 2024,
Avanthi Mandaleson, an orthopaedic surgeon, recorded that the plaintiff
complained of “constant pain in the right hand with
intermittent swelling
and restricted finger flexion”, she rated her pain 5 out of 10 at rest,
noting that it increased with
Dr Mandaleson opined
that the plaintiff’s pain was likely to “remain stable and
similar” given the long term duration
during which she had experienced
symptoms since the injury.
work capacity, Dr Mandaleson noted that the plaintiff did not describe any
restrictions on her ability to work and considered
that her condition will not
significantly deteriorate. Dr Mandaleson noted that “nil restrictions
should be placed on”
the plaintiff as to her work hours or duties and that
the plaintiff was able to manage her condition and work around any restricted
use of the right hand. Dr Mandaleson considered that the plaintiff’s
prognosis was fair, that she was likely to experience
ongoing mild hand
dysfunction and low to moderate levels of pain that were unlikely to worsen with
Sullivan, pain specialist
Richard Sullivan is an interventional pain specialist and specialist
anaesthetist who reported on 30 June
that the plaintiff
presented with “chronic posttraumatic pain of the right upper limb”.
He says that whilst there are
“associated features consistent with
persisting, increased sympathetic tone”, the plaintiff “does not
diagnostic criteria for complex regional pain syndrome of the right
upper limb due to the lack of hypersensitivity and
allodynia”.
Dr Sullivan
opined that the “functional limitations associated with the chronic pain
conditions” will impose “lifelong
restrictions and limitations
consequent to the injury sustained in January
Further, Dr
Sullivan concluded that the plaintiff could continue to work with appropriate
modifications avoiding sustained or repetitive
use of her right upper limb.
Sullivan considered the plaintiff’s diagnosis as chronic post-traumatic
pain of the right upper limb and that her prognosis
was poor with the chronic
pain condition expected to continue into the foreseeable future. Dr Sullivan
considered that there was
a clear underlying organic basis for the chronic pain
presentation and there were some associated features consistent with increased
sympathetic tone consequent to the injuries. Deterioration of the
plaintiff’s injury was
Anstee, plastic surgeon
consulting with the plaintiff on 11 June 2025, plastic surgeon Dr John Anstee
reported on 8 July 2025,
the plaintiff demonstrated a reduced range of movement of the right hand on
examination, consistent with a diagnosis of a previous
“compound fracture
of the distal phalanx of the right little finger, together with damage to the
nail bed and damage to the
right index
Dr Anstee opined
that her recovery has been complicated by “complex regional pain
syndrome”, “a trigger finger”
and “degenerative
arthritis”.
In respect of
the arthritis, Dr Anstee noted that it was likely genetically determined but
that it may have been aggravated by the
Noting the plaintiff was
employed in a full-time capacity, Dr Anstee considered there was no reason why
she should not continue to
work until retirement
Defendant’s medicolegal reports
Associate Professor Evange Romas, rheumatologist
Professor Evange Romas is a consultant rheumatologist and he prepared a report
dated 24 April 2024,
in which he
opined that the plaintiff presented with no symptoms of “atrophy, oedema,
hyperalgesia, allodynia, or excessive
sweating, nor any other signs indicative
of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome” on
examination.
He considered a
diagnosis of “post-traumatic aggravation of osteoarthritis involving right
middle, ring and little fingers”
and “left shoulder
stiffness”.
Professor Romas considered the plaintiff’s prognosis to be good, that the
conditions had stabilised and he noted
that the plaintiff had previously been
diagnosed with CRPS a few years ago but is no longer suffering from this
Peter Dixon, plastic surgeon
Peter Dixon is a plastic surgeon who reported on 12 June
that on examination, the
plaintiff demonstrates a “propensity for degenerative arthritis” and
symptomology associated
with CRPS. Mr Dixon accepted that current symptoms could
not be attributed to an aggravation of a pre-existing condition stating
“[t]he 2019 injury was a new injury with its pathological
consequences”.
noted that the plaintiff was at the time of the examination employed on a
full-time basis as a business development manager
for an NDIS
He also considered
that as at mid-June 2025 the plaintiff did not have capacity for preinjury
employment. But we know from the plaintiff’s
evidence that she is now
employed by Adeney Private Hospital as a full-time theatre technician and has
been so employed since August
2025, and as noted earlier, she plans to continue
working for as long as she
contentions
summary, for the plaintiff, it was submitted that:
(a) in addition to the hand injury, the plaintiff says the evidence supports a
conclusion the plaintiff has developed and continues
to suffer CRPS; or
alternatively, she developed and suffers chronic pain syndrome which has an
organic foundation in the injury to
the plaintiff’s right hand;
(b) there has been a reduction in the plaintiff’s grip strength over time
since the injury; consequently, she has difficulties
with chores around the
house such as bed making, lifting pots and pans, and preparing meals; she has
intermittent swelling of her
right hand and avoids repetitive cleaning tasks,
instead relying on her husband and son;
(c) the plaintiff continues to experience ongoing pain, limitations and
restrictions; the plaintiff’s pain is worse in cooler
months; she has an
aching type of pain which is constant; but worse in the right ring and the right
little finger; she has a restricted
range of movement through the little ring
and to a lesser extent the middle finger;
(d) although she has returned to work as a full-time theatre technician, the
plaintiff has a minor incapacity with respect to some
jobs she previously
performed because of the driving requirements and the limitations on her grip
(e) the plaintiff is 61 years old and has a lot of work and a lot of life left
to live; she has interrupted sleep, impacting both
her sleeping quality, and her
relationship with her husband;
(f) the plaintiff’s pre-injury participation in hobbies and activities
such as tenpin bowling, gym attendance, scrapbooking
and colouring have been
impacted. She no longer attends the gym and after a failed return to bowling she
no longer bowls; and
(g) when consideration is given to all the evidence, the plaintiff’s
injury is, when compared with other possible impairments,
losses of body
function or disfigurements, at least ‘very considerable’.
its part the defendant in summary contends that:
(a) it accepts the plaintiff suffered a fracture to the fifth (little) finger of
her right hand and closed mallet injuries to the
third (index) and fourth (ring)
fingers in an industrial accident on 24 January 2019;
(b) surgical repair to the little finger on 25 January 2019 (with insertion and
then subsequent removal of K-wire), and a subsequent
trigger finger release of
the plaintiff’s ring finger on 14 April 2020 was also successful;
(c) there was an initial CRPS diagnosis, but the preponderance of medical
opinion supports a finding that this has since resolved;
(d) it accepts that the plaintiff is now left with some residual impairment in
the affected fingers of her right hand; though the
impairment is not trivial, it
cannot be described as “at least very considerable”; and
(e) this is because when comparison is made with a range of cases, including
cases involving impairment of the brain, the spine and
larger or weight bearing
joints, and cases involving consequences such as pain requiring prescription
medication, significant medical
treatment, significant sleep deprivation and
inability to work or socialise, the plaintiff’s impairment falls far short
the statutory threshold.
What is the plaintiff’s injury and is it
permanent/long term?
plaintiff suffered traumatic injuries to the right little finger (fracture and
K-wires) and to the index and ring fingers (closed
mallet injuries). She
underwent surgery on 25 January 2019, followed by K-wire removal, intensive hand
therapy, three cortisone injections,
and a trigger finger release on the ring
finger in April 2020.
successful surgeries, I agree with the defendant, that the plaintiff is now left
with a residual impairment in the affected
fingers of her right hand. The
medical evidence suggests, and I accept, the impairment has stabilised, it is
unlikely to deteriorate
but is permanent. Furthermore, I consider, on the
available medical evidence, that although there was an earlier CRPS diagnosis,
CRPS is no longer a feature of the plaintiff’s impairment. The medical
evidence – Mr Dixon notwithstanding – of
Drs Mandaleson and
Sullivan, and Associate Professor Romas suggested that the hallmarks of CRPS
have resolved and that the plaintiff
did not meet the full diagnostic criteria
for ongoing CRPS.
plaintiff’s alternative contention that the plaintiff has chronic pain
syndrome for which there is an organic basis is also
rejected. It may be
accepted that Dr Sullivan considered the plaintiff’s prognosis was poor
with the chronic pain condition
expected to continue into the foreseeable
future. He opined that there is a clear underlying organic basis to the chronic
pain presentation,
and there are some associated features consistent with
increased sympathetic tone consequent to the injuries. Beyond that, there
other diagnosis in the medical material suggesting chronic pain syndrome, much
less an organic basis for it. Moreover, chronic
pain syndrome treatment will
usually involve,
, medication, physiotherapy and psychological
support and the plaintiff is not prescribed medication, she has not undertaken
physiotherapy
since early 2023 and there is no evidence of referral to or
seeking assistance from a psychologist for support. I am therefore not
the plaintiff has made good in the evidence the existence of an organic based
chronic pain syndrome.
residual impairment in the plaintiff’s affected fingers of her right hand
is not trivial or insignificant. The evidence
indicates some ongoing pain,
stiffness, and reduced grip strength in the plaintiff’s right hand. Grip
strength measurements
taken at various times since the injury show on balance a
decline over time. For example, in April 2021, the plaintiff’s right
grip strength was 36, 34, 32 kg (slightly reduced compared to the left), but by
January 2023 it appears to have deteriorated
to 20 kg in the right hand compared
to 30 kg in the left. Nonetheless, the plaintiff retains the ability to grip and
hold objects,
including when setting up a theatre, transferring patients or
using her right hand to hold the limbs of patients. And as earlier
plaintiff was also able to undertake external painting of her home including on
the veranda, often using her right hand
which likely involved gripping the paint
brush or paint roller.
examinations tend to show some stiffness in the plaintiff’s fingers and
inability to make a fully closed fist, but
no significant atrophy, oedema, or
other severe abnormalities are
What are the impairment
consequences for the plaintiff?
plaintiff said, and I accept, that she experiences ongoing pain, which she
described as a “fairly constant” background
ache with periods of
intense pain and limitations that fluctuated with activity and cold. The
plaintiff does not complain of pins
and needles or numbness, and there has been
some improvement in pain since January 2023, though with some decline depending
activities.
assessing the objective evidence about any disabling effect of the
plaintiff’s pain I make allowance in the plaintiff’s
favour for the
fact that I consider the plaintiff is stoic as earlier noted. Nevertheless,
whilst the plaintiff’s pain may
be fairly constant, it is in the
background, and it is not so severe or disabling as to prevent her using her
right hand for daily
personal, domestic and work activities. In her oral
evidence, the plaintiff described her background pain as 3 out of 10 on a pain
scale of 1-10. Earlier in her affidavit material, the plaintiff said that
despite suffering, she pushed herself to keep using her
right hand as she was
right hand dominant. That the plaintiff is able, despite the background pain, to
continue using her right hand
is evident in her current role as a theatre
technician and is consistent with the observations in the clinical examination
the absence of any significant muscle atrophy because of disuse. The
plaintiff is not prescribed pain medication for her background
pain and she uses
over the counter medication
earlier discussed, the plaintiff returned to her preinjury employment initially
on modified duties. When she was almost ready to
resume her preinjury full-time
duties as a theatre technician, the plaintiff pursued other opportunities in a
variety of sales-oriented
roles. Very recently, she has resumed working as a
theatre technician in which she is happy. She described the job as relatively
light and manageable, compared to her previous role and intends to continue
working in the role until retirement.
changing careers, the plaintiff in May 2021 reported that she “did an
ortho list and felt able to do all tasks at preinjury
level. No flare ups,
background ache remains...”. She has since returned to work for a
different employer at a different hospital
as a full-time theatre technician.
The plaintiff’s work capacity is, as the defendant contends, demonstrative
of very significantly
retained function of the fingers, hand and upper limb. And
that the plaintiff has resumed and maintains full-time employment in her
field suggests that her career and working lifestyle remain largely unaffected.
Medication and medical treatment
already noted, the plaintiff is not prescribed any medication for her injury or
symptoms. She uses over the counter Nurofen occasionally
rather than constantly,
and during a flare up or on a day where she cannot bear it she will use
something stronger like Panadeine
Forte, Mersyndol Forte or Maxigesic for which
she said she had old prescriptions. She also uses topical ointments for pain
The plaintiff has not sought further medical or therapy treatments. As
earlier noted, the plaintiff had hand therapy treatment in
early 2022 which
continued until about January 2023. The plaintiff’s evidence was that she
was told “there was little
more that could be done” on her hand. In
the result the plaintiff has had little treatment since 2023 and there is no
of the plaintiff seeking any further opinions from any other hand
Sleep and cognitive
functioning
her affidavit, the plaintiff said she was “often woken at night by right
hand pain” and that she slept with her hand
elevated whilst on the couch.
There is no evidence she takes any sleep medication, and although the plaintiff
said that she wakes
up tired and unrested most mornings, she did not give any
evidence about any adverse consequences of impaired sleep quality such
excessive fatigue or impaired concentration. The plaintiff works full-time in an
important theatre technician role which operates
in an operating theatre
environment, doubtless requiring concentration and reliable cognitive
functioning. Fatigue and lack of concentration
caused by interrupted sleep would
impair the plaintiff’s capacity to function as a theatre technician. Were
that the case the
plaintiff would doubtless have said so, but she did not.
plaintiff’s cognitive functioning has not been otherwise affected. There
is no evidence that the fairly constant pain is
so severe or disabling as to
impact her cognitive functioning. The plaintiff is not regularly taking
prescription medication but
primarily uses over the counter medication
“sparingly” so there can be no impact on cognitive functioning
any medication. And as already observed, the plaintiff can work
full-time in a demanding and responsible position as a theatre technician
Sleep and the plaintiff’s relationship
Dixon refers to the plaintiff’s participation in desired sexual activity
as being impaired
but does not
explain how or why that is. There is no other compelling evidence of impairment
in the plaintiff’s sexual life
or activities, and the plaintiff’s
affidavit material does not refer to any difficulties or limitations of a sexual
As the defendant points out, in the plaintiff’s first affidavit,
there is reference to the plaintiff sleeping on the couch
as affecting her
relationship with her husband
but how so is not explained and the plaintiff’s husband did not provide an
accept as the defendant contends, the plaintiff’s mobility has not been
affected by the injury in any significant way. She
works full-time as a theatre
technician, a job that requires agility and spending most of the working day on
her feet. She has some
restrictions on going for “longer vigorous
walks” but can undertake “power walks” up to 1.5 hours a few
per week. The recent reduction in her walking has been the product of work
commitments and coming home after 6 pm – not because
of any impairment or
Activities of daily
is no evidence suggesting the plaintiff’s capacity for self-care and
management is affected in any significant way by
the impairment. The plaintiff
did not refer to any difficulties or limitations in undertaking personal care
activities and said in
oral evidence that she was independent in these
activities.
is evidence that the plaintiff’s performance of household and family
duties has been affected but not in a significant
way. The clinical notes of the
plaintiff’s attendances at the Melbourne Institute of Plastic Surgery make
several references
to the plaintiff continuing to undertake domestic tasks in
2021 including cooking, cleaning and painting. The evidence is that the
plaintiff continues to undertake most domestic duties and shopping, albeit in a
modified way. And while her 31-year-old son undertakes
some domestic duties and
cooking, the extent and frequency with which he assists because of any
limitation caused by the plaintiff’s
impairment is not clear on the
evidence. His affidavit certainly does not provide any detail about the
frequency and extent to which
he renders assistance beyond that which one would
expect of an adult living with his parents.
the end, I agree with the defendant that the plaintiff’s capacity to
undertake the activities discussed above has not been
significantly affected by
the plaintiff’s
impairment.
Sports, hobbies and
social activities
noted earlier, the plaintiff ceased tenpin bowling and going to the gym,
although she had stopped these activities before the crush
injury because of a
pectoral injury. She no longer undertakes scrapbooking or colouring. Her power
walking activity was affected
but she resumed some walking of up to 1.5 hours a
few days a week, only stopping recently because she arrives home from work in
theatre technician job after 6 pm. I accept that the plaintiff’s
participation in some of these activities has been negatively
impacted by her
impairment. I accept that the plaintiff has experienced a loss of the pleasure
of doing activities she used to be
able to do and is likely frustrated in being
unable to do those things.
accept that the plaintiff maintains her friendships and continues to attend
family and other social events but on a reduced basis.
of the plaintiff’s post-injury sales roles required a lot of driving,
sometimes five to six hours a day. There was some
country driving and some
driving to various metropolitan Melbourne destinations. The plaintiff’s
driving appears to have exacerbated
the pain she felt. The plaintiff’s
current role does not involve driving as part of her duties. The
plaintiff’s present
intention is to remain in that role until she retires,
but I accept that the plaintiff would struggle if it becomes necessary to
to a sales role which required regular driving and gripping of the steering
plaintiff says the pain she experiences is a fairly constant background ache
with periods of intense pain and limitations that
fluctuated with activity and
cold. The medical evidence and clinical notes suggest that the fairly constant
pain the plaintiff experiences
is not so severe or disabling as to prevent her
using her hand for daily personal, domestic and work activities. Her current
as a full-time theatre technician is also consistent with this assessment.
The plaintiff’s work capacity is largely unaffected,
and the plaintiff
described her background pain is 3 out of 10 on a pain scale of 1-10. She takes
over the counter pain medication
sparingly and has not sought medical or
therapeutic intervention since early 2023.
plaintiff’s capacity to participate in and enjoy some of the activities
and hobbies she enjoyed before her injury have been
negatively impacted and is a
real loss. But on the totality of the evidence, and the combined impact of the
different matters discussed
above, I am not persuaded that residual impairment
to the affected fingers of the plaintiff’s right hand considering the
of the plaintiff’s pain and suffering consequence discussed above
meets the "very considerable" test in s 325(2)(c) of the
Act. I accept, as the
defendant submitted, that when comparison is made with a range of cases,
including cases involving impairment
of the brain, the spine and larger or
weight bearing joints, and cases involving consequences such as pain requiring
prescription
medication, significant medical treatment, significant sleep
deprivation and inability to work or socialise, the plaintiff’s
falls short of the statutory threshold. I would reach the same conclusion even
if I were satisfied that the plaintiff
continued to be afflicted by CRPS because
there are no additional pain and suffering consequences asserted beyond the
Consequently,
the plaintiff’s impairment of a body function though permanent, is not
serious for the purposes of s 335(2) of
the Act because the pain and suffering
consequence discussed earlier is not, when judged by comparison with other
cases, in the range
of possible impairments of a body function, fairly described
as being more than significant or marked, and as being at least very
considerable.
application for leave to bring proceedings for pain and suffering damages is
will hear the parties on costs.
Section 325(2)(b) of the
Section 325(2)(c) of the
Humphries and Anor v
[1992] VicRp 58
[1992] 2 VR 129.
Ibid at 140.
Haden Engineering Pty Ltd v
[2010] VSCA 69
Hawkins v DHL Express (Aust)
[2013] VSCA 26
at [12], citing
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2008] VSCA 260
Sejranovic v Berkeley Challenge Pty Ltd
[2009] VSCA 108
”) at [171]);
Sabanovic v Atco Controls Pty
[2009] VSCA 143
at [12], citing
Plaintiff’s Court Book
PCB 13, 21.
PCB 17, 22, 23.
22–23; Transcript (T) 31.
Defendant’s Court Book (DCB) 46–51.
PCB 18, 19.
54, DCB 31.
PCB 25, 26.
PCB 28, 29.
PCB 62, 63.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter