URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/83.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Clarke [1996] VicRp 83; [1996] 2 VR 520 (16 April 1996)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, HAYNE and CHARLES JJA
16 April 1996
I invite Charles JA to deliver the first judgment.
The respondent, who was born on 18 August 1965, was presented on 8 November 1995 before the County Court at Warrnambool on one count
of intentionally causing serious injury, to which he pleaded guilty. Presented with him was Gregory Wayne McGuinness, who pleaded
guilty to one count of recklessly causing serious injury.
The penalty for the offence of intentionally causing serious injury is, pursuant to
Crimes Act 1958
, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 years six months. S10 of the
Sentencing Act 1991
does not apply. -
The respondent admitted 41 previous convictions from seven court appearances between 13 March 1984 and 22 August 1989.
After a plea was heard, during which the respondent's mother, Jacqueline Elaine Clarke, gave evidence, the learned judge, on 10 November
1995, sentenced the respondent to be imprisoned for 36 months and directed that he serve 18 months' imprisonment before being eligible
for parole.
The Director of Public Prosecutions now appeals against the sentence, on the grounds that (a) the learned judge erred in sentencing
principle in that the sentence imposed failed to address the principle of retribution, having regard to the particular circumstances
of the case; (b) the judge erred in that having regard to the offender's behaviour the sentence he imposed reflected such an imbalance
between considerations of rehabilitation and considerations of deterrence and retribution that the sentence was rendered manifestly
inadequate.
The circumstances giving rise to the offence were as follows. On the night of 8 October 1993 the respondent, Gregory McGuinness and
Gregory's brother William were together at Framlingham and had been drinking beer. The respondent and Gregory McGuinness decided
they would go in to Warrnambool to buy marijuana from Darren John Byron, who occupied a flat at 25 Kruger Street. The respondent
and McGuinness knocked at the door of the flat. Byron was watching television with Rianna Bourke, a 15 year old girl. Byron answered
the door and the two men barged straight in. The respondent took Byron by the arm, told him that he wanted to talk to him in private,
and steered him into the bathroom. McGuinness remained in the lounge room with Ms Bourke. The respondent was then heard by Ms Bourke
saying, "Don't fuck with us, mate, we've been in gaol", and, "You've fucked me up". The evidence did not clearly establish what was
the respondent's complaint against Byron, one version being that Byron was unable or unwilling to sell marijuana to him that night,
a second being that he was upset that a quantity previously sold to him had been of very bad quality. Ms Bourke then heard the sounds
of someone being punched and Byron groaning and asking the respondent to stop. Byron was, Ms Bourke said, receiving a severe beating
from the respondent. McGuinness then walked to the bedroom and the respondent came out and demanded money or drugs from Ms Bourke
who said she had no money and knew nothing about drugs. She could still hear Byron moaning in the bathroom while McGuinness was with
him. Ms Bourke got up and saw Byron lying in the hallway. The respondent kicked Byron in the head, as though kicking a ball, and
then stomped on Byron's head three or four times, as though wanting to squash his head into the carpet. By this time there was blood
all over Byron's head.
The police were called by neighbours who had been disturbed by the noise. The respondent was intercepted by them near the flat, carrying
a microwave oven he had taken from the flat.
Byron was found lying unconscious in the hallway. His injuries included a fractured finger on the left hand, a fracture to the medial
wall of the left eye socket, a fracture to the skull on the left side, a broken tooth and extensive lacerations to the lower lip.
His right ear was lacerated to the point that it was nearly severed, necessitating sutures to re-attach it. There was heavy bruising
to the face and both eyes were blackened and closed. There was bruising and abrasion to the right groin. Byron did not regain consciousness
for some days. He now suffers permanent brain damage which has rendered him totally and permanently incapacitated for work. -
The Crown Prosecutor in the course of the plea submitted that the effect on the victim was indeed horrendous, that his life had been
altered forever, that he cannot work again, he cannot run, he cannot play sport, he cannot concentrate to the extent of being able
to perform normal tasks; that it was a ferocious and prolonged attack involving a complete lack of concern or mercy for Byron; and
that, both by the nature of the attack and its results, the offence should be characterised towards the upper end of the scale of
seriousness. In my view the Crown submissions were fully justified.
This is an appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions. The principles which apply to Crown appeals are well established: Griffiths
[1977] HCA 44
(1977) 137 CLR 293
per Barwick CJ at 310; Malvaso v R
[1989] HCA 58
(1989) 168 CLR 227
per Deane and McHugh JJ at 234; Everett v R
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
per Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 299. These principles were recently stated in summary form in the judgment of the Court
of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales in R v Allpass
(1993) 72 A Crim R 561
at 562-3. See also R v Osenkowski
(1982) 30 SASR 212
at 212-13 per King CJ.
The relevant rules may be stated in the following propositions:
1. An appeal by the Crown should be brought only in "the rare and exceptional case" (Everett at 299) to establish some point of principle.
The reason is that such appeals "represent a departure from traditional standards of what is proper in the administration of criminal
justice in that, in a practical sense, it is contrary to deep-rooted notions of fairness and decency which underlie the common law
principle against double jeopardy" (Malvaso at 234).
2. Occasions may arise for the bringing of a Crown appeal (a) where a sentence reveals such manifest inadequacy or inconsistency
in sentencing standards as to constitute error in principle (Everett at 300); (b) where it is necessary for a court of criminal appeal
to lay down principles for the governance and guidance of courts having the duty of sentencing convicted persons (Griffiths at 310);
(c) to enable the courts to establish and maintain adequate standards of punishment for crime; (d) to enable idiosyncratic views
of individual judges as to particular crimes or types of crimes to be corrected; (e) to correct a sentence which is so disproportionate
to the seriousness of the crime as to shock the public conscience (as to the last three, see Osenkowski at 213); (f) to ensure, so
far as the subject matter permits, that there will be uniformity in sentencing (Everett at 306).
3. A court of criminal appeal dealing with any appeal against sentence, including by a prisoner, is not a court hearing the matter
anew, and is not entitled to substitute its own opinion for that of the sentencing judge merely because it considers the sentence
inadequate or excessive. It may only interfere if there is manifest inadequacy or it is shown that the sentencing judge fell into
material error of law or fact (Allpass at 562-3).
Allpass is also authority for the following propositions:
4. When, in response to a Crown appeal, the court decides to re-sentence an offender, it ordinarily gives recognition to the element
of double jeopardy involved (in twice standing for sentence) by imposing a sentence that is somewhat less than the sentence it considers
should have been imposed at first instance.
5. An appellate court has an over-riding discretion which may lead it to decline to intervene, even if it comes to the conclusion
that error has been shown in the original sentencing process. In this connection, the conduct of the Crown at the original sentencing
proceedings may be a matter of significance. -
These principles are unquestionably part of the law of this State; see R v Boxtel [1994] 2 VR 98 per Crockett and Hampel JJ at 104;
and R v Vallis [1996] 1 VR 269 in which the authorities were examined by this court. It is important, however, in the application
of these principles, to bear in mind what King CJ said in R v Osenkowski
(1982) 30 SASR 212
Osenkowski at 212-13:
[P]rosecution appeals should not be allowed to circumscribe unduly the sentencing discretion of judges. There must always be a place
for the exercise of mercy where a judge's sympathies are reasonably excited by the circumstances of the case. There must always be
a place for the leniency which has traditionally been extended, even to offenders with bad records, when the judge forms the view,
almost intuitively in the case of experienced judges, that leniency at that particular stage of the offender's life might lead to
It must be said that the judge was confronted with a most difficult sentencing problem. The respondent comes from a background of
very significant disadvantage, and the problems associated with his intellectual disabilities and drug abuse plainly contributed
to his history of prior convictions. These were all factors which his Honour carefully considered. It is noteworthy that the Crown
does not submit that his Honour made any relevant error of fact or law.
The respondent is now aged 30. He is significantly mentally retarded, with an IQ of around 65 to 73, which may be partly due to the
fact that his father assaulted his mother with a full beer bottle when she was seven months pregnant with the respondent, almost
causing a miscarriage. From an early age he was not a normal child, showing severe learning difficulties. He progressed through school
to the age of 15, promoted from one class to another more or less for the sake of putting him up to the next year. He is now basically
illiterate and has only pre-reading skills. His learning difficulties caused more trouble with his father, who often beat him and
was completely unsympathetic to his son's failures. He may well be eligible for services under the
Intellectually Disabled Persons Services Act 1986
, although his application for such services presently stands rejected by the Community Services Department. Save for a caring and
affectionate mother, he was an outsider to his family and siblings, beaten not only by his father but the recipient of a severe hiding
from a brother-in-law which left him with a broken nose, facial injuries and fractures in both lower legs. He was introduced to marijuana
at 15, to heroin and intravenous amphetamine use at 17. By 20 his drug abuse amounted to using two grams of heroin per day, and by
1988 it was three to four grams, costing $300 to $400, per day. He has now made a genuine effort to rid himself of his addiction
to drugs and has conquered his addiction to heroin.
Notwithstanding that his mental development and his drug abuse left him with very serious difficulties in obtaining worthwhile employment,
the respondent did seem to have turned a corner in 1987. After his convictions in that year he had, before these events, incurred
only one further set of convictions, in 1989, the sentence for which suggests that no offence of great moment was involved. He had
formed a relationship with a young woman which had been stabilising and beneficial but which was interrupted by a temporary separation
not long before the events of 8 October 1993.
These events occurred at a time when the respondent was intoxicated with the ingestion of alcohol and Rohypnol, a factor which the
judge considered might account for his unbridled violence towards Byron. He pleaded guilty. He expressed remorse on numerous occasions.
The Crown concedes that his limited -
mental development places him at least to some extent within the ambit of R v Anderson
[1981] VicRp 17
[1981] VR 155
; that is, someone who is not an appropriate medium for making an example to others.
All these matters were taken into account by the learned judge in imposing sentence.
Making all due allowance for each of these extenuating circumstances, I am none the less satisfied that the sentence was manifestly
inadequate to such an extent as to require this court to intervene, and that this appeal should succeed on both grounds. The ferocity
of the assault was calculated to produce precisely the injuries inflicted on Byron, and might well have killed him. The respondent
would then have been facing a trial for murder and the probability of a sentence of many years' imprisonment. Instead of killing
Byron, however, the actions of the respondent caused horrific injuries which effectively destroyed much, if not most, of his enjoyment
I would therefore allow the Director's appeal. Having regard to the element of double jeopardy and the principle that a sentence
somewhat less than might otherwise have been imposed should now be set, I would re-sentence the respondent to five years' imprisonment
and would impose a non-parole period of three and a half years.
I agree with the orders proposed by Charles JA and for the reasons that he has given.
I also agree.
The formal orders of this court will be as follows: The appeal of the Director is allowed.
The sentence imposed by the learned sentencing judge is quashed. In lieu thereof it is ordered that the respondent be sentenced on
the count of intentionally causing serious injury to be imprisoned for a period of five years. We fix the period of three years and
six months as the minimum period to be served before he is eligible for parole.
Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
we declare that the period of 222 days of pre-sentence detention be reckoned as a period already served pursuant to the sentence
which we have imposed, and we order that the fact that this declaration has been made and its details be noted in the records of
Appeal allowed.
Solicitor for the appellant: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Solicitors for the respondent: Hale and Wakeling.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter