URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jayawardana v Telstra Limited (Penalty) [2025] VMC 4 (11 April 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-230098150
SHEHAN JAYAWARDANA
TELSTRA LIMITED TRADING AS TELSTRA
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
26 February 2025
DATE OF DECISION:
11 April 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Jayawardana v Telstra Limited (Penalty)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 4
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
pecuniary penalty orders – course of conduct –
contravention of the same clause of successive enterprise agreements –
deliberate conduct and awareness of risk – genuine and reasonable error of
construction – contrition and corrective action.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Daniel Dwyer
Communications Electrical and Plumbing Union (
For the Defendant
Dimitri Ternovski
Seyfarth Shaw Australia
this proceeding, Mr Jayawardana claimed that
had incorrectly classified
him at level CFW4 in his employment as a Fibre Technician on Telstra’s
optic fibre network. On 11
October 2024 I determined that Mr Jayawardana was
entitled to be classified at level CFW5 under the applicable enterprise
Liability Decision
). Accordingly Telstra contravened the
enterprise agreements applicable to Mr Jayawardana’s employment and
). On 24 December 2024 I
made orders by consent for the payment of compensation by Telstra of $98,187,
reflecting an agreed sum in
settlement of all monies due to Mr Jayawardana for
the period 1 October 2019 to 11 October 2024.
of the Act provides that an eligible State or Territory court may order a
person to pay a pecuniary penalty that the court considers
is appropriate if the
court is satisfied that the person has contravened a civil remedy provision.
of the Act is a civil remedy
This decision concerns
Mr Jayawardana’s remaining claim for the imposition of pecuniary
considering the matter, I have had regard to the written and oral submissions of
each party and the additional evidence relied
on by Telstra in the affidavit of
Michael Cooper dated 17 February 2025, along with the evidence and findings in
the Liability Decision.
This decision assumes familiarity with the Liability
Decision, and terms have the same meaning in both decisions.
ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE OF MR COOPER
following evidence of Mr Cooper was uncontested and I accept it.
has approximately 20,670 current employees, most of whom are covered by the
Telstra Limited Enterprise Agreement 2024-2027
2024 Agreement
Over the last 20 years there has been over 70 collective agreements covering
Telstra employees.
reviewed Mr Jayawardana’s classification in around 2020 after he raised
concerns. The review concluded that Mr Jayawardana
was correctly classified as a
CFW4. Mr Cooper then conducted his own secondary review and reached the same
conclusion. He acknowledges
this conclusion has been held to be incorrect but he
genuinely considered Mr Jayawardana was correctly classified.
has undertaken remedial steps in respect of Mr Jayawardana, including reaching
agreement on a compensation figure in respect
of his claim, changing his
classification in the payroll system to CFW5 on 1 January 2025, and paying Mr
Jayawardana the difference
between the CFW4 and CFW5 rates from the date of
judgment to the date of reclassification.
has also expedited a review, which commenced in 2023, of the Core Job
Descriptions (
) upon which the classifications are based. It has
provided draft revised CJDs to field employees and the CEPU for feedback. It has
identified 32 CFW4 employees who may be reclassified, based on the draft updated
CJDs, and has voluntarily commenced paying them
higher duties allowances so
their remuneration is in line with a CFW5. This will continue until either 31
July 2025 or when the updated
CJDs come into effect, at which time Telstra will
conduct a further assessment as to whether the employees are reclassified as
Cooper is only aware of two prior contraventions of civil penalty provisions of
the Act or its predecessors by Telstra, being
CEPU v Telstra Corporation Ltd
v Telstra Corporation
LEGAL PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING APPROPRIATE PENALTIES
was no issue between the parties as to the general principles the Court should
apply in determining appropriate penalties, and
the established procedural
approach for doing so.
purpose of civil penalties is primarily, if not solely, the promotion of the
public interest in compliance with the Act by both
specific and general
deterrence of further
contraventions.
A civil penalty
must be fixed with a view to ensuring that it is not regarded by the contravenor
or others as an acceptable cost
For the purpose of
general deterrence, it is important to send a message that the relevant
contraventions are serious and not
acceptable.
‘appropriate’ civil penalty will not exceed what is reasonably
necessary to achieve the deterrence of future contraventions
of a like kind by
the contravenor and others,
will strike a reasonable balance between oppressive severity and the need for
deterrence.
Both the circumstances
of the contravenor as well as the conduct involved in the contravention may be
considered, as both may bear
on the need for
deterrence.
maximum penalty is one factor in determining an appropriate penalty, in that
there must be some reasonable relationship between
the theoretical maximum and
the penalty imposed.
the maximum penalty is not to be applied
‘mechanically’.
factors which may be relevant to determining an appropriate penalty in respect
of the Act include: the nature and extent of
the contravening conduct; the
amount of loss or damage caused; the circumstances in which the conduct took
place; the size of the
contravening company and its market power; the
deliberateness of the contravention and the period over which it extended;
the contravention arose out of the conduct of senior management or a
lower level; whether the contravener has a corporate culture
conducive to
compliance or had taken corrective action; and whether the contravenor has
cooperated with authorities responsible for
enforcement of the Act in relation
to the contravention.
also include: whether there has been any similar previous conduct by the
contravenor; whether the contravenor had exhibited
contrition; and the need to
ensure compliance with minimum standards by provision of an effective means for
investigation and enforcement.
These factors are non-exhaustive and should not be applied as a
Deterrence remains
the primary consideration,
these other factors to be ‘seen through the prism of what is necessary to
achieve deterrence.’
principles of totality, parity and course of conduct from criminal sentencing
may assist in the assessment of what is considered
reasonably necessary to
achieve deterrence.
Ultimately,
as with criminal sentencing, determination of a civil penalty is an evaluative
exercise, taking account the relevant
factors through a process of
‘instinctive
synthesis.’
I have considered appropriate penalties in accordance with the established
procedural approach as set out in
Fair Work Ombudsman v NSH North Pty Ltd
) as follows:
(1) Identify the separate contraventions, with each breach of each obligation
being a separate contravention, and each breach of
a term of the [Agreement]
being a separate contravention.
(2) Consider whether each separate contravention should be dealt with
independently or with some degree of aggregation for those
contraventions
arising out of a course of conduct, noting that s 557 of the FW Act provides
that two or more contraventions of a
given civil remedy provision are to be
taken to be a single contravention if committed by the same person and arising
out of a course
of conduct by that person.
(3) Consider whether there should be further adjustment to ensure that, to the
extent of any overlap between groups of separate aggregated
contraventions,
there is no double penalty imposed, and that the penalty is an appropriate
response to what [the] respondent did.
(4) Consider the appropriate penalty in respect of each final individual group
of contraventions, taken in isolation.
(5) Consider the overall penalties arrived at ... and apply the totality
principle, to ensure that the penalties ... are appropriate
and proportionate to
the conduct viewed as a whole, making such adjustments as are necessary
[citations omitted].
the parties agreed on the generally applicable principles, the critical
difference between them related to whether Telstra’s
contraventions should
be characterised as deliberate, or a genuine and reasonable error of
construction. The parties referred to
alternate authorities on this issue. I
have dealt with this in detail below in the course of considering the steps in
Step 1 – identifying separate contraventions
parties were in dispute as to the relevant contraventions.
Jayawardana’s Statement of Claim alleged contraventions of the following
agreements, in each of which the classification
provisions were relevantly
Enterprise Agreement 2015-2018 (
2015 Agreement
), which applied from 12
November 2015 until 18 June 2020;
Enterprise Agreement 2019-2021 (
2019 Agreement
), which applied from 19
June 2020 until 12 July 2022; and
Limited Enterprise Agreement 2022-2024 (
2022 Agreement
), which applied
from 13 July 2022 until 1 October 2024.
Jayawardana contended that there should also be findings of contravention in
respect of the 2024 Agreement, which commenced operation
on 1 October 2024.
Telstra contended that the 2024 Agreement was not the subject of Mr
Jayawardana’s claim and was not part
of the evidence in the
proceeding.
Jayawardana further contended that for each Agreement, there should be five
findings of contraventions of s 50 of the Act, being:
C1.1 and C1.2 of Appendix C, relating to the obligation to correctly classify
B2 of Appendix B, relating to the obligation to pay the correct salary;
19.2, relating to payment of overtime at time and a half;
Clause 19.2, relating to payment of overtime at double time; and
9, relating to superannuation.
contended that Mr Jayawardana is confined to declarations and penalties in
respect of contraventions of cl C1 of the 2015
Agreement, 2019 Agreement and
2022 Agreement, because Mr Jayawardana did not plead contravention of the other
provisions and cannot
now add them. Telstra relies on the principles articulated
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v
that pleadings must
state with sufficient clarity the case to be met, to ensure procedural fairness
to the other party, and that a
party is not entitled to depart from their
pleaded case unless both parties have deliberately chosen to conduct the dispute
different basis, particularly where the serious consequence of imposition
of civil penalties is sought.
Jayawardana contended that because the issues of wages, overtime and
superannuation were raised in his Statement of Claim, Telstra
was on notice that
these contraventions were alleged and he should therefore be permitted to obtain
declarations and penalties in
respect of them. Further he contended that the
penalty proceeding is a new proceeding.
Jayawardana’s Complaint was made by way of the Form 13A template provided
for under the Court rules,
he selected the relevant breach to be ‘failure to pay wages.’ Where
Form 13A requires a description of each alleged
breach, Mr Jayawardana referred
to his attached statement, being his Statement of Claim. The Statement of Claim
does not allege breaches
of cl 9, cl 19.2 or cl B2 of Appendix B. Nor was
contravention of those provisions alleged to be a contravention of s 50 of the
The only relevant relief sought is as follows:
29 The Plaintiff seeks:
(c) A finding that between 1 October 2019 and 1 November 2022 the Defendant, by
not assessing the correct classification of the work
of the Plaintiff, has
contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
by failing to comply with:
Clause C1.1 and
Clause C1.2 of the
2015 Agreement
Clause C1.1 and
Clause C1.2 of the
2019 Agreement
Clause C1.1 and
Clause C1.2 of the
2022 Agreement
Jayawardana also sought ‘an order pursuant to s 546(1) of the FW Act that
the Defendant pay pecuniary penalties in respect
of the contraventions.’
Given no other contraventions were pleaded, this reference to
‘contraventions’ can only
be to the contraventions identified in
paragraph 29(c).
relief sought also included orders pursuant to s 545 of the FW Act for
compensation and ‘adjusted appropriate allowances
including overtime and
superannuation contributions.’ However, these matters were not the subject
of contravention allegations.
Further, no alleged contravention of the 2024
Agreement was pleaded. I conclude that it is not open for Mr Jayawardana to now
declarations of contravention or pecuniary penalties in respect of these
additional contraventions or the 2024 Agreement.
was a further issue between the parties as to whether Telstra contravened cl C1
or more specifically cl C1.2(a). I conclude
that within cl C.1, it is only cl
C1.2(a), which provides ‘[w]ork in each Workstream will be evaluated in
accordance with the
Company’s Job Evaluation and Classification System and
these principles’, which has been contravened by Telstra. There
issue as to the appropriateness of declaratory relief, and I will make the
relevant declaration to this effect.
Steps 2 and 3 – course of conduct considerations
557 of the Act provides:
(1) For the purposes of this Part, 2 or more contraventions of a civil remedy
provision referred to in subsection (2) are ... taken
to constitute a single
contravention if:
(a) the contraventions are committed by the same person; and
(b) the contraventions arose out of a course of conduct by the person.
(2) The civil remedy provisions are the following:
(c) section 50 (which deals with contraventions of enterprise agreements).
557 does not permit contraventions of multiple clauses within a single agreement
to be taken as a single
contravention.
It has also been
considered inapplicable in respect of contraventions of identical clauses across
multiple agreements (albeit with
application to different
employees).
However, Telstra
contended that if the fact of contravention of three successive Agreements
prevents the contraventions being treated
as a single contravention pursuant to
s 557, they nonetheless ought to be so treated pursuant to common law
principles.
common law course of conduct principle ‘recognises that where there are
multiple contraventions arising out of a single
course of conduct, there is a
danger of a contravenor being punished more than once for essentially the same
offending conduct.’
Telstra contended that here, the contraventions of the 2015 Agreement, 2019
Agreement and 2022 Agreement wholly overlap as the same
conduct constitutes a
contravention of the same classification provision of each of them. Mr
Jayawardana did not contest this analysis,
and I accept it. Telstra maintained
Mr Jayawardana’s incorrect classification under the 2015 Agreement, 2019
Agreement and
2022 Agreement. The commencement of each new Agreement did no more
than provide for the continuous operation of relevantly identical
classification
provisions. The net effect is no different than if only one Agreement had
applied. Accordingly I regard the three
contraventions as a single course of
conduct. Whilst application of the common law course of conduct principle does
not confine the
Court to imposing a single
to avoid imposing more
than one punishment I consider that to be the appropriate approach. As this
approach conforms with s 557,
it has not been necessary to decide whether s 557
has direct application.
Step 4 – determining appropriate penalties
evidence and submissions raise the following matters for consideration in
determining an appropriate penalty, each of which I
have considered in the
context that they inform what penalty is reasonably necessary to achieve both
specific and general deterrence
of further contraventions.
Maximum penalty
parties agreed, and I accept, that the relevant maximum penalty for a single
contravention (ascertained by averaging the applicable
maximum penalties over
the relevant period) is $76,500.
Deliberate contraventions or a genuine and reasonable error of
construction?
contended that its contravening conduct was a bona fide and reasonable mistake,
as Telstra genuinely believed Mr Jayawardana
was appropriately classified at
CFW4. Telstra argued that the assessment of Mr Jayawardana’s
classification was complex, about
which reasonable minds could differ. It turned
on the construction of the CJDs which have not been updated since 2002 and their
application
to Mr Jayawardana’s work after numerous changes to
Telstra’s network. Whilst Telstra was in error in applying the CFW4
classification, Mr Jayawardana’s primary contention, that his correct
classification was CFW7, was also incorrect. Further,
CFW4 and CFW5 describe
very similar roles. The specific examples in the CJDs differentiating each role
were mostly obsolete and not
directly applicable to Mr Jayawardana’s work.
Key differences thus related to abstract questions of complexity which are
to assess. To the extent that the Court found useful distinctions,
these were subject to disputed questions of construction and Telstra’s
construction, whilst rejected in part by the Court, was nonetheless reasonable.
For this reason, Telstra contended that no penalty
should be imposed.
Jayawardana acknowledged that the matter of his classification was not
straightforward. However he contended that Telstra, nonetheless,
was aware of
the risk associated with its misclassification of Mr Jayawardana, meaning that
Telstra’s conduct was deliberate,
and a penalty at the higher level would
be appropriate.
Telstra and Mr Jayawardana referred the Court to authorities which each
contended supported their position.
AEU v Yooralla Society of Victoria
, the applicable award and classification were in
At first instance, the
union’s claim had been
On appeal the
union’s claim had been allowed in part and the Court had stated the matter
was ‘finely balanced,’
there was a lack of clarity as to how the two
awards were to be read together and the question of the relevant classification
dismissed a penalty appeal and observed:
In other circumstances where there has been a
defence of a
penalty proceeding, and where, for instance, questions of construction of Awards
have arisen that were not of easy resolution,
courts have held that the
imposition of a penalty is not always required because in those circumstances
there was no need for specific
or general deterrence: [citations omitted]. This
case is not in that category, because the primary judge considered that some
should be imposed. However, those authorities illustrate that the
circumstances in which a dispute might arise, and whether there
basis for the contravener to defend its position, may bear upon the
extent to which there is a need for either general or specific
deterrence.
also relied on
CEPU v Telstra
Telstra had failed to
maintain the salary of an employee redeployed then made redundant from a lower
paying position. Telstra’s
obligations depended upon the proper
construction of the interaction between two enterprise
agreements.
The Court determined
not to impose a penalty, stating:
...[T]he breaches arose out of a disputed and disputable construction of [the
two agreements]. Neither breach was flagrant, wilful
or deliberate. ... Where
the unlawful conduct arises out of an arguable but erroneous construction of a
relevant term, and the subsequent
breach cannot be characterised as
demonstrating a flagrant or wilful disregard for the agreement, [the]
legislative purpose [of deterrence]
is not furthered by imposition of a penalty.
In these circumstances, neither general nor specific deterrence is a significant
weighing in favour of imposing a penalty. Moreover, Mr McDonald has been
fully compensated for the loss suffered as a result of the
breach. I do not
consider that the circumstances in which the conduct took place warrant the
Court exercising its discretion to impose
a penalty on
also relied on
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Qube Logistics
(Rail) Pty Ltd
matter, the employer underpaid 31 employees for a period of two years, due to a
genuinely held but erroneous view that it
was not required to increase salaries
because it had commenced re-negotiation for a replacement agreement, as opposed
to having concluded
negotiation.
The Court stated:
But no order should be made for the imposition of any penalty. The Union has
advanced no submission nor adduced any evidence to suggest
that Qube Rail
pursued the course which it did without a genuine and
that it was entitled to do so. In those cases, such as the present, where no
question arises as to the need for general deterrence,
let alone specific
deterrence, an imposition of a penalty is not always required: cf.
Mortgage Services Pty Ltd v King
[citation omitted]. The contraventions that
did occur in the present case, as their Honours observed in that case, were
deliberate, but result[ed] from an arguable but erroneous
misconstruction of an industrial instrument
Jayawardana relied on
Danaratna v Arunatilaka (Penalty)
In that matter, the contravening conduct was held to be extremely
The Court concluded
that the contravener’s conduct was
deliberate,
having earlier
... The concept of deliberateness within the civil penalty context is spectral:
Conduct may be deliberate if done consciously, in
the sense of being aware of
each of the essential facts constituting the elements of the contravention
without understanding them
to be unlawful, or while apparently believing them to
be lawful or otherwise due to an innocent mistake ... [citing
, [61]–[65]]. As observed by the Full Court in
, the precise basis of purported “innocence” may give rise
to the need for consideration when determining deterrence.
Consideration must be given to whether the contravention involves a relevant
state of mind including, a deliberate flouting of the
law, recklessness, wilful
blindness, “courting the risk”, negligence or innocence:
at [131]. Furthermore, where there is any degree of awareness
(noting the spectrum) of the actual or potential unlawfulness, the contravention
is necessarily more serious. It is worthwhile extracting the Full Court’s
holding in full ....
two authorities referred to in the passage above from
contraventions of trade practices/consumer law. The passage extracted in
Reckitt Benckiser
is as follows:
If a contravention does not involve any state of mind then it is for the party
asserting any particular state of mind (be it a deliberate
flouting of the law,
recklessness, wilful blindness, “courting the risk”, negligence, or
innocence or any other characterisation
of state of mind) to prove its
assertion. If, in the event, neither party discharges its onus to establish any
particular state of
mind in relation to the contraventions, the Court
determines penalty on no more than the fact of the proscribed nature of the
... However, if any degree of awareness of the actual or potential
unlawfulness of the conduct is proved then, all other things being
contravention is necessarily more serious. Such awareness may be able to be
inferred from the very nature of the conduct
or representations constituting the
conduct. However absence of such proof does not establish a mitigatory state of
mind ... It means
only that the neutral state of mind required for liability has
not been disturbed for the purposes of penalty. If a contravening
party wishes
to go beyond the neutral statutory state of mind for liability and positively
assert a lack of consciousness of the
character of the conduct for the purposes
of penalty, that is a circumstance of mitigation which the contravening party
must prove.
concerned ‘price
contraventions and
involved a conclusion that Flight Centre as agent for various airlines was part
of the same market as those
Flight Centre
characterised this as
Court accepted that ‘an intuitive or analytical view might have been taken
that agents and principals do not compete
which may give
the conduct an ‘innocent
Flight Centre relied
CEPU v Telstra
with its primary submission being that no penalty
should be imposed.
accepted that the relevant decision-maker believed in the lawfulness of the
conduct and there was therefore no deliberate
contravention. However, the Court
said that the ‘innocence’ should not be overstated because the basis
for it was unexplained,
and given that the conduct concerned was purposely
seeking to deny consumers a price benefit for the benefit of Flight Centre, it
did not obviate the need for
deterrence.
The Court held that
both could be taken into account, stating:
Once the above is appreciated, the approach of Flight Centre to no, or a very
light, penalty should be rejected. The circumstances
are quite unlike those
faced by Kiefel J in the Meat Holdings case and by Gordon J in the Telstra case.
In the former case, there
was a reasonable construction of a clause in an award
that led to underpayment of wages of $431.97. This led Kiefel J not to impose
penalty. It is a decision (and an entirely explicable and apparently just one)
on its own facts. It is misconceived to extrapolate
from it, as Flight Centre
does in its submissions, a proposition that if one reasonably misunderstands
one’s liability position
in circumstances that give rise to a civil
penalty, one should be relieved of the penalty or one should receive a light
No principle arises out of the case; to seek to draw legal principle
from a factual evaluative conclusion of this kind is misconceived.
The decision
of Gordon J in Telstra ... should be viewed no
differently.
Jayawardana contended that the authorities relied on by Telstra were old cases
which did not reflect appropriately the modifications
to the Act and the
increased focus on the seriousness of contraventions. Telstra contended that
must be viewed in the context of the very serious nature of the
contravening conduct in that matter. Telstra contended that its authorities
were more specific to the industrial relations context than those referred to in
CEPU v Telstra
is on all fours with this case,
where there is a difficult and disputed construction of the provision and the
determination of the
matter turned to a large extent on an evaluative
characterisation of the work performed and its complexity.
accept, based on the authorities relied upon by Telstra, that where difficult or
disputable construction issues arise in respect
of the provision which has been
contravened, and the contravenor had a genuine and reasonable belief that it was
entitled to pursue
the course it did, then there may be no need for the
imposition of a penalty as there may be no need for specific or general
deterrence.
However, I consider that I must also have regard to
Flight Centre.
Whilst they arise in a different
regulatory context, they have been cited with approval in an industrial context
. Critically, these authorities identify that innocence is
requires close analysis, and that conduct may nonetheless require deterrence
even in the context of a genuine and reasonable
misconstruction of the legal
obligation concerned. Further, the decision in
CEPU v Telstra
considered and characterised in
Flight Centre
as a ‘factual
evaluative conclusion’
from which no general legal principle arises.
Jayawardana contended that Telstra was ‘courting the risk’ within
the meaning of that term in
Reckitt Benckiser
because Telstra stopped allocating Mr Jayawardana Wideband Work in May 2023,
after he had questioned his supervisor as to his entitlement
to be classified at
CFW5 or CFW7. In the Liability Decision I made no finding as to Telstra’s
reason for doing so. The evidence
as to this matter is summarised at [64] of the
Liability Decision, as follows:
It was agreed that Mr Jayawardana has not performed Wideband Work since May
2023. Mr Jayawardana said that from mid-2021 he was part
of the initial MFT
group doing all the Wideband Work. He helped upskill newer staff. In May 2023,
after he questioned his supervisor
Mark Mays whether the upskilling work should
be classified at level 5 or level 7, Mr Mays took Mr Jayawardana off Wideband
He did not refuse to do the work; the work was not provided to him. Mr De
Blasio said that Wideband Work ceased being allocated to
technicians who did not
perform data base entry, however none of the Telstra witnesses had direct
knowledge of why Mr Jayawardana
was taken off Wideband Work.
Jayawardana contended in effect that Telstra deliberately withdrew Wideband Work
from Mr Jayawardana so as to reduce the risk of
a higher classification applying
to him. Whilst Telstra’s reason was unexplained, on balance I do not
consider the evidence
sufficient to draw this inference.
Jayawardana also argued Telstra was ‘courting the risk’ because of
the earlier reclassification of employees by Telstra
from CFW4 to CFW5, and the
fact that Mr Jayawardana had raised the issue of his classification with
Telstra. In the Liability Decision,
I held that in 2012, Mr De Blasio was
performing the same work as Mr Jayawardana when he and around 14 staff in the
Fibre Maintenance
) were reclassified by Telstra from CFW4 to
Also relevant, and to
similar effect, I held that Telstra classified all but two employees who
performed the same work as Mr Jayawardana
in the FMG at
that there was no
distinguishing features and no greater complexity or degree of specialisation
between the work performed by other
employees in the FMG and Mr Jayawardana, and
that the most complex work within that team was performed by CFW5
Telstra led no
evidence, either during the liability hearing or in respect of penalties, as to
why Mr Jayawardana was differently
classified than these CFW5 employees
performing the same work. In the Liability Decision, in the absence of evidence
from Telstra
as to alternative reasons for those employees, including Mr De
Blasio, to be classified at CFW5 not CFW4, I held that they had been
classified because of their duties and
consider the classification of these other employees gave rise to an obvious
line of inquiry relevant to whether Mr Jayawardana
was correctly classified as
CFW4. The classification of these employees is not of itself determinative of Mr
Jayawardana’s
classification.
However, if the
CFW5 employees were so classified because of their duties and functions, and Mr
Jayawardana performed the same work,
then there is nonetheless an apparent risk
that Mr Jayawardana has been incorrectly classified. I have accepted that
Telstra followed
a process to address the question of Mr Jayawardana’s
classification when he raised it internally, and that Mr Cooper genuinely
wrongly believed Mr Jayawardana was correctly classified at CFW4. However, the
evidence does not address the process of the review
or what considerations were
undertaken in that assessment. In particular, it is unknown whether Mr Cooper
considered this obvious
line of inquiry.
contended that if it were required to have had regard to the risk of
misclassification, it would have had to reclassify Mr
Jayawardana at CFW7. This
submission wrongly equates considerations relevant to CFW5 and CFW7 and I was
not persuaded by it. The
CFW7 CJD describes complex functions and expertise and
there was no evidence of its application to work of a similar nature to Mr
Jayawardana’s work.
contrast, the CFW5 CJD describes a ‘very
role to CFW4 and
there was evidence of employees doing comparable work to Mr Jayawardana being
classified at CFW5.
light of the
deliberateness, given Telstra was on notice of the risk insofar as it had
classified other employees doing the same work
as Mr Jayawardana at CFW5, I
conclude that Telstra’s state of mind was something more than
‘innocence’ in the sense
described in
Flight Centre.
Whilst Mr Cooper may have genuinely
believed Mr Jayawardana’s classification was CFW4, the absence of evidence
that Mr Cooper
considered this obvious risk in making his assessment undermines
the reasonableness of his belief. Because of this, I do not consider
appropriate that no penalty be awarded, as any degree of awareness of the
potential unlawfulness of the conduct means that the
contravention is
necessarily more serious. I consider that there is a need to impose a penalty
accordingly, for the purpose of both
specific and general deterrence.
I consider that the significance of Telstra’s awareness of the risk is
very greatly reduced by the objective difficulty
in applying the classification
provisions.
that respect, the Liability Decision states:
is evident from this decision that the exercise of determining Mr
Jayawardana’s correct classification in the context of
changed technology
has been far from straightforward. It has required extensive analysis of both
historic and current functions.
It has required careful consideration of a range
of opposing and sometimes contradictory submissions in order to determine,
what the CJDs meant at the time they were written, and, secondly, to
arrive at a technology-appropriate and internally consistent
approach to
interpreting the CJDs some 22 years later. It must be observed that complexity
of this nature is hardly beneficial for
either Telstra or the employees to which
the CJDs apply. For completeness I note that the 2022 Agreement contains both a
process for designing new CJDs and robust dispute resolution
procedures. Each of these processes would potentially facilitate not
resolution of classification disputes but the development of new, agreed
approaches which could address this undesirable
complexity to the benefit of
both parties in future agreements.
agreements are the product of negotiation and agreement between the employer,
employees and (sometimes, as in this case)
their representatives. They are often
not drafted with precision. The industrial context sometimes makes
interpretation of enterprise
agreements more complex. It is not uncommon that
differences in construction of enterprise agreements arise between parties. A
contravenor
cannot simply rely on a reasonable alternative construction to be
relieved of a penalty.
I conclude that the difficulty in deriving meaning from the CFW4 and CFW5 CJDs
and applying them to Mr Jayawardana’s
role, as evidenced by the Liability
Decision, is so substantial that this is a rare matter whereby the construction
difficulties
were the primary cause of the misclassification. Thus, despite
Telstra’s awareness of the risk, I conclude that the extent
of the penalty
required to deter future like conduct by Telstra or others is greatly reduced.
The nature and extent of the contravening conduct, the
circumstances in which it took place and the loss and damage caused
Jayawardana contended, and Telstra accepted, that the loss suffered by Mr
Jayawardana, reflected in the sum agreed between the
parties, was significant.
Mr Jayawardana further submitted that the amount of compensation payable to him,
being over $98,000, is
more than the maximum penalty, which should be borne in
mind when undertaking instinctive synthesis. In addition, the dispute was
inherently stressful for Mr Jayawardana. Mr Jayawardana further submitted that
the contravening conduct took place over at least
5 years, which was not
contested and is a relevant consideration. Whilst Telstra contended that the
contravention related solely
to classification, with the resultant impact on Mr
Jayawardana being consequential only, I consider this to be a distinction
a difference. The underpayment was a consequence which naturally flowed
from the misclassification.
the extent of the conduct, Mr Jayawardana accepted that there was no evidence
that the contravening conduct is more widespread.
Telstra’s evidence that
it has voluntarily identified 32 employees who would likely be classified as
CFW5 should the new CJDs
be implemented does not permit me to take the matter
further, as the new proposed CJDs were not in evidence, nor was there any
as to how they compared to the current CJDs. Further again, the
findings in the Liability Decision were highly factually contingent
Jayawardana’s work.
conclude that in light of these matters that the contravention had significant
consequences for Mr Jayawardana. However, on the
evidence before me, the extent
of the contravening conduct is limited to Mr Jayawardana. I have had regard to
both of these matters
in considering an appropriate penalty.
Jayawardana also contended that his career prospects had been reduced due to his
classification at the lower level. Telstra contended
that there was no evidence
that this was the case. I accept Telstra’s submission. There was no
evidence that had Mr Jayawardana
not been misclassified over the relevant
period, he would have been promoted to some other role.
Contrition/corrective action
Jayawardana contended that Telstra exhibited no contrition and defended the
proceedings all the way. Telstra contended that this
approach should be
rejected, given its genuine and reasonable mistake. I do not consider
Telstra’s defence of the claim warrants
any penalty considerations.
consider that Telstra has demonstrated contrition in acknowledging its error,
and taking a number of remedial steps, including:
reaching agreement with Mr
Jayawardana on a compensation figure; reclassifying Mr Jayawardana at CFW5;
acknowledging observations
in the Liability Decision as to the desirability of
agreeing upon new, updated CJDs, and expediting this process, noting that it
also contingent on the agreement of the CEPU; and voluntarily identifying 32
employees who may be reclassified as CFW5 and paying
them a higher duties
Jayawardana contended that Telstra had not considered employees who may be
entitled to back payment based on the current CJDs and
that Telstra’s
actions in respect of the 32 employees is therefore not appropriately corrective
or contrite. Further, Mr Jayawardana
contended that the arrangement put in place
for payment of higher duties is temporary only and may cease on 31 July 2025.
The difficulty
with this contention is, again, that the only evidence before the
Court as to the contravention of the classification provision is
in respect of
Mr Jayawardana. Telstra acknowledged in submissions that there are other CFW4
employees in respect of whom a process
is underway and that the group identified
by Telstra covers employees who perform similar work to Mr Jayawardana. However,
notwithstanding
this, the identification of these 32 employees by Telstra does
not establish that they are entitled to backpay. Further, the temporary
appears reasonable in circumstances where the development of new CJDs requires
the agreement of the CEPU and the final form
of the proposed updated CJDs may
Accordingly,
I consider Telstra has exhibited appropriate contrition and has taken
appropriate corrective action. This reduces the
need for specific deterrence.
Any similar previous conduct by contravenor
based on Mr Cooper’s evidence, identified only two prior occasions where
Telstra had been found to have contravened
the Act or its predecessor
legislation. The most recent such matter was
CEPU v Telstra
referred to above, in which no penalty was imposed. The other matter,
Telstra Corporation Ltd
, was determined in 2001.
contended that accordingly, its compliance history is good. Mr Jayawardana did
not contend otherwise. In light of the size
of Telstra’s workforce and the
number of industrial instruments which have applied to it over the relevant
period, these previous
contraventions do not lead me to conclude that there is
any greater need for deterrence, either general or specific, than results
the other factors I have considered.
Size of the business
Jayawardana submitted that Telstra has over 30,000 staff and is one of the
largest corporations in Australia, with substantial
assets, profits and
employees. It has a large and experienced human resources group. Its net profit
after tax in FY24, reported in
its Annual Report, was $2.3 billion. These
matters were not the subject of evidence and I have accepted Mr Cooper’s
that Telstra has approximately 20,670 current employees. The other
matters raised in submissions were not confirmed or contested
by Telstra.
Telstra accepted however that its size could be a significant factor if there
was a need to ensure that penalties are
not simply an acceptable cost of doing
business. However, Telstra contended that this is not a relevant consideration
in circumstances
where the contravention arose from a genuine and reasonable
position as to Mr Jayawardana’s classification, and in light of
being taken by Telstra to remedy the error and prevent similar errors occurring
in the future.
consider that I must have regard to Telstra’s size in order to address the
specific deterrence objective in light of Telstra’s
awareness of the risk
it was misclassifying Mr Jayawardana, and to achieve general deterrence for the
same reason. But this does
not change my assessment of the limited extent to
which a penalty is required, in light of the construction difficulties with the
relevant provisions.
QUANTUM OF PENALTY AND WHO IT IS PAYABLE TO?
all those matters into consideration, I have determined that the imposition of a
penalty of $7,650, being 10 per cent of the
maximum penalty, is appropriate, and
is reasonably necessary to meet the objectives of specific and general
deterrence.
CEPU, which represented Mr Jayawardana in the proceeding, contended that the
penalty should be payable to the CEPU. The CEPU contended
that this is
permissible pursuant to s 546(3), that the CEPU is entitled to represent Mr
Jayawardana’s interests and could
have been the named Plaintiff in the
proceedings.
contended that penalties should be made payable to Mr Jayawardana and it is open
to him to pass those monies on to the CEPU,
however, there is no evidentiary
foundation for ordering that penalties be paid to the CEPU.
to s 546(3), the Court may order that the penalty, or part of the penalty, be
paid to the Commonwealth, a particular organisation
or a particular person. The
power in s 546(3) ‘is ordinarily to be exercised by awarding any penalty
to the successful
applicant.’
Accordingly,
in the ordinary course, the penalty would be payable to Mr Jayawardana. I accept
the Court may depart from that principle
depending on the particular
circumstances. I do not consider that there would be anything inherently
inappropriate in ordering that
penalties be payable to the CEPU in this matter,
in light of the role the CEPU has played in the proceeding. However, Mr
Jayawardana’s
request that this occur was made only by way of the
CEPU’s submission. In the absence of evidence directly from Mr Jayawardana
communicating that he seeks an order that the penalty be payable to the CEPU and
the basis for it, I decline to make that order.
I will order that the penalty be
paid to Mr Jayawardana. He may give effect to any administrative arrangement
with the CEPU privately.
order as follows.
Court declares that the Defendant contravened
Fair Work Act
(Cth) (the Act) by classifying the Plaintiff at level CFW4 not level
CFW5 in contravention of clause 1.2(a) of Appendix C of each
a. the Telstra Enterprise Agreement 2015-2018;
b. the Telstra Enterprise Agreement 2019-2021; and
c. the Telstra Limited Enterprise Agreement 2022-2024.
2. The Court orders:
to s 546(1) of the Act, that the Defendant pay a pecuniary penalty of $7,650 in
respect of the contravention referred to
in Order 1.
to s 546(3) of the Act, that the Defendant pay the pecuniary penalty to the
Mr Jayawardana was employed by
Telstra Corporation Ltd until 8 December 2022, with his employment transfer to
Telstra constituting
a transfer of business under the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and all liabilities of Telstra Corporation Ltd transferred to Telstra
Limited. Both entities are referred to as ‘Telstra’
(2007) 168 IR 368
(2001) 108 IR 228
Australian Building
and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] HCA 13
Ibid, [17];
Competition and Consumer Commission v TPG internet Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 54
; Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2012] FCAFC 20
(2012) 287 ALR 249
, 265 [62].
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2017) 254 FCR 68
(2017) 271 IR 321
[2017] FCAFC 113
Ibid, [46]-[47].
Ibid, [55].
Ibid, [53], quoting
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Reckitt Benckiser
(Australia) Pty Ltd
(2016) 340 ALR 25; [2016] FCAFC 181 (
), 63 [155]-[156].
[18]; quoting
Re Trade Practices Commission v CSR Limited
[1990] FCA 521;
(1991) ATPR
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
(2007) 166 IR 14
[2007] FCA 1080
Ibid, [18].
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Sushi Bay Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2024] FCA 869
Reckitt Benckiser
Flight Centre Ltd v
Australian Competition and consumer Commission (No 2)
(2018) 260 FCR 68
[2018] FCAFC 53
Flight Centre
(2017) 275 IR 148
(2018) 261 FCR 347
Ibid, [49-[50], quoting
Banque Commerciale S.A., En Liquidation v Akhil Holdings Limited
(1990) 169 CLR 279
, 286-7, Mason CJ and Gaudron J. Telstra also relied on
Chin v Visual Thing Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G 896
Magistrates’ Court
(Miscellaneous Civil Proceedings) Rules 2020
Rocky Holdings Pty Ltd v
Fair Work Ombudsman
[2014] 221 FCR 153
[2014] FCAFC 62
), [10]-[27].
QR Ltd v Communications,
Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied
Services Union of Australia
(2010) 204 IR 142
[2010] FCAFC 150
, [48], cited
Rocky Holdings
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union
[2019] FCAFC 69
[181], Rangiah J.
[2021] FCA 954.
Ibid, [4], in reference to
Australian Education Union v Yooralla
[2019] FCA 1511
, [45], [51].
Ibid, [23].
CEPU v Telstra
Ibid, [18].
(2020 300 IR 198)
Ibid, [1], [3]-[4].
Ibid, [50]. In
Mortgage Services Pty Ltd v King
[2020] FCAFC 15
(2020) 274 FCR 225
; 292 IR 317, [55] the
Court (Rangiah and Charlesworth JJ) held that because the relevant
contraventions of s 340(1) of the Act were
‘deliberate’ and had
serious consequences, the object of deterrence required the imposition of a
penalty, notwithstanding
that there was a construction argument raised in
respect of s 340(1).
[2024] FCA 1431.
Ibid, [20]-[25]. Despite
being entitled to over $374,000 in unpaid wages and entitlements, the Applicant
only received $11,212.70
which equated to being paid less than $0.90 an hour.
This was associated with a serious deprivation of the Applicant’s liberty
by the contravener.
Ibid, [31].
Ibid, [14-[15].
Reckitt Benckiser
[131] (citations omitted).
Flight Centre,
Ibid, [61].
Ibid, [34].
Ibid, [63].
Flight Centre
Liability Decision,
Ibid, [103].
Ibid, [111].
Ibid, [109].
See Liability Decision,
[107]-[111].
Ibid, [185]-[188].
Ibid, [198]-[199].
Flight Centre,
Sayed v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 4
, [101], [107].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (826 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter