URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2008/1340.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gibson v Latrobe CC (General) [2008] VCAT 1340 (10 July 2008)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION / CIVIL DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO.
General List – Freedom of Information – exemptions claimed
– access granted to one document –
Freedom of Information Act
1988 – ss 33(1), 34(1)(b), 34(4)(a)(ii) and 50(4)
Sharon Gibson
RESPONDENT:
Latrobe City Council
WHERE HELD:
Acting President Judge I J K Ross
HEARING TYPE:
DATE OF HEARING:
DATE OF ORDER:
10 July 2008
Gibson v Latrobe CC (General)
[2008] VCAT 1340
decision of the Respondent be varied in that Document 2 is to be released to the
decision of the Respondent with respect to Documents 1 and 3 is affirmed.
1 be stayed for a period of 28 days from the date of the order.
His Honour Judge I J K Ross
Acting President
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant:
Ms Fiona McKenzie with Mr Christien Corns of Counsel
For Respondent:
Mr Mick Batskos, Solicitor
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. Introduction
May 2007, Sharon Gibson (the Applicant) sought access under the
Information Act
(the FOI Act) from the Latrobe City Council (the
Respondent) to copies of various documents
any proposals by the
private sector to purchase the Moe Library and any reports by a consultant on
any proposal to renovate the
was granted in full to a number of documents but access was denied in part to
one document and in full to two documents, the
subject of the current
proceeding.
decision deals with an application by the Applicant for review of a decision of
the Respondent to refuse access to three documents,
(i) Letter of
27 October 2006 from Architect to Council and attached Moe Feasibility Study
Plans (released all but part of one page)
(document 1);
(ii) Letter of
23 February 2007 from Accountant to Council (2 pages) (document 2); and
(iii) Letter of
26 October 2006 from Cost Consultant to Architect (document
Applicant contends that she has a legally enforceable right to obtain access to
the documents, because:
documents are not exempt documents; and
event that the Tribunal finds that any of the documents are exempt under s 34,
the documents attract the public interest
override power of the Tribunal
pursuant to s 50(4).
Respondent’s position in relation to each of the documents or part
documents in dispute is that they are exempt from access
under sections 33,
34(1)(b) and 34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Respondent also submits that the public interest does not require that access be
granted to those documents under s 50(4) of the
Applicant contends that the exemptions claimed are not sustainable on the facts
or the law.
3. The Legislative Framework
object of the FOI Act is to extend as far as possible the right of the community
to access information in the possession of the
Government of Victoria and
certain other bodies by, relevantly, creating a general right of access to
information in documentary
form. Such a general right is limited only by
exceptions and exemptions necessary for the protection of essential public
and the private and business affairs of persons in respect of whom
information is collected and held by agencies (see s 3(1)).
discretions conferred by the FOI Act are to be exercised, so far as possible, so
as to ‘facilitate and promote, promptly
and at the lowest reasonable cost,
the disclosure of
information’
It follows that while the issue will ultimately depend on the proper
construction of the relevant provisions of the FOI Act the
Tribunal should
generally lean in favour of disclosure and construe the exemptions
13 confers a broad right of access to information, in the following
“Subject to this Act, every person has a legally
enforceable right to obtain access in accordance with this Act to –
(a) a document of an agency, other than an exempt document; or
(b) an official document of a Minister, other than an exempt
observations may be made about this provision:
the right to
access conferred by s 13 comes into existence as an enforceable right only if a
request is made which satisfies the requirements
the expression
‘Subject to this Act’ makes it clear that the right of access is
qualified by provisions such as s 14 and
Part IV of the FOI Act which deals with
exempt documents;
agency’ means a department, council or a prescribed authority (see s
document of an agency’ means ‘a document in the possession of an
agency... whether created by the agency or received
in the agency’ (see s
an agency refuses to grant access to a document, s 51 provides that the
applicant may apply to the principal officer of the agency
for internal review
of the decision. If the applicant is not satisfied with the internal review
decision, he or she may apply to
the Tribunal under s50 for a review of the
decision. The Tribunal reviews decisions on the merits and is not restricted to
the arguments
or evidence taken into account by the agency.
review proceedings the agency to which the request was made has the onus of
establishing that a decision given in respect of the
request was justified or
that the Tribunal should give a decision adverse to the applicant (see s 55(2)).
It follows that the respondent
agency usually presents its case first. In
addition to having the same powers as the agency, the Tribunal has a discretion
access to an exempt document where ‘the public interest
requires’ that access to the document should be granted. The
this power - often referred to as the public interest override – was
considered in
Secretary to the Department of Premier and Cabinet v
, where the
Court of Appeal made the following observations:
The override
cannot be invoked unless the document in question is first found to be an exempt
document under Pt IV.
The override
cannot be invoked simply because the Tribunal holds the opinion that it is
public interest that the exempt document be released; rather, the
question is whether the public interest
“demands” or “necessitates” – the release of that
This question is
a question of fact for the Tribunal to decide.
This question
may be answered in the affirmative only if the considerations of the public
interest are so strong as to override those
factors that confer exempt status on
the document in the first place.
However strong
the public interest considerations must be to prevail in a particular case
depends upon the nature and strength of
the factors that confer exempt status on
the document in question.
The agency bears
the onus of proving that the override should not be invoked.
a subsequent case,
Secretary to the Department of Justice v
of Appeal made the following additional observations about the public interest
the operation of
the override depends upon the particular circumstances of the case, and
“abstract policy considerations”
– such as “the
desirability of greater transparency in decision-making by the executive”
irrelevant;
the power to
grant access to an exempt document is exercisable only if the Tribunal concludes
that the public interest requires that
access be granted.
relation to the second point his Honour Justice Maxwell described the public
interest override in the following terms:
"That is a stringent test.
As this Court said in Hulls, "requires" in this context is synonymous with
"demands" or "necessitates".
There is "a sense of the imperative". The public
interest consideration(s) said to require the granting of access must be so
as to override the public interest considerations underpinning the
applicable exemption(s). The case for access must, in effect,
irresistible.”
his Honour Justice Bongiorno
word “required” connotes “obligation”,
“necessity” or “compulsion”, and
said that the Tribunal
must be able to express itself in terms that convey that “it had no
practical alternative but to allow
access” and that it must be of the
opinion that “unless access was granted the public interest would suffer
or be diminished
this matter the Respondent claims that the documents are exempt pursuant to ss
33, 34(1)(b) and 34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
document will be exempt under s 33(1) if the following conditions are
document would disclose information relating to the personal affairs of any
person; and
(ii) disclosure
of the document would be unreasonable.
33(9) of the FOI Act sets out an inclusive definition of the phrase
“information relating to the personal affairs of
any person”. It is
sufficient if the information identifies any person or discloses their address
or location. It is also
sufficient if it is information from which any person's
identity, address or location can reasonably be determined.
words “personal affairs” have a wide interpretation and have been
held to mean matters of private concern to an
individual.
second matter to be considered by the Tribunal under this exemption is whether
disclosure of the documents would be unreasonable.
This involves a balancing
exercise in which the right to privacy of people referred to in documents is
considered as against the
general right of access to information conferred by
the FOI Act. No single factor is determinative as the question is to be decided
by reference to all relevant circumstances. As Judge Jones said in
Metropolitan Transit Authority
“What therefore has to be
decided is whether disclosure is unreasonable. This requires a balancing of
interests: the right
to personal privacy of an individual whose personal
affairs may be unreasonably disclosed by granting access to the information and
the object of the Act to extend as far as possible the right of the community to
access to information in the possession of Government
or Agencies. More
particularly, this balancing of interests requires a consideration of all the
circumstances, including the interest
that the applicant has in the information
in question, the nature of the information that would be disclosed, the
circumstances in
which the information was obtained, the likelihood of the
information being information that the person concerned would not wish
disclosed without consent, and whether the information has any current
relevance. It is apparent that the purpose of s 33(1)
of the Act is to prevent
the unreasonable invasion of the privacy of third
34(1)(b) of the FOI Act would operate to exempt a document if it would
(a) information
acquired by an agency from a business, commercial or financial undertaking;
relates to matters of a business, commercial or financial nature;
disclosure would be likely to expose the undertaking unreasonably to
disadvantage (taking into account the matters in section
determining whether a document contains information ‘acquired’ by an
agency, it does not matter whether the document
originated from a business
undertaking. What is of significance is whether the document discloses
information
acquired by an agency from a business
undertaking.
information need not have come directly from the business undertaking. It is
sufficient if it was acquired by the agency from
a third party acting as
information acquired by the agency must be of a business, commercial or
financial nature. These words have their ordinary meaning.
must also be apparent that disclosure would give rise to some disadvantage to
the business undertaking and it is necessary to consider
whether disclosure
would “unreasonably” disadvantage the business undertaking.
determining whether disclosure would expose the business undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage, the Tribunal may take into account
considerations set out in paragraphs 34(2)(a) to (d) of the FOI Act,
(a) whether the
information is generally available to competitors of the undertaking;
(b) whether the
information would be an exempt matter if it were generated by an agency;
(c) whether the
information could be disclosed without causing substantial harm to the
competitive position of the undertaking; and
(d) whether
there are any considerations in the public interest in favour of disclosure
which outweigh considerations of competitive
disadvantage to the undertaking,
for instance, the public interest in evaluating environmental
addition, the Tribunal may consider any other consideration which in its opinion
is relevant (s 34(2)).
determination of whether any disadvantage is unreasonable requires a balancing
of interests between the private or business interests
of the business against
the object of the FOI Act having regard to all the
circumstances.
34(4) provides that a document is exempt if:
“(a) ... it
(i) a trade secret of an agency; or
(ii) in the case of an agency engaged in trade or commerce, information of a
business, commercial or financial nature; and
that would, if disclosed under this Act be likely to expose the agency
unreasonably to disadvantage.”
is not contended the documents contain ‘a trade secret of an agency’
and hence s 34(4)(a)(i) is not relevant in the
circumstances of this case.
document is exempt under s 34(4)(a)(ii) if three conditions are satisfied:
the agency is
engaged in trade or commerce;
the document
contains information of a business, commercial or financial nature; and
disclosure of
the information would be likely to expose the agency unreasonably to
disadvantage.
terms ‘trade’ and ‘commerce’ are not terms of art;
rather they are expressions of fact and terms of common
same observation may be made in relation to what constitutes ‘information
of a business, commercial or financial nature’.
Ku-Ring-Gai
Co-operative Building Society (No 12) Ltd
with whom Brennan J agreed, observed that the terms ‘trade’ and
‘commerce’ were ‘of the widest
import’ and were not
restricted to ordinary trading and commercial activities in open markets. His
Honour went on to observe
that the terms:
“... are not
restricted to dealings or communications which can properly be described as
being at arm’s length in the
sense that they are within open markets or
between strangers or have a dominant objective of profit making. They are apt
commercial or business dealings in finance between a company and its
members which are not within the mainstream of ordinary commercial
and which, while being commercial in character, are marked by a degree of
altruism which is not compatible with a dominant
objective of profit
Concrete Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd v Nelson (Concrete Constructions)
majority of the High Court held that to be ‘in trade or commerce’
for the purpose of
Trade Practices Act
activities or transactions in question must ‘of their nature, bear a
trading or commercial
character’.
agency may be regarded as ‘engaged in trade and commerce’ even if
the trade and commerce in which it is engaged is
only incidental to its other
undertaken with the dominant objective of
agency engaged in property transactions as the lessor, lessee, purchaser or
vendor has been held to be engaged in trade or
disclosure of the document must be ‘
to expose the agency
unreasonably
disadvantage
to disadvantage would be ‘likely’ if it were ‘probable, such
as well might happen or be
‘Disadvantage’
in this context means disadvantage in a business, commercial or financial
been held that such disadvantage can occur where it reduces an agency’s
capacity to compete in a market or to negotiate
the disadvantage occasioned by the disclosure would be
unreasonable
’ involves a consideration of all the
circumstances,
the nature of
the information;
circumstances in which the information was obtained;
the likelihood
of the information being information that the person concerned would not wish to
have disclosed without consent;
whether the
information has any current relevance. Current relevance and sensitivity of the
information to be disclosed are relevant
considerations as to whether disclosure
would be likely to expose the agency unreasonably to
disadvantage.
3. The Evidence
witnesses were called on behalf of the Applicant:
Sharon Gibson
(statements of 9 April and 2 May
Cheryl Wragg
(statement of 9 April
Gibson is the Applicant and Cheryl Wragg is a researcher and a resident of
essence of the Applicant’s case is that these documents all relate to the
proposed relocation of the Moe Public Library
and that there is considerable
community debate and concern about these issues. In short the Applicant
believes that the Respondent
has not properly considered the impact that
relocation of the library would have on the community and nor has it properly
the option of maintaining and redeveloping the library on its current
site. The Applicant also believes that the Respondent’s
relocate the library has been based, in whole or part, on an offer made by an
adjoining business to purchase the land
on which the library is situated.
relevant history which has given rise to these concerns is set out in the
evidence adduced by the Applicant, as follows:
(a) September
2006, the Respondent issued an invitation to develop "Moe Activity Centre Plan"
which does not refer to the Moe Library
(b) February
2007, the Respondent committee of Moe businesses and organisations met once (and
only once) to provide input into the
Moe Activity Centre
February 2007, a letter of offer is made to the Respondent (apparently from
Tanjil Place Medical Centre) to purchase Moe Library;
(d) 26 March
2007 the Respondent considers offer of Tanjil Place Medical Centre (see the
Respondent’s document entitled "7.21
Expression of Interest - Moe Service
Centre/Library
(e) 30 March
2007, a public meeting is held, the "Search conference," regarding the Moe
Activity Centre Plan, during a conference
participant (Mr Bill Carmichael)
announced that the Library was to move and Tanjil Place Medical Centre was to
extend into Library
premises (Mr Carmichael is the father of Councillor Lisa
Price. It is not suggested that Mr Carmichael is a councillor or authorised
speak on behalf of the
Respondent);
(f) Around May
2007, signing of petition by over 1400 signatories, pleading that the Library
not be moved;
2007, a "Speak Out" conference is held, which is an unclear
, where relocation of the Library is lobbied for,
but the location of the library in the map on public display was not
(h) Around 5
November 2007, after a Council meeting, Cheryl Wragg reviews the Moe Activity
Centre Plan; the Plan notes that the decision
to relocate the Library was the
Respondent’s;
(i) Around 19
November 2007, after a Council meeting where Cheryl Wragg was told that the
proposal to locate the library came from
the Council Library Strategy Plan. The
Strategy Plan referred
to a report
that investigates options for the
library, but Cheryl Wragg was denied access on the basis that it was an internal
(j) Between 5
November 2007 and early 2008 Cheryl Wragg endeavours to engage with the Council
through meetings, providing submissions,
and requesting information; she and
others are said to be frustrated and inhibited in that process, resulting in a
lack of transparency
and the impression that public concerns are not being aired
Respondent;
(k) Around 18
December 2007, a "counter-petition" was signed by 18 people, most of whom are
related to RGM Group Accountants, the
group accountants of Tanjil Place Medical
reports, including on 27 December 2007, with a councillor of the Respondent
citing the petition with 1400 signatories as
(m) Prior to 4
February 2008, an open letter is produced by Tanjil Place Medical Centre seeking
to clarify matters whereby it asserts
it has been villified (see paragraph 80
Respondent tendered statements from three witnesses:
Fahna Leigh
Ammett (a Senior Associate of the Respondent’s
solicitors)
Kyriacou (Manager Community Information Services at the Latrobe City
Geoffrey Mervyn
Hill (Manager, Business Development of the Latrobe City
Ammett’s statement was prepared pursuant to s 34(3) of the FOI Act and
sets out the views of Cost Control (Victoria) Pty
Ltd and the Tanjil Place
Medical Centre as to the possible disclosure of a business, commercial or
financial nature about them contained
in the documents the subject of these
proceedings. Both businesses objected to the disclosure of information about
their business,
pursuant to s 34 of the FOI Act.
Kyriacou’s evidence sets out some of the background and context to this
Hill’s evidence goes to the impact that disclosure of these documents
would have on the Respondent.
the following basis of the Respondent’s evidence I make the following
three documents in these proceedings were generated in the context of an
internal project to explore possible options in relation
to the Moe Library.
That internal project arose from the adoption by Council of the Five Year
Library Strategy Plan for the Moe
Library, on 19 June 2006.
the internal project was progressing the Council was also engaged in a separate
process in relation to the development of a Moe
Activity Centre Plan (MACP). A
consultant was engaged to develop the plan. It became apparent that it would be
impractical to continue
to look at the library in isolation under the Strategy
Plan and that it was appropriate to have the library considered as part of
MACP. The consultant was instructed accordingly.
MACP was adopted by the Council on 17 December 2008.
envisaged that further community and stakeholder consultation would be
undertaken as part of the planning and implementation process
for individual
projects that arise from the MACP.
has been no decision made by the Council at any time to relocate the Moe
relation to the last point I accept the evidence of Julie-Anne Kyriacou and
Geoffrey Hill. I reject the evidence to the contrary
relied on by the
Applicant. The Applicant’s evidence was unconvincing. It is largely
based on inference and rumour. Reference
is made to statements made by
individuals but the evidence does not establish that the opinions of the
individuals concerned reflected
the concluded view of the Respondent.
deal later with Mr Hill’s evidence regarding the impact of disclosing
these documents.
4. The Exemption Claims
4.1 Documents 1 and 3
relation to documents 1 and 3 it is only necessary to deal with the
Respondent’s claim that these documents are exempt pursuant
s34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
1 has been released apart from two projected cost estimate figures for two
proposals with respect to the Library. The parts
of the document to which access
has been granted are set out below:
“I am pleased to enclose
the completed feasibility study plans for the above project. I have included a
proposal for George
Street (Option 2), which includes the Library/Service Centre
only, allowing for a larger “town square”, an information
and some car parking. I also enclose cost estimates for all three alternative
proposals. In summary, these are as follows:
Albert Street
Redevelopment: xxxxxxx
George Street
Development (Option 1) xxxxxxx
George Street
Development (Option 2) xxxxxxx
If the George Street (Option 2) was
pursued, one would assume that a child care facility of the equivalent size
proposed in Option
1, but built elsewhere, for example on the Albert Street
site, would cost in the order of xxxxxxx (the difference between Option
Option 2). The gross building area of the child care component of Option 1 is
800 sq.m; the required outdoor play area of
an additional 420 sq.m., hence a
total of 1,200 sq.m. This should fit on the existing Albert Street site, which
has an area of approximately
1,700 sq.m. Ensuring optimum orientation of both
indoor and outdoor play areas would be critical, and may prove a challenge.
As indicated to you, the perspective view of the George Street proposal will
follow on Monday morning.
If you have any queries about any of the enclosed, please do not hesitate to
call me. I will be available on my office number all
day Saturday. Thank you
for the opportunity of working with you on this project. I look forward to
seeing how this develops.”
information in document 3 comprises a detailed cost plan for the various options
that were being explored by the Council as part
of the Moe Library Strategy
It includes
all the information in document 1 but shows a much more detailed breakdown of
those estimated or proposed costs.
the basis of the evidence I am satisfied that the Respondent regularly engages
in property dealings and transactions and will continue
clear that as the Respondent creates projects to implement the MACP it will be
necessary to tender out to the private
sector in relation to that process. On
this basis the agency is clearly engaged in trade or commerce.
documents contain information about projected cost estimates for development
proposals with respect to the library. I am satisfied
that this is information
of a business, commercial or financial nature.
central issue in contention is whether disclosure of this information would be
‘likely to expose the agency unreasonably
to disadvantage’.
am satisfied that such disclosure would be likely (in the sense that it might
well happen) to expose the agency to disadvantage.
The disadvantage would arise
in the event that the Council ultimately decided to pursue a development option
with respect to the
library. In this context I accept Mr Hill’s evidence
where, at paragraphs 10 and 18 of his first statement, he
“[10] ... I believe the disclosure of such information
could adversely influence any tender process. There would be great risk
tenderers would submit proposals and costs in accordance with these figures and
prejudice unreasonably the legitimacy of the
tender process ...
[18] The disclosure of the costs information would be likely to lead to a
skewing or corruption of any subsequent tender process that
may eventuate in
relation to the Library and Service Centre. If prospective tenderers for a Moe
Library development project had
access to this information it is likely to
influence the quotes they provide as they may believe their quotes should come
in at these
acknowledge that disclosure of this information may be to the advantage of the
agency if the cost estimates were lower than the
actual costs likely to be
incurred. Such circumstances may provide downward pressure on tenderers. Mr
Hill acknowledged such a
possibility in cross examination. But I think it is
that disclosure will disadvantage the agency.
the disadvantage occasioned by the disclosure would be
unreasonable
involves a consideration of all the circumstances including factors for and
against disclosure.
Applicant submitted that none of the relevant undertakings nor the Respondent
unreasonably
disadvantaged by disclosure of the documents. It is
submitted that the very nature of these matters, which are between the public
and private sector, is that they ought be more open to public scrutiny than
transactions within the private sector. The Applicant
relies on the decision in
Re Delta-Riva v Department of Treasury and Finance (Re: Delta
support of its contention.
Respondent submits that while the costs information does not accurately reflect
the real costs that would be involved in developing
the three options –
speculative
sufficiently “ball park” to have an adverse commercial effect on the
Council if released. The costs were obtained
as part of a project of
considering and exploring possible options without making any recommendations or
decisions about those
Council decides to pursue a development option as part of the implementation of
MACP, disclosure would likely have a detrimental
effect on any associated tender
am satisfied that the documents are the subject of potential current and future
relevance depending on how the MACP is implemented
and what projects emerge out
of that implementation process. If as part of the implementation of the MACP a
project involves the
relocation or redevelopment of the Moe Library disclosure
of the information in the documents would allow all of the commercial entities
with which the Respondent would have to deal to access information from which
they can strengthen their bargaining position at the
expense of the Respondent
and ultimately the ratepayers. Disclosure is release into the public domain as
the Applicant wishes to
have the information so that it can be disseminated
throughout the local community. I am satisfied that this would amount to
unreasonable
disadvantage.
would be contrary to the obligations on the Council to maximise any commercial
benefits to ratepayers when engaging in
property dealings and
transactions.
to the Applicant’s submissions the decision in
Re Delta-Riva
distinguishable from the circumstances in this case. In
Re Delta-Riva
one of the issues concerned the disclosure of a document known as the public
service comparator (PSC) for the Mitcham Frankston Freeway
Project. The PSC was
a program for calculating the costs and benefits of publicly funding assets or
arranging for them to be constructed
solely or partly by the private sector in
exchange for a concession to operate the asset. The Tribunal held that
disclosure of this
document was not contrary to the public interest because,
among other things, the relevant contract had been awarded and the information
in the document would no longer affect bidding
contractors.
circumstances in this case are quite different – no contract has been
awarded and the release of the costs information would
be likely to have a
detrimental effect on the tender process associated with any future decision to
redevelop or relocate the Moe
am satisfied that documents 1 and 3 are exempt documents within the meaning of s
34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
the event that the Tribunal finds that any of the documents are exempt under the
Act, the Applicant submitted that the Tribunal
should exercise its discretion
pursuant to s 50(4) to release the documents. The primary argument advanced by
the Applicant in this
context was the need to ‘clear the air’ in
respect of the library relocation issue.
my view the public interest considerations said to require the granting of
access are not so strong as to override the public interest
considerations
underpinning the s 34(4)(a)(ii)
case for access is not, in effect,
irresistible
the exempt documents to be released under s 50(4) the Tribunal would have to be
of the opinion that unless access was granted
the public interest would suffer
or be diminished in some way. I am not so persuaded and short of such a state
of satisfaction the
public interest would not require that there be access to
am not persuaded that the Applicant has asserted a ground of public interest
that would be addressed by disclosure of the documents.
The Applicant’s
case is based on the misconception that the Council has made a decision to
relocate Moe library, when, on
the evidence before me, that is not the case.
documents have been created at a preliminary stage in circumstances where the
Respondent is still formulating options to be considered.
As part of this
process it is actively engaging in extensive community consultation and has made
no decision in relation to the
property the subject of the documents or other
properties as part of a broader subject matter.
am I persuaded that there has been any demonstrated illegality, impropriety,
sharp practice or wrongdoing in connection with the
Respondent in its dealings
with the matters the subject of the documents. Further, the release of the
documents would not show any
such illegality, impropriety, sharp practice or
wrongdoing. As such, there is no reason to “clear the air”.
fact that an individual or even a section of the public may be interested in the
subject matter of a document does not equate
with disclosure of that document
being in the public interest. The fact that there has been some media interest
or interest shown
by members of the local community does not, of itself, equate
to public interest. As his Honour Justice Maxwell said in
“The extent to which the public are - or are
believed to be - interested in a particular matter is not, by itself, relevant
to the determination of whether disclosure of a document relating to that matter
is in the public interest, within the meaning of
s 50(4). Were it otherwise,
the formation of the opinion which s 50(4) requires would depend upon the
ascertainment of the extent
to which the public had been shown to be interested
in the topic. I pointed out in the course of argument the practical
difficulties
which this would create. But this is, in my view, an error of
principle, not merely a question of practicability. Accordingly,
respectful opinion, the Tribunal fell into error by taking into account an
irrelevant consideration, being the Tribunal's perception
of the extent to which
"the public" wished to know why the petition had been
interest considerations favour non disclosure given the commercial impact of
disclosure on the Respondent. The Respondent
has a duty in dealing with its
assets to obtain the best possible return for the benefit of its ratepayers. In
the context of property
transactions by a Council the Tribunal in the
“Transparency
would not, in my view, be in the public interest, if it required an institution
like the City of Melbourne engaged
in the poker game of the property market to
show its cards to the private players at the table with those players being
to keep their cards close to their chest. In short, in transactions
such as these there is a strong public interest in permitting
the City to retain
commercial confidentiality to the same extent that other players in the property
market may.”
3.2 Document 2
2 contains information volunteered to the Council by an accountant on behalf of
a private business, the Tanjil Place Medical
Centre. The Respondent describes
the document as containing ‘various information about the business plans
of that business
and information in the nature of a draft
turning to the exemptions claimed it is important to set out the information
which is already in the public domain with respect
to the contents of this
letter from FOI Solutions to Tanjil Place Medical Centre dated 23 November 2007
describes document 2 in these terms:
“... a letter to Council
dated 23 February 2007 from RGM Accountants and Advisor’s proposing the
acquisition of Council
property made on your
G to Exhibit A is a council document dated 26 March 2007 which deals with the
Tanjil Place Medical Centre’s (referred
to as TPM in the document)
expression of interest in expanding its operations and acquiring certain council
properties, it states:
“At a recent meeting with Council
officers, TPM outlined their vision to widen the range of health services being
the Moe and Latrobe Valley Community. This initial discussion
identified their desire to develop a holistic integrated medical facility
through the development of a Moe CBD Medical Precinct.
To facilitate their expansion, TPM also identified a need for additional
space. They expressed an interest in obtaining Latrobe City
specifically the Moe Service Centre, Library and adjoining car parks.”
or about 4 February 2008 the Tanjil Place Medical Centre sent an open letter to
its patients, in the following terms:
“The management and
staff of Tanjil Place Medical have demonstrated a commitment to delivering the
best health services to our
patients for many years. We continue to seek to
provide more and better services to the Moe community. Our directors have made a
significant investment in the present facility and believe that the number of
medical services provided here can still be expanded
and improved.
Some months ago we became aware that the Latrobe City Council was
investigating improved Library and Community facilities in Moe and
considered their present facilities unsuitable for redevelopment. Advice to
Council had been that the present library site
is too small to adequately cater
for new buildings, increased services, parking and open space.
subsequently approached the Council indicating that, should they pursue their
plans for improved community facilities elsewhere
in the Moe CBD, Tanjil Place
would consider purchasing the adjacent properties (strictly according to
statutory valuations and processes).
We would use the facilities to provide
extended medical services in Moe.
Let’s be absolutely clear, Tanjil
Place contacted Council only after Council had begun to explore alternative
sites for future
Community facilities in the Moe CBD.
Unfortunately a small number of individuals have chosen to vilify Tanjil
Place and our directors; making unfounded allegations regarding
our dealings
with Council. Some have even suggested the Council’s own redevelopment
plan for Moe were only designed to advantage
“a few businessmen”.
This is an insult, not only to Council and Tanjil Place Medical but to anyone
thinking of investing
in our town in the future.
This campaign of attacks on the Tanjil Place team is not only baseless,
but misleading and scurrilous. It may also impact detrimentally
Council s plans
to deliver new community facilities in Moe. While the reuse of present Library
and Service centre buildings may present
opportunities to improve medical
services to the Moe community, they are not and never have been essential to the
future of Tanjil
Place Medical. For this reason we will explore other options to
cater for improved medical services to Moe. It may take longer than
cooperation with Council but we are not willing to have our organisation or any
member of our team unfairly vilified by
scurrilous attacks.
Also, we do not wish to see Moe disadvantaged further. The rumour and
innuendo aimed at Tanjul Place Medical and Council has diverted
people’s attention from Council’s plans for a new library, community
facilities, tourist and transport hub in the
Moe CBD. This quality proposal was
arrived at as a result of significant consultation with the Moe community over
more than 18 months.
Like the clear majority of our community, we support the
plan. Council has spent many millions of dollars in each of Traralgon, Morwell
and Churchill and has now indicated a willingness to make a worthwhile
investment in our town. It is not before time. It is difficult
to imagine why
any individuals or local group would seek to undermine such an investment in
For our part, our patients can be confident that our commitment to the health
and wellbeing of our community remains our principal
(emphasis added)
letter is signed by the directors of the Tanjil Medical Centre.
clear inference from the material set out above is that document 2 contains a
proposal by the Tanjil Medical Centre to acquire
certain Council property,
including the current site of the Moe library. It is also apparent that the
Tanjil Medical Centre now
proposes to ‘explore other options to cater for
improved medical services to Moe’. In relation to the latter point I
the apparent inconsistency between the Medical Centre’s public statements
and its response to FOI Solutions as set out
in Annexure FA3 to Exhibit
Respondent claims that this document is an exempt document pursuant to ss 33,
34(1)(b) and 34(4)(a)(ii).
the purpose of determining the exemptions claimed I accept the following:
the document
would disclose information relating to the personal affairs of persons (s
the document
contains information of a business, commercial or financial nature (within the
meaning of ss 34(1)(b) and 34(4)(a)(ii));
the agency is
engaged in trade or commerce (s 34(4)(a)(ii)).
persuaded that the disclosure of the document would:
be unreasonable
within the meaning of s 33(1); or
be likely to
expose the undertaking unreasonably to disadvantage within the meaning of s
34(1)(b); or
be likely to
expose the agency unreasonably to disadvantage within the meaning of s
34(4)(a)(ii).
follows that I reject the Respondent’s submission that document 2 is an
exempt document pursuant to ss 33(1), 34(1)(b) or
34(4)(a)(ii). My reasons for
reaching this conclusion may be shortly stated.
relation to exemption claimed pursuant to s 33(1) disclosure is not unreasonable
on the basis that the persons concerned do not
rely on this exemption and having
regard to the extent of material already in the public domain. The Tanjil
Medical Centre’s
‘Open Letter to Patients’ is particularly
relevant in this regard.
am I persuaded that the disclosure of the document would unreasonably expose the
Tanjil Medical Centre to disadvantage. The thrust
of the information contained
in the document is already in the public domain. I accept that the information
was initially commercially
sensitive and was provided in confidence. But the
subsequent disclosures lead me to conclude that the information may be disclosed
without causing substantial harm to the competitive position of the
undertaking.
I am persuaded that the agency would be unreasonably disadvantaged by the
disclosure. I accept that the Respondent would not
normally disclose such
information and as a general proposition there is some force in the argument
that disclosure may discourage
unsolicited private sector proposals to
these submissions must be seen in context and in particular against the
background of the extent to which the matters canvassed
in the document are in
the public domain. Viewed in this way, I am not persuaded that the agency would
be unreasonably disadvantaged.
5. CONCLUSION
the reasons given I propose to affirm the decision of the Respondent with
respect to documents 1 and 3. I will vary the Respondent’s
decision in
respect of document 2 and order that the document be released to the
His Honour Judge I J K Ross
Acting President
Statement, p.1, para
documents 1, 2 and 3 collectively as ‘the
See s3(2) of the FOI Act and more generally
Interpretation of
Legislation Act
, which directs that in the interpretation of a
provision of an Act a construction that would promote the purpose or object
the Act shall be preferred to a construction that would not promote
that purpose or
Sobh v Police Force of Victoria
[1994] VicRp 2
[1994] 1 VR 41
at 61 per Ashley
Accident Compensation Commission v Goom
[1991] VicRp 72
[1991] 2 VR 322
Secretary to the Department of Treasury and Finance v Dalla-Riva
Wallace v Health Commission of Victoria
[1985] VicRp 43
[1985] VR 403
Birrell v Victorian Economic Development Corporation
(1989) 3 VAR
[1999] VSCA 117
[1999] 3 VR
[2007] VSCA
at [94] per
Maxwell P, at [114] per Ashley
Hutchison and Department of Human Services
(1997) 12 VAR 422
Health Department
(1988) 2 VAR 458
at 245-246; Cited with approval by Hansen J in
Marke v Victoria
[2007] VSC 522
(13 December
Gill and Department of Industry, Technology and Resources
(1985) 1 VAR 97
City Parking Pty Ltd and City of Melbourne
(1996) 10 VAR 170
Byrne and Swan Hill Rural City Council
(2000) 16 VAR 366
at 372-3 and
Re Page and Metropolitan Transit Authority
(1988) 2 VAR 243
Ku-Ring-Gai Co-operative Building Society (No 12) Ltd
[1978] FCA 50
per Deane J, with whom Brennan J
[1990] HCA 17
(1990) 169 CLR 594
at 604 per Mason CJ and Deane J, Dawson and Gaudron
Marple and Department of Agriculture
(1995) 9 VAR 29
at 76 per Macnamara
Ku-Ring-Gai Cooperative Building Society (No 12) Ltd
(1978) 36 FLR 136
167 per Deane J;
Byrne v Swan Hill Rural City Council
(2000) 16 VAR
Parking Pty Ltd v City of Melbourne
(1996) 10 VAR 170
Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development
[2005] VCAT 2702
Accident Compensation Commission v Goom
[1991] VicRp 72
[1991] 2 VR 322
v Department of Industry and Technology
(1986) 1 VAR 345
Swan Hill Rural City Council
(2000) 16 VAR 366
at 372-3, Macnamara DP;
Page v Metropolitan Transit Authority
(1988) 2 VAR 243
at 246 per Judge
Riva v Department of Treasury and Finance
[2005] VCAT 2083
McCulloch v University of Melbourne
Stewart v Department of Tourism, Sport and the Commonwealth
See Exhibits A2 and
Sharon Gibson statement 1 paragraph
Sharon Gibson statement 1 paragraph
A2 Sharon Gibson statement 1 paragraph
A2 Sharon Gibson statement 1 paragraph
A2 Sharon Gibson statement 1 paragraph [35]; Exhibit A4 Cheryl Wragg statement
A4 Cheryl Wragg statement paragraphs [10] –
A4 Cheryl Wragg
Exhibit A2 Sharon Gibson statement 1, annexure “F” page 5; Exhibit
A4 Cheryl Wragg statement paragraphs [30] –
LCC2 and LCC3
Exhibits LCC4 and
LCC4 statement of Mr Hill at para
Hill Statement, Exhibit LCC4, paras [9], [10] and
LCC4; See also Exhibit LCC5 at paras [8] –
[2005] VCAT 2083
Exhibit LCC 4 at paras [8]-[9]; Exhibit LCC 2,
Exhibit LCC 2 at paras [20] – [22]; Exhibit LCC 3 at paras [16]-[17];
Exhibit LCC 4
Save Albert Park Inc v Australian Grand Prix Corporation
[2008] VCAT 168
LCC at paras [9] –
[2005] VCAT 2083
Secretary to the Department of Premier and Cabinet v Hulls
[1999] VSCA 117
[1999] 3 VR
Secretary, Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96
Secretary, Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96
Secretary, Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96
Maxwell P; Also see Bongiorno AJA at
Parking Pty Ltd v City of Melbourne
(1996) 10 VAR 170
Respondent’s submission’s at paragraph
Attachment FA2 to Exhibit
Annexure 1 to Exhibit
See Exhibit
LCC4 at paras [12]-[13] and Exhibit LCC5 at paras [12]-[13]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (267 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter