URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/683.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lawrence & Hanson Group Pty Ltd v Slade (No 2) [2025] VSC 683 (5 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
COMMERCIAL COURT
COMMERCIAL LIST
& HANSON GROUP PTY LTD
(ACN 080 350 812)
SHANE JOHN SLADE
DATE OF HEARING
31 October 2025
DATE OF RULING
5 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Lawrence & Hanson Group Pty Ltd v Slade (No 2)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 683
EVIDENCE — Privilege against self-incrimination — Freezing order
— Disclosure order — Section 128A of
Evidence Act 2008
— Whether valid objection made — Whether separate affidavit
adequately set out basis of objection — Whether
reasonable grounds for
objection — Whether real and appreciable risk of prosecution —
Whether interests of justice require
disclosure — Consideration of
efficacy of freezing order where minimal assets disclosed — Balancing
public interest in
compliance with disclosure order against potential detriment
to defendant — Confidential affidavit ordered to be returned to
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Shi
[2021] HCA 22
(2021) 273 CLR 235
considered.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr Sam B Rosewarne KC with Mr Harley G
For the Defendant
Ms Vicki Bell
Johnstone and Reimer Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
A. INTRODUCTION
1 On 10 September 2025, on the application
of the Plaintiff, the Court made a freezing order against the assets of the
Defendant (
Freezing Order
2 The Freezing
Order required, among other matters, that the Defendant provide certain
information concerning his assets on affidavit.
3 The Freezing Order stated that if the Defendant
wished to object to providing such information on the grounds that some or all
the information required to be disclosed may tend to prove that he had
committed an offence against or arising under an Australian
law or a law of a
foreign country or was liable to a civil penalty, he must:
(a) disclose so much of the
information required to be disclosed to which no objection is
(b) prepare an affidavit containing so much of
the information required to be disclosed to which objection is taken and deliver
to the Court in a sealed envelope; and
and serve on each other party a separate affidavit setting out the basis of the
4 Pursuant to the Freezing Order:
(a) on 25 September 2025, the
Defendant swore and filed an affidavit (
Open Affidavit
). The Open
Affidavit set out a table of bank accounts in which the Defendant had an
interest. Many of the accounts had zero balances.
While some accounts had very
small balances of no more than $2,000, there was also a personal loan account
with a negative balance
of more than $43,000. The Defendant also confirmed in
the Open Affidavit that he had no real property assets in his name or any other
beneficial interests where he was not the named owner of that property;
(b) on 29 September 2025, the Defendant filed a
further affidavit, also sworn on 25 September 2025, which was sealed and marked
‘confidential’
Confidential Affidavit
(c) on 29 September 2025, the Defendant filed an
affidavit of his instructing solicitor, Mr Hayes, which asserted that the
claimed the privilege against self-incrimination with respect to the
Confidential Affidavit (
First Hayes Affidavit
5 In correspondence to the
Defendant’s solicitors dated 30 September 2025, the Plaintiff’s
solicitors objected to the
First Hayes Affidavit on the basis that it failed to
comply with the requirements of
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act
6 On 10 October 2025,
the Defendant filed a further affidavit of Mr Hayes purporting to set out the
factual and legal basis for the
Defendant’s objection to produce the
Confidential Affidavit (
Second Hayes
7 In reliance on
Evidence Act
the Defendant contends that there are reasonable grounds
for the objection and that the interests of justice do not require the
Confidential
Affidavit to be
8 Accordingly, the Defendant contends that
the Court must return the Confidential Affidavit to the
9 The Plaintiff disagrees. It contends
that the Defendant has failed to establish that his objection meets the
requirements of
Evidence Act
. The Plaintiff also argues
that, even if
is properly engaged and there are reasonable grounds for
the objection, the interests of justice nonetheless require the Confidential
Affidavit to be produced subject to the Defendant being given a certificate
pursuant to
B. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
10 The factual background of this
proceeding is outlined in
Lawrence & Hanson Group Pty Ltd v Slade
[2025] VSC 578
, in which I provided reasons for my decision to grant the
Plaintiff’s freezing order application.
summary, the Plaintiff sells lighting solutions and participated in the
Victorian Energy Upgrades (
) scheme. Under that scheme, the Plaintiff
was entitled to Victorian energy efficiency certificates (
return for undertaking certain energy efficiency activities reducing a
customer’s energy usage. The Defendant was an employee
of the Plaintiff in
charge of the Plaintiff’s account with the VEU scheme. In that capacity,
the Defendant had unrestricted
access to the Plaintiff’s VEECs, which
could be transferred and sold for value.
Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant caused a large number of the
Plaintiff’s VEECs to be transferred to the Defendant
for no payment. The
Plaintiff further contends that the Defendant sold those VEECs and retained the
C. LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Section 128A
Evidence Act
relevantly provides:
(2) If a relevant person objects to complying with a disclosure order on the
grounds that some or all of the information required
to be disclosed may tend to
prove that the person—
(a) has committed an offence against or arising under an Australian law or a law
of a foreign country; or
(b) is liable to a civil penalty—
the person must—
(c) disclose so much of the information required to be disclosed to which no
objection is taken; and
(d) prepare an affidavit containing so much of the information required to be
disclosed to which objection is taken (the
privilege affidavit
and deliver it to the court in a sealed envelope; and
(e) file and serve on each other party a separate affidavit setting out the
basis of the objection.
(3) The sealed envelope containing the privilege affidavit must not be opened
except as directed by the court.
(4) The court must determine whether or not there are reasonable grounds for the
(5) Subject to subsection (6), if the court finds that there are reasonable
grounds for the objection, the court must not require
the information contained
in the privilege affidavit to be disclosed and must return it to the relevant
(6) If the court is satisfied that—
(a) any information disclosed in the privilege affidavit may tend to prove that
the relevant person has committed an offence against
or arising under, or is
liable to a civil penalty under, an Australian law; and
(b) the information does not tend to prove that the relevant person has
committed an offence against or arising under, or is liable
to a civil penalty
under, a law of a foreign country; and
(c) the interests of justice require the information to be disclosed—
the court may make an order requiring the whole or any part of the privilege
affidavit containing information of the kind referred
to in paragraph (a) to be
filed and served on the parties.
(7) If the whole or any part of the privilege affidavit is disclosed (including
by order under subsection (6)), the court must cause
the relevant person to
be given a certificate in respect of the information referred to in subsection
(8) In any proceeding in a Victorian court—
(a) evidence of information disclosed by a relevant
person in respect of which a certificate has been given under this
section; and
(b) evidence of any information, document or thing obtained as a direct result
or indirect consequence of the relevant
person having
disclosed that information—
cannot be used against the person. However, this does not apply to a criminal
proceeding in respect of the falsity of the evidence
14 The High Court explained the
requirements of
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
15 Gordon J, in a comprehensive judgment, with
which Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Gleeson JJ generally agreed, observed that
deals with self-incrimination privilege in a particular
context — compulsory disclosure of information because of an order
ancillary to a freezing or search
Her Honour continued:
The context is important – the disclosure of the information has been
compelled by court order and, except by application to
set aside or vary the
making of, relevantly, one or both of the freezing order and the disclosure
order, the basis for the making
of the orders, as well as the reasons for the
making of the orders, and the ambit of those orders, have been established.
Consideration
of any application for a claim of self-incrimination privilege
must proceed from the premises that the court has ordered
disclosure of the information; the information is relevant to and necessary
the efficacy of the relevant freezing order; and the person subject to the
orders has not successfully applied for the setting
aside of those orders. The
context in which issues of self‑incrimination might arise at trial
Evidence Act
necessarily and markedly different.
16 Gordon J noted that
framework in many cases for considering the issues sequentially in the order in
which the section is set
respect of the first step of the enquiry, the plurality noted that the
requirements of
include the following:
(a) the relevant person must
disclose so much of the information required to be disclosed to which no
objection is taken;
(b) the relevant person must
prepare and deliver to the court in a sealed envelope a privilege affidavit
containing the information
subject to the objection;
(c) the relevant person must file and serve a
separate affidavit setting out the basis for the objection. This requires the
affidavit to indicate, at least in outline, the legal and factual
foundation for the objection.
18 The relevant person asserting
privilege bears the onus of establishing the factual basis for the
As for the threshold
which the relevant person must meet:
information
“may tend to prove” the commission of an offence where it affords
“a link in the chain of evidence”
and is “a means of bringing
is likely to, “set
in train a process which may lead to incrimination or
may lead to the discovery of real evidence of an incriminating
character”;
however, there
is no need for the person claiming privilege to prove that disclosure will, on
the balance of probabilities, prove
the commission of an offence. Neither are
they required to explain fully how disclosure would bring about the
incriminating effect,
as doing so would in at least some circumstances
“annihilate the protection that the section is designed to
on the other
hand, the standard will be unlikely to be met where the relevant person advances
no more than a mere statement that they
believe disclosure will tend to
incriminate them. Likewise where there are other circumstances which cause the
court to believe that
disclosure will not really tend to incriminate
19 As for the second step of the enquiry,
Kiefel CJ and Gageler and Gleeson JJ explained that, in order for the court to
find reasonable
grounds for the objection under
the court must be satisfied on the evidence before it that there is a legal and
factual foundation for the objection that is sufficient
for the court itself to
conclude that the objection is reasonably maintained at the time the court makes
its decision.
20 Gordon J further explained that:
the test as to
whether or not there are reasonable grounds for the objection is objective and
evaluative;
the court must
assess whether there is a “real and appreciable risk” of prosecution
upon disclosure;
having regard to
the circumstances of the case and the nature of the information sought to be
disclosed, the court must consider whether
there are reasonable grounds to
apprehend danger to the claimant from being compelled to disclose the
information. This involves
consideration of whether the information may tend to
prove the commission of an offence and the likelihood or risk of steps being
taken to prosecute the offence;
the reasonable
grounds must be supported by materials on which the court can be satisfied of
these matters. The materials the court
can have regard to include both the
privilege affidavit and any other material filed by the relevant
21 Gordon J emphasised that if the court
finds that there are reasonable grounds for the objection, then, subject
, the court must
require the information
contained in the privilege affidavit to be disclosed and must return the
privilege affidavit containing the
information to the relevant
connection with the last step of the enquiry under
, Gordon J noted
that this sub-section provides only a “limited” exception to a claim
of self-incrimination privilege,
which only applies where the court is satisfied of three matters:
“(a) any information disclosed in the privilege affidavit may tend to
prove that the relevant person has committed an offence
against or arising
under, or is liable to a civil penalty under, an Australian law; and
(b) the information does not tend to prove that the relevant person has
committed an offence against or arising under, or is liable
to a civil penalty
under, a law of a foreign country; and
(c) the interests of justice require the information to be
disclosed.”
23 Further, Gordon J observed that:
if the court is satisfied of those three matters, then "the
make an order requiring the whole or any part of the
privilege affidavit containing information of the kind referred to in paragraph
(a) to be filed and served on the parties" (emphasis added). Disclosure is not
24 For present purposes, the
Court’s comments in respect of the third matter (viz the interests of
justice) are particularly
25 Kiefel CJ,
Gageler J and Gleeson JJ noted that the evaluation of the interests of justice
s 128A(6)(c)
is primarily informed by balancing the public interest in the
relevant person complying with the disclosure order against the potential
detriment to that person arising from the tendency of the information to prove
that the person has committed an offence or is subject
to a civil penalty. The
potential detriment must be assessed with regard to the constraints on the use
and dissemination of the disclosed
information which may apply. For example, the
party to whom disclosure is made may be prohibited from making use of the
information
other than for the purpose of the proceeding in question, and orders
restricting the dissemination of the information may also be
J explained that what the interests of justice require in a particular case is
to be weighed having regard to the proceeding
in which the question arises. The
factors to be balanced are not and cannot be prescribed, but may include the
nature of the information,
the likelihood of an offence being
and any resulting unfairness to a
J further stated that while the possibility of obtaining the
evidence by alternative coercive means is not relevant, the availability
evidence that may tend to prove, to the same or some
other degree, the information contained in the privilege affidavit may indicate
that it is not in the interests of justice that the information over which
privilege is claimed be
Her Honour said:
[i]f the information over which the privilege is claimed is common with
information already available to the party with the benefit
of the disclosure
order, or if alternative information relevant to the efficacy of the freezing
order is in the possession of the
party with the benefit of the disclosure
order, the interests of justice may not require the information to be disclosed
the relative importance of the information over which privilege is
claimed is diminished. Similarly, if the information is not particularly
important to the efficacy of the freezing order, the interests of justice are
not advanced by compelling the person claiming the
privilege to disclose the
information.
D. SUBMISSIONS
28 Each party provided the Court with a
written outline of submissions and made further oral submissions at the hearing
on 31 October
D.1 Defendant’s submissions
29 The Defendant submits that there are
reasonable grounds for his objection under
. He contends that the information required to be disclosed in the
Confidential Affidavit — concerning the receipt, whereabouts,
and proceeds
of sale of VEECs — may tend to prove that he has committed offences of
theft, obtaining property by deception,
or obtaining a financial advantage by
deception contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
well as offences or civil penalties under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) relating to misuse of position or
information.
30 The Defendant's primary submission
is that the interests of justice do not require disclosure of the Confidential
Affidavit. He
argues that the Plaintiff's case remains inchoate, with only a
freezing order in place and no substantive claim yet filed despite
having passed. This makes it difficult to assess the relevance of the evidence.
31 More significantly, the Defendant submits that
the Plaintiff already possesses the material information through other sources:
the Plaintiff's own evidence indicates its current understanding that the
Defendant transferred VEECs to his own account and traded
them; a search of the
VEU register would reveal current ownership; and the Defendant's Open Affidavit
confirms that any proceeds
are not held in his name.
32 Against this, the Defendant submits the Court
should infer a high risk of criminal prosecution, and that compelling disclosure
would impinge upon his fundamental right to silence. The Defendant contends the
Plaintiff has not satisfied the "relatively high
standard" required to
demonstrate that the interests of justice favour disclosure.
33 The Defendant's written submissions contemplated
that if disclosure were required, a certificate should be issued. However, in
oral argument, the Defendant advanced a more emphatic position: that the sealed
Confidential Affidavit ought to be returned to him
rather than being disclosed
with a certificate.
D.2 Plaintiff's submissions
34 The Plaintiff advances three principal
35 First, the Plaintiff submits that the
Defendant has failed to make a valid objection under s 128A(2)(e) because the
First and Second
Hayes Affidavits do not adequately set out the legal and
factual basis for the objection as required by
. While the Second
Hayes Affidavit lists certain statutory provisions and employment facts, it
provides no explanation as to how these
factual matters give rise to any risk
that the Confidential Affidavit may tend to prove commission of the identified
offences. The
Plaintiff submits this failure to satisfy the procedural
prerequisite means the objection should be dismissed outright and the
Confidential
Affidavit released without a
certificate.
36 Secondly, even if s 128A(2) is
satisfied, the Plaintiff submits the Defendant has not demonstrated reasonable
grounds for the objection
under s 128A(4). The Plaintiff argues there is no
evidence of a "real and appreciable risk" of prosecution: the Defendant concedes
there is no evidence of any pending criminal investigation or charges, and the
assertion that the Court should "infer" a high risk
of prosecution is mere
conjecture. Moreover, if criminal charges are likely to be brought in any event
(because the alleged criminal
conduct is obvious), then the disclosure adds
nothing to the Defendant's jeopardy, which militates against rather than in
of the objection.
37 Thirdly, if the Court
finds reasonable grounds exist, the Plaintiff submits that the interests of
justice nonetheless require disclosure.
The Plaintiff emphasises that the
Defendant has fundamentally misunderstood the applicable legal principles by
failing to account
for the public interest in compliance with extant disclosure
orders. Relying on
, the Plaintiff submits that the context is
critical: the disclosure has already been compelled by court order, and the
and necessity of the information for the efficacy of the freezing
order has been established by the making of that order. The Plaintiff
that the Defendant's argument concerning alternative sources of information is
irrelevant — once a disclosure order
is made, the fact that information
might be obtained elsewhere does not bear upon whether the interests of justice
require compliance
with that order. The Plaintiff contends that any detriment to
the Defendant is adequately addressed by the issuance of a certificate,
together with other safeguards, provides sufficient protection. Accordingly, the
interests of justice require disclosure of
the sealed Confidential Affidavit
with a certificate.
E. CONSIDERATION
E.1 Section 128A(2) – Valid Objection
38 The first question is whether the
Defendant has made a valid objection under
. The Plaintiff submits that the First and Second Hayes Affidavits are
insufficient to satisfy the requirement in
s 128A(2)(e)
that the Defendant "file
and serve on each other party a separate affidavit setting out the basis of the
objection".
39 As the High Court made clear in
, for a person to comply with
s 128A(2)(e)
, the separate affidavit
must indicate, at least in outline, the legal and factual foundation for the
objection. Both elements of
are important: the sealed privilege
affidavit and the separate affidavit setting out the basis for the objection.
The purpose of
the separate affidavit is to ameliorate the difficulty an
opponent faces in negating the prima facie privilege without access to
relevant evidence.
40 I accept that the First Hayes
Affidavit, standing alone, would be insufficient. It contains only a bare
general assertion that
the information may tend to prove that the Defendant has
committed an offence against Australian law. However, the Second Hayes Affidavit
goes further. It identifies:
(a) the factual basis of the
objection: the Defendant's employment with the Plaintiff, his role in managing
the Plaintiff's account
with the VEU scheme, his exclusive access to the VEECs,
the discovery of discrepancies, the investigation by forensic accountants,
and the Defendant's resignation; and
(b) the legal
basis of the objection: specific offences or civil penalties under
Crimes Act 1958
Corporations Act 2001
41 The Plaintiff's principal criticism is
that the Second Hayes Affidavit fails to explain adequately how the factual
matters give
rise to any risk that the Confidential Affidavit may tend to prove
commission of the offences, and that there is "no attempt... to
draw together
the factual and legal assertions to adequately explain the basis of the
Defendant's objection". However, this submission
conflates the requirements of
s 128A(2)(e) with those of s 128A(4). The question at the s 128A(2) stage
is whether the separate affidavit
sets out, in outline, the basis for the
objection — not whether reasonable grounds for the objection have been
established
or whether there is a demonstrated nexus between the specific
contents of the Confidential Affidavit and the identified
42 To require the Defendant to provide a
more detailed explanation of how the specific contents of the Confidential
Affidavit may
prove the commission of offences would risk undermining the very
protection that s 128A is designed to provide. As Gordon J stated
at [30], a person claiming privilege is not required to explain fully
how disclosure would bring about the incriminating effect,
as doing so would, in
at least some circumstances, “annihilate the protection that the section
is designed to provide”.
The Defendant must walk a careful line: providing
sufficient information to enable the Court and the opposing party to understand
the nature of the objection, while not disclosing the very information over
which privilege is claimed. To say more would run the
risk of defeating the
43 I consider that enough has been
provided to satisfy the test of setting out the legal and factual basis for the
objection. The
Defendant has identified the factual matrix (his employment,
role, and exclusive access to valuable certificates that are alleged
been misappropriated) and the legal framework (specific criminal and civil
penalty provisions). This is sufficient to provide,
at least in outline, the
legal and factual foundation for the objection. I am satisfied that the
Defendant has complied with s 128A(2)(e)
and made a valid objection.
E.2 Section 128A(4) – Reasonable Grounds
44 The second question is whether there
are reasonable grounds for the objection. The test is objective and evaluative.
J explained in
at [33]-[34], the Court must assess whether
there are reasonable grounds to apprehend danger to the Defendant from being
to disclose the information. This requires consideration of whether
the information may tend to prove the commission of an offence,
as well as the
likelihood, or risk, of steps being taken to prosecute that offence. There must
be a "real and appreciable risk" of
prosecution if the relevant information is
disclosed. The Defendant bears the onus of establishing reasonable grounds for
the objection.
45 I have read the Confidential
Affidavit in its entirety and have taken its contents into account in assessing
whether there are
reasonable grounds for the
46 The Plaintiff advances two principal
arguments. First, it submits that the Defendant has failed to establish a real
and appreciable
risk of prosecution because the Defendant concedes there is no
evidence of any pending criminal investigation or charges, and the
that the Court should infer a high risk of prosecution is "mere conjecture and
speculation". Secondly, the Plaintiff submits
that if criminal charges are
likely to be brought in any event (because the alleged conduct is obvious), then
the disclosure adds
nothing to the Defendant's jeopardy, which militates against
rather than in favour of the objection.
47 I reject
both of these submissions.
48 As to the first
submission, the absence of evidence of a pending investigation or charges does
not preclude a finding that there
is a real and appreciable risk of prosecution.
The question is whether there are reasonable grounds to apprehend that, if the
information
is disclosed, steps may be taken to prosecute an offence. The nature
of the alleged conduct — the misappropriation of valuable
certificates
entrusted to the Defendant's control by his employer — is serious. The
amounts involved appear to be substantial.
It is not speculative or conjectural
to conclude that if evidence of such conduct came to the attention of
prosecuting authorities,
there would be a real and appreciable risk of
prosecution.
49 As to the Plaintiff's second
submission, it fundamentally misconstrues the inquiry required by s 128A(4). The
question is not whether
the Defendant faces some abstract risk of prosecution
based on what may already be known or suspected. The question is whether the
disclosure of the specific information in the Confidential Affidavit would tend
to prove the commission of an offence and whether
there is a real and
appreciable risk of prosecution if that information is
Plaintiff's argument appears to be that because the alleged criminal conduct is
"obvious", charges are likely to be brought
regardless of whether the
Confidential Affidavit is disclosed, and therefore disclosure "adds nothing to
the individual's jeopardy".
This argument misapprehends what is meant by
"jeopardy" in this context. As Gordon J explained in
at [35], there
can be no real and appreciable risk of prosecution where "the taking of the step
in question [the disclosure] will
not add to the individual's jeopardy". This
principle applies where, for example, the information is already in the
possession of
prosecuting authorities or is otherwise publicly available, such
that the compelled disclosure adds nothing new that could be used
against the
person. It does not apply where, as here, the information in the Confidential
Affidavit is not in the possession of prosecuting
authorities and would, if
disclosed, provide direct evidence from the Defendant himself as to potentially
incriminating matters.
51 Having regard to the
nature and content of the information in the Confidential Affidavit, which I
have read, I am satisfied that
it may tend to prove the commission of the
offences and contraventions identified by the Defendant.
52 Given the serious nature of the alleged conduct
and the probative value of the information in the Confidential Affidavit, I am
satisfied that there is a real and appreciable risk that, if disclosed, this
information could trigger prosecution. The fact that
prosecuting authorities may
already have suspicions about the Defendant's conduct, or that the Plaintiff may
have formed views about
what occurred, does not mean that the disclosure of the
specific information in the Confidential Affidavit — which comes directly
from the Defendant and addresses the very matters that would need to be proved
in any prosecution — adds nothing to the Defendant's
jeopardy. On the
contrary, compelled disclosure of this information would significantly increase
the risk of successful prosecution.
53 Accordingly,
I am satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for the objection under
E.3 Section 128A(6)(c) – Interests of Justice
54 The third question is whether the
interests of justice require that the information be disclosed notwithstanding
the reasonable
grounds for the objection.
Edelman J observed in
at [89], and as Delany J noted in
Sunrise Pty Ltd v Big J Enterprises Pty Ltd (No
there is some debate as
to whether any party bears an onus on the question of the interests of justice.
However, it is not necessary
for me to resolve that debate in this case. Having
considered all the materials and submissions, I am not satisfied that the
of justice require disclosure of the information in the Confidential
56 As Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Gleeson JJ
explained in
at [12], the evaluation of the interests of justice
under s 128A(6)(c) is primarily informed by balancing the public interest in
Defendant complying with the disclosure order against the potential detriment to
the Defendant arising from the tendency of the
information to prove that he has
committed an offence or is subject to a civil
57 The public interest in compliance with
disclosure orders ancillary to freezing orders is undoubtedly significant.
Freezing orders
are an important tool to prevent the dissipation of assets
pending the determination of civil claims, and ancillary disclosure orders
be necessary to ensure the efficacy of the freezing orders. However, the weight
to be given to the public interest in compliance
must be assessed having regard
to the particular circumstances of the case, including the efficacy and utility
of the Freezing Order
in light of what is already known about the Defendant's
58 In this case, the Open Affidavit makes
clear that the Defendant has few, if any, assets available to satisfy any
prospective judgment.
The Defendant has disclosed in the Open Affidavit the
limited assets he possesses. The Confidential Affidavit does not disclose
assets in his possession. In these circumstances, the relative
importance of obtaining disclosure of the information in the Confidential
Affidavit for the efficacy of the Freezing Order is
diminished.
59 This is not to say that the
Confidential Affidavit contains no information of relevance to the Freezing
Order. Having read it,
I accept that it contains information that would
ordinarily be relevant to understanding what has become of the VEECs and any
from their sale. However, the question is not merely whether the
information is relevant, but whether the interests of justice require
disclosure.
60 Where, as here, the Open Affidavit
demonstrates that the Defendant has minimal assets, the utility of compelling
disclosure of
the Confidential Affidavit for the purpose of the Freezing Order
is substantially reduced. The Freezing Order operates to prevent
dissipation of
assets, but if there are few assets to dissipate, the importance of the
disclosure order ancillary to that Freezing
Order is correspondingly
diminished.
61 The Plaintiff emphasises the public
interest in compliance with disclosure orders. However, as the Plaintiff
correctly notes in
its submissions, what the interests of justice require must
be weighed having regard to the proceeding in which the question arises.
proceeding, the Freezing Order was made on the basis that there was a risk the
Defendant would deal with or dispose of assets
to frustrate any judgment. The
Open Affidavit reveals that the Defendant's disclosed assets are minimal. In
these circumstances,
while there remains a public interest in compliance with
the disclosure order, the practical utility of that compliance for the purpose
for which the disclosure order was made is
62 The Plaintiff also submits that the
Defendant's argument concerning alternative sources of information is
irrelevant, relying on
at [11] and [42]–[43]. The Plaintiff is
correct that the possibility of obtaining the same information by alternative
means is not relevant to the interests of justice inquiry. However,
that is not the basis upon which I have concluded that the interests
do not require disclosure in this case. Rather, my conclusion is based on the
limited efficacy of the Freezing Order itself,
as revealed by the Open
Affidavit, and the consequent diminished importance of the information in the
Confidential Affidavit to the
operation of that
63 As Gordon J explained in
[43], if information is not particularly important to the efficacy of the
freezing order, the interests of justice are not advanced
by compelling
disclosure. That is the position here. The information in the Confidential
Affidavit may be relevant to understanding
what happened to the VEECs, but its
importance to the efficacy of a Freezing Order directed to preserving assets
(that, it appears,
largely do not exist) is
64 Against this limited public interest in
disclosure must be weighed the significant detriment to the Defendant. As I have
there is a real and appreciable risk of prosecution if the information in
the Confidential Affidavit is disclosed. While ss 128A(7)
and (8) provide
protection through the certificate mechanism — such that the information
cannot be used against the Defendant
in any proceeding in a Victorian court
(save in respect of the falsity of the evidence) — this protection is not
The certificate does not prevent the Plaintiff from using the
information for the purposes of this civil proceeding. More significantly,
does not bind prosecuting authorities in other jurisdictions or prevent the
information from being discovered through other investigative
means once its
existence and nature are revealed.
65 Balancing
these considerations, I am not satisfied that the interests of justice require
disclosure of the information in the Confidential
Affidavit. The public interest
in compliance with the disclosure order is diminished by the limited efficacy of
the Freezing Order
(given the minimal assets disclosed in the Open Affidavit),
while the potential detriment to the Defendant from compelled disclosure
information that tends to prove serious criminal offences remains substantial
notwithstanding the protections afforded by the
certificate.
F. CONCLUSION AND ORDERS
66 For the reasons set out above:
(a) I am satisfied that the
Defendant has made a valid objection under s
128A(2)(e);
(b) I am satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for the objection under s 128A(4);
(c) I am not satisfied that the interests of
justice require the information in the Confidential Affidavit to be disclosed
67 Accordingly, pursuant to s 128A(5), I
will order that the Confidential Affidavit of the Defendant sworn on 25
September 2025 and
filed on 29 September 2025 be returned to the
68 The parties are required to confer
and, within seven days, either submit a consent minute in respect of the
appropriate costs order
or, failing agreement, file and serve submissions of no
more than 2 pages addressing costs.
[2021] HCA 22
(2021) 273 CLR 235
). The case concerned s 128A of the
Evidence Act 2008
(Cth) which is in almost identical terms to
Evidence Act
Ibid at [23].
Ibid at [25].
Ibid at [6]–[7]; [27].
Ibid at [28].
Ibid at [29], quoting
parte P; Re Hamilton
(1957) 74 WN (NSW) 397
Distributors Ltd v Video Information Centre
[1982] AC 380
Ibid at [29]–[30],
Accident Insurance Mutual Holdings Ltd v McFadden
(1993) 31 NSWLR
Ibid at [30].
Ibid at [7].
Ibid at [33].
Ibid at [34].
Ibid at [36] citing s
128(5) of the
Evidence Act 2008
Ibid at [36].
Ibid at [36].
Ibid at [36].
Ibid at [12].
Ibid at [41].
Ibid at [42]–[43].
Ibid at [43].
Ibid at [34].
Timeless Sunrise Pty Ltd
v Big J Enterprises Pty Ltd (No 7)
[2022] VSC 549
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter