URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hakim v Thomas Cook Boot & Clothing Co [2025] VMC 7 (5 May 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-240058346
THOMAS COOK BOOT & CLOTHING CO.
Magistrate M J Richards
DATE OF HEARING
1 and 3 April 2025
DATE OF DECISION
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Hakim v Thomas Cook Boot & Clothing Co
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 7
WORKERS COMPENSATION - Whether plaintiff is a deemed worker - Preliminary
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Schedule 1 Clause 9 Contractors.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr S Carson
Arnold Thomas & Becker
For the Defendant
Mr A Middleton
Lander & Rogers
INTRODUCTION
parties have asked the Court to determine a preliminary issue with respect to
whether the plaintiff is a deemed worker within
the meaning of Clause 9 of
Schedule 1 of the
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(the WIRC Act). Plaintiff’s counsel has conceded the
plaintiff does not satisfy the test for a common law employee but maintains
is a deemed worker pursuant to the WIRC Act.
(Roy) Hakim (the plaintiff) completed a Workcover claim for compensation dated
10 October 2023 alleging injuries to his ribs,
back and bruising as a result
falling from a roof on 9 October 2023 (PCB 41-44). The plaintiff stated he was a
self-employed builder
and alleged he had been employed by Thomas Cook Boot &
Clothing Co. (the defendant) at the time of his injury. The plaintiff
injured whilst working at the family home of Murray Cook (Mr Cook), the Managing
Director of the defendant, at the time of the
behalf of the defendant, the claim for compensation was rejected by Gallagher
Bassett Services Pty Ltd (Gallagher Bassett) on 13
November 2023 on the
following grounds:
the plaintiff
was not a worker under the WIRC Act;
the plaintiff
had not sustained an injury arising out of or in the course of
employment.
(PCB 45-51)
alia, the notice of rejection referred to the following
Whilst Gallagher Bassett has determined that in all
probability you have suffered 3 fractured ribs, chipped bone in the lower back
whilst working for your own company Linear Building Pty Ltd, Australian Business
Number (ABN 21 620 235 047), it is evident that
as at the date of injury you
were a contractor, providing services to Thomas Cook Boot & Clothing Co Pty
Ltd on behalf of Linear
Building Group Pty Ltd (ABN 21 620 235 635). You further
operate as an individual Sole/Trader under Hakim, Rawy Christian, Australian
Business number (ABN 64 654 962 635).
In order for a contractor to be deemed a worker under the provisions of
Clause 9 of Schedule 1 of the Act, a sole trader must satisfy
that during the
relevant period the contractor is not carrying on an independent trade or
business and 80% of the services provided
is completed by the same individual
and 80% of the contractor’s total gross income must be earned from the
services of the
same class provided by or on behalf of the contractor in the
relevant period, derived form that contract, and the services are not
to the provision of materials and equipment.
plaintiff has issued these proceedings against the defendant challenging the
decision of Gallagher Bassett.
S Carson of Counsel appeared for the plaintiff and Mr A Middleton of Counsel
appeared for the defendant.
issue in dispute concerned the application of Clause 9(1)(d) of Schedule
gross income of the contractor that is, or is
to be, derived from the provision of the services pursuant to the contractual
arrangement
is, or is to be, at least 80 per cent of the total gross income of
the contractor earned from services of the same class provided
by or on behalf
of the contractor in the relevant period.
A Middleton denied that the plaintiff was a deemed worker.
agreed that the period from 9 October 2022 to 9 October 2023 was the
‘relevant period’
pursuant to Clause 9(6)(ii) of Schedule
preliminary hearing proceeded over two days. The plaintiff, Mr Cook and Mr Don
Jayasingha (Mr Jayasingha) gave evidence.
were added to the respective court books during the running of the case. The
Plaintiff’s Court Book (PCB) was tendered
as Exhibit 1. The
Defendant’s Court Book was tendered as Exhibit A.
Examination-in-chief of the Plaintiff
plaintiff was a qualified mechanical engineer who had moved to building work in
the last twenty years. The plaintiff said his
building work initially involved
the construction of new buildings, renovations, extensions, and small building
or about 2018, the plaintiff said he worked on a building job for the
sister-in-law of Mr Cook. About one year later, Mr Cook’s
sister-in-law
replace the defendant’s maintenance
worker who had retired.
plaintiff said he was interested and was introduced to Mr Cook. The plaintiff
said he commenced working for the defendant on and
off and eventually commenced
working for the defendant on a full-time basis.
or about 2020, the plaintiff said he did some small building work for a friend,
Mr Andrew Gaal, but, thereafter, primarily did
work for the defendant. The
plaintiff said his work for the defendant gradually increased over time.
plaintiff said Mr Cook would tell him what work was needed to be done for the
defendant. At one stage the plaintiff said he was
doing work involving
partitions for the defendant during Covid 19. If the work involved engaging
subcontractors such as electricians,
Mr Cook would pay the subcontractors
directly. The plaintiff said he did not pay subcontractors that were engaged to
do work for
the defendant.
the plaintiff’s work for the defendant increased, the plaintiff said he
would talk to Mr Cook daily at the defendant’s
warehouse/office. Mr Cook
would also text and ring the plaintiff every day.
plaintiff said Mr Cook also asked him to do work for him at his family house in
Donvale and for his son, Lochie, at his family
house. The plaintiff said he
mainly did work at the defendant’s warehouse in Nunawading.
plaintiff said, if he was painting outside at the warehouse, and the weather was
not good, he would not go to work.
plaintiff said he would invoice the defendant $45 per hour for the work he did.
plaintiff was referred to an invoice dated 5 September 2022 with the
Linear Building Group P/L
ABN 64 654 962
Renovations/
Developments
Multi storey
The plaintiff said the invoice was from his company and was addressed to the
defendant in Nunawading for work that he had done (PCB
58). The plaintiff said
the invoice was paid by Ms Sue Cook, Mr Cook’s wife, who worked for the
plaintiff said he would see Mr Cook daily at the defendant’s warehouse. Mr
Cook would discuss with the plaintiff what work
he wanted the plaintiff to do
once or twice a week and would also text or ring him. The plaintiff said the
defendant’s warehouse
also involved a big office and that there was always
work to do such as painting.
the twelve-month period before he was injured on 9 October 2023, the plaintiff
said he worked for the defendant Monday to Friday,
apart from some occasional
work on the weekends for his friend, Andrew Gaal. During the week, the plaintiff
said he was always working
for the defendant, unless the weather prevented him
from working outside.
plaintiff was referred to a photograph of a van with the words
‘Southern Cross Miniature’s’
on the door of the van
(DCB 43). The plaintiff said this was a hobby business that he had started which
sold models such as cars.
Cross-examination of the
plaintiff agreed that his Linear Building Group P/L business existed before he
commenced doing work for the defendant.
plaintiff was referred to the invoices that he provided the defendant. It was
put to the plaintiff that he represented to the
defendant that he was a
‘Registered
Building Practitioner’
plaintiff said it was costing money to stay registered as a builder and that he
decided to cease operating as a registered builder.
The plaintiff said the
business was deregistered in 2019, but he kept using the trading name on his
plaintiff was referred to the claim for compensation signed by him on 10 October
2023 (PCB 44). The plaintiff said he was in hospital
at the time recovering from
his injuries but agreed it was his signature. The plaintiff said his wife
completed the claim form after
he told her what to do. The plaintiff was
referred to the claim form stating that he was ‘
Self-employed’
(PCB 42) and that he had started work
‘Approx. 4-5 years
plaintiff was asked whether he was working for Linear Building Group P/L or Mr
Cook when the claim form was completed. The plaintiff
said he was working for Mr
Cook and that he assumed Mr Cook was the employer.
plaintiff agreed that the defendant did not pay him holiday pay, annual leave,
sick pay, or superannuation.
plaintiff said he recorded the hours that he worked for the defendant in his
diary. He said he usually worked Monday to Friday
from 8:30am to 3:00pm most
weeks. Sometimes he would start work earlier and sometimes he would finish work
later. If there was no
work to do for the defendant, the plaintiff said he would
not go to work. The plaintiff said he charged the defendant $45 per hour
plaintiff agreed that he did some private work for Mr Cook and his son, Lochie
Cook. The plaintiff said he sent the invoice for
the work he did for Lochie Cook
to Lochie Cook and not the defendant. The work for Lochie Cook was prior to the
‘relevant period’.
plaintiff was referred to paragraph 4(b) of the Statement of Claim dated 15
March 2024 which read:
4(b) The Plaintiff was employed by the
Defendant on a sub-contractor basis for approximately 2 years as a maintenance
labourer. The
Plaintiff did 100% work for the Defendant and all jobs performed
were at the discretion of the Defendant.
was put to the plaintiff that the paragraph 4(a) was incorrect as he had
provided the following invoices to Claudette and Andrew
Gaal at 5 Sunridge
Place, Berwick during the relevant period:
4 July 2023 for
$746.57 for 12 hours work done on 26, 28 and 30 June 2023 inclusive of an amount
for the supply of materials on 30
June 2023 totalling $146.57 - (PCB 99);
22 July 2023 for
$1709.73 for 28 hours work done on 4, 7,14, 19, 20 and 21 July 2023 inclusive of
an amount for the supply of materials
on 19 and 21 July 2023 totalling $309.73 -
30 July 2023 for
$1647.08 for 15.5 hours work done on 27, 25 and 28 July 2023 inclusive of an
amount for the supply of materials and
paint on 7, 19, 24, and 28 July 2023
totalling $872.08 - (PCB 105);
6 August 2023
for $1187.78 for 18.5 hours work done on 31 July 2023, 1 and 2 August 2023
inclusive of an amount for the supply of
materials on 2 August 2023 totalling
$262.78 - (PCB 107).
plaintiff said Andrew Gaal was his best friend and agreed that he had done some
work for him.
plaintiff agreed he had not lodged tax returns for the period from 2019 to 2024.
The plaintiff said he has not had a chance to
lodge the tax returns because of
the problems he has had over the past few years. The plaintiff said that he does
intend to lodge
the tax returns and has spoken to his accountant but is not
mentally fit to lodge them at present due to his injury. The plaintiff
had the records needed to lodge the tax returns.
plaintiff was asked why he had not lodged tax returns before he was injured. The
plaintiff said he had been busy and did not get
a chance to do them. The
plaintiff said it was his fault that the tax returns had not been lodged. The
plaintiff denied not lodging
tax returns because he was making more money.
plaintiff was referred to his personal ‘
Smart Access’
statements from the Commonwealth Bank for the period from 28 December 2017 to 27
September 2024 (PCB 118-573). Bearing in mind
that the parties have agreed that
relevant period
’ was from 9 October 2022 to 9 October
2023, the Court has not referred to some of Mr Middleton’s
cross-examination with
respect to these records.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 4 July 2023 in the
amount of $746.57 with the description
‘INV070223AG’
The plaintiff said the payment related to the invoice dated 4 July
2023 made out to Mr Gaal.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 10 July 2023 in the
amount of $337.04 with the description
‘Misc invoices’
500). The plaintiff said it related to a payment from Andrew Gaal even though
the description did not refer to Mr Gaal. The plaintiff
said the payment would
only have come from Mr Gaal or Mr Cook.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 17 July 2023 in the
amount of $1284.80 with the description
‘Quote - 40452’
502). The plaintiff said it was a payment from Mr Gaal. The plaintiff said he
had provided a verbal quote for materials for roofing
work for Mr Gaal and Mr
Gaal had paid him the money for the materials. The plaintiff said he did not
charge Mr Gaal for his labour
in doing the job.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 27 July 2023 in the
amount of $1709.73 with the description
‘INV-072223AG’
504). The plaintiff said the payment related to the invoice dated 22 July 2023
made out to Mr Gaal.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 1 August 2023 in the
amount of $1647.08 with the description
‘INV-073023AG’
505). The plaintiff said the payment related to the invoice dated 30 July 2023
made out to Mr Gaal.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 1 August 2023 in the
amount of $1647.08 with the description
‘INV-073023AG’
505). The plaintiff said the payment related to the invoice dated 30 July 2023
made out to Mr Gaal.
plaintiff was referred to a payment into his account on 10 August 2023 in the
amount of $1187.78 with the description
‘INV-080623AG’
512). The plaintiff said the payment related to the invoice dated 6 August 2023
made out to Mr Gaal.
was put to the plaintiff that the fall on 9 October 2023, when doing work for Mr
Cook, had nothing to do with his work for the
plaintiff did not respond.
Re-examination of the
plaintiff was asked whether he knew that he was working for Mr Cook when he was
at Mr Cook’s family house. The plaintiff
said he was asked by Mr Cook to
do the work and would do it.
Leave granted to further
cross-examine the Plaintiff
plaintiff was asked whether he sometimes had other tradesmen assisting him with
work for the defendant.
plaintiff said he might have had assistance from tradesmen at the start of
working for the defendant but would always have the
defendant pay for the work
that they did.
Further re-examination of the Plaintiff
plaintiff said he primarily worked on his own for the defendant in the twelve
months before he was injured. If an electrician
had assisted him in the last
twelve months, the electrician would have sent a separate invoice to the
Evidence-in-chief of Mr Cook
Cook said he was the Managing Director of the defendant.
Cook said he engaged the plaintiff to do handyman work for the defendant. He met
the plaintiff through his sister-in-law for whom
the plaintiff had done work
Cook said the defendant had another handyman who had retired, and he asked the
plaintiff to do some work. The plaintiff initially
worked on a café in
the defendant’s warehouse in Nunawading.
Cook said the plaintiff had no set hours of work and did not have to turn up
every day. Mr Cook said the plaintiff was able to
do work for other people. Mr
Cook said he could not recall the plaintiff ever saying that he could not work
for the defendant.
Cook said he also asked the plaintiff to do some work at his family house. The
plaintiff would invoice the defendant for the work
he did. The invoices would
refer to work that the plaintiff did for the defendant at the warehouse and
refer to work done by the
plaintiff at Mr Cook’s house.
Cook said there was no arrangement for the plaintiff to provide a separate
invoice for work done at his family house. It was easier
for the plaintiff to
set out all the work he did on one invoice. Mr Cook said he would separate the
defendant’s account department would pay the invoices provided by the
plaintiff. Mr Cook said he would get the defendant’s
chartered accountant
to arrange for payment of any private work done by the plaintiff from Mr
Cook’s personal loan account
and not the defendant’s business
Cook said he kept the payment separate because it was a personal payment and not
a business expense.
Cook said he had a personal load account with the defendant which was used to
pay for non-work-related expenses. Mr Cook said the
loan account was a debt that
he owed the defendant and would have to be paid at some stage. Mr Cook said
there was a time frame involved
in repaying the debt and the debt was being
carried forward to be settled one day.
Cook could not remember the plaintiff having any other tradesmen assist him
during the last twelve months that he worked for the
defendant. Sometimes the
plaintiff had used other tradesmen when he first started doing work for the
defendant. If the plaintiff
had used other tradesmen in the past, those
tradesmen had provided their own invoice to the defendant for
Cross-examination of Mr Cook
Cook agreed that any tradesman that had assisted the plaintiff when he worked
for the defendant provided a separate invoice to
the defendant.
Cook also agreed that the plaintiff had not been assisted by any other tradesman
during the last twelve months that he had worked
Re-examination of Mr Cook
Cook said the plaintiff’s invoice would be accompanied by a separate
invoice from a tradesman if the plaintiff had required
assistance from someone
else. On occasions, the plaintiff had required an electrician to do some work,
but this had not happened
in the last twelve
Evidence-in-chief of Mr Jayasingha
Jayasingha worked for the defendant as their Financial Controller for seventeen
years before retiring in mid-2024.
Jayasingha said the invoices provided by the plaintiff to the defendant were
processed by an assistant accountant who managed the
accounts payable. The
assistant accountant would check the plaintiff’s invoice with Mr Cook. Mr
Jayasingha said he would sign
off on payment of the invoice.
Jayasingha said the plaintiff sometimes provided an invoice that referred to
work done privately for Mr Cook and to work done for
the defendant. Mr
Jayasingha said his assistant would check with Mr Cook to determine what expense
related to the defendant and what
expense was private.
Jayasingha said the defendant would distinguish what was a company expense or a
personal expense. If it were a personal expense,
the payment would come from a
loan account that Mr Cook had with the defendant. Accordingly, the expense would
not be a tax deduction
for the defendant.
a tradesman had assisted the plaintiff, the tradesman invoice would provide a
separate account which the plaintiff would attach
to his invoice for payment. Mr
Jayasingha said the defendant would pay one amount to the plaintiff and the
plaintiff would then pass
on payment to the tradesmen.
Jayasingha said once the defendant approved the work to be done by the
plaintiff, it was up to the plaintiff to complete the job
as he pleased and
invoice the defendant.
Jayasingha said the plaintiff was not at the defendant’s warehouse every
day and worked his own hours. The plaintiff could
start and finish when he
Cross-examination of Mr Jayasingha
Jayasingha agreed that the defendant would pay the plaintiff’s invoices.
Jayasingha said the loan account provided to Mr Cook was an internal arrangement
between Mr Cook and the defendant.
Jayasingha agreed the plaintiff was not aware of the loan account.
Jayasingha said it was none of the plaintiff’s business as to what the
defendant and Mr Cook did in respect of the loan
Submission on behalf of the Defendant
incident occurred at the family home of Mr Cook, a director of the
was submitted that there were two issues in respect of the plaintiff’s
the plaintiff
operated as a subcontractor to the defendant but at times performed work
privately for Mr Cook and his family. The plaintiff
therefore had to satisfy the
provisions of Schedule 1, Clause 9 of the WIRC Act;
at the time of
the incident, whether the plaintiff was doing work for the defendant or
privately for Mr Cook.
respect to whether the plaintiff was working privately for Mr Cook at the time
of the incident, the defendant led evidence through
Mr Cook and Mr Jayasingha
that Mr Cook’s private work was kept separate from the defendant’s
was submitted that, whilst the plaintiff invoiced the defendant for all the work
that he did, when the defendant received the invoice,
the private work would be
identified and separated into Mr Cook’s loan account. After the defendant
paid the total amount of
the invoice to the plaintiff, Mr Cook would reimburse
the defendant thorough his loan account.
defendant submitted that the plaintiff did not challenge this evidence.
Therefore, the defendant submitted that the plaintiff
did private work for Mr
Cook which was separate from the defendant.
was submitted that the remuneration that the plaintiff received for this work
should not be included in any assessment for the
purposes of Schedule 1, Clause
was also submitted that the payment from Mr Gaal for the work performed by the
plaintiff should also not be included in any assessment.
defendant submitted that only the work that the plaintiff did for the defendant
should be included in any assessment.
was submitted that Mr Cook had made a calculation based on the number of hours
worked for both the defendant and him during the
The figures produced by Mr Cook indicated that the work done
by the plaintiff for the defendant were less than the 80% required.
making that submission, the defendant relied on an undated document prepared by
Mr Cook which apportioned the plaintiff’s
hours of work at the
defendant’s business, hours of work at Mr Cook’s house and hours of
work with Mr Gaal during the
‘relevant period’
(DCB 57). The
document read as follows:
9/10/22 to 9/10/23
Thomas Cook was invoiced by the plaintiff 50 times during this
The total number of hours worked in that year was 1198.5 hours.
By reference to the personal loan account, work on private non-Thomas Cook
jobs was 273 hours and work for Thomas Cook jobs was 925
Personal/Private jobs averaged 5,25 hours per week.
Thomas Cook jobs averaged 17.78 hours per week.
These figures do not include the work that was done for Andrew Gaal in the
same period which I am instructed by my legal advisors
totals 74 hours.
The percentage amounts of work excluding that done for Andrew Gaal
Thomas Cook 77.25%
Cook Family 22.75%
When the work for Andrew Gaal is added, the percentages are as
Thomas Cook 72.72%
Cook Family 21.46%
Andrew Gaal 5.82%
plaintiff conceded in cross-examination that he had not lodged a personal tax
return since 2019. The plaintiff’s excuse
seemed to be that he was too
busy and that he did not get around to it.
of the personal tax returns preceded the plaintiff’s injury on 9 October
2023. It was submitted that the plaintiff’s
excuse was implausible given
the amount of work he did for the defendant and other entities.
was submitted that the Court should not accept the plaintiff’s answers to
this issue as truthful.
conclusion, apart from the 80% issue, it was submitted that the circumstances
and location of the incident, clearly established
that the plaintiff was not
working for the defendant at the time of the incident.
on behalf of the Plaintiff
was submitted that the plaintiff came within Schedule 1, Clause 9 of the WIRC
plaintiff had no issue with the defendant’s submission concerning the cost
of materials not being included in the assessment.
was submitted that the plaintiff was a witness of truth and did his best to
answer the questions put to him, if at times, he did
evidence of Mr Cook and Mr Jayasingha corroborated the evidence of the
plaintiff’s case. The plaintiff sent his invoices
to the defendant which
was the corporate entity. The plaintiff did not send invoices to Mr Cook for
work done at his family house.
plaintiff’s invoices, whether for work done at Mr Cook’s house, or
for the defendant, were paid by the defendant.
The reality was that the
plaintiff provided an invoice for the work that he did, and payment was received
by the plaintiff by the
was none of the plaintiff’s business that the defendant apportioned the
payment of the plaintiff’s accounts between
the loan account of Mr Cook
and the defendant’s business.
was agreed that the
‘relevant period’
was from 9 October 2022
to 9 October 2023. During that period, the plaintiff exceeded the 80%
assessment.
spread sheet prepared on behalf of the plaintiff
indicated that the
plaintiff worked 1213.5 hours for the defendant during the
This included work at Mr Cook’s house. In addition, the
plaintiff worked 74 hours for Mr Gaal during the
The percentage of time worked at the defendant’s
business, including work at Mr Cook’s house, amounted to 94.1% of the
total amount of hours. The percentage of time worked for Mr Gaal amounted to
5.73% (PCB 729-732).
to the spread sheet, the plaintiff received a total income of $60,387.75 during
‘relevant period’.
The plaintiff received $58,087.75
income from the defendant and, after the deduction of payments for materials,
the balance from Mr
Gaal. The percentage of income paid by the defendant of the
total amount amounted to 96.19%. The percentage of income paid by Mr
amounted to 3.80%.
total number of invoices provided by the plaintiff during the
was said to be 57 made up of the
Thomas Cook Invoices: 52
Sue Cook Invoices: 1
Gaal Invoices: 4
was submitted that the plaintiff’s gross income was at least 80% of the
total gross income earned by the plaintiff from services
of the same class
provided by the plaintiff to the defendant within the meaning of Schedule 9
Clause (1)(d).
defendant’s analysis was flawed and was arrived at after the fact, based
on a reconstruction of the evidence to now apportion
the work that the plaintiff
performed for the defendant during the
Reply submission on behalf of the
defendant submitted the plaintiff’s submission should be disregarded and
did not accord with the assessment of the hours
the plaintiff worked for the
defendant and Mr Cook, and the resultant
remuneration.
plaintiff has the onus in establishing that he was a ‘worker’. The
Court must decide this preliminary issue bearing
in mind that the burden of
proof lies with the plaintiff.
accordance with subclause 9(1)(d), the Court must determine whether the gross
income of the plaintiff derived from the provision
of the services pursuant to
the contractual arrangement with the defendant was at least 80% of the total
gross income of the plaintiff
earned from services of the same class provided by
the plaintiff in the
'relevant period’
was common ground that the defendant, through Mr Cook, engaged the plaintiff to
provide his services as a handyman.
9 of Schedule 1 of the WIRC Act reads:
(1) This clause applies if -
an entity (the
), in the course of, and for the
purposes of a trade or business carried on by the entity, enters into a
contractual arrangement with
another entity (the
provision by the contractor of services (not being transport services within the
meaning of clause 8) to the principal for
reward in respect of a relevant
period; and
the provision of the services by the contractor under the contractual
arrangement is not ancillary to the provision of materials or
equipment by the
contractor to the principal under the contractual arrangement; and
at least 80 per cent of those services are, or are to be, pursuant to
the contractual arrangement, provided by the same individual
(i) the contractor; or
(ii) if the contractor is a partnership, an individual member of the
partnership; or
(iii) if the contractor is a body corporate - a member, director, shareholder
or employee of the body corporate; or
(iv) if the contractor is the trustee of a trust - a person who may benefit
under that trust or is an employee of the trustee; and
the gross income of the contractor that is, or is to be, derived from
the provision of the services pursuant to the contractual arrangement
to be, at least 80 percent of the total gross income of the contractor earned
from the services of the same class provided
by or on behalf of the contractor
in the relevant period.
(2) This clause does not apply in respect of a contractual arrangement if the
Authority determines that, in providing services to
the principal, the
contractor is carrying on an independent trade or business.
(3) The Authority may make guidelines as to the circumstances in which it may
determine that a contractor, in providing services
to a principal, is carrying
on an independent trade or business.
(4) The authority must ensure that guidelines made under subclause (3) are
published and are generally available.
(5) If subclause (1) applies –
(a) the individual is deemed to be a worker in respect of the relevant
period; and
(b) the principal is deemed to be the employer of the individual in respect
of the relevant period; and
(c) the total amount paid or payable by the principal to the contractor
under the contractual arrangement, less –
(i) the applicable prescribed percentage (if any); or
(ii) if there is no applicable prescribed percentage, the part of that total
attributable to the provision of labour -
is deemed to be remuneration.
(6) In this clause –
includes a group, or one or more members of a group, within
the meaning of section 431;
relevant period
, in relation to services provided under a contractual
arrangement referred to in subclause (1) means –
(a) the financial year in which those services are, or are to be provided; or
(b) if those services are, or are to be, provided in 2 consecutive financial
(i) the 12 month period beginning on the date on which those services are first
provided pursuant to the contractual arrangement;
(ii) the 12 month period ending on the date on which those services cease, or
are to cease, to be provided;
includes results (whether goods or
services) of work performed.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
described Clause 9, along with Clauses 10 and 11 as ‘contractor
provisions’, which were intended to look beyond the business
and corporate
structures of a contractual arrangement in order to determine the true working
relationship of the relationship. If
this is akin to an employment relationship,
the WIRC Act treats the relationship as such, by deeming the relevant party to
have worker
or employer status. Clauses 9 re-enacted Section 8 of the Accident
Compensation Act 1985 (see page 325 of the Explanatory Memorandum).
respect to Clause 9(1)(d), the Explanatory Memorandum
Clause 9(1)(d) sets out the third and final limb of the
clause 9 employment test. This reflects the principle that where a contractor
effectively ‘tied to’ one principal and does all or most of his or
her work for one principal, then the true working
relationship underpinning the
contractual arrangement tends to an employment relationship.
This limb of the employment test will be satisfied if the gross income
earned from that arrangement comprises 80 per cent or more
of the contractor
entity’s total gross income from the provision of services of the same
kind in the relevant period.
is agreement as to the
‘relevant period’.
for the plaintiff and the defendant do not agree on the figures for the
‘relevant period’
from 9 October 2022 to 9 October 2023.
accept the submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff.
do not accept the submissions made on behalf of the defendant.
found the plaintiff to be a credible witness. At times he struggled to grapple
with some questions put to him but did his best to
answer them truthfully. He
readily conceded that he had failed to lodge taxation returns over the past
three years and accepted that
he was at fault. I do not find that this impugns
his credit.
plaintiff was engaged by Mr Cook to work as a handyman for the defendant. I
accept the plaintiff’s evidence that he would
do whatever work Mr Cook
asked him to do, whether it was at the defendant’s warehouse or at Mr
Cook’s family home. I
find it completely artificial for Mr Cook to say
that when the plaintiff did work at the family home, he was not working for the
defendant. I do not accept that analysis.
is relevant that the plaintiff invoiced the defendant for the work that he did
‘relevant period’
, whether at the
defendant’s warehouse or Mr Cook’s family house. The plaintiff did
not provide separate invoices based
on who he had allegedly worked for. The
defendant did not object to being provided with such an invoice. As Counsel for
the plaintiff
submitted, the reality was that the plaintiff provided an invoice
for the work that he did, regardless of where he had done it, and
payment was
received from the defendant.
find it important that the defendant paid the plaintiff’s invoices as a
total payment from the defendant. The defendant did
not pay the invoices on the
basis that there was an apportionment between the defendant with Mr Cook.
fact that the defendant now says that there was an internal decision made to
apportion the payment between the defendant and Mr
Cook’s loan account is
beside the point. As indicated by Mr Jayasingha, that was a decision made for
taxation purposes and
was none of the plaintiff’s business.
plaintiff did not put his case on the basis that he was a worker in the primary
sense. Some of the defendant’s cross-examination
seemed to address that
issue which was not in dispute.
my findings, the plaintiff is a deemed worker within the meaning Schedule 1,
Clause 9 of the WIRC Act.
opened by Counsel, the preliminary issue in dispute concerned the application of
Clause 9(1)(d) of Schedule 1. The evidence was
directed to that issue.
I am satisfied of the following:
in the course
of, and for the purposes of its business, the defendant entered into a
contractual arrangement with the plaintiff for
the provision of his services to
the defendant as a handyman for reward in respect of a ‘
- subclause 9(1)(a); and
the provision of
these services by the plaintiff under the contractual arrangement was not
ancillary to the provision of materials
or equipment by the plaintiff to the
defendants under the contractual agreement - subclause 9(1)(b); and
at least 80% of
these services, pursuant to the contractual arrangement, were provided by the
plaintiff - subclause 9(1)(c)(i); and
based on the
evidence, the gross income of the plaintiff derived from the provision of the
services pursuant to the contractual arrangement
was at least 80% of the total
gross income of the plaintiff earned from services of the same class provided by
the plaintiff in the
‘relevant period’
- subclause
relevant period’
was from 9 October 2022 to 9 October 2023 -
subclause 9(6)(b)(ii);
in respect of
the contractual arrangement, in providing services to the defendant, the
plaintiff was not carrying on an independent
trade or business.
Accordingly,
subclause 9(1) applies and the plaintiff is deemed to be a worker in respect of
‘relevant period’
and the defendant is deemed to be the
employer of the plaintiff in respect of the
‘relevant period’.
the totality of the evidence, the plaintiff has discharged the onus.
notice of Gallagher Bassett dated 13 November 2023 rejecting the plaintiff claim
for compensation on the ground that he was not
a worker is set aside.
follows from the above reasoning that the plaintiff was working for the
defendant at the time of the incident.
Furthermore,
the Court is of the opinion that, based on the evidence, this decision also
accords with the Explanatory Memorandum to
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation
and Compensation Bill 2013
and reflects the true working relationship between
the plaintiff and the defendant.
invite the parties to provide orders as to the future conduct of the
proceeding.
MAGISTRATE M J RICHARDS
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (327 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter