URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/1001.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nguyen v Tran (Residential Tenancies) [2025] VCAT 1001 (9 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES DIVISION
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
VCAT REFERENCE NO. R2025/19047 & R2025/19573
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
section 91ZM
- application for
possession for rent arrears, three tiered rental arrangements, whether
applies where subletting occurred without consent;
section 91YA
applicant had standing to make application, whether SDA definitions of
‘SDA resident’ and ‘SDA dwelling’
met, whether daily
care provided.
R2025/19047
Hai-vi D Nguyen
Thi Bich N Tran
R2025/19573
Ebony Richardson
Everest Disability Care Pty Ltd
Teleconference
Dr A Treble, Senior Member
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
1 September 2025 and 30 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
30 October 2025
DATE OF REASONS
9 November 2025
Nguyen v Tran (Residential Tenancies) [2025] VCAT 1001
R2025/19047
VCAT orders and directs:
renter must vacate the rented premises by 24 November 2025.
renter must now pay the residential rental provider the rent owed of
$13,179.95.
the request of the person who obtained the possession order and on payment of
the prescribed fee the principal registrar of VCAT
must issue a warrant of
possession to be executed within 14 days after the date of issue. This request
may be made after 24 November
2025 and no later than 30 April
Warning to renter: If you fail to vacate the rented premises
by 24 November 2025 the residential rental provider can request the principal
registrar to issue a warrant of possession. You may then be forcibly evicted
from the rented premises by a police officer or an authorised
person carrying
out a warrant of possession.
R2025/19573
VCAT orders:
application is dismissed for the reasons given orally at the
Dr A Treble
Senior Member
APPEARANCES:
For Hai-vi D Nguyen
Ms Trin Le, estate agent (20 October 2025 only)
For Thi Bich N Tran
In person (20 October 2025 only)
For Ebony Richardson
Ms R Thompson, Villamanta Disability Rights Legal Service
For Everest Disability Care Pty Ltd
Mr Ayyoub Ali (1 September 2025 only)
application in R2025/19047 involves a residential rental agreement between the
rental provider Hai-Vi Nguyen and the renter, Thi
Bich Tran, in respect of
premises in Hampton Park that commenced in or about August 2024 by way of
written agreement.
subsequent written agreement dated 4 February 2025, Ms Tran was required to pay
rent of $2,520 per month. However, she ceased
paying rent in May 2025.
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
required the
renter to seek the permission of the rental provider in order to sublet the
premises. Without seeking such permission,
Ms Tran sublet the premises in 2024.
to the evidence of Mr Ali at the hearing on 1 September 2025, Ms Tran was
effectively an agent who sourced homes for Everest
Disability Care Pty Ltd
(‘Everest’), an organisation which is certified under the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) to be a registered
National Disability Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’)
provider. He said that Ms Tran had sublet the
premises to Everest. The agreement
was verbal only, under which Everest was required to pay monthly rent to Ms
to the evidence of Ms Tran at the hearing on 20 October 2025, she rented the
premises to live in with her friend ‘Adbul’,
but Ms Tran did not
move in. Instead, she sublet the premises to the friend, and did not know what
he then did with the property.
Ms Tran said that, after a while, her friend
ceased paying her any rent, as he could no longer afford to do so. He said he
move out and he gave Ms Tran back the keys – then Ms Tran found
another person living there. Ms Tran said her friend worked
for Everest and that
the company paid the rent. She said she did not act as an agent for Everest; she
was just helping her friend
who was looking for a house to stay in.
in turn entered into a residential rental agreement with Ms Ebony Richardson in
August 2024. Initially, there was no written
agreement, but a fixed term
agreement was entered into on 11 April 2025, from 4 January 2025 to 31 March
2026, for a rental amount
of $300 per fortnight. According to evidence provided
by Mr Ali, Ms Richardson was always required to pay 30% of her pension toward
rent but she had only ever paid one month’s rent. Ms Richardson said that
she was told rent was waived, but Mr Ali said that
the waiver related to the
first property Everest arranged for her to live in, not for the Hampton Park
property. Mr Ali stated that
Ms Richardson had not been paying any rent for
Hampton Park. Ms Richardson did not dispute that evidence, but instead gave
reasons why she had not paid.
9 July 2025, the rental provider, Mr Nguyen, issued a notice to vacate under
section 91ZM of the RTA for rent arrears, which was
served on Ms Tran by email.
As at 9 July 2025, the rent was paid to 23 May 2025, and Ms Tran owed $3,846 in
rent arrears. Mr Nguyen
then made an application to the Tribunal seeking a
possession order. On 31 July 2025, Ms Richardson was joined as an interested
to the application for possession and on 1 September 2025, Everest was
also joined as an interested party.
31 July 2025, Ms Richardson applied to the Tribunal in R2025/19573 under section
91YA of the RTA, seeking an order under section
91YB(1)(b) that Everest, as an
provider, be required to enter
into or establish an SDA residency agreement with Ms Richardson, as an SDA
resident. That matter was
heard by me on 1 September 2025, but adjourned to be
finally determined with the possession application, with Mr Nguyen and Ms Tran
being joined as interested parties to Ms Richardson’s application.
matters returned for further hearing on 30 October 2025, on which date I
delivered oral reasons for decision in relation to both
applications, as set out
R2025/19047 - THE APPLICATION FOR POSSESSION
What is the effect of the notice to vacate in this case
– does it terminate the rental agreement given that another person is
occupation?
some circumstances, as set out in section 91G of the RTA, a residential rental
agreement automatically ends on the termination
date specified in a notice to
vacate, if the renter is not in possession of the rented premises because the
renter has sublet them.
The effect of section 91G is that the Tribunal cannot
make an order terminating the rental agreement, rather it has already been
terminated by force of the section.
is evident in this case that the rented premises have been sublet, however that
subletting is not valid because it has not occurred
with the written consent of
Mr Nguyen as required under
of the RTA. I am of the view that section
91G can only operate in the context of a valid subletting. Accordingly, the
residential
rental agreement between Mr Nguyen and Ms Tran has not terminated
under section 91G, for the purposes of the RTA Ms Tran is still
in effective
possession, and the Tribunal is empowered to make a possession order.
Should a possession order be made in this case?
find on the evidence before me that the notice to vacate given to Ms Tran was
valid and properly served, and that the grounds are
proved, namely that as at
the date of the notice to vacate, the renter owed at least 14 days in rent. No
rent was paid before the
termination date on the notice, so the notice to vacate
remained effective.
satisfied that Mr Nguyen served a copy of the possession application on Ms
next issue I am required to consider is whether suitable arrangements can be
made to avoid financial loss to the rental provider
by way of a payment
this case, I am not satisfied that reasonable arrangements can be made to avoid
financial loss to the rental provider by making
a payment plan order. Ms Tran
has not put forward any plan to repay the rent and claimed at the hearing that
she could not afford
must next consider whether it is reasonable and proportionate to make a
possession order.
In doing so, I
must take into account the interests of the renter, the rental provider, and the
impact on the renter and the rental
provider of making a possession order. I
must also consider the interests and impact of the possession order on any
‘co-tenants
or co-site tenants or other residents’. Whilst it is
unclear whether Ms Richardson’s interests are encompassed by this
of the provision, I will assume that to be the case, as her interests are in any
event something to be relevantly considered
under paragraph 330A(j) of the RTA,
which states that the Tribunal may take into account, under the reasonable and
proportionate
test, any other matter considered relevant.
this case, there is evidence of financial hardship for the rental provider Mr
Nguyen, with the non-payment of rent being ongoing
and with no likelihood of
rectification or future compliance with the residential rental agreement. There
is no evidence of any adverse
impact of a possession order on the renter Ms
Tran, rather she was keen for the rental agreement to terminate in order to end
ongoing liability for rent. Similarly, there is no evidence of any adverse
impact on Everest.
accept that having to move will be a very significant burden and hardship for Ms
Richardson who is the actual occupant, especially
given her health conditions
and disability, however I note that she is ultimately in possession of the
rented premises under an agreement
that has not been approved in any way by Mr
Nguyen, and that she herself has paid no rent for a considerable period.
must also take into account the factors in section 330A of the RTA. I refer to
the factors I must take into account under section
330A insofar as they are
relevant to this matter, noting that the matters in paragraphs (d) and (i) are
inapplicable on the facts
of this case.
the nature, frequency and duration of the conduct of the renter which led to the
notice to vacate being given, including
whether the conduct is a recurring
breach of obligations under a residential rental agreement. In this case, there
have been repeated
and ongoing breaches of the obligation to pay rent. I note
that rent has been in arrears since the notice to vacate was given on
2025 and that no rent has been paid since. This factor weighs in favour of a
possession order being made.
whether the breach is trivial. The breach is not trivial. Non-payment of rent
for many months is not a trivial matter. The
rent owed is now $13,256. This
factor also weighs in favour of a possession order being made.
whether the breach was caused by the conduct of any person other than the
renter. It was Ms Tran’s obligation under
the residential rental agreement
to pay the rent owed. Accordingly, the breach was not caused by another person.
whether the breach has been remedied as far as is practicable. The breach has
not been remedied, and the rent arrears have
grown substantially. This factor
also weighs in favour of a possession order being made.
whether the renter has, or will soon have, capacity to remedy the breach and
comply with their obligations under the residential
rental agreement. For the
reasons previously explained, I am not satisfied that the renter can make a
payment plan, nor that Ms Tran
has or soon will have the capacity to remedy the
breach and pay the rent owed. This factor also weighs in favour of a possession
order being made.
the effect of the conduct of the renter on others as a renter. In this case, the
conduct of the renter, in subletting to
others without consent, clearly has
adverse consequences for Ms Richardson. However, that is not a factor that
militates against
a possession order being made, as subletting the property
without consent was a further breach of Ms Tran’s obligations as
whether any other order or course of action is reasonably available instead of
making a possession order. I am not satisfied
that arrangements can be made to
avoid financial loss to the rental provider or that a payment plan order is an
appropriate option
in this case. Any further delay means the potential for the
rent arrears to increase, to the detriment of the rental provider. This
also weighs in favour of a possession order being made.
any other matter the Tribunal considers relevant. I have previously considered
the unusual factors in this case, including
the impact of a possession order on
Ms Richardson, which will be considerable. However, all of the factors in this
case weigh heavily
in favour of a possession order being made and I find it is
reasonable and proportionate to make such an order. When VCAT makes a
order that means vacant possession must be given back to the rental provider by
the stated date. If that does not happen,
the rental provider can ask the
Tribunal to issue a warrant of possession. That is a document that authorises
the police to remove
all persons at the rented premises, which in this case will
involve Ms Richardson.
into account the impact on Ms Richardson, I have decided to make a possession
order today with a termination date of 24 November
2025. This will hopefully
allow time for Ms Richardson to make suitable arrangements for alternative
accommodation.
R2025/19573 - THE APPLICATION FOR ORDERS REQUIRING EVEREST TO
ENTER INTO AN SDA AGREEMENT
the RTA, a person who is an SDA resident may choose to enter into a residential
rental agreement or an SDA residency agreement.
However, section 91YA enables an
SDA resident under a residential rental agreement to apply to the Tribunal for
an order terminating
the existing residential rental agreement and requiring the
SDA provider, who is the rental provider under that agreement, to instead
into or establish an SDA residency agreement.
issue in this case is whether Ms Richardson is an SDA resident who was entitled
to bring an application under section 91YA. Subsection
3(1) of the RTA defines
an ‘SDA resident’ as ‘a person with a disability –
(a) who receives, or is eligible to receive, funded daily independent living
support; and
(b) who is residing, or proposes to reside, in an SDA dwelling under an SDA
residency agreement or residential rental agreement.’
Richardson is a participant of the NDIS. When she moved into the Hampton Park
property she had an NDIS Plan dated 20 May 2024,
with funding allocated to
‘Core Supports’ for ‘Assistance with Daily Life’, being
described in the plan as
‘supports to assist or supervise you with
personal tasks during day-to-day life that enable you to live as independently
possible. These supports can be provided individually in a range of
environments, including your own home.’ Just over half
of the total
funding package was allocated to ‘Assistance with Daily Life’.
argued that ‘daily independent living support’ is different from
‘activities of daily living’ under
the NDIS and they are separate
line items for NDIS funding purposes. Ms Richardson argued that the RTA
definition should be broadly
interpreted.
to the NDIS website
‘Assistance with Daily Life’ is a flexible funded amount within the
NDIS Core Supports budget for help with everyday
tasks in various settings,
while ‘Supported Independent Living’ is help or supervision with
daily tasks in the home to
while building skills. It includes things like having a person to help with
care tasks, or cooking meals. The website says:
independent living is for people with higher support needs, who need some level
of help at home all the time. Supported
independent living is best suited to
people with a disability who have higher support needs. This means you need a
significant amount
of help throughout the day, 7 days a week.
accept that there is ambiguity in the words of the RTA but in my view the words
are much more likely to be directed toward the higher
level of support described
on the NDIS website as ‘Supported Independent Living’.
that to one side, if a broader interpretation is adopted, it is arguable that Ms
Richardson was funded under her NDIS plan
for supports related to her daily
living, and that she could choose to have these supports provided daily, so she
could potentially
meet the definition of an ‘SDA resident’ set out
in paragraph (a), because she is a person with a disability who receives,
eligible to receive, funded daily independent living support.
Ms Richardson must also meet paragraph (b) in that she must reside or propose to
reside in an SDA dwelling. An SDA dwelling
is defined in section 498BA to
(a) an SDA enrolled dwelling; or
(b) any other permanent dwelling that provides long term accommodation and where
daily independent living support is provided to
one or more residents with a
disability funded by a specified entity or program...
issue therefore is whether daily independent living support is provided at the
Hampton Park property.
material before the Tribunal shows that Ms Richardson first entered into an NDIS
Service Agreement with Everest on 20 May 2024.
At that time, she was living at
another property managed by Everest in Braybrook. A further NDIS Service
agreement was entered into
with Everest on the same terms on 19 May 2025. Both
agreements specified the support to be provided as 1.1 support on weekdays,
in the daytime, evening or night-time.
to submissions made by Ms Richardson, when she moved into the Hampton Park
premises in August 2024, the parties understood
that her needs would vary, and
the support subsequently provided was approximately 2 days per week for 6 hours.
The funding for this
support was allocated from the ‘Core Supports –
Assistance with Daily Life’ budget. It was unclear from Ms
Richardson’s
evidence what support she in fact utilised from Everest
because when asked by me at the hearing, she did not clarify the issue but
instead said she did not feel comfortable with the carers Everest provided. She
stated that she presently used supports from a different
provider, on Monday for
a couple of hours, Wednesday for 3 hours and Friday for 2-3 hours. The support
provided included such things
as companionship, emotional support, going for
walks, and going to the beach with her dog.
argued that Ms Richardson had never received daily support. The initial
agreement in April 2024 was for short term accommodation
and respite services,
because she was homeless at that time. Later they entered into the NDIS Service
Agreement dated 20 May 2025,
for support with activities of daily living. Since
Ms Richardson moved to Hampton Park, she had not been provided with supports of
any description on a daily basis. Some weeks there would be no support utilised,
sometimes support would be provided for 1, 2, 3
or 4 days in a week. The
services with Everest were cancelled by Ms Richardson in July 2025.
to documentary evidence provided by Everest, in November 2024 Ms Richardson
utilised 6 hours of support on the following
days – 4 out of 5 Fridays, 3
Wednesdays and 1 Thursday for the month; in June 2025 she was invoiced for a
total of 12 hours
‘assistance with self-care activities’ delivered
on 27 and 30 June 2025; in July 2025 she was invoiced for a total of
‘assistance with self-care activities’ delivered on 1, 3 and 7 July
conclude from the evidence provided by both parties that Ms Richardson did not,
at the time of entering into occupation of the Hampton
Park premises or at the
time she signed the residential rental agreement, intend to utilise daily
supports however described, nor
did Everest intend to provide daily supports.
According to the submission presented for the applicant, the understanding was
Everest would provide support two days per week for 6 hours. In actuality,
Ms Richardson has utilised, and Everest has provided,
a fluctuating level of
support, but never daily support.
ordinary definition of ‘daily’ is just that. The Online Collins
dictionary states that ‘If something happens
daily, it happens every
The evidence does not
show that there was ever an intention that Ms Richardson was to be provided with
daily independent living support
at the Hampton Park premises.
conclude that Ms Richardson does not meet the definition of SDA resident and
does not therefore have standing to bring the application
under section 91YA.
This conclusion is consistent with the description of Specialist Disability
Accommodation on the NDIS website
which refers to SDA meeting ‘support
requirements [for persons] with extreme functional impairment or very high
support needs.’
any event, I would otherwise have declined to make the order sought given that a
possession order has been made in the related
proceeding.
Dr A Treble
Senior Member
No copy of the initial
agreement was provided to the Tribunal.
RTA, subsection 81(1) states
that a renter under a residential rental agreement must not assign or sublet the
whole or any part
of the rented premises without the rental provider’s
written consent.
SDA refers to Specialist
Disability Accommodation, which is governed by Part 12A of the RTA.
RTA section 91R further
provides that a residential rental agreement is then created between the rental
provider and the sub-renter
who is in possession, unless the sub-residential
rental agreement has also terminated in accordance with the RTA. However, this
would only appear to apply to a two-tiered rental arrangement, not
three-tiered as is the case here.
See RTA, section 91ZM(1)
See RTA, section 330(1)(f) and
section 330A which set out the matters that must be considered under the
‘reasonable and proportionate
https://www.ndis.gov.au.
https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/daily.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter