URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LHB [2024] VMHT 25 (29 November 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan mental health service
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Magdalena Wysocka (Legal Member)
Peter Braun (Psychiatrist Member)
Kylie McShane (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Sophie Hastings
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
With online video from another location
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made an inpatient
treatment order with a duration of 16 Weeks expiring on
28/01/2025.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your legal representative requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's
decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating
team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your treating team
applied for another treatment order and your community treatment order had been
to an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not to make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy- you told the Tribunal that you had been trying to take control of your
life including through seeking alternative
treatments prior to your recent
Diversity of
care- you had been accessing various group and psychology sessions whilst an
inpatient that you found to be therapeutic
and were keen to find a private
psychiatrist and new general practitioner in the community.
restriction- you wanted to be a voluntary patient and were agreeable to remain
in hospital voluntarily until ready for discharge.
decision making- the Tribunal heard that you wanted to have input into your care
including wanting to cease certain medication
in the past and, going forward, to
have your mental health looked after by another clinic as well as to find a
private psychiatrist.
Dignity of risk-
your legal representative told the Tribunal that you should be given the
opportunity to manage your health again
and that your commitment to your health
and wellness balanced the risks of doing so.
The Tribunal must also
give proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’).
Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under
the Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
Your treating team prepared a report for your
hearing (‘the report’) that they gave to you and to the Tribunal and
also provided some documents extracted from your file. Both you and your
treating team spoke to and answered questions from the Tribunal
in the hearing.
Your legal representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement
of reasons does not summarise all
that information, but the next section refers
to the information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you and your legal representative told the Tribunal and the
materials we
read, the Tribunal understood that you now believed that you had a mental
illness that required treatment to prevent
your mental health from
deteriorating. You would continue with your medication if voluntary and would
also elect to remain in hospital
until your treating team discharged you as you
found the group work in hospital extremely beneficial. At the same time, you
also worried about your personal safety in hospital after experiencing an
assault. You were keen to seek support from a private psychiatrist
treatment order was necessary, wanted your treatment to be managed by another
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Your legal representative Sophie told the
Tribunal that you conceded that you had a mental illness and had come to
acknowledge that
Bipolar Affective Disorder (‘BPAD’) was the most
likely diagnosis. The report indicates that at times during your admission
held a different view about whether you had a mental illness, and specifically
TD, one of the doctors treating you in hospital, said that when you
were admitted, you were quite unwell, that your thoughts were
racing from one
topic to the next and that you were irritable. TD He noted that at the time of
the hearing, you were still emotional
at times and experienced some outbursts
but that they were more controlled than before.
The report summarises
your history of mental health treatment and notes that during your admissions in
recent years, you have been
observed to have paranoid and disorganised thoughts
as well as rapid changes in your mood and agitation.
The Tribunal was
satisfied based on the above information that you had experienced symptoms of a
mental illness, namely a significant
disturbance in your thought and a
significant disturbance in your mood.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Based on your instructions to her, Sophie also
told the Tribunal that you agreed that you needed treatment to prevent your
health from getting worse and that you had found your medication to be
effective. The Tribunal heard from TD that your mental state
had significantly
improved after your medication was increased following your admission. There was
also information in the report
indicating that you had experienced relapses of
your mental illness and required hospital admissions when you had not taken your
prescribed treatment in the past or, as happened recently, when your medication
was ceased at your request.
The Tribunal was satisfied that you needed
treatment for your mental illness now to try and prevent your mental health from
deteriorating.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
At the time of the hearing, you had been
prescribed various medications including a monthly aripiprazole depot and sodium
as well as olanzapine tablets that your treating team planned to
gradually decrease and cease. You had also been participating in
various group
programs while in hospital and upon discharge, the plan was for you to receive
case management and ongoing support
from your community treating team. The
Tribunal was therefore satisfied that you would receive immediate treatment if
on a treatment
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Sophie told the Tribunal that you would continue
your medication and were agreeable to remaining in hospital until your doctors
ready to discharge you. She said that you wanted support from a private
psychiatrist and a new general practitioner (‘GP’)
and would also
receive support in your recovery from a cousin.
At the hearing, the
Tribunal discussed information contained in the report with you indicating that
your attitude towards whether
you have a mental illness and towards your
treatment differed from the views presented at the hearing. For example,
according to
the report your recent admission occurred after you requested to be
weaned off olanzapine, leading to a gradual deterioration in
your mental state.
In response, you said that you had developed greater insight.
relation to your most recent hospitalisation, you told the Tribunal that you had
been taking control of your mental health by seeking
alternative medical
treatment. You had arranged an appointment with a new GP and had been trying to
find a new private psychiatrist.
A police constable had offered to help you find
one and you were supposed to have a follow up appointment with a police officer
this on the day that you were admitted. You told the Tribunal that, while
the decision was out of your hands, you did not think
that you needed to be
You were a compelling advocate for yourself at the hearing and
were able to discuss your treatment, views and preferences with the
However, we also had to consider information provided by your treating teams.
The Tribunal found the following information from your community team,
who had worked with you for some time, persuasive. RG said
that you frequently
changed your mind and often asked the community team to change your medications.
It had been a struggle to try
to achieve a level of stability in your mood in
the preceding one and a half to two years. RG told the Tribunal that at your
the team gradually ceased your olanzapine and changed your medication,
but this did not go well and had led to your admission. He
said that the team
was able to get you well but there had been no success so far in maintaining
that wellness for a reasonable period.
You had had several admissions since
mid-2023 and numerous complaints to police from your neighbours. You live by
yourself and have
very limited community supports. RG said that the team had
gone out of their way to help you remain in your accommodation but that
often irritable when they tried to make suggestions. Both RG and your case
manager also said that it had been challenging
to contact you.
that the community team were happy to work with you to support your recovery
goals including changing clinics and finding
a private psychiatrist. He said
that your previous psychiatrist had retired and that the team had been trying to
find a new private
psychiatrist for you but have not been able to yet.
While we accepted that at the time of the hearing, you were agreeable to
remaining in hospital voluntarily for a period of time, the
Tribunal also had to
consider the bigger picture. Given what we heard about the difficulties
achieving a stable mental state and
several admissions since mid-2023, concerns
challenges in contacting you, the Tribunal formed the view that
there was no less restrictive means to enable you to receive immediate
treatment. Accordingly, the Tribunal had to make a treatment order.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected
under the Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only
make an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be
treated in the community.
Your inpatient treating team said that you
needed to remain in hospital for a few more days so that they could adjust your
and make arrangements for your discharge. TD said that you had a
number of falls in the past and your doctors wanted to ensure that
this risk was
addressed prior to your discharge. As noted above, Sophie told the Tribunal that
you were agreeable to remain in hospital,
but she also said that if the Tribunal
found that a treatment order was necessary, then a community treatment order was
appropriate.
The Tribunal decided that an inpatient treatment order was
required to ensure that your medication was adjusted and that appropriate
arrangements were made for your discharge so that you could safely return to the
Length of the Treatment Order
The Act sets a
maximum duration of six months for treatment orders. Your treating team
requested a treatment order to run for 26
weeks. Neither you nor your legal
representative made any specific comments about the proposed length of the
treatment order.
The Tribunal decided to make a treatment order for 16
weeks. It recognised that there were challenges associated with keeping you
and with your engagement with your community treating team. You had goals of
engaging a private psychiatrist, which your community
team was trying to help
you arrange, but the Tribunal acknowledged that doing so would take some time
and it was important that you
were supported in the community after your
Sixteen weeks is the longest this treatment order can last.
Your treating doctor must revoke your treatment order at any time if they
believe the treatment criteria no longer apply.
determination: 09-10-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Magdalena Wysocka
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 29 November 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (516 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter