URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Beach House Fitness Centre Pty Ltd No.2 [1998] VADT 10 (17 July 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Exemption No. 30 of 1998
Exemption No. 64 of 1998
IN THE MATTER OF THE REVOCATION OF AN EXEMPTION ON THE INITIATIVE OF THE
APPLICATION FOR A NEW EXEMPTION
BEACH HOUSE FITNESS CENTRE PTY LTD
REASONS FOR DECISION ON THE REVOCATION AND ON THE APPLICATION FOR A NEW
17 July 1998
Mr John Wolters - Senior Member
The proceeding
The applicant, Beach House Fitness Centre Pty Ltd, by letter dated 23 March
1998 applied for an exemption under the
Equal Opportunity Act
Act) to enable it to carry on a health club and fitness centre for women only at
218 Nepean Highway Edithvale. The hearing was
held on 3 April 1998. It was not
opposed. On 6 April 1998 the Tribunal granted the applicant an exemption and
published its reasons.
The exemption notice was published in the Victoria
Government Gazette on 9 April 1998. The published notice however contained an
error in that, contrary to the reasons for decision, it purported to grant the
applicant a general exemption to provide fitness centres
catering for women
only. In fact the Tribunal had decided to grant an exemption only in relation to
the premises at Edithvale that
had been the subject of the original application.
The Tribunal, on learning of the error, accordingly advised the Beach House
Centre Pty Ltd as the grantee of the exemption on 8 July 1998 that it
would hold a hearing on 16 July 1998 on the question whether
the exemption
should be revoked on the initiative of the Tribunal. At the same time the
original applicant gave notice to the Tribunal
that it would make application
for a new exemption that would allow it to operate fitness centres for women
only at premises including
those at Edithvale that had been the subject of the
original application.
The legislation
The Tribunal now sets out the provisions of the Act (as amended by the
Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
Act 1998 with
operation from 1 July 1998) permitting it to grant or revoke exemptions:
Exemptions by the Tribunal
The Tribunal, by notice published in the
Government Gazette, may grant an exemption-
of the provisions of this Act in relation to-
(i) a person or class of people; or
(ii) an activity or class of activities;
in the circumstances referred to in section 28; or
from any other provisions of this Act in any other circumstances
specified by the Tribunal.
An exemption remains in force for the
period, not exceeding 3 years, that is specified in the
The Tribunal, by notice published in
the Government Gazette-
may renew an
exemption from time to time for the period, not exceeding 3 years, specified in
the notice;
may revoke an exemption with
effect from the date specified in the notice, which must be a date not less than
three months after the
date the notice is
An exemption may be granted or
renewed subject to any conditions the Tribunal thinks
An exemption may be granted, renewed or
on the application of a person
whose interests, in the opinion of the Tribunal, are or may be affected by the
exemption; or
on the Tribunal's own
initiative.
The Tribunal's power to grant and revoke
In previous exemption applications, the Tribunal has observed that section
83(1) and (2) of the
Equal Opportunity Act
are identical, in
substance, to s40(1) of the
Equal Opportunity Act
. The Tribunal's
predecessor, the Equal Opportunity Board, discussed the interpretation of s40(1)
of the 1984 Act in
re Fernwood Fitness Centre
([1996] EOC 92-782).
This Tribunal adopted the principles set out in
and applied
them to s83(1) of the 1995 Act in
re Balmforth
(ADT of Vic, 4 November
Briefly, the principles are that the Tribunal has a clear discretion whether
or not to grant an exemption. In exercising that discretion
the Tribunal will
consider whether or not the exemption is appropriate. In considering whether or
not an exemption is appropriate,
it will take the following matters into
that an exemption will not be
granted unnecessarily - that is, where another statutory exception in the Act
clearly applies, or where
there is no arguable case of
discrimination;
that an exemption will
not be granted where this will be futile - that is, where the conduct sought to
be exempted is clearly prohibited
that, in considering an
application for exemption, the Tribunal will take into account how the exemption
might promote the objectives
of the Act, and also whether the exemption is
consistent with the spirit (although obviously it will not be within the letter)
the scheme of the Act;
whether there
is some overriding public interest that justifies conduct being taken out of the
statutory prohibitions on discrimination;
all the relevant circumstances
of the particular case.
The Tribunal makes the following further
observations that are relevant to the present matter. From July 1 1998,
following the amendments
made to the section by s48 of the Tribunals and
Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998, which substituted the
former subsections (4) and (5) with new provisions, the Tribunal has been given
an express power in ss(4) to grant or renew an exemption
subject to any
conditions the Tribunal thinks fit. The power to revoke an exemption, which
requires a delay of three months from
the date of publication of the notice
before the revocation comes into effect (ss3)(b)) appears to be otherwise
unfettered. Section
83 no longer requires a notification in writing to the
original applicant three months before the date the revocation comes into
(the former provisions of ss(4)) but clause 18(1) of schedule 1 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
provides for general notification of
parties whose interests may be affected by a revocation proposed on the
Tribunal's own initiative.
Taking the latter provision into account, and also
the consideration that the principles of natural justice would require, where
exceptional circumstances existed, that the grantee of the exemption be given a
reasonable opportunity to make submissions, the
Tribunal decided to hold a
hearing at which the revocation could be considered and submissions could be
made by the original applicant.
The material before the Tribunal
Any revocation of the existing exemption was not opposed by Mr Adam Price,
who again appeared to represent the applicant as its managing
director. Because
the application made to the Tribunal for a new exemption concerned material put
before the Tribunal at the original
hearing on 3 April 1998 the Tribunal will
set out relevant parts of that material to assist in the understanding of the
hearing and the new application, which was made unopposed.
Mr Price gave evidence at the original hearing that he was an experienced
health and fitness professional, qualified by VicFit. Over
the past eight years
he taught in the health and fitness industry in Melbourne and for four years was
with the Re Creation Health
Club in Armadale. Through his work he has become
aware that there is a need for health clubs that are open to women only,
that is underscored by the success of the Fernwood and Lady Works
health club centres. Mr Price had for some years been on the lookout
suitable centre that he might either take over or build up from start.
When the premises at 218 Nepean Highway Edithvale were operated as a fitness
centre in the past he had wished to buy the business
as a going concern but did
not proceed because he could not get access to the books. After noticing that
the premises were vacant
he decided to do some market research with a view to
establishing a fitness and health centre. On the basis of encouraging responses
to advertisements placed locally to gauge the level of interest in a centre for
women he decided to lease the premises for a period
of two years with an option
of a further two years. He then fitted the premises out for aerobic exercise.
With only a female and
male toilet installed, further work needed to be done to
provide change rooms leading to showers and to do appropriate fitout. The
equipment for the proposed centre was still to be purchased.
Mr Price's inquiries convinced him that there was a need for a gym and
fitness centre in the area available to women only. Women in
the Edithvale
neighbourhood exercised frequently using the foreshore of Port Phillip Bay and
local streets. It is however not regarded
as very safe, and an indoor facility
was welcomed. The former facility had been open to men and women, but was
attended during the
day by women only with only four to five men at the most
using it at night. The women Mr Price interviewed about the proposed facility
had a strong preference for a women only centre, as it was felt that a mixed
centre provided an unwelcome intimidatory element.
Mr Price did not propose to be the person physically running the centre, and
this has in fact turned out to be the case. A female
manager was hired to do
this. Although it had been proposed to have male instructors, and Mr Price had
himself intended to be one,
only female staff now operate at the centre. Many
women tended to lack self confidence and self esteem in a mixed sporting
environment
and many were not certain about their appearance. Those who were not
able to purchase fashionable gym or sporting outfits would prefer
to exercise in
a women only environment.
At the present hearing Mr Price said that all this had now been confirmed by
a successful operation at Edithvale, where from a budgeted
membership of 300 the
numbers had in fact risen to 400, 60% of members joining because of personal
referrals. Women had told Mr Price
that centres at which women only were
permitted tended to be fresh and clean, which was not the case where male
customers shared
such facilities.
From his previous engagement with Re Creation Health Club in Armadale Mr
Price had become familiar with the appeal that lectures on
health and fitness by
professionals such as dieticians and physiotherapists held for women. Similar
programs are proposed for the
Edithvale centre. Additionally, classes had been
proposed for 'over fifties', which were attractive to older women who might wish
to attend aerobics at a faster pace than was offered in clubs that specifically
catered for the retired and the elderly. However,
the membership in Edithvale
had in fact turned out to be largely women between the ages of 25 and 40,
reflecting the relatively youthful
demographics of the area. Special programs
had been proposed for pregnant women and, subject to demand, for religious
groups that
required separation of the sexes. With regard to the latter,
however, Mr Price now felt that the demographic make-up of the area
surrounding
Edithvale was not expected to offer much demand.
The nearest gym and fitness centres to the location at Edithvale were in
Parkdale, 7 kilometres to the north, and in Frankston, 10
kilometres to the
south. Both catering for men as well as women. For women, apart from the fact
that the Frankston centre was mixed,
there was the added disincentive that
Frankston was not regarded as particularly safe.
The new application, which was for a general exemption allowing the company
to establish and run fitness centres for women in locations
across Melbourne,
starting, after Edithvale, with Bentleigh - which had demographics similar to
Edithvale - and then moving to the
Templestowe or northern Melbourne area, was
made by Mr Price very much on the basis as the 23 March application. There was
no proposal to take over existing centres and to convert them from mixed
health centres to centres for women only. Not only did economic
considerations
militate against this, as scarce capital had to be devoted to paying for the
goodwill of a going concern, a greenfield
operation gave the company a great
deal more flexibility. In the case of Bentleigh, where the company had secured a
site that in
the past had operated as a fitness centre but that had been vacant
for some time - the same situation as had prevailed at Edithvale
- the landlord
was prepared to spend a considerable sum on refurbishment and fitout, including
the installation of air conditioning,
which Mr Price had found was indispensable
for a women's fitness centre, while providing 9 months' rent free from the time
signing of the lease. The lease is for 5 years, with options for a
further 2 years and 3 years.
The site at Bentleigh, which had up to about 18 months ago traded as
'Trackside' has a mixed health centre located 4 kilometres to
the west, at
Brighton Beach. Another mixed centre is located 2 kilometres to the south, the
'A1 Fitness Centre', and another 6 kilometres
to the north east, called 'Body
Challenge'. These centres, Mr Price said, provide adequate alternative
facilities for men in the
general area. It was also an important consideration
in establishing a new centre that it was not located too close to an existing
'Fernwood' centre, similarly catering for women only. It is proposed to operate
the Bentleigh site, which is still to be equipped,
but is otherwise ready to
open in October, on the same basis as Edithvale. All the staff would be women as
well, because the customers
at Edithvale have shown a marked preference in
selecting training times when female staff are on duty.
Revocation of the
exemption granted on 6 April 1998
The proposed revocation of the exemption granted on 6 April 1998 in this
matter being unopposed, the Tribunal revokes the exemption
on the basis that it
was inconsistent with the terms of the decision to grant the exemption and the
application made to the Tribunal
and as such was signed and published in that
form in error. The revocation is to take effect from Monday 26 October 1998
Should the new, general, exemption be granted?
The Tribunal proposes to grant this exemption on the basis of the application
of the principles in the cases of
re Balmforth
out above. It has taken account, in that regard, of the fact that many of the
features of the application are similar to those
considered in
It grants the exemption specifically in respect of the applicant's premises at
Edithvale and Bentleigh. However, in extending the
exemption to apply to future
centres to be acquired or set up, and operated, by the applicant, the Tribunal
makes the exemption conditional
on any such premises either being centres in
respect of which a like exemption from this Tribunal is then in place in respect
another person or centres which have not in the previous six months operated
as a fitness centre or like business.
The Tribunal is in this regard of the view that:
the exemption would not be granted
unnecessarily, as there is no statutory exemption that clearly applies; there is
however an arguable
case of discrimination if men were excluded from a new
centre as proposed. No statutory exemption in the Act clearly applies. The
Tribunal has previously observed in that regard that a number of exemptions and
provisions in the Act, notably those relating to
genuine occupational
requirements for a person of a particular sex (s17), those relating to clubs
(division 6 of Part 3) and sport
(division 7 of Part 3), and the welfare
measures and special needs provisions of the Act (s82) point clearly at a broad
the Act to exempt for sound social or practical reasons and to redress
disadvantage.
The establishment of gyms
and fitness centres, together with proposed professional classes on women's
health and fitness issues, available
to women only, appears to the Tribunal both
to promote the objectives of the Act and to be consistent with the spirit of the
of the Act because the initiative addresses a disadvantage that women
perceive in not otherwise being able to exercise in safe surroundings
being able to do so free from what is perceived as the intimidatory presence of
men. Pregnant women, older women and those
with what they would regard as
unsatisfactory body shapes would be able to do exercise in an environment that
accepted them uncritically.
Meeting the
legitimate and demonstrated needs of an important sector of the community that
has in the past suffered from a lack of
equality and that still has legitimate
needs with regard to safety and protection from intrusion or unnecessary
exposure would in
the Tribunal's opinion serve an overriding public interest
that would justify the conduct being taken out of the statutory prohibitions
discrimination.
Lastly, taking account
of all the relevant circumstances of the particular application - which concern
the proposed availability of
suitable gym and fitness facilities for women in
metropolitan areas that are either regarded as less than safe for outdoor
or are otherwise well served by mixed facilities but poorly served by
women only facilities; the probability of such facilities not
being a commercial
success if they were to be open to men as well, because they would be less
attractive to women, with no assurance
that there would be a counterbalancing
participation by men; and the inability of such centres to offer specialised
services for
classes of women - those circumstances are such that the Tribunal
concludes that an exemption of the kind foreshadowed, subject to
appropriate
conditions, would be fully justified. In the case of the Edithvale premises the
Tribunal has taken into account the Mordialloc
Chelsea News demographic survey
tables that were submitted to the Tribunal by the applicant at the April 1998
hearing showing the
relatively low percentage of married women in the workforce
in the Mordialloc Chelsea area. In the case of the Bentleigh premises
Tribunal has taken into account of the close proximity of facilities catering
both for men and for women.
Taking account of the above the Tribunal revokes the exemption granted to the
applicant on 6 April 1998 and grants the exemption sought
for the period of
three years, the maximum allowable under the Act, subject to the stated
conditions. The exemption will take effect
from the time that the appropriate
notice is published in the Government Gazette.
Dated this 17
of July 1998.
Mr John Wolters - Senior Member
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Exemption No. 30 of 1998
IN THE MATTER OF THE REVOCATION OF AN EXEMPTION UNDER SECTION 83 OF THE
OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
BEACH HOUSE FITNESS CENTRE PTY LTD
By notice published in the Government Gazette of 9 April 1998 at page 788 the
Tribunal granted an exemption to Beach House Fitness
Centre Pty Ltd pursuant to
section 83(1) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(the Act) in the terms set out
in that notice.
Pursuant to clause 18(1) of schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
the Tribunal notified Mr Adam Price, managing
director of Beach House Fitness Centre Pty Ltd, that it would hold a hearing on
July 1998 to determine whether the exemption granted should be revoked on the
Tribunal's own initiative.
The grantee having attended the hearing by Mr Price and not having opposed
the revocation of the exemption-
THE TRIBUNAL NOW REVOKES THIS EXEMPTION WITH EFFECT FROM MONDAY 26 OCTOBER
Dated this 17
day of July 1998
Mr John Wolters - Senior Member
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Exemption No. 64 of 1998
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR AN EXEMPTION UNDER SECTION 83 OF THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
BEACH HOUSE FITNESS CENTRE PTY LTD
(APPLICANT)
The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal has considered an application
pursuant to section 83 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(the Act) by Beach
House Fitness Centre Pty Ltd for exemption from sections 42, 100 and 195 of the
Act. The application for exemption
is to enable the applicant to provide health
and fitness centres catering for women only.
Upon reading the material submitted in support of the application and upon
hearing submissions from Mr Adam Price for the applicant
and for the reasons for
decision given by the Tribunal on 17 July 1998, the Tribunal is satisfied that
it is appropriate to grant
an exemption from sections 42, 100 and 195 of the Act
to enable the applicant to provide health and fitness centres catering for
This exemption will apply only to: (1) the applicant's health and fitness
centre at Edithvale; (2) the applicant's proposed health
and fitness centre at
Bentleigh; and (3) to any other health and fitness centres that may be acquired
or set up, and operated, by
the applicant in the future, if the latter are
centres in respect of which a like exemption from this Tribunal is then in place
respect of another person or are centres which have not in the previous six
months operated as a fitness centre or a like business.
The Tribunal hereby grants an exemption to Beach House Fitness Centre Pty Ltd
from the operation of sections 42, 100 and 195 of the
Act subject to the above
conditions to enable the applicant to provide health and fitness centres
catering for women only. This exemption
is to remain in force until 22 July
Dated this 17
day of July 1998
John Wolters - Senior Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (49.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter