URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Long-Term Sentencing Trends in Victoria [2022] VicSAC 7; (13 September 2022)
Long-Term Sentencing Trends in Victoria
Sentencing Advisory Council, September 2022
Introduction 2
Sentencing practices in the higher
Homicide offences 7
Serious violent offences 11
Serious drug offences 15
Serious sex offences 18
Conclusion 22
References 24
Introduction
The Sentencing Advisory Council was established in 2004, with one of its
statutory functions being the provision of sentencing statistics
judiciary and other interested persons. One of the ways that the Council
achieves this is by publishing
Sentencing Snapshots
, each of which
provides an overview of how a certain serious offence was sentenced in the
higher courts (the County and Supreme Courts)
in the most recent five-year
period. Currently, 25
are published every two years. The first
publicly available
related to murder and how that offence was
sentenced from 1998–99 to 2003–04. Each
is based on
original court data and since 2014 accounts for subsequent successful conviction
and sentence appeals. Given that there
is now over 20 years’ worth of
sentencing data available, now seems an opportune time to
review whether there have been noticeable changes in sentencing practices
serious offences in Victoria and, if so, whether those changes have been more
pronounced for some offences than for others.
To that end, this report examines changes in sentencing for a select number
of homicide offences, serious violent offences, serious
drug offences and
serious sex offences. While
include a broader range of data
than what is discussed here, the focus of this report is to identify long-term
changes in:
the number of
people sentenced for each offence;
the proportion
of people receiving an immediate custodial sentence;
the average
length of prison sentences imposed for each offence (‘charge-level
sentences’);
the average
length of total effective sentences of imprisonment imposed on each person
(‘case-level sentences’); and
the average
length of non-parole periods imposed on each person.
of this report are that in the last 20 years:
the number of
serious offences sentenced in the higher courts has decreased;
the rate of
imprisonment for serious offences has increased, particularly in the last five
the lengths of
prison sentences for serious offences have also increased, and this seems to
have been a long-term trend for the
last two decades.
practices in the higher courts
Before examining the specific offences covered by
useful to contextualise that analysis with the more general long-term trends in
the higher courts. Figure 1 shows that there
has been a relatively consistent
trend of fewer cases being sentenced in the higher courts each year since
2004–05. This represents
more than just a decrease in the number of cases.
Victoria’s total population increased from 4.9 million in 2004 to 6.7
in 2020. Therefore, whereas 41.8 in every 100,000 Victorians were
sentenced in the higher courts in 2004–05, that rate had
halved to 20.7 by
Figure 1: Number of cases sentenced in the higher courts, 2004–05 to
Financial year
Number of cases
Alongside the moderate decline in the number of cases sentenced in the higher
courts each year (about 14% over 16 years), there have
been significant changes
in the types of sentences imposed (Figure 2). The rate of imprisonment has
almost doubled, from 39.6% to
75.1%. The rate of community orders decreased to
2009–10, then increased to 2015–16, and has decreased again since
The rate of wholly and partially suspended sentences decreased
significantly, from 34.5% of all outcomes to 2.0%. Some of these changes
attributable to legislative developments, most notably the abolition of
suspended sentences. Others are attributable to non-legislative
developments,
such as the Court of Appeal’s guideline judgment in 2014 encouraging
increased use of community correction orders
(though the effect of that
encouragement seems to have been short-lived). The doubling of imprisonment
cases is likely to be due
to a combination of factors, such as more cases now
being finalised in the summary jurisdiction, changes to Victoria’s bail
laws leading to a significant increase in time served prison sentences and
various sentencing schemes – such as category 1
and 2 offence
classification, standard sentence offences and the serious offender provisions
– reducing judicial discretion.
Figure 2: Sentencing outcomes in the higher courts, 2004–05 to
Financial year
Imprisonment
Suspended sentence
Community order
Any changes in long-term trends for the offences below must therefore be
understood in the context of a moderate decline in the number
of cases dealt
with in the higher courts each year and a significant increase in the rate of
prison sentences (mostly, it seems,
replacing suspended sentences).
Homicide offences
cover three homicide offences: murder, manslaughter and
culpable driving causing death. As shown in Figure 3, there were (with two
exceptions) more people sentenced for murder each year than there were people
sentenced for either manslaughter or culpable
driving causing death. Further,
while the number of people sentenced for murder and manslaughter each year did
not show any particular
trend, there has been a decrease in the number of people
sentenced for culpable driving causing death over the 20-year period.
Figure 3: Number of people sentenced for homicide offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Manslaughter
Culpable driving causing death
As would be expected for homicide offences, there was a very high rate of
immediate custodial sentences for each offence (Figure 4):
99.6% for murder,
95.9% for manslaughter and 94.0% for culpable driving causing death. With one
exception (in 2017–18 someone
with a mental illness received a
non-custodial supervision order for murder), everyone sentenced for a homicide
offence in the most
recent four years received an immediate custodial sentence.
This may be attributable to these three offences being classified as
category 1 or category 2 offences since 2017 (for murder and manslaughter) and
2018 (for culpable driving causing death),
such that courts must always (except
in rare circumstances) impose an immediate custodial sentence.
Figure 4: Percentage of people receiving immediate custodial sentences for
homicide offences, 2001–02 to 2019–20
Financial year
Manslaughter
Culpable driving causing death
The lengths of prison sentences for each of the three homicide offences
increased steadily and significantly (Figures 5 and 6), especially
for culpable
driving causing death. The charge-level sentences increased by 25.5% for murder,
33.8% for manslaughter and 60.3% for
culpable driving causing death. Total
effective sentences for the three offences increased by 26.2%, 30.0% and 73.8%
respectively.
And non-parole periods increased by 22.0%, 51.2% and 108.8%
respectively. Given the concurrent decrease in the number of cases of
driving causing death (an average of 23.4 cases per year in the nine years to
2009–10 and 12.5 cases per year since),
it is possible that the longer
average prison sentences for that offence are due – perhaps because of
plea negotiations –
to more of these cases being finalised as the less
serious offence of dangerous driving causing death, which came into effect in
October 2004.
Figure 5: Average length (years) of charge-level prison sentences for
homicide offences, 2001–02 to 2019–20
Financial year
Manslaughter
Culpable driving causing death
Figure 6: Average length (years) of total effective sentences and
non-parole periods for people sentenced for homicide offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Murder (total effective sentence)
Murder (non-parole period)
Manslaughter (total effective sentence)
Manslaughter (non-parole period)
Culpable driving causing death (total effective
Culpable driving causing death (non-parole
Serious violent offences
four serious violent offences, with varying
maximum penalties: recklessly causing injury (5 years), intentionally causing
years), recklessly causing serious injury (15 years) and
intentionally causing serious injury (20 years). While intentionally causing
serious injury must be dealt with in the higher courts, the other three offences
can be, and often are, dealt with in the Magistrates’
Court instead.
Indeed, given that most cases involving recklessly causing injury are dealt with
in the Magistrates’ Court,
the number of cases involving that offence are
included for context, but the custodial sentence rates and average prison
are not. Also, the data below for intentionally causing injury and
recklessly causing injury is limited to the years 2006–07
onwards because
in the early years either those offences were merged into a single
or they covered sentencing outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court rather
than in the higher courts.
The number of people sentenced in the higher courts for the four serious
violent offences has decreased markedly since 2006–07
(Figure 7), from 363
cases to just 132 cases in 2020–21, with most of the decrease being in the
serious injury
cases as opposed to
cases. Rather than being a product of plea
negotiations to lesser offences, this is likely to be due to a significant
decline in the
number of causing serious injury offences being recorded by
Figure 7: Number of people sentenced in the higher courts for serious
violent offences, 2001–02 to 2020–21
Financial year
Intentionally causing serious injury
Recklessly causing serious injury
Intentionally causing injury
Recklessly causing injury
The rate of immediate custodial sentences for intentionally causing serious
injury, recklessly causing serious injury and intentionally
causing injury
increased during the 20-year period (Figure 8). One particularly interesting
trend is the convergence of immediate
custodial sentence rates for intentionally
causing serious injury and recklessly causing serious injury, to the point that
have been almost identical for those two offences each year since
Figure 8: Percentage of people receiving immediate custodial sentences in
the higher courts for serious violent offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Intentionally causing serious injury
Recklessly causing serious injury
Intentionally causing injury
The lengths of prison sentences for these three serious violent offences have
all generally increased, some more than others (Figures
9 and 10). The average
charge-level prison sentences have increased by 83.7% for intentionally causing
serious injury, 59.3% for
recklessly causing serious injury and 130.8% for
intentionally causing injury. The total effective sentences in cases where these
offences were the principal proven offence increased by 77.6%, 93.3% and 130%
respectively. And the average non-parole period in
those cases increased by
93.1%, 100.0% and 64.7% respectively. Some of these increases in prison sentence
lengths may reflect a change
in the higher courts in the nature of cases
involving these offences, particularly if more cases are being finalised in the
Figure 9: Average charge-level prison sentences for serious violent
offences, 2001–02 to 2020–21
Financial year
Intentionally causing serious injury
Recklessly causing serious injury
Intentionally causing injury
Figure 10: Average total effective sentences and non-parole periods for
people sentenced for serious violent offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Intentionally causing serious injury (total effective
Intentionally causing serious injury (non-parole
Recklessly causing serious injury (total effective
Recklessly causing serious injury (non-parole
Intentionally causing injury (total effective
Intentionally causing injury (non-parole period)
Serious drug offences
cover five serious drug offences: cultivating a commercial
quantity of narcotic plants, cultivating a non-commercial quantity of narcotic
plants, trafficking in a large commercial quantity of drugs, trafficking in a
commercial quantity of drugs and trafficking in a non-commercial
quantity of
drugs. Given that most cases involving a
non-commercial
of plants or drugs are dealt with in the Magistrates’ Court, the data
below includes the number of cases in the higher courts
involving non-commercial
quantities for context, but not sentencing outcomes. The number of people
sentenced for trafficking in or
cultivating a commercial quantity or a large
commercial quantity of plants or drugs was fairly stable each year (Figure 11).
was, though, a significant decline in the number of cases in the higher
courts involving trafficking in a non-commercial quantity
of drugs; it is
possible that those cases are now being dealt with in the Magistrates’
Court instead.
Figure 11: Number of people sentenced in the higher courts for serious
drug offences, 2001–02 to 2020–21
Financial year
Traffick in a large commercial quantity
Traffick in a commercial quantity
Cultivate a commercial quantity
Traffick a non-commercial quantity
Cultivate a non-commercial quantity
Trafficking in a large commercial quantity of drugs – a category 1
offence – almost exclusively received immediate custodial
sentences (there
were four wholly suspended sentences). Trafficking in a commercial quantity of
drugs has had an increasing rate
of custodial sentences in the most recent four
years; this may be attributable to its classification as a category 2 offence
2017. There was also a significant increase in the rate of immediate
custodial sentences for cultivating a commercial quantity of
narcotic plants,
with 95% or more cases receiving a custodial sentence in the most recent five
years (Figure 12).
Figure 12: Percentage of people receiving immediate custodial sentences in
the higher courts for serious drug offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Traffick in a large commercial quantity
Traffick in a commercial quantity
Cultivate a commercial quantity
The lengths of prison sentences for trafficking in or cultivating a
commercial quantity of drugs or narcotic plants did not change
significantly in
the last two decades, fluctuating within a relatively stable range (Figures 13
and 14). It is, though, plausible
that prison sentences for trafficking in a
commercial quantity of drugs were beginning to increase in 2018–19 and
and that COVID-19 is the cause of the decrease in 2020–21.
The Court of Appeal in 2017 called for an increase in sentencing
practices in
the ‘upper category’ of this offence, so the timing would match.
There was also a more sustained and significant
increase in the average prison
sentences for trafficking in a large commercial quantity of drugs. In the last
two decades excluding
2002–03 (in which there were only two cases, both
extreme outliers), the average charge-level sentence length increased by
the average total effective sentence increased by 118.8% and the average
non-parole period increased by 135.7%. These increases
may be partly explained,
as the Court of Appeal later clarified, by the increase in prison sentence
lengths for trafficking in a
commercial quantity of drugs, which was expected to
have a ‘knock-on effect’ on prison sentence lengths for trafficking
in a large commercial quantity of drugs. It would, however, appear that the
increases in prison sentence lengths for trafficking
in a large commercial
quantity of drugs are part of a much longer-term trend.
Figure 13: Average charge-level prison sentences for serious drug
offences, 2002–03 to 2020–21
Financial year
Traffick in a large commercial quantity
Traffick in a commercial quantity
Cultivate a commercial quantity
Figure 14: Average total effective sentences and non-parole periods for
people sentenced for serious drug offences, 2002–03
Financial year
Traffick in a large commercial quantity (total effective
Traffick in a large commercial quantity (non-parole
Traffick in a commercial quantity (total effective
Traffick in a commercial quantity (non-parole
Cultivate a commercial quantity (total effective
Cultivate a commercial quantity (non-parole
Serious sex offences
cover seven serious sex offences. The graphs below focus on
the three most common offences involving penetration: rape, incest and
penetration of a child aged 12 to under 16. For context, the number of cases
involving sexual penetration of a child aged
under 12 and persistent sexual
abuse of a child aged under 16 is included in Figure 15. There does not appear
to be any particular
trend in the number of cases involving those offences. The
most recent
for incest only has data to 2018–19.
Figure 15: Number of people sentenced in the higher courts for serious sex
offences, 2001–02 to 2019–20
Financial year
Sexual penetration of a child aged under 12
Sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to under
Persistent sexual abuse of a child
The rates of immediate custodial sentences for rape and incest have been
fairly stable at 88% or more for both offences since 2003–04
(Figure 16).
That rate will increase in coming years. Both offences are now category 1
offences, prohibiting courts from imposing
a sentence other than an immediate
custodial sentence if the offence was committed on or after 20 March 2017. The
Council has raised
concerns about the effect of mandatory sentencing schemes
such as this, and who it affects; its recent report on sex offences highlights
the exceptional circumstances in some cases where offenders had previously
received non-custodial sentences for serious sex offences
such as rape.
Figure 16: Percentage of people receiving immediate custodial sentences in
the higher courts for serious sex offences, 2001–02
Financial year
Sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to under
The average lengths of prison sentences imposed over the 20-year period
increased for all three sex offences analysed (Figures 17
and 18). Many of those
increases occurred quite recently. In 2021, the Council found that average
prison sentences for rape had increased
since 2017, which may be due to the
Court of Appeal calling for an uplift in sentences for digital rape. The Council
also found that
prison sentences for incest had increased significantly since
2016 as a result of a number of reforms: incest being classified as
sentence offence in 2018, a series of appeal judgments starting in 2016 calling
for an uplift in sentencing practices,
and a reform in 2015 allowing certain
sexual offences, including incest, to be prosecuted as ‘course of
conduct’ offences.
The Council also observed a recent increase in prison
sentences for sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to under 16 that may have
been due to an increase in 2017 in the maximum penalty for that offence. That
said, the data suggests that the recent increase in
prison sentences for sexual
penetration of a child aged 12 to under 16 may have been a more pronounced part
of a longer-term trend.
Figure 17: Average charge-level prison sentences for serious sex offences,
2001–02 to 2019–20
Financial year
Sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to under
Figure 18: Average total effective sentences and non-parole periods for
people sentenced for serious sex offences, 2001–02 to
Financial year
Rape (total effective sentence)
Rape (non-parole period)
Incest (total effective sentence)
Incest (non-parole period)
Sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to 15 (total
effective sentence)
Sexual penetration of a child aged 12 to under 16
(non-parole period)
The key findings of the analysis in this report are that:
in the higher
courts, there was either a drop or a stable rate in all serious offences
analysed over the last 20 years. There are
fewer cases each year of culpable
driving causing death, intentionally causing serious injury, recklessly causing
serious injury
and trafficking in a non-commercial quantity of drugs. The rest
were stable – there were no noticeable increases. The decreases
partly because some of these offences are less prevalent than they were
previously (especially the causing serious injury
offences given the decrease in
the number of these offences recorded by police) but they may also be because
changes in plea negotiation
practices are affecting what charges are ultimately
sentenced, and/or some of these cases now being finalised in the summary
instead of in the higher courts;
increasingly imposing immediate custodial sentences for serious offences, much
of which appears attributable to the abolition
of suspended sentences and the
more recent introduction of category 1 and 2 offence classification; and
prominently, courts are imposing longer prison sentences for all of the analysed
homicide offences, serious violent offences
and serious sex offences, and for
trafficking in a commercial and large commercial quantity of drugs. In effect,
prison sentences
have increased significantly for almost every serious offence
analysed, the only exception being the stable prison sentence lengths
cultivating a commercial quantity of narcotic plants. And these increases have
occurred across the 20-year period.
In the last 20
years, there has been a significant increase in the percentage of people
sentenced to prison and the lengths of prison
sentences imposed for serious
offences in the higher courts.
Together, these findings suggest that sentencing outcomes in Victoria’s
higher courts are much more severe now than they were
20 years ago.
Victoria’s prison population has grown significantly in recent decades,
not just in number but
. In 2000, 67 of every 100,000
Victorians were in prison (3,153 people); by 2019, that per capita rate had
almost doubled to 123 per
100,000 Victorians (8,101 people). The increase in
Victoria’s prison population is in no small part because more people are
being held on remand and because more people are receiving short prison
sentences. The findings of this report suggest that there
is also a third
explanation, that people are spending longer in prison for serious offences.
Bibliography
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
National, State and Territory
(abs.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/population/national-state-and-territory-population/latest-release>.
Corrections Victoria, ‘Prisoner and Offender Statistics’,
Corrections, Prison & Parole (corrections.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-higher-courts>.
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Year Ending 31 December 2021’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/crime-statistics/download-crime-data/year-ending-31-december-2021>.
Freiberg, Arie and Asher Flynn,
Plea Negotiations: Pragmatic Justice in an
Imperfect World
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).
Parliament of Victoria, Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Inquiry into
Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(Victorian Government Printer,
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Paper
(Productivity Commission, 2021).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Higher
Courts’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-higher-courts>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Major Driving Offences: Current Sentencing
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘SACStat Higher Courts: Dangerous Driving
Causing Death’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sacstat/higher_courts/HC_6231_319_1.html>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Guidance in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Sex Offences in Victoria: An
Analysis of Three Sentencing Reforms
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Victoria’s Imprisonment
Rates’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/victorias-imprisonment-rates>.
Boulton & Ors v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
DPP v Bowen
[2021] VSCA 355
Gregory (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
Quah v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 164
Rahmani v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 51
Shrestha v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 364
Worboyes v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 169
Legislation
Crimes (Dangerous Driving) Act 2004
Crimes (Sexual Offences) Act 2006
Crimes Amendment (Child Homicide) Act 2008
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2010
Sentencing (Community Correction Order) and Other Acts Amendment Act 2016
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Amendment Act 2010
Authored by Paul McGorrery and Zsombor Bathy
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may be
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-70-2 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (830 KB)
PDF format (892 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (38.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter