URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1635.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Manoharan [2025] VCC 1635 (12 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CR-23-01054
OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
GUNASEELEAN MANOHARAN
DATE OF HEARING
25 September 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
12 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Manoharan
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1635
REASONS FOR
Subject: CRIMINAL LAW – SENTENCE
Catchwords: Sexual assault of a child under 16 – sexual assault
– breach of trust by employer – no prior convictions
of deportation – guilty after trial
Legislation Cited:
Sentencing Act 1991
Sex Offenders Registration Act
Cases Cited:
Narang (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2022] VSCA 103
v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 75
Guden v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 196
Sentence: Total effective sentence of 12 months’
imprisonment and 12 months’ CCO
APPEARANCES
For the DPP
Mr Paul D’Arcy
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr Rohan Barton
Giorgianni & Liang Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
Summary of offending
Manoharan, between 2020 and 2022, you operated a bar and restaurant in Horsham.
You employed Karen Quinn,
15 years old. You also employed Myra
First victim – ‘Karen Quinn’
Quinn worked with you for four months between March and June 2021.
commented on her appearance and her personal and sexual relationships. You told
her that if she was your age, you would marry
or date her.
3 – Sexual assault of child under 16
Ms Quinn’s first fortnight of employment, you approached her when she
stood at the front counter checking in for her shift.
leant down in front of her to pick up your AirPods from a shelf. You complained
of dog hair and lint on her work clothes and patted
her down with both of your
hands. You patted her back, her buttocks and her legs. You then rubbed the front
of her body, over her
shoulders, down to her breasts and her waist.
Charge 4 – Sexual assault of child under 16
one month after Ms Quinn started work, she was at the front counter commencing
her shift. You stood behind her and patted her
with both hands on her back,
buttock and hips. You said you were tidying her uniform. You moved your hands,
brushing around her upper
felt uncomfortable and stepped back.
Charge 5 – Sexual
assault of child under 16
She bought a top at Cotton On for a friend’s party on 1 May 2021. She took
the Cotton On shopping bag to her shift.
and she were standing behind the front counter where she checked in for work.
You asked her what she had bought. She showed you
the top. You told her she
should wear it to her next shift and added that she had lint on her
turned to commence her shift. You stood behind her. You touched her with both
hands on either side of her waist down to her hips,
then to her back, tailbone,
and the upper part of her buttocks.
Charge 6 – Sexual
assault of child under 16
of May 2021, your business held a pop-up stall at the Horsham
show grounds selling food from the restaurant.
Quinn was working at the stall. Other employees were present including you and
Quinn walked behind the tables to move an esky. You approached her from behind
and patted her back. You moved your hands down her
hips and onto her buttock.
You made a comment about brushing off lint and dog hair from her clothing.
continued working at the stall and Ms Quinn returned to the restaurant and
finished her shift.
that evening, she called you and advised she would not be returning to work
anymore. She recorded part of that conversation
with you. She provided the
recording to police.
one point, you said, ‘If I hurt you, you tell me.” She said,
“Guna, please, I don’t like this. Please don’t
talk to me and
please don’t touch me I don’t like this.” You responded,
“if you tell me, I do- I never do
never returned to work. Throughout her employment she had disclosed some of your
conduct to her mother, and, later, to other people,
including the second victim,
Second Victim – ‘Myra
Charge 7 – Sexual assault
Walsh was employed at your restaurant from mid-2021 for a few months as a
made comments to her about her tattoos during each shift she worked
of January 2022, her father-in-law passed away and she took
some time off work. On 10 January 2022, she returned to work, rostered
at 5:30PM. There were two other employees scheduled to work the same shift.
were the only other person in the restaurant when she arrived. She walked into
the kitchen to start her shift.
walked out of the kitchen and locked the front door.
told her you had told the others to come about half an hour later because the
restaurant wasn’t going to be busy.
stood near the bench in the kitchen. She stood about one metre away near the
dishwasher. You asked her how she was, and she became
walked over to her and hugged her. You forced your arms between her ribs and her
arms. You wrapped your arms around her tightly
and placed your head between her
neck and shoulder. She left her arms by her side.
let go of her, grabbed her arms and tried to wrap them around your body. She
held her arms loosely around you.
held her and told her you missed her. You kissed her on her neck near her
collarbone, on her cheek, and along her jawline, while
you held her.
was a knock on the back door. You jumped away from her and unlocked the door.
Another employee walked in and asked why the door
was locked.
next day, you approached her. You grabbed her arms and pulled them towards you
trying to get her to hug you. She pushed you away
and said, “I don’t
like hugs”, and you asked, “why not?”. She responded, “I
like them.” You walked away.
disclosed your offending to her husband. She resigned on 22 January 2022,
sending a message identifying issues she had with her
employment. Part of the
message read, “(he) took advantage of an emotional situation and forced me
to hug (him) multiple times,
kissed my neck and face and even locked the
restaurant door so (he) could not be interrupted.”
Investigation
were notified of the allegations. You were arrested and interviewed on 2
December 2022. You denied there had been any issues
with staff. You denied ever
commenting on their appearance or their uniforms. You also denied touching staff
and stated you did not
want to discuss the respective employees when questioned.
pleaded Not Guilty to these charges. A jury of your peers found you guilty. It
acquitted you of two charges relating to another
employee. The maximum penalty
for each offence is 10 years.
Assault of a Child is a standard sentence offence. The standard sentence is 4
years. Having been found guilty of three or more
Class 2 offences, you are
liable under the
Sex Offenders Registration Act
to mandatory life
Circumstances of offender
were born in Chennai, in Tamil Nadu, India. You are now 42 years old. You live
in Bendigo with your wife and children.
emigrated to Australia in 2014, having been wedded in2013 in an arranged
marriage. Your wife gave evidence on your behalf at trial.
You met as neighbours
when children and have two children, both boys, aged 4 and 10.
have limited support in the community and your family is isolated.
were educated in India, attending a government school in Chennai where you
obtained a degree in Hotel management and catering
technology.
have taught yourself English.
worked as a chef in Lismore NSW when you arrived. You and your wife are now on
bridging visas.
catered on cruise ships before emigrating to Australia. You travelled
extensively through the Atlantic.
leaving Lismore, you ran a hotel in Victoria. After running the business in
Horsham, you moved to Bendigo in December 2022.
ran a restaurant in Bendigo, but it failed and you are now an employee chef.
Your wife works in retail.
Horsham, you were involved in fundraising work, and your restaurant raised
$5,000 for the family of the late Bree Eerden, a young
mother with small
children who passed away suddenly.
Defence Submissions
Barton conceded that the offending against Ms Quinn merits a prison sentence. He
does not concede that the offending against Ms
Walsh justifies gaol. He argued
that a combined term of imprisonment with a community correction order is the
best way of accommodating
the sentencing purposes in
Barton also accepted that the offending against
is relevant to my assessment of
your prospects of rehabilitation and the objective gravity of this offending.
Your offending against
FR occurred in 2019 when you operated a hotel in
Victoria. She was 16. You employed her as a waitress and kitchenhand. You asked
her if she wanted a massage. She did not. You were alone at work with her. You
massaged her shoulders, back and buttocks. A little
later, you returned to
massaging her, rubbing her shoulders, her back, her buttocks and legs. You put
your hands under her t shirt
and touched her skin and the underside of her bra.
You stopped to answer the phone.
pleaded guilty to this offending and you were convicted and sentenced in
December 2022 to a community correction order. You were
put on the Sex Offenders
Register for eight years.
you offended against FR in 2019, you were not sentenced until after you had
committed these offences. You are therefore to
be sentenced for a second time as
a ‘first offender’.
Barton accepted that general deterrence and denunciation have a central role. He
suggested that your moral culpability is low for
charge 7, the sexual assault,
because you only offended against Ms Walsh once. As Mr D’Arcy observed,
your victim immediately
resigned, putting paid to any further opportunity for
unbidden intimacy between you.
to community protection, Mr Barton says that you now have limited involvement
with children due to your work as a chef in Bendigo.
Prosecution
Submissions
D’arcy submitted that a term of imprisonment with a non-parole period is
required, and that a combination sentence is not
within range.
also submitted that whilst sexual assault of a child under 16 has a standard
sentence of four years’ imprisonment, most of
the cases involving this
charge involve objectively more serious offending, often involving touching of
the victim’s genitals.
He referred me to the cases of
, which involve graver offending. As Priest JA observed in
, generally physical contact with a child’s vagina will be
objectively more serious than physical contact with the child’s
a rolled-up count of sexual assault of a child under 16. The offender was
sentenced to 4 years’ imprisonment with
a non-parole period of 1 year and
7 months. He was a 44 year old yoga teacher who sexually assaulted a 15 year old
victim when she
attended a class of his with her mother. Using the pretext of
instructing her, of instructing her, he lifted up the child’s
grabbed her breasts and moved his hands inside her underwear, touching her
vagina for about a minute. He tried to kiss the
victim but she pulled away. He
then grabbed the victim’s wrist to move her hand towards his penis. She
resisted, and he touched
her vagina and breasts.
had no prior convictions and was 47 years old at sentence. He had depression and
anxiety. He received a discount for pleading guilty
during COVID-19, which had
caused procedural delays.
were several aggravating features. The offending was audacious and done in the
presence of the child’s mother. It was
a breach of trust.
involved three charges of sexual offending by a 47 year old father against his
biological daughter, who was between 9 and 11 years
old. He was sentenced to
five years’ and 10 months’ imprisonment, with a 3 year, 11 month
non-parole period.
offender entered the victim’s bedroom, put his tongue in her mouth and
touched her on the vagina. She tried to push him
away, but he kissed her on the
breast. The indecent assault charge related to an episode where he put her hand
against his penis.
was 49 years’ when sentenced, had no prior convictions, made admissions to
authorities, had a decent work history, participated
in rehabilitation programs
and had reasonable prospects of rehabilitation.
offending was objectively graver than yours and his moral culpability was
higher. It involved a despicable breach of trust by
a father whose job was to
protect, nurture and raise his daughter.
an employer, you had a responsibility to ensure the safety and wellbeing of your
younger staff members especially. You exploited
your position to groom a
vulnerable 15 year old girl. You made repeated sexual approaches to her. You
abused your authority. You
also manipulated your position as Ms Walsh’s
employer in abusing her trust in you. You exploited your position when she was
emotionally fragile. You ensured you were alone together. You had the power to
ensure she was not with anyone else when you chose
to sexually assault her by
abusing your role as her boss.
I do not accept that
are analogous to your case
and they have not helped me much. But there are a number of concerning features
to your offending. You
were significantly older than both victims, you
manipulated them and exploited their respective vulnerabilities. You did that
base and selfish reasons. You damaged both of them in different ways. You
had already offended in a strikingly similar way in 2019
when you chose to
offend against Ms Quinn and Ms Walsh. You had not learnt from that earlier
D’arcy submitted that although you have no prior convictions, you have
relevant subsequent convictions from the Horsham Magistrates’
December 2022 where you were sentenced for two unlawful assaults against your
wife which you committed in September 2020
and the sexual assault of FR,
committed in November 2019.
remained on bail until I remanded you in custody after the jury returned its
Gravity of Offending & Moral Culpability
offending involved a breach of trust. You took advantage of your position of
seniority as an employer to exploit two vulnerable
female employees.
offending occurred in the workplace, where they were entitled to feel secure.
moral culpability in relation to Ms Quinn is higher because it was repeated,
persistent, the power imbalance between you was
greater and she was a vulnerable
junior employee. She was only 15. You persisted until she resigned.
you offended against Ms Walsh once, you locked the door and instructed other
staff to attend work late so that you could
isolate her. You took advantage of
her fragile emotional condition. You were predatory.
had previously offended against a 16-year-old employee of yours. Your moral
culpability for these offences is high. They are not
objectively grave examples
of their type, but the impact of your offending has been
Victim Impact Statement
victims have provided Victim Impact Statements.
Quinn says your offending caused her to grow up quickly. She struggled with
a deep distrust of
men and coworkers. It has been difficult for her to build healthy relationships,
feel safe in professional settings,
or trust the intentions of those around her.
The trial reopened those wounds and exacerbated the pain. The years of waiting
her carrying anxiety, shame and fear daily. When she was 16, police
attended school and she was taken out of class for interview.
This started
rumours that spread throughout school. She felt exposed, embarrassed, and judged
without anyone knowing the truth. She
sought therapy and mental health treatment
for the trauma, shame, and isolation caused by your offending, and she has
worked hard
to rebuild her sense of stability and wellbeing.
Walsh has described the ongoing impact your offending has had on her mental
Prospects of Rehabilitation
31 October 2025, your suitability for a Community Corrections Order was
assessed. You were placed on a CCO on 8 December 2022.
That Order was suspended
pending the outcome of your trial. It is due to expire on 22 November 2025.
Corrections
assessed you as a medium risk of general reoffending and as unsuitable to
undertake a CCO, due to your poor insight into
the offending and its impact on
your victims.
appeared confused when asked about the offending and asked, “why are you
asking me this, I am fighting the charges.”
You said, “I
didn’t do it, I am not a sex offender.” When you were asked about
kissing Ms Walsh on the neck, you
said, “the business wasn’t
open.” You said, “I was in Melbourne. I have bank statements to show
came in. I gave this to my solicitor, but it was too late.” You
were asked if you denied the offending and you replied, “yes.”
either minimised or denied this offending. You said, “they offered me a
CCO if I plead guilty, not go to jail. I am pleading
guilty to get a CCO, I am
not a sex offender.”
you indicated you would engage with programs on a CCO, Corrections doubt your
treatment readiness and your willingness to
address your offending. You continue
to deny your offending.
Guilty Plea
Barton conceded that given the jury’s findings of guilt, there is no
evidence of remorse. You get no credit for facilitating
justice or sparing the
expense of a trial. Although he relied on delay in mitigation, you were offered
a summary contest but you
elected to take these charges to the County Court and
put them before a jury of your peers. You engaged seven different firms of
solicitors, obviously unhappy with the advice you received. This restlessness
prolonged the time before your charges were finalised.
Although these charges
have been hanging over your head for years, you are largely responsible for the
delay in finalising them.
There is no evidence of you reformation or
rehabilitation in the meantime. This delay is not mitigatory.
is your right to contest the charges. You will not be punished for choosing to
fight, but you do not receive the benefits given
to those who plead guilty,
demonstrate reformation or express regret.
Barton submits that you have been on bail for a long time and you and have
always complied with your bail conditions. I will adjust
your sentence modestly
to reflect the inconvenience to you of being on bail, but you are responsible
for many of the delays in getting
these charges heard.
Deportation
Barton submitted that you risk being deported as you are presently on a bridging
visa. Your time in custody will be more oppressive
due to the fear and anxiety
of your uncertain immigration
I will moderate your
sentence a little to reflect that your time in custody will be more unsettling
and stressful for you.
Sentencing Principles
Sentencing Act 1991
, the purposes for which you are to be
sentenced are:
(a) To punish you in a manner and to an extent which is just in all of the
circumstances;
(b) To deter you or others from committing similar offences in
(c) To facilitate rehabilitation;
(d) To manifest the denunciation of your conduct;
(e) To protect the community; or
(f) A combination of two or more of these purposes.
3, Sexual Assault of a Child: 5 months’ imprisonment and 12 months’
Community Correction Order.
4: Sexual Assault of a Child: 7 months’ imprisonment and 12 months’
Community Correction Order.
5: Sexual Assault of a Child: 5 months’ imprisonment and 12 months’
Community Correction Order.
6: Sexual Assault of a Child: 5 months’ imprisonment and 12 months’
Community Correction Order.
7: Sexual Assault: 12 months’ Community Correction Order.
4 is the base sentence. 2 months of charge 3 are to be cumulated; one month of
charge 5 is to be cumulated and 2 months of
charge 6 is to be cumulated,
producing a sentence of 12 months.
are a number of additional conditions attached to the Community Corrections
(a) You have to perform 100 hours of unpaid community work over a period of 12
months as directed by the Regional Manager. 50 hours
of treatment and
rehabilitation satisfactorily undertaken are to be counted as hours of unpaid
community work for the purposes of
the unpaid community work condition.
(b) You must be under the supervision of a Community Corrections Officer for a
period of 12 months.
(c) You are required to be supervised, monitored and managed as directed by the
Secretary, or his or her nominee.
(d) You must undergo programs or courses aimed at addressing factors relating to
the offending as directed by the Regional Manager.
(e) You must attend for review of your progress and compliance or otherwise with
conditions of the Order and you have got to come
back before me on 25 March
declare 48 days’ pre-sentence detention as time served.
are to be registered for mandatory life reporting under the
Sex Offenders
Registration Act
Sentencing Act
, I declare you a serious sexual
A pseudonym.
A pseudonym.
A pseudonym.
Lugo v The Queen
VSCA 75 (Priest
Narang (a pseudonym) v The
Lugo (a pseudonym) v The
[2020] VSCA 75.
Guden v The Queen
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (267 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter