URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/88.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Seventeenth Febtor Pty Ltd v Household Financial Services Ltd and Anor [1996] VicRp 88; [1996] 2 VR 577 (12 February 1996)
SEVENTEENTH FEBTOR PTY LTD v HOUSEHOLD FINANCIAL SERVICES LTD and ANOR
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
29 January, 12 February 1996
This is a proceeding by summons on originating motion for judicial review of the order of a Magistrate in the Magistrates' Court
at Melbourne on 4 November 1994 refusing to set aside a default judgment entered against the plaintiff in the court on 16 September
1993. The judgment was entered in default of defence.
This proceeding was commenced on 26 April 1995, considerably outside the time for commencement of proceeding prescribed by r56 of
the Rules of Procedure in Civil Proceedings 1985. R56.02 provides that the court shall not extend the time fixed by r56.02(1) except
in special circumstances. I shall defer the issue of delay for the present.
The defendant brought a claim in the Magistrates' Court against the plaintiff for breach of three hire-purchase agreements and against
one Stephen Lynne Wharton as guarantor of the three agreements. The plaintiff is trustee for the SL Wharton Family Trust trading
as Wharton & Co.
Arising out of a breach of the first hire-purchase agreement dated 11 May 1990 the defendant claimed $3017.56; arising out of a breach
of the second hire-purchase agreement dated 20 June 1990 the defendant claimed $2310.08 and arising out of a breach of the third
agreement dated 27 June 1990 the defendant claimed $19,834.21. The defendant abandoned the excess over the jurisdiction and sought
to recover $25,000 plus interest and costs.
In due course the court entered judgment against the plaintiff for $25,000 together with interest of $1039.73 and costs of $459.50.
When the court dismissed the application of the plaintiff to set aside the default judgment on 4 November 1994 the court ordered
the plaintiff to pay costs of the application fixed at $937.20.
The ground of the application was that a request in writing from the hirer of the goods under the three hire-purchase agreements
to the owner pursuant to s7 of the
Hire-Purchase Act 1959
was not complied with at all, or sufficiently, before the owner sought to enforce the agreements against the hirer and guarantor.
Consequently, it was argued, the hirer had an arguable defence to the claim because the owner was not entitled to enforce the agreements
against the hirer and the guarantor in the Magistrates' Court in August 1993 when the complaint was issued and both were entitled
to orders setting aside the default judgment. Counsel for the defendant argued in the court below on 4 November 1994 that the defendant
did comply with s7 or there had been substantial compliance. The learned magistrate upheld the submissions of counsel for the defendant
and dismissed the application.
It cannot be gainsaid, had the plaintiff been able to show in the court below it had an arguable defence to the claim, that the default
judgment should have been set aside. See Williams, Civil Procedure Victoria, looseleaf, Butterworths, vol 1 at 3335-46 and the cases
cited. Generally a party who appears to have a good defence will be allowed to defend even when the application to set aside the
judgment is not made promptly.
It is necessary now to examine the circumstances relied upon by the plaintiff to create an arguable defence based upon s7 of the
Act. S7 is in PtII of the Act which was enacted to provide statutory protection of hirers. The section should be construed so as
to give the fullest relief to the hirer which the fair meaning of the language will allow.
S7 provides: -
(1) At any time before the final payment has been made under a hire-purchase agreement the owner shall, within fourteen days after
he has received a request in writing from the hirer, send to the hirer a copy of the agreement, together with a statement signed
by the owner or his agent showing -
(a) the amount paid to the owner by or on behalf of the hirer;
(b) the amount which has become due under the agreement but remains unpaid; and
(c) the amount which is to become payable under the agreement -
but an owner shall not be obliged to comply with such a request if he has sent the hirer a copy of the agreement and a statement
within the period of three months immediately preceding the receipt of the request.
(2) If an owner contravenes the last preceding subsection by failing to comply with a request made pursuant to the last preceding
subsection he shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a penalty not exceeding 10 penalty units and until the default is remedied
(a) the owner shall not be entitled to enforce -
(i) the agreement against the hirer:
(ii) any right to recover the goods from the hirer; or
(iii) any contract of guarantee relating to the agreement; and
(b) any security given by the hirer in respect of money payable under the agreement or given by a guarantor shall not be enforceable
against the hirer or the guarantor by any holder thereof.
Subs(1) does not make it clear what information a hirer must request from an owner before the penal provision of subs(2) is triggered.
In so far as s7 has a penal operation it must not be construed liberally against an owner. Consequently, I am of the opinion that
a hirer must request the owner to send, a copy of the agreement, together with a statement signed by the owner or his agent showing
- (a) the amount paid to the owner by or on behalf of the hirer; (b) the amount which has become due under the agreement but remains
unpaid; and (c) the amount which is to become payable under the agreement before an owner may be found guilty of the offence created
by subs(2). A request for a copy of the agreement alone is not a request made pursuant to subs(1).
An owner will comply with a request if he sends the hirer a copy of the agreement and a statement within 14 days after he has received
a request in writing from the hirer. But if an owner has sent the hirer a copy of the agreement and a statement "within the period
of three months immediately preceding the receipt of the request" the owner is not obliged to comply with such a request.
By subs(2), if an owner contravenes subs(1) he shall be guilty of an offence and until the default is remedied the agreement is unenforceable
against the hirer and any guarantor.
A hirer may commence a criminal proceeding in the Magistrates' Court by filing a charge with the appropriate registrar (see s26 of
Magistrates' Court Act 1989
) and applying for the issue of a summons (s28 of the
Magistrates' Court Act
In the present case a criminal proceeding was not commenced by the hirer (the plaintiff).
The circumstances relied upon by the plaintiff to show an arguable defence to the claim based upon
of the Act are as follows.
Mr Wharton is and was at all material times an accountant by profession and a director of the plaintiff. On or about 21 July 1993
the defendant wrote three letters to the plaintiff in the same terms advising that it had terminated each -
hire-purchase agreement and demanding payment of a specified amount allegedly due in accordance with the agreement and threatening
to commence legal proceedings. These letters caused Mr Wharton to discuss the demands with one Ian Powell on 21 July and then to
forward by facsimile transmission a handwritten request to "Household Commercial" (the name by which the defendant is known):
Attention: Ian Powell
From: Stephen Wharton
Message:Seventeenth Febtor PL Hire-Purchase Contracts 2005 4352, 4360, 4050
In reference to our discussion today and to assist us with the proposal in relation to the equipment could you please provide the
1. Copy of each contract for our record.
2. Contract arrears.
3. Payout value of each contract and detail of interest rebate on payment.
4. Schedule of payments on each contract.
5. On 1/6/92 we paid $2000. Please advise how this amount was applied against contracts.
6. Who do you usually use as valuers.
It is apparent that the request did not expressly seek "a statement signed by the owner or his agent", nor did it refer to
of the Act.
The defendant replied to the handwritten request by letter addressed to Wharton & Co on 22 July 1993. The letter was signed by
one John Alamanas, account manager, and purported to enclose "all details you have requested on your facsimile date 21/7/93". A summary
of the financial obligations of the hirer under each hire-purchase agreement in the form of the First Schedule to the Act and a copy
of the Guarantee and Indemnity of Hirer's Obligations Agreement in respect of each hire-purchase agreement were enclosed in the letter.
The letter did not provide a complete copy of each hire-purchase agreement.
Save for the omission to provide a complete copy of each hire-purchase agreement, I consider that the defendant complied with the
request contained in the facsimile. Part of each hire-purchase agreement and the whole of each contract of guarantee relating to
the hire-purchase agreement was sent to Wharton & Co.
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the defendant contravened
by failing to comply with a request made in writing from the hirer for a copy of each hire-purchase agreement with the consequence
that the defendant was not entitled to enforce each agreement against the plaintiff in August 1993. Counsel for the defendant submitted
that the hire-purchase agreements were not unenforceable because the plaintiff failed to prove that the defendant was guilty of the
offence created by subs(2), a condition precedent to rendering the agreements unenforceable. Counsel also argued that the defendant
complied or substantially complied with the request from the hirer.
A question arises whether the consequences of para(a) of subs(2) will only arise if an owner is first proved guilty of an offence
by failing to comply with a request made pursuant to subs(1).
The construction I place on
does not require a hirer to first invoke the criminal provisions of
before being able to defend a civil claim by the owner on the ground that the agreement is not enforceable by reason of a contravention
of subs(1) which has not been remedied. In my opinion, a hirer may defend a -
civil claim by the owner on the ground that the agreement is not enforceable by proving on the balance of probability that an owner
has failed to comply with a request made pursuant to subs(1) and the default has not been remedied.
The critical question here is whether Mr Wharton made a request pursuant to
on 21 July 1993. If he did not, the defendant did not contravene subs(1) and was entitled to enforce the hire-purchase agreements
against the plaintiff. In my opinion, a request made pursuant to
must satisfy the following conditions. Firstly, it must be in writing, secondly, it must be from the hirer and, thirdly, it must
request the owner to send to him a copy of the agreement together with a statement signed by the owner or his agent showing (a) the
amount paid to the owner by or on behalf of the hirer; (b) the amount which has become due under the agreement but remains unpaid;
and (c) the amount which is to become payable under the agreement. The evidence does not prove that a request was made for "a statement
signed by the owner or his agent" showing (a), (b) and (c). In the absence of a request for such a statement the learned magistrate
could not conclude that the defendant in the present case failed to comply with "a request made pursuant to (subs(1))". The hirer
made a request in writing to the owner for a copy of each hire-purchase agreement but the information requested by Mr Wharton in
para2, para3 and para4 of the facsimile was not a request for a statement pursuant to subs(1). Whether the defendant complied or
substantially complied with the request made by Mr Wharton in the facsimile is not relevant, in my opinion, unless the facsimile
was a request pursuant to subs(1).
In my opinion, an agreement only becomes unenforceable against the hirer and/or the guarantor by reason of
of the Act if an owner contravenes subs(1) by failing to comply with a request made pursuant to subs(1). As no contravention of subs(1)
could be proved against the defendant because "no request was made pursuant to subs(1)", the issue of compliance or substantial compliance
does not arise for determination.
does not render a hire-purchase agreement illegal or void, if an owner contravenes subs(1), only unenforceable "until the default
is remedied". Although
is clearly for the protection of the hirer and intended to delay the enforceability of an agreement against a hirer or a guarantor
until a request for information is complied with by the owner, the construction which I place on
requires a hirer to show, on the balance of probability, a contravention of subs(1) by an owner before an agreement becomes unenforceable.
In my opinion, the plaintiff has not satisfied this requirement and the agreements were enforceable against the hirer and Mr Wharton
in the Magistrates' Court at all material times.
In my opinion, the plaintiff did not show in the court below it had an arguable defence based on
and, therefore, special circumstances do not exist for extending the time fixed by r56.02(1).
The summons on originating motion is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Solicitors for the plaintiff: Oakley, Thompson and Co.
Solicitors for the first defendant: Home Wilkinson Lowry.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter