URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'GA4' and Building and Plumbing Commission (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 67; (13 August 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Building and Plumbing Commission (formerly the Victorian Building
Decision date:
13 August 2025
Exemptions and provisions considered:
Sections 30(1), 31(1)(d), 34(1)(b)
'GA4' and Building and Plumbing Commission
(Freedom of Information)
[2025] VICmr 67
(13 August 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – full technical assessment report –
complaint made by the Applicant – methods and procedures
used by the
Agency – irrelevant personal affairs information
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to documents requested by the Applicant
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request differs from the Agency’s
decision and more information is to be released.
Please refer to the end of my decision for information about review rights
through the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access Deputy
Commissioner
13 August 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
[date], the Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to a report in
relation to a complaint they made.
[date] and [date], the Applicant advised the Agency that it was ‘welcome
to exclude any personal information’ from
the report.
[date], the Agency made a decision on the Applicant’s request. The Agency
identified one document falling within the terms
of the Applicant’s
request and granted access to the document in part, exempting certain
information under sections 30(1),
33(1) and 31(1)(d). The Agency’s
decision letter sets out the reasons for its decision.
application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access.
have examined a copy of the document subject to review.
the review, the Agency has also relied on section 34(1)(b) to exempt company
names throughout the document. Accordingly, I
will also consider the application
of section 34(1)(b).
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
conducting a review under section 49F, section 49P requires that I make a new or
‘fresh decision’. Therefore, my review
does not involve determining
whether the Agency’s decision is correct, but rather requires my fresh
decision to be the ‘correct
or preferable
This involves
ensuring my decision is correctly made under the FOI Act and any other
applicable law in force at the time of my
Review of exemptions
Section 30(1) – Internal working documents
30(1) exempts documents that contain opinion, advice or recommendation, or
consultation or deliberation, where disclosure
would be contrary to the public
interest. A document is not exempt simply because it is an internal working
be exempt under section 30(1), three conditions must be satisfied:
the document or
information is matter in the nature of
advice or recommendation prepared by an agency officer or a Minister or
consultation
or deliberation that has taken place between agency officers or Ministers
the matter was
created during the deliberative process of an agency, Minister, or the
government’s functions
disclosure of
the matter would be contrary to the public interest.
are four circumstances where section 30(1) does not apply:
required to be made available for inspection and purchase under section 8
purely factual
information
documents relating to adjudicative functions
documents more
than 10 years old.
term ‘officer’ is defined in section 5(1). It includes independent
contractors, consultants and legal advisers engaged
by an agency to carry out
work or provide services.
document subject to review was prepared by an external consultant on behalf of
the Agency.
respect to the information exempted by the Agency on page 1, the information is
instructions from the Agency to the consultant
address, rather than opinion, advice, recommendation, or consultation or
deliberation. As such,
it does not meet the first condition of section 30(1),
set out above.
respect to the information exempted by the Agency on page 2, the exempted
information sets out the allegations made by the Applicant.
It also is not
opinion, advice, recommendation of an Agency officer, or consultation or
deliberation between Agency officers. As
such, the first condition of section
30(1) is not met.
Accordingly,
information in the document is not exempt from release under section
Section 31(1)(d) – Disclosure of methods for
preventing, detecting, investigating breaches of the law
document or information is exempt under section 31(1)(d) if two conditions are
of the information would, or would be reasonably likely to disclose methods
procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or dealing with
breaches of the law
the information would, or would be reasonably likely to prejudice the
effectiveness
of those methods or procedures.
methods or procedures identified must not be widespread and
well-known.
Where methods or
procedures are well known, then it is unlikely to cause prejudice to the
effectiveness of those methods or procedures.
This includes standard
investigatory practices like conducting interviews or gathering evidence in a
way that could be reasonably
inferred from knowledge of the offence being
investigated.
Agency’s decision states:
The document which is subject to
your request are exempt pursuant to this provision of the Act. That is because
the document was part
of an investigation of the [Agency], and disclosure
outside of the [Agency] of the methods and procedures used during an
investigation
would be reasonably likely to prejudice the effectiveness of
future investigations of a breach or possible breach of the Building
Regulations, or prejudice the enforcement or proper administration of the
Building Act or Regulations.
It is contrary to the public interest to release law enforcement documents
which show details of methods of investigation. It is in
the public interest
that the [Agency] investigates a breach or possible breach of the law without
prejudicing the investigation by
releasing documents outside of the [Agency]
which show investigation methods which may be used to hinder investigation of
in the future.
carefully considered the exempted information, I consider that the methods and
procedures used by the Agency in this instance
align with standard investigatory
practices which could reasonably be inferred from knowledge of the complaint
being investigated.
Disclosure of the information would unlikely prejudice
investigations undertaken by the Agency, including the effectiveness any methods
and procedures they generally use.
such, section 31(1)(d) does not apply.
Section 34(1)(b)
– business, commercial or financial information of a third party
undertaking
document or information is exempt under section 34(1)(b) if three conditions are
or information was acquired from a business, commercial, or
financial undertaking
the information
relates to matters of a business, commercial or financial nature
disclosure of
the information is likely to expose the undertaking unreasonably to disadvantage
(based on matters listed in section
34(2) and any other relevant
considerations).
Agency has applied this exemption over the names of companies within a section
of the document titled ‘Documents provided
by the [Agency] and which were
reviewed’ and ‘observation and discussion’ sections throughout
the document. For
the purpose of this exemption, the companies are
‘undertakings’.
respect to the first condition of section 34(1)(b), I am satisfied the
information relating to the undertakings broadly reveals
information that was
obtained from the undertakings, and as such, the first condition is met.
respect to the second condition of section 34(1)(b), the information only
broadly concerns business and commercial information,
as it concerns the
companies conducting their business. For examples, preparing drawings and
designs for a project.
respect to the third condition of section 34(1)(b), I have considered the
The information
was obtained in the context of a complaint made by the Applicant in relation to
a building project.
The undertakings
are named in the investigation report and therefore disclosure of the document
would reveal that they are connected
with an investigation undertaken by the
Disclosing the
names of undertakings that were involved in the project, where complaints have
been substantiated, could impact their
reputation if the document was more
widely distributed. Disclosing the document could cause some harm to the
undertakings where the
complaints were substantiated, however, I do not consider
it would result in substantial or unreasonable harm to their competitive
undertakings named in the document were not subject to the complaints made by
the Applicant, and as such, revealing their names
in the document will not cause
any disadvantage to them.
consideration of these factors, I have decided that disclosing the names of the
undertakings would not likely expose the companies
to unreasonable disadvantage.
As such, section 34(1)(b) does not apply.
Section 25 –
Deletion of exempt or irrelevant information
25 requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant
information and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
whether it is ‘practicable’ to delete exempt or irrelevant
information requires an agency or Minister to consider:
involved in making the deletions from a resources point of
effectiveness of those deletions – that is, whether the edited document
still has meaning.
information is information which is clearly outside the scope, or beyond the
terms of the applicant’s request.
Applicant advised the Agency on two occasions that personal affairs information
could be excluded. Accordingly, the personal affairs
information in the document
is to remain deleted as it is irrelevant information. Company email addresses,
however, are not personal
affairs information and such content is to be
Agency has also redacted a statement of work as irrelevant information. I do not
consider it is irrelevant information as it forms
part of the report. It is also
to be released with personal affairs information deleted. Names of companies,
however, are to be released.
have considered the effect of deleting irrelevant and exempt information from
the document. In my view, it is practicable for the
Agency to delete the
irrelevant and exempt information.
the information before me, I am not satisfied information in the documents is
exempt from release under sections 30(1), 31(1)(d)
or 34(1)(b).
I am satisfied it is practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited copy of
the document with irrelevant information deleted,
access to the document is
granted in part.
Directions on what is to be released in the
The information
that the Agency exempted under sections 30(1) and 31(1)(d) on page 1 is to be
The information
exempted by the Agency on page 3 under sections 30(1) and 31(1)(d) is to be
Company names
throughout the document are to be released. A list of these names will be
provided to the Agency separately. This includes
the company name and CDB-U
number in the ‘Builder’ section on page 1 and the
‘Practitioner’ section on pages
30, which are to be released.
address on page 10 point 5 and page 18 point 5 is to be released.
The statement of
work is to be released with irrelevant personal affairs information deleted.
Timeframe to seek a review of my decision
either party to this review is not satisfied with my decision, they are entitled
to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if either party applies to VCAT for
a review of my
party review rights
have decided to release the names of undertakings and an email address which the
Agency refused access to under section 34(1)(b).
such, those undertakings have a right to apply to VCAT for a review of my
decision within 60 days of being notified of my decision.
have decided that it is practicable to notify all but one of the business
undertakings.
confirm that OVIC will notify those undertakings of their review rights as soon
as practicable.
When this decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the undertakings’ review period
expires. If a review application is made to VCAT, my
decision will be subject to
any VCAT determination.
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 24 ALR 577
Graze v Commissioner
of State Revenue
[2013] VCAT 869
Mees v University of
[2009] VCAT 782
XYZ v Victoria
[2010] VCAT 255
Mickelburough v
Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
The Herald and Weekly
Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier (General)
[2012] VCAT
Honeywood v
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
Victoria Police FOI Division (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
[140], [155];
Re Hutchinson and Department of Human
(1997) 12 VAR
The Applicant in section
50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (300 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter