URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miller (THO) - App 22 2007 [2008] VRAT 4 (30 May 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 22 of 2007
In the matter of an Appeal
MR DAVID MILLER
AGAISNT THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF A SIX MONTH SUSPENSION IMPOSED BY
THE RACING APPEALS AND DISCIPLINARY BOARD ON 12 NOVEMBER 2007
FOR BREACHING
AUSTRALIAN RULE OF RACING 175 A
JUDGE R. WILLIAMS
, His Honour
Mrs A. Carlyon,
Mrs J. Spears, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON FRIDAY 30
MAY 2008 AT 8.56 A.M.
MR T. FORREST QC appeared on behalf of Racing Victoria Stewards.
MR D. SHEALES appeared on behalf of Mr Miller.
(His Honour Judge Williams)
J U D G M E N T
HIS HONOUR: In the appeal of David Miller against Racing Victoria
Limited, at the Racing Appeals and Disciplinary Board hearing
on 12 November
2007, Mr David Miller a licensed trainer was found guilty of a breach of
AR175(a), that is of conduct prejudicial
to the image, interest or welfare of
racing. And he was duly convicted and suspended for six months.
It is from this finding that he now appeals to this Racing Appeals
Tribunal. It is necessary and important in this case that the
precise conduct
on the part of the appellant which is relied on as constituting the offence, be
identified. The precise conduct
has been particularised under the heading
"Charge 1" and the particulars are as follows.
(1) That the appellant was at all relevant times a licensed trainer.
(2) That the appellant engaged in conduct that was prejudicial
to the image of
racing in that between November 2006 and April 2007, he disposed of six horses
that had been in his care by leaving
them in an open pit at the Property he was
renting and from which he was licensed to train at 1040 McDonalds Drain Road,
East Pakenham.
It is equally important to make the following points clear. That is,
because of the particularisation of the charge, the Tribunal
is not to be
concerned with and there is no relevant criticism of the appellant for (1)
cruelty to horses on his property, (2) the
fact of his putting down of horses on
his property, (3) the reasons for or methods by which horses were put down on
his property.
The subject conduct which is in question and which the stewards are
relying on as prejudicial to the image of racing, is the fact
that the appellant
disposed of a number of horses indeed, their carcasses by putting them in an
open pit at his property and leaving
them there over a period indeed until he
was required to vacate the Property in July 07.
As this hearing is by way of a re-hearing (Racing Act s.83K(8D), the
Tribunal has had access to the whole of the transcript and
evidence before the
RAD Board which is an Exhibit in this appeal. Helpfully there are a large
number of facts of varying degrees
of importance which have been agreed between
the parties and which the Tribunal accepts as agreed facts. I will read these
into the transcript.
Bruce Miller was at all relevant times a licensed trainer with his licensed
premises located at 1040 McDonalds Drain Road East,
Pakenham South (
rented the Property from its owner, Paul Kenrick. He also lived at the
Property. Kenrick owns the Property through a trust.
Miller no longer rents or
resides at the Property. The current tenant is Neil Lawrence.
addition to training horses, Miller operated a horse transport business with
Kenrick under the name 'Network Horse Transport',
through a corporate entity,
Jebner Pty Ltd (
). Miller was contracted to the business. He had
an account with Jebner which he would invoice for his labour and expenses
in the course of the business, and against which Kenrick would set-off
Miller's weekly rent of $200 for use of the Property. Accordingly,
rent was, effectively, being paid by Jebner.
addition to Miller living and training horses at the Property, the Property was
course of the business; and
(b) for the
agistment of horses.
parties who had horses agisted at the Property were Ms Jodie Ward, Mr Rodney
Wallace, Ms Sylvia Thurmer, and Mr John Holm. Agistment
money was paid to
Kenrick in cash or by cheque, and on occasions was paid to Miller and passed-on
to Kenrick.
15 March 2007, Kenrick caused Jebner to cease payments of Miller's rent.
25 March 2007, Kenrick inspected the Property accompanied by:
(a) Mr David
Cunningham, a contractor with expertise in pasture preparation, who was invited
onto the Property by Kenrick to advise
Kenrick on options for growing lucerne;
(b) Mr Mark
Eckley, a friend of Kenrick's who was invited onto the Property by Kenrick for
the purposes of recording video footage
of the Property.
the course of the inspection, the three men drove around the Property in
Kenrick's vehicle. Eckley took video footage as they
were driving and at one
point they observed a pit in the back paddock which contained the carcasses of 6
dead horses.
pit was approximately 40 metres from the north boundary fence of the property.
McDonald's Drain runs parallel to the north boundary
fence, between the fence
and the adjacent property. The drain is bordered by two embankments, each 5-6
feet high. The paddock at
the Property adjacent to the paddock containing the
pit was agisted in its entirety to Jodie Ward.
Immediately
following his inspection of the Property on 25 March 2007, Kenrick delivered a
notice to vacate to Miller (that same day).
his inspection on 25 March 2007, Kenrick had a conversation with Neil Lawrence,
during which he asked Lawrence to issue
a complaint regarding the treatment of
animals by Miller at the property. Kenrick said that there were horses being
starved at the
Property and kept in a bad condition, and that the Property was
generally in a mess. Kenrick claims that he also told Lawrence
though Lawrence does not recall being told this at the time.
following day Lawrence went to view the property himself. He returned a couple
of days later and took another look. At no stage
did he enter the Property nor
did he observe the pit.
his second inspection, Lawrence contacted Racing Victoria Stewards and made an
anonymous complaint in relation to the condition
of horses he saw at the
Property. Lawrence did not mention the pit in his complaint.
29 March 2007, Kenrick's solicitors sent Miller a letter setting out various
complaints about the state of the Property. No mention
was made in the letter
of the pit.
eventually vacated the Property on 14 July 2007.
next day, 15 July 2007, Kenrick entered the property accompanied by Neil and
Sharon Lawrence. During this inspection, the Lawrences
observed the dead horses
in the pit.
Lawrence eventually leased the property from Kenrick 2 to 3 weeks after Miller
vacated, and continues to reside there.
16 July 2007, Stipendiary Steward James Williams carried out an inspection at
the Property, accompanied by Kenrick.
inspection of the back paddock at the property, Williams observed the pit.
Williams took photographs of the pit.
informed Williams that he first became aware of the pit the day before (15 July
19 July 2007, Williams again inspected the Property, accompanied by Stipendiary
Steward Dion Villella, veterinary surgeon Dr Patricia
Ellis, and Kenrick. Dr
Ellis has provided a report on her inspection of the horse carcasses in the pit.
this inspection, at 12.06pm, Williams, Villella and Dr Ellis interviewed
Kenrick. During the course of this interview,
Kenrick stated:
(a) that he had
actually first seen the pit on 25 March 2007; and
(b) that he did
not contact the stewards when he first saw the pit because he was not aware of
the ramifications or the necessity
to report it;
20 July 2007 Williams and Chairman of Stewards Des Gleeson interviewed Miller
via telephone. Miller stated the following:
(a) that at
least six horses had died or been put down at the Property;
(b) some horses
were sent to the knackery while others were placed in the pit at the back of the
(c) one horse
was shot, 'a couple were needled' and three died;
(d) that he had
'needled' a couple of horses using 'euthanasia stuff';
(e) that he
found three horses had died, one from a twisted bowel and the others for unknown
(f) that due to
the drought conditions he disposed of quite a few other horses;
(g) that no-one
could see the horses carcasses in the pit unless they were 'right on top of
(h) that the
Property was marked 'private property' and that there were two signs at the
front of the property to that effect;
(i) that he
owned all the dead horses save for one, which was there on agistment for $35 per
week and was a retired horse.
27 July 2007, Williams conducted a recorded interview with Neil Lawrence at
Racing Victoria Offices. During the course of the
interview Lawrence
(a) that he had
come to speak to the Stewards to ensure that they 'knew the facts' about his
anonymous complaint in March;
(b) that in
March, he had reported to the Stewards that some horses were being mistreated at
the property;
(c) that he was
asked to contact the Stewards in March by Kenrick, because Kenrick did not want
to report the matter himself for fear
of a backlash from Miller.
5 October 2007, Williams, Deputy Chairman of Stewards Terry Bailey and
Stipendiary Steward Heidi Lester conducted an inquiry at
Racing Victoria Offices
into the matter of David Miller. Miller attended and was questioned. During
questioning he stated as follows:
(a) that the
horses in the pit were not race horses;
(b) that at
least two of the horses were retired race horses;
(c) that there
were six horses in the pit which had died as follows, and in the following
(i) a black
filly owned by Kenrick, from a suspected snake bite in a blackberry bush;
(ii) a chestnut
mare owned by Silvia Thurmer, which had been on agistment, from a suspected
snake bite;
(iii) a bay
gelding (a retired hunter), on agistment, from a colic twisted bowel;
(iv) a brown
yearling owned by Miller with turned out feet which could not be straightened,
and which Miller ultimately shot;
(v) a black
mare owned by Silvia Thurmer, on agistment, from a suspected snake bite;
(vi) a black
gelding owned by Miller that suffered from a lump under its jaw, and which was
subsequently put down my Miller using
an injection of penicillin to the
(d) that the
six horses had all died in the period November 2006 to April 2007;
(e) that he did
not want to incur the expense of paying the knackery to take the dead horses
away, nor the expense of paying a digger
to dig a hole and bury the
In addition and/or by way of emphasis, certain other facts have become
evident to and accepted by the Tribunal from the course of
the hearing of this
appeal including importantly evidence from three witnesses called on behalf of
the appellant, namely Mr Noel
Ferguson, a licensed trainer since 1974. Mr David
Cunningham, who has referred to in the agreed facts, and Mr Eric Musgrove, a
known and respected trainer of thoroughbred horses over many years.
These additional facts are as follows:
(a) That for some considerable time prior to and during the relevant
period, this area of Victoria (along with many others) had been
experiencing
severe drought conditions. Indeed, the video clip taken by Mr Eckley on 25
March confirms this. And confirms the notable
absence of grass/feed in the
(b) That it is extremely common in the farming industry generally to
dispose of dead animals - whether sheep, cattle, horses or otherwise
locating their carcasses in a strategically placed open pit - usually in an out
of the way section of a rear paddock where they
can't easily be seen or smelt,
where they remain in quite open conditions so the carcasses can dry out with a
view to ultimate incineration.
All three above witnesses confirmed this common
practice. All did it or had done it or had often seen it themselves. None were
offended by the practice. All found it quite normal.
Further, Mr Cunningham, had actually seen the subject pit at the
appellant's property on 25 March and he stated his view that it
was neither
putrid nor offensive to him. And Mr Musgrove also saw the subject pit in August
of 07 - (true by then the carcasses
were more fully decomposed), but he too was
not upset or offended by what he saw. I might add that my lay colleagues were
of considerable
assistance to me by reason of their experience on the land.
They too considered "the open pit at the back of the Property" scenario,
the normal and accepted way for farmers to deal with dead carcasses which
otherwise had nowhere to go - with a view to ultimately
when dried, being
incinerated with the help of some accelerant.
Finally, in relation to this point, it should be recorded that Mr Terry
Forrest QC for Racing Victoria Limited with his customary
common sense made the
following carefully worded concession, "It is a legitimate farming practice to
dispose of dead animals in an
(c) This point goes hand in hand with the previous point, knackeries
traditionally refuse to accept carcasses unless there is scope
for processing
them in some way for profit. Therefore, if the horse is dead or emaciated or
otherwise contaminated in some way its
carcass is unlikely to be taken by the
(d) The pit in the subject case - was not on the licensed part of the
appellant's property - was at the rear of the Property in an
out of the way
location - was not visible to the public - was not likely to be seen by casual
visitors to the Property unless deliberately
taken there - was not obvious by
sight or smell to anybody unless they were quite close to it;
(e) That in relation to the appellant's disposal of carcasses in the pit
in this case, there was no (or at least there is no evidence
of any) breach of
any law, or any Racing Industry Rule, any RSPCA edict, any industry practice or
any known guidelines from any source;
(f) That throughout the relevant period and up until the appellant
vacating the Property in July 07, there was quite a bitter dispute
between the owner of the Property (Paul Kendrick,) and the appellant himself.
They were former business partners and they
were in dispute over the business,
over money, over rent owing and over the appellant's continued occupancy of the
Clearly Kendrick, (and the Lawrences who subsequently took over
possession once the appellant vacated), wanted to get the appellant
possession and their attitude and behaviour towards him in this matter can
reasonably and fairly be described as "hostile)";
(g) As examples of this hostile attitude,
(i) After the 25 March visit when Kendrick took Cunningham and Eckley
with the video camera onto the Property, Kendrick persuaded
Lawrence to contact
the stewards and make an anonymous complaint regarding the state of the Property
and the horses thereon.
(ii) After the appellant vacated the Property, Kendrick almost
immediately informed Mr Terry Sharp, Deputy Chairman of Stewards,
and the carcasses and it was because of this contact that stewards (through Mr
James Williams and then others) became
involved, visited and inspected the
Property and ultimately brought the charge.
(h) In reality in regard to the trios visit to the Property on 25
(i) Kendrick really had little or no interest in the pit or carcasses.
He didn't even refer to it in a long list of complaints
he reduced into a letter
dated 29 March 07 which he had his solicitor send to the appellant in an attempt
to force the appellant
to vacate the Property.
(ii) Cunningham gave evidence that the pit and carcasses did not
concern him and that it was not putrid or offensive to him.
(iii) Eckley was filming the Property with the
video camera but barely bothered with the pit. The tribunal saw the
video of some two or three minutes and less than two seconds
was spent in
panning over the pit.
(iv) The pit and carcasses in issue were photographed twice. First by
the stewards on the first visit on 16 July 07 and those photographs
exhibited and secondly, on a recent date. Those photos were also
The witnesses called, namely Ferguson and Musgrave, both agreed that
the carcasses could have been organised and/or configured in
a better manner and
the scene might well have and perhaps should have been "tidied up", was their
expression, prior to Miller leaving
and handing the property over to another
To sum up the factual situation then
. In essence, we have this
situation. An occupier of a farm property, the relevant portion of the property
not being licensed.
Indeed, only the stable area on the property was licensed.
That occupier in fact being a licensed thoroughbred trainer having a
horses die or required to be put down in late 2006, early 2007 and having to
dispose of their carcasses - choosing to follow
the common and accepted farming
practice of putting them in an inconspicuous pit at the rear of the property not
seen by or coming
under public notice were it not for the actions of the
landlord with whom the appellant was in a real dispute and who wanted to force
the appellant out of the property. Therefore the landlord making the pit known
to a select few others and ultimately organising
for the stewards to visit and
inspect the pit which visit was the genesis for the charge that the appellant is
now facing. So much
for the facts.
To simply pose the question, "was Miller's conduct prejudicial to the
image of racing" may end up with the correct answer but in
fact such a test is
too simplistic and hides the true elements of the offence here under
consideration.
Those elements are outlined in some depth in the appeal of
before the New South Wales Racing Appeals Tribunal (Mr Barrie
Thorley presiding) on 4 September 2002.
They are also discussed in depth by Mr Martin Kosla in his article
"Disciplined for Bringing a Sport into Disrepute - A Framework
for Judicial
Review", 2001,
[2001] MelbULawRw 22
25 Melbourne University Law Review, 654
at 669. Also
Zucal RWWA Chairman of Stewards & Ors v. Harper
, (2005) Western
Australian Supreme Court of Appeal 76, and I refer especially to the judgment of
Steytler P., Paragraphs 49 and 50.
The elements of this offence appear to be:
(1) That the conduct has become or had the potential to inevitably
become publicly known. That is, enter the public domain whether
treatment or otherwise. (This would be opposed to the situation where the
impugned conduct was known only to the perpetrator
and perhaps a select few
others, - perhaps his family or a close circle of friends in circumstances where
in the normal courses of
events it would be unlikely to become more widely
(2) That there is a connection between the conduct and the
sports/industry of racing such that on an objective view, it has a tendency
not merely to damage the reputation of the perpetrator - but to damage the image
of racing itself. That is to cause reasonable
people to lose confidence in the
integrity and standards of the racing industry.
(3) That the conduct be blameworthy - again applying an objective test.
Often the "blameworthiness" will easily flow from the fact
that the conduct
constitutes an offence against the law but this need not necessarily be the case
for the conduct to be "blameworthy".
The cases I was referred to demonstrate the interaction between the
second and third elements above and the need for consideration
by the Tribunal
of both "blameworthiness" and "connection with and negative effect upon racing".
For example, in the cases of
, 31 January 1997 Queensland
27 August 2001, Victorian RAT,
, 27 September
2005 Western Australian RAT and
, 17 December 2002, Tasmanian RAT.
The offender in each case had committed acts that constituted breaches of the
criminal law (e.g.
assaults, criminal damage et cetera) and without argument
such actions were "blameworthy".
In the cases of
, 22 December 1997 Western Australian
, 2 March 2000 Victorian RAT,
, 4 September
2002, New South Wales RAT,
, 3 November 1999 Queensland RAT,
3 December 1998 Western Australian RAT and
18 April 2000 Queensland RAT, the actions were not
obvious breaches of the criminal law but were easily viewed as "blameworthy" in
the sense of that word as defined in the Macquarie Concise Dictionary, 3rd
edition namely, "Deserving of rebuke or censure". For
example, recording
illegitimate bets; using foul and inflammatory language; neglecting dogs'
welfare; smuggling a 15 year old into
a casino et cetera.
Hence, all of the above cases involved "blameworthy conduct" in one
form or another either because they were offences against the
criminal law or
because although not offences, the conduct was unarguably blameworthy.
But not all of those cases involved the necessary connection with
racing so as to lead the Tribunal to conclude that the image of
racing had been
brought into disrepute.
As explained in
, if the damaging to the cars' windscreens
had occurred elsewhere, that is away from the racecourse and its car park, the
would have been regarded as a private matter and not a breach of this
Such also was the outcome in
. ie. there
was no connection found with the racing industry. In those two instances the
charges were dismissed.
In the other cases the necessary connection with racing was found and
because there was (1) the necessary connection with racing
and (2) blameworthy
conduct and (3) public knowledge, convictions were recorded.
The above outline as I have just explained it, demonstrates the sort of
considerations that are relevant together along of course
with the first
element, the need for the matter to become public knowledge.
Turning then to the situation in the instant case of Mr Miller. The
course of argument between counsel revealed the stark contrast
in the respective
positions taken.
Mr Sheales for the appellant argued that the appellant had done nothing
reprehensible and should be subject to no censure.
Mr Forrest QC for Racing Victoria Limited submitted that Miller's
conduct in placing the carcasses in the pit and leaving them there
called a "log jam" situation for some months created and ugly and smelly
scenario which is the complete antithesis of
the "beautiful image" of superbly
presented thoroughbreds with their accompanying colourful silks seen in the
glossies throughout
the big racing carnivals. And he submitted in this sense,
the conduct must be seen as objectively blameworthy.
He went on to submit that Miller in perpetrating this conduct and being
a licensed person who is supposed to have the welfare and
respect for horses and
his sport at heart, caused the public to lower its respect for him and through
the flow on process referred
to by Steytler P in
Harper's case
damage to the image of racing generally. In other words (he submitted), this
conduct by Miller amounted in the eyes of reasonable
members of the public to an
insult to the image of racing.
On the facts of this case as I view them, I cannot accept Mr Forrest's
argument and indeed I go on to conclude that I am not persuaded
Briginshaw standard that the offence has been proven.
As already discussed, the conduct in question is not only "not
unlawful" but would certainly not even be characterised as blameworthy
by an ordinary farmer. It accords with the widespread farming practice. It
would be looked as "reasonable measures" in
the circumstances.
Does the fact, then, that it was done by a licensed person somehow
convert what was not otherwise blameworthy into something that
is blameworthy?
Mr Forrest argued that it does because of the standards expected of licensed
I do not consider that this is so in this case. There may be other
cases - other sets of facts - where the licensed person would
not get away with
behaviour that non-licensed persons may get away with.
But here the actions are entirely acceptable - a pit for stock
carcasses at a remote corner of the property not visible to the public.
is nothing inherently offensive about such a measure especially in a
farm/drought setting.
True, it is stark and confronting to see and smell close up and it can
be made to sound very unpleasant. But death and dead bodies
are stark and
confronting. For example, at a morgue. And such is farm life in a drought.
I do not consider that the appellant should have the characterisation
of what he did changed against him from "acceptable" to "blameworthy"
because he is a licensed person.
I do not consider that reasonable people in the public, people who had
no axe to grind with the appellant, would regard his actions
as damaging to his
own reputation (vis a vis, his attitude towards animals and horses,; nor do I
consider they would regard this
conduct on his part as reprehensible and
reflecting negatively on the racing industry.
Why (I ask rhetorically), should the use of a widely accepted farm
practice bring racing into disrepute?
tidied up the pit and/or the carcasses in the pit to some
degree. But this is
not going to alter the conclusion I have reached.
I have decided the appeal without having to consider in detail the
satisfaction or otherwise of the other element, public knowledge.
All I wish to
add on this issue is my concern that in all likelihood had it not been for the
intrusion and actions of Miller's hostile
landlord, the out of the way pit would
never have become known to the public nor in turn to the stewards.
By reason of this circumstance, it may also have been inappropriate to
attribute to Miller the fact of the matter coming into the
public domain. But
it is unnecessary in view of my earlier findings to express a concluded view on
this particular aspect of proofs.
In conclusion, I wish to thank in particular the input of the lay
members in this case. It has been invaluable in the light of
their personal
knowledge of the farming industry and practices.
The appeal will be allowed. The conviction will be set aside and there
will be an order made that the deposit be returned to the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (83.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter