URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
XGY [2025] VMHT 9 (6 May 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan mental health service
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Arna Delle-Vergini (Legal Member)
Helen McKenzie (Medical Member)
John Griffin (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Dan Decleva
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Interpreter
With online video
Family member
With online video from the health service
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal confirmed the
Community treatment order expiring on 15/05/2025.
This statement of
After the hearing your treating team requested a written
explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of reasons
be given to your treating team as well as to you and your legal representative.
While the statement of reasons was requested
by your treating team, because it
concerns you it is addressed to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you applied to have
your Treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not an order should remain in place.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the
Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental health and wellbeing
principles (‘principles’).
Based on the information provided in
your hearing and our understanding of your circumstances, the Tribunal
identified the following
principles were particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – a person living with a mental illness needs to be supported to
exercise their rights and for their rights,
dignity and autonomy to be promoted.
It is important to you that the treating team leave you alone as you believe
they have made
you suffer. You prefer the support of your general practitioner
(GP). The treating team describe you as a very independent person
independence is important to you.
restriction – you do not want to take the treatment recommended by the
treating team preferring instead to visit your
GP on a regular basis. You would
take medication if your GP suggested it, but your preference is not to take
medication as you experience
negative side effects including impact on your
memory and this interferes with your quality of life.
decision making – your views and preferences should be given priority when
you are support to make decisions about
your mental health treatment. You prefer
to be treated by your GP and your treating team are happy to work in a shared
care arrangement
with your GP to ensure you receive treatment.
carers – your daughter, FM, attended the hearing to support you. On
several occasions during the hearing FM said
the information being shared with
you was not being interpreted correctly and she was concerned that important
information was being
lost in translation.
Dignity of risk
– Your lawyer, Dan, told the Tribunal you have the right to take risks to
achieve personal growth, self-esteem
and overall quality of life. He said any
risks you take are reasonable as you unequivocally deny ever harming yourself or
– your diverse needs and experiences need to be actively considered under
the Act. Your cultural background, sex,
language, disability all need to be
factored into any decisions being made under the Act or services provided. More
recently, the
treating team ensures that interpreters are available every time
they conduct a review with you.
Gender safety
– it is important that your history of family violence and trauma is
acknowledged and considered when making assessments
of your mental health or in
the provision of mental health services to you. Even though there may be
disagreement about the causes
of some of your experiences, the treating team
told us they acknowledge and respect that you have experienced considerable
during your life.
The Tribunal must also give proper
consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory
treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under the
Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you do not
agree that you
experience schizophrenia.
Your lawyer, Dan, told the Tribunal you accept
you experience mental illness at times, but you do not accept your last
admission to
hospital was due to a relapse of your mental illness. Dan said you
do not accept that you are a risk to yourself or other people
and that you do
not accept if you were not receiving the treatment you are being prescribed
there would be a serious deterioration
in your mental health. Dan said you have
a good relationship with your GP and you are happy to continue to see him on a
regular basis.
He told the Tribunal your views and preferences should be given
priority when it comes to decisions made about your mental health
treatment and
that you deserved the right to take reasonable risks with your mental health
treatment in order to achieve the quality
of life you want to experience. Dan
criticised the credibility of the evidence before the Tribunal and asked that
the Tribunal not
accept historical and unproven allegations. He said you
unequivocally deny ever having hurt anybody, hearing voices or getting ideas
reference from the television. You told the Tribunal that the members of the
treating team are crazy, and you believe the AP wants
to force you to have
treatment. You said you have suffered enough.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Majority decision
Your lawyer,
Dan, initially told the Tribunal that you deny ever having a mental illness, and
you confirmed this view in response
to questions by the Tribunal. You attributed
your condition to grief and trauma rather than any mental illness such as
schizophrenia
and Dan said you accept you have experienced mental illness as a
result of these stressors at times. On this basis Dan stated that
you conceded
criterion (a) was met.
AP told the Tribunal that it is the opinion of the
treating team that you have an underlying mental illness which is in addition to
any trauma that you may have experienced. AP told the Tribunal that the team
believe you have a mental illness due to significant
disturbances in your
thoughts, mood, and perception, which are consistent with psychosis.
outlined that, when unwell, you develop complex paranoid delusions that you are
being persecuted by your healthcare clinicians,
as well as your ex-husband and
your neighbours which is a disturbance of thought. Clinicians, including your
case manager CM, has
also observed you responding to internal stimuli, such as
auditory hallucinations, and you had disclosed these experiences to staff
unwell, although in the hearing you denied this had occurred This is evidence of
disturbance of perception. The treating team
also observed that you become
emotionally volatile and labile when experiencing psychosis which they said was
a disturbance of mood.
According to the information before the Tribunal, as a
result of this disturbance in the past you have threatened and attempted to
assault healthcare workers.
AP told the Tribunal that you have had a
well-established mental illness for over thirty-five years with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia.
The report and medical notes outlined in some detail your history
of numerous compulsory hospital admissions and periods of community
supervision
since the mid 80’s
In late 2024, you were admitted to hospital.
Your treating team stated that you appeared to be agitated and paranoid in the
expressing a belief that your children were being kidnapped. During
your admission, you remained paranoid about clinicians believing
children were mentally ill and that they wanted to admit your children to the
hospital. You were restarted on aripiprazole
depot and discharged for case
management on a community treatment order. Unfortunately, according to the
report, you continued to
experience paranoid thoughts involving your treating
team and you were re-admitted to hospital in late 2024. AP advised the Tribunal
that your paranoia about the treating team was significant enough to warrant the
allocation of a new treating team to try to rebuild
a therapeutic relationship
The treating team noted that when you consistently receive
treatment you experience improvement in your symptoms of mental illness
in turn, allows you to function well at home and maintain a better quality of
independent living.
On the basis of significant historical information
and more recent observations of the treating team, including first-hand accounts
by clinician CM, a majority of the Tribunal, comprising the medical and
community members, were satisfied that you have experienced
a mental illness
characterised by disturbance of thought, mood and perception.
The legal member could not be satisfied that you had a
mental illness as defined by the Act.
The Act defines mental illness as a
medical condition characterised by a significant disturbance of thought, mood,
perception or memory.
There is no definition of ‘significant
disturbance’ in the Act but it can be interpreted to mean a disruption,
interference
or abnormality of important consequence. It needs to be more than
trivial or insignificant but need not be as high as serious. There
number of exclusionary criteria in the Act which, alone, or in combination, do
not amount to a mental illness. For instance,
relevantly, a person is not
considered to have a mental illness just because they have been or are
experiencing psychological distress
or have previously been diagnosed with or
treated for a mental illness.
When exercising functions under the Act,
including making decisions, the Tribunal must consider the mental health and
wellbeing principles
including, relevantly, the principles of dignity and
autonomy, least restriction, supported decision making, dignity of risk,
cultural and gender safety.
When the Tribunal makes decisions,
it also has to make those decisions based on relevant and logically probative
information (that
is, information that tends logically to prove the assertion
being made). The standard of proof that applies is the civil standard,
the Tribunal needs to be satisfied that the matters relied on are more likely to
have occurred than not. Because making
a compulsory treatment order can have
grave consequences for a person including the infringement of their civil
liberties, it is
important that matters in issue are proven to a reasonable
satisfaction. This is unlikely to happen if those matters are based on
proofs of evidence or by drawing indirect inferences.
For the reasons
outlined below, the legal member was of the view that the evidence being
presented to the Tribunal was incomplete
and/or was of a quality that did not
meet the required standard of proof.
The treating team provided a long
history of mental illness in their report. The history provided referred to
paranoia about your
husband and neighbour during the period you were separating
from your husband but did not detail the nature of that paranoia. You
consistently denied experiencing paranoia and believe that the assessment of you
at that time has been used against you in future
assessments. The legal member
noted your medical file recorded a history of family violence perpetrated by
your husband. Given the
historical nature of this evidence the Tribunal was not
able to obtain further evidence about the alleged paranoid thoughts.
There was a vague report that you spent a period of time homeless when
travelling in overseas around 20 years ago, but no context
was provided. You
were said to often harbour concerns about your children’s safety,
including worrying about their health or
that they might be kidnapped. You were
said to have accused your mother of being responsible for your son’s
suicide, but, again,
no context was provided.
You were said to have
obtained an intervention order against a neighbour which was of two years
duration. The Tribunal was not given
details about the paranoid thinking that
led to you obtaining this intervention order, but the legal member noted you
were the protected
person, and you were granted an order of longer than usual
duration by the judicial officer presiding over that hearing.
treating team referred to an alleged assault against your mother. However, your
mother denied this occurred and as a result that
material was redacted from your
files. Despite this, it appeared in the report and in the more recent discharge
summary which was
provided to the Tribunal. Given your mother had denied these
events had occurred and that this material had been redacted from your
this was not material the legal member was comfortable relying on.
denied ever reporting hearing voices or references from the television.
Historically as well as recently, you have called members
of the treating team
‘crazy’ for saying things like this about you. This was reported as
you experiencing significant
paranoia about the treating team. You have also
acted aggressively in response to compulsory treatment in the past. The legal
did not consider behaviour designed to challenge and resist compulsory
treatment as necessarily indicative of mental illness.
When you were
admitted to hospital in 2020 you were found in your home with the lights off and
blinds drawn. The information before
the Tribunal indicated you had not been
attending to your cleaning and did not have fresh food in the house. This
occurred during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The report stated you were tangential and
paranoid when admitted to hospital, but no examples were provided.
Many people
did not function as they ordinarily would have during the pandemic. Given the
context weight was not placed on this evidence.
In 2024 when you were
hospitalised you were deemed to be polite but guarded and irritable when
discussing mental health. You did not
agree you had a mental illness. You were
said to have ‘themes of religion and persecution’ but with no
examples provided.
You were concerned about bacteria in the air from other
co-consumers who had not showered which is not necessarily a significant
disturbance of thought. You were resistant to treatment, but you were not
responding to internal stimuli and had no suicidal or homicidal
ideation. You
were angry about being forced to have medications which you said impacted your
memory and quality of life. Some time
into your admission you became less
aggressive and more compliant which was attributed to your symptoms being
managed by antipsychotic
medications, though antipsychotic medications are
notoriously sedating, which may have explained the change in your behaviour.
is particularly so when your admission was triggered by a failure to have
your depot injection which resulted in you being brought
into hospital by
police, as opposed to being found to be actively psychotic. Other than being
concerned about bacteria and being
angry about being in hospital and forced to
have treatment, there did not appear to be any signs of a decline in your mental
at that time. Despite this, the treating team’s report says that
you experienced a ‘psychotic relapse’.
During the hearing CM
said you neglected yourself leading up to your last admission and had lost a lot
of weight. You told the Tribunal
that CM was crazy and that you had to go on a
diet to lose weight because your GP recommended it.
You have experienced
significant trauma during your life. According to the report, you migrated to
Australia from another country
as a refugee. Your brother, who was a teenager at
the time, was abducted by soldiers and you never saw him again. Within a few
of arriving in Australia, your marriage ended leaving you with the care of
three children on your own. You experienced family violence
within that
marriage. You suffered orthopaedic injuries in the 1980’s which led to you
being the recipient of a Disability
Support Pension. You lost a son to suicide.
Despite all this you remained independent, raised your children, and you were
in your community, attending English classes, local groups and church. An
exception to this was during the pandemic, as noted above.
English as a second language and require an interpreter. You adamantly deny
saying things included in the report and other
documents that the treating team
say are symptoms of mental illness. The legal member was concerned that
historically you have been
recorded as saying things where it is not clear that
you had the benefit of an interpreter. The legal member also noted FM raised
concerns about the interpreting services during the hearing. FM told the
Tribunal several times that what was being said was being
misinterpreted. Your
hearing had already been adjourned multiple times, and you did not want the
Tribunal to adjourn it again. It
was difficult to have confidence in the
standard of interpretation following this which meant it was hard to be
satisfied that you
were able to properly respond to what the treating team said
in the hearing. In one notable example you told the Tribunal you were
talking to yourself when CM attended your home to conduct an assessment, and
this was confirmed by your daughter. As it turns
out, CM was talking about a
different experience, but something was clearly lost in translation. On this
point, CM told the Tribunal
you were talking to yourself for hours when no-one
else was in the home. But it was impossible to know if you were directing what
you were saying to CM who, by his own account, was standing outside your home
for an extended period of time, or yourself, or if
you were just talking to
someone on the telephone. There was no mention of an interpreter present so what
you were, in fact, saying
was also unknown. You denied ever talking to yourself.
In the more recent discharge summary, it was evident the hospital had
listened your repeated requests for an interpreter, and one
was present
throughout all of the reviews. According to the discharge summary it was
anticipated that you would require interpreters
for your community clinic
reviews which would ‘significantly improve engagement with
clinicians’. It would appear from
this document that it had not been a
habit of community clinicians to review you with an interpreter
The Tribunal was invited to conclude that multiple previous
admissions to hospital was evidence that you experienced a mental illness.
details of those admissions are scarce but the fact that there were many can be
relied on. Having said that, past diagnosis of
mental health is not necessarily
evidence of a current mental illness.
Much of the evidence relied on to
establish you experience a mental illness in the hearing consisted of vague and
broad statements
thinking’ but with no examples provided. Likewise, much of the
that you had a mental illness consisted of accounts of your failing to adhere to
treatment. Again, this is not necessarily
indicative of a mental illness.
It is impossible in the time frame allotted to hearings to critically
examine all of the evidence provided. It is customary for the
Tribunal to rely
on the report prepared by the treating team and part of the medical file with
the knowledge that it is not a complete
account of your history and that some of
it may be in dispute. However, given the vague and broad descriptions of
symptoms above,
lack of context around your experiences of those symptoms, and
without clear evidence that your behaviours have been assessed through
cultural, gender and trauma lens and/or with the benefit of an interpreter, the
legal member was uncomfortable making a determination
that you had a mental
illness as defined by the Act.
This minority decision should not be read
as the legal member drawing a conclusion that you do not experience, or have
not, experienced
mental illness. Your lawyer, Dan, told the Tribunal you
identify with having some form of mental illness at times. The minority decision
is just the legal member’s assessment that the material before the
Tribunal at the time of the hearing was not of sufficient
probity to rely upon
to reach a conclusion about mental illness given the seriousness of the decision
the Tribunal is being asked
Because the legal member was not
satisfied that you have mental illness, she was not required to consider the
remaining criteria.
The remaining reasons are therefore a record of the majority
decision which reflects the views of the psychiatrist and community
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
The treating team’s report outlined a long
and significant history of hospitalisations as well as compulsory and voluntary
in the community. The treating team identified that when you are not
treated with antipsychotic medication your mental health deteriorates,
has been a pattern over time. At times this results in you being hospitalised
which you find very distressing. When you
are experiencing symptoms of your
mental illness you become angry, irritable, paranoid, suspicious and you isolate
yourself. You
stop engaging in your favourite activities and you spend
significant periods of time isolated in your home without fresh food and
in squalor. At one point whilst travelling overseas you were reported as being
children, even turning up at
their workplaces and homes uninvited because you are worried harm will come to
them. You have also threatened
to harm clinicians when unwell, kicking and
biting them.
For these reasons a majority of the Tribunal was satisfied
that because of your mental illness you need treatment now to prevent a
deterioration to your mental health, physical health and to prevent serious harm
to yourself and others.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
A majority of the Tribunal was satisfied you
would continue to receive immediate treatment if it confirmed your treatment
order. This
treatment includes but is not limited to psychiatric reviews,
monitoring of your mental state, case management and the administration
psychotropic medications.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
The treating team told the Tribunal you do not
accept that you experience a mental illness that requires the treatment they are
recommending.
For this reason, according to your treating team you resist taking
medication and you have ceased medications in the past as soon
as you are not
compelled to take them. This has led at times to periods of hospitalisation
which you find very distressing. Dan told
the Tribunal you do not agree that you
need the treatment recommended by the treating team because you are not a risk
to yourself
or anyone else.
The Tribunal heard that if you were making
your own decisions about your treatment you would like to see your GP on a
regular basis
because you have a good relationship with him, and you trust him.
You told the Tribunal you took medications when your GP recommended you do
so. You stopped taking this medication when your GP told
you this was okay. CM
told the Tribunal that within a month of stopping the medications you relapsed
and were hospitalised again.
He said that that each time you relapse it takes
longer and longer to for you to recover. You denied you relapsed at all.
Taking into account your long history of hospital admissions and the
pattern of ceasing medication and relapses, and given you do
not accept you need
treatment and would not accept treatment in the absence of a compulsory
treatment order, the majority of the
Tribunal was satisfied that there is no
less restrictive means than a treatment order that would enable you to receive
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal confirmed a treatment
As your hearing was about your application to have your order
revoked the Tribunal did not have to make a decision about how long
should last. The Act sets the duration of your order as the amount of time
remaining on your order at the time of the
hearing. This means the duration of
your order is unchanged and it will expire on 15 May 2025.
Your treatment
order cannot extend beyond 15 May 2025
Your treating doctor must revoke
your treatment order at any time if they believe the treatment criteria no
longer apply.
Date of determination: 07-04-2025
the legal member]
Arna Delle-Vergini
Presiding member, on behalf of
the Tribunal division.
Date: 06 May 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (573 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter