URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/952.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v O'Brien (Legal Practice) [2025] VCAT 952 (6 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
LEGAL PRACTICE LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. J22/2022 &
Legal Practice List – penalty decision – earlier findings of
multiple instances of misconduct at common law and professional
– respondent not fit and proper – own acknowledgement that no longer
fit either physically or mentally to
practise law – general deterrence of
high importance where misconduct related to guardianship, wills and estate
matters and
other actions leading to the respondent obtaining a share of an
elderly woman’s estate – offensive and outrageous communications
including threats about a judicial officer, to and about the Commissioner, to
others, and to the Supreme Court including breach of
an undertaking to the Court
to stop such communications – no
conclusion available but
some evidence of poor physical and mental health including disinhibition and
cognitive impairment –
prohibition on applying for a practising
certificate and other orders – recommendation to the Supreme Court to
remove respondent’s
name from the roll – request by applicant for
unusual payment order refused – consideration of the scope and limits of
the Tribunal’s discretion to make penalty orders, the limits on
compensation orders, and other issues with the requested order
Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
ss 302 to 309.
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
John O’Brien
Senior Member Wentworth
HEARING TYPE
Decision on the Papers (Penalty)
DATE OF ORDER AND REASONS
6 November 2025
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v O’Brien (Legal Practice)
[2025] VCAT 952
J22/2022 and J59/2023
Tribunal recommends to the Supreme Court of Victoria (‘the Court’)
that the respondent’s name be removed from
the roll of legal practitioners
kept by the Court.
respondent is reprimanded.
respondent is prohibited from applying for an Australian practising certificate
for a period of 10 years from the date of these
respondent is to pay a fine in the amount of $25,000.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceeding, to be
assessed by the Costs Court in default of agreement.
respondent is reprimanded.
respondent is prohibited from applying for an Australian practising certificate
for a period of five years from the date of these
orders, to be concurrent with
the order in J22/2022.
respondent is to pay a fine in the amount of $5,000.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceeding, to be
assessed by the Costs Court in default of agreement.
E Wentworth
Senior Member
THIS DECISION
is my decision about the appropriate penalty orders in two professional
disciplinary cases, J22/2022 and J59/2023, brought to
VCAT by the Victorian
Legal Services Commissioner, under the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Law’) and heard together.
both cases Mr John O’Brien is the respondent, and in both cases I have
previously made serious findings against him in relation
to his professional
findings and reasons in J22/2022 were published in
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner v
also contains a summary of my decision (reasons given orally) in J59/2023.
refer to that decision (‘the liability decision’) without repeating
what is set out there, except in summary form.
It provides the background to
these reasons and should be read in conjunction with them.
ease of reference, the charges found proved, as recorded in the formal findings
in that decision are appended.
Summary of the previous findings
J59/2023, on 23 January 2024, with his agreement, I found Mr O’Brien
guilty of four charges, finding that in each case he
had engaged in professional
misconduct.
case concerned his conduct between March 2019 and September 2020. In short, Mr
O’Brien breached court orders and sent
undoubtedly inappropriate,
discourteous, and offensive emails to the Supreme Court of Victoria and its
staff, in the course of estate
proceedings; and to the Commissioner in the
course of her subsequent investigation.
November 2019 onwards, the emails to the Supreme Court were also in breach of an
undertaking he had given the Court on 18 October
2019, that in future he
judicial officers with respect, and refrain from using improper language,
sarcasm or tone in his communications to the Court;
authority of judicial officers to give directions about the conduct of legal
proceedings in matters that they are hearing,
and to follow such
directions.
O’Brien admitted the allegations, and I made findings that he had engaged
in four instances of conduct constituting professional
misconduct, under either
or both of s 297 and 298 of the Uniform Law.
J22/2022, on 9 August 2024, I found Mr O’Brien guilty of 22
relating to his conduct
between 2017 and 2021.
found his conduct to be misconduct at common law in relation to six of those
charges; professional misconduct
relation to eight charges; and unsatisfactory professional conduct in relation
to eight charges.
numerous, concerning respects he engaged in conduct justifying a finding that he
was not a fit and proper person to engage in legal
December 2021, Mr O’Brien acknowledged to the Commissioner that he should
not continue in practice and undertook to retire.
I said in the liability decision, he was right to do so, and it is unfortunate
that he did not do so sooner.
conduct the subject of J22/2022 included but was not limited to:
conduct between
2017 and 2019
in relation to:
elderly woman, M, while she was in hospital in 2017, including a highly
problematic will and subsequent codicil he drafted without
instructions;
obtained her
signature on both in circumstances where testamentary capacity was in doubt; and
witnessed despite receiving a benefit
under the documents; and
family members after she died and in relation to her estate. The conduct
included retaliatory threats made to a family member
who complained about his
conduct to the Commissioner; charging the estate improperly; and unilaterally
drafting and proposing a deed
of family arrangement (‘Deed’) under
which he received 15% of M’s estate;
vitriolic, and in some cases disgraceful email communications to the
Commissioner in the course of the investigation of
his conduct in relation to M,
and to others, which included threats to ‘destroy’ a judicial
officer, and a threat directed
against the members of the Board of Examiners;
false statements
to VCAT in the guardianship application he made in relation to M; to a bank in
relation to a deceased account (about
whether M made a will); and to the
Commissioner in the course of her investigation.
[496] of the liability decision I observed:
Notably, no-one who has thwarted Mr O’Brien, in his judgment, escapes the
vitriol: judges, registrars, a VCAT member, the Commissioner,
her staff, STL
[State Trustees Limited], the person who complained about him to the
Commissioner, and for no obvious reason, the
Board of Examiners.
O’Brien admitted the charges in relation to his email and other
communications and has expressed shame and remorse about
his correspondence
was to his credit. Unfortunately, as referred to later, he has not been able to
restrain himself from sending further offensive
emails to the Commissioner in
the period between the liability decision and this decision on penalty, one of
which contained an outrageous
accusation against the Commissioner and the
Supreme Court.
contrast, at all times, including at the hearing before me, Mr O’Brien has
remained defiant about his conduct in relation
M and her estate, which he sought
to justify and defend.
insisted that:
testamentary capacity, despite compelling evidence to the contrary that ought to
have put him on notice of the issue and paused
his plan for her to sign the will
(that he should not have drafted in the first
he was in the
best position to judge her testamentary capacity, despite neuropsychological
assessment of M to the contrary, and the
evidence of audio recordings he made of
his hospital visits with M. (He believed that they demonstrated M’s
capacity and confirmed
his judgment – they did the opposite);
in drafting the
will and codicil without instructions he was acting in M’s best interests
(and that he pressured her to sign
the will and codicil because he knew it was
in her interests); and
in unilaterally
drafting the Deed and pressuring family members to sign it, despite it
conferring on him a share of M’s estate
just short of $300,000, he was
carrying out her (undocumented) wishes, as her friend.
concluded, at [527]-[528] of the liability decision that:
Whether or not Mr O’Brien believed he was compelled to the action he took
by an altruistic desire to carry out M’s wishes,
his views of what was
appropriate conduct and his actions, were inconsistent with being a fit and
proper person to engage in legal
And his altruism would have been more convincing, if his determined actions had
not resulted in him receiving a significant share
of M’s estate.
Progress to a penalty hearing
those findings, the Commissioner filed extensive written submissions.
were then some delays in progressing the matter.
O’Brien, who suffers from a range of health conditions, had several
hospital stays after the Commissioner provided her submissions.
One of those
stays required adjournment of a three day hearing that had been listed in April
this year, because he was an inpatient
awaiting transfer to a specialist mental
health unit.
Commissioner opposed the requested adjournment.
my view, based on letters received from his treating and other physicians, the
circumstances and his condition prevented him from
participating in a hearing.
Further, in light of the orders sought by the Commissioner, it was important
that Mr O’Brien be
given a fair opportunity to respond.
other orders, the Commissioner was asking for a recommendation to the Supreme
Court that Mr O’Brien’s name be removed
from the roll of
practitioners – also referred to as being ‘struck off’.
Commissioner was also asking for an unprecedented order in disciplinary
proceedings under the Uniform Law, that Mr O’Brien
pay almost $300,000 to
third parties who were neither clients of Mr O’Brien, nor complainants,
and did not represent M’s
was not a request that monies be paid to the legal representative for the estate
– the administrator did not wish to make
such a claim and declined to be
involved in the proceedings.
Commissioner asked instead that the Tribunal order Mr O’Brien to pay the
monies to two of M’s family members, Margaret
two nieces who each
received a 10% share of M’s estate under the Deed, drafted by Mr
O’Brien and ultimately signed by
all parties to it.
for the Deed, or some other agreed solution, the estate would have been
distributed under intestacy principles, to M’s two
nieces and two nephews,
with each receiving 25%. After all parties signed the Deed, the administrator
(one of M’s nephews)
distributed the estate in accordance with the terms
of the Deed.
acknowledged by the Commissioner, the orders sought did not meet the
requirements of compensation orders under the Uniform
In particular, the two
nieces were not complainants; nor were they clients of Mr O’Brien; in any
event a request for compensation
was not made at the required
and the amount sought was
beyond the cap of $25,000.
Commissioner’s submission was that the order could be made under the
discretion in s 302(1) for the Tribunal to ‘make
any orders that it thinks
fit...’; and that under that ‘broad discretion’ the order
could be made as ‘a form
of restitution’. I come back to the
application for the order later.
O’Brien was originally required to file and serve written submissions and
confirm the number of witnesses he wished to call
by 21 January
He did not do so.
date was extended twice.
Mr O’Brien did not, in the end, file formal submissions addressing all of
the matters referred to in the Commissioner’s
extensive submissions, he
has sent emails putting his position in several respects, which I set out later.
was satisfied he understood the
and understood what
the Commissioner was asking for as penalty orders.
both parties agreed that I make this decision on the papers, without a
turn next to the orders that the Tribunal may make.
ORDERS THAT MAY BE MADE BY WAY OF DETERMINATIONS
302(1) and (2) set out the orders the Tribunal may
They provide:
Determination by designated
tribunal—disciplinary matters
(1) If, after it has completed a hearing under this Part into the conduct of a
respondent lawyer, the designated tribunal finds
that the lawyer is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct, the designated
tribunal may make any
orders that it thinks fit, including any of the orders
that a local regulatory authority can make under section 299 in relation to
lawyer and any one or more of the following—
(a) an order that the lawyer do or refrain from
doing something in connection with the practice of law;
(b) an order that the lawyer cease to accept instructions as a public notary in
relation to notarial services;
(c) an order that the lawyer's practice be managed for a specified period in a
specified way or subject to specified conditions;
(d) an order that the lawyer's practice be subject to periodic inspection by a
specified person for a specified period;
(e) an order that the lawyer seek advice in relation to the management of the
lawyer's practice from a specified person;
(f) an order recommending that the name of the lawyer be removed from a roll
kept by a Supreme Court, a register of lawyers kept
under jurisdictional
legislation or the Australian Legal Profession Register;
(g) an order directing that a specified condition be
imposed on the Australian practising certificate or Australian registration
certificate
of the lawyer;
(h) an order directing that the lawyer's Australian practising certificate or
Australian registration certificate be suspended for
a specified period or
(i) an order directing that an Australian practising certificate or Australian
registration certificate not be granted to the lawyer
before the end of a
specified period;
(j) an order that the lawyer not apply for an Australian practising certificate
or Australian registration certificate before the
end of a specified period;
(k) a compensation order against the lawyer in accordance with Part 5.5;
(l) an order that the lawyer pay a fine of a specified amount not exceeding
$100 000 if the lawyer is found guilty of professional
misconduct.
(2) Subject to section 303, the designated tribunal may make ancillary or
other orders, including—
(a) an order for payment by the lawyer of expenses associated with orders under
this section, as assessed or reviewed in or in accordance
with the order or as
agreed; and
(b) an interlocutory or interim order, including an order of the kind referred
to in subsection (1).
Compensation orders under Part 5.5
302(1)(k) refers to compensation orders under Part 5.5.
provisions relating to compensation orders, ss 306-311, provide context to the
later discussion of the third-party payment orders
sought by the Commissioner.
They set out the framework for compensation orders under Part 5.5, and the
limits on who can apply, when
they must apply, and how much can be
Part 5.5—Compensation Orders
of compensation orders
(1) For the purposes of section 290, the designated local regulatory authority
may make a compensation order against a respondent
lawyer or law practice in
accordance with this Part.
(2) For the purposes of section 302, the designated
tribunal may make a compensation order against a respondent lawyer in accordance
with this Part.
307 Request by complainant for compensation
(1) A complainant may request—
(a) the designated local regulatory authority; or
(b) the designated tribunal in proceedings under Division 3 of Part 5.4—
to make a compensation order.
(2) A compensation order may be requested in respect of loss suffered by—
(a) the complainant; or
(b) another person who is a client of the respondent—
(or both) because of the conduct the subject of the complaint. The complainant,
or other person, suffering the loss is referred to
in this Part as an
aggrieved person
(3) A complainant who makes such a request must describe the loss suffered by
the aggrieved person and the relevant circumstances.
(4) A request may be made in the complaint or to the designated local regulatory
authority at any time after the complaint is made
and before it is disposed
(5) However, a request may not be made after
proceedings have been initiated in the designated tribunal with respect to the
unless the designated tribunal grants the complainant leave to make
the request.
308 Nature of compensation orders
(1) A compensation order is an order to compensate the aggrieved person for loss
suffered because of conduct that is the subject
of a complaint and consists of
one or more of the orders referred to in subsections (2), (3) and (4).
(2) A compensation order may include an order that the respondent lawyer or law
practice pay to the aggrieved person, by way of monetary
compensation for the
loss, a specified amount not exceeding—
(a) where the compensation order is made by the designated local regulatory
authority—$25 000; or
(b) where the compensation order is made by the designated
tribunal—$25 000 or a greater amount agreed to with the consent
both the complainant and the respondent lawyer or law practice.
(3) A compensation order may include an order that the respondent lawyer or law
practice cannot recover or must repay the whole or
a specified part of the
amount charged to the aggrieved person by the lawyer or law practice in respect
of specified legal services.
An order under this subsection is effective—
(a) to prevent recovery of an amount even if proceedings to recover the amount
(or any part of it) have been commenced by or on behalf
of the lawyer or law
practice; and
(b) to require repayment of an amount even if a court has ordered payment of the
amount (or an amount of which it is part) in proceedings
brought by or on
behalf of the lawyer or law practice.
(4) A compensation order may include an order discharging a lien possessed by
the lawyer or law practice in respect of a specified
document or class of
(5) A compensation order may specify the person to whom monetary compensation is
payable, whether to the aggrieved person or to another
person on behalf of the
aggrieved person.
Section 311 provides that compensation awarded under this Part does not
affect any other remedy available for the loss.
309 Prerequisites for making of compensation
(1) Unless the complainant and the respondent lawyer or law practice concerned
agree, a compensation order is not to be made unless
the designated local
regulatory authority or designated tribunal (as the case requires) is satisfied
(a) the aggrieved person has suffered loss because of the conduct concerned;
(b) it is in the interests of justice that the order be made.
(2) A compensation order is not to be made in respect of any loss for which the
aggrieved person has received or is entitled to receive—
(a) compensation under an order that has been made by a court; or
(b) compensation paid or payable from a fidelity fund of any jurisdiction, where
a relevant claim for payment from that fund has
been made or determined.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply where a fidelity authority is seeking a
compensation order under its subrogation to the rights
and remedies of a
claimant (see section 246).
310 Enforcement of compensation orders
A copy of a compensation order made by the designated local regulatory authority
may be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction
and the order (so far as it
relates to any amount payable under the order) may be enforced as if it were an
order of the court.
311 Other remedies not affected
The recovery of compensation awarded under this Part does not affect any other
remedy available to an aggrieved person, but any compensation
so awarded must be
taken into account, and appropriate adjustments made, in any other proceedings
by or on behalf of the aggrieved
person in respect of the same loss.
Orders sought by the VLSC
VLSC seeks the following orders, as set out in the submissions, at [8]:
In matters J59/2023 and J22/2022:
(a) the Tribunal recommends to the Supreme Court that the respondent’s
name be removed from the roll of legal practitioners;
(b) the respondent is reprimanded;
(c) the respondent is prohibited from applying for an Australian practising
certificate for a total period of 10 years from the date
of these Orders; and
(d) the respondent pay the applicant’s costs.
In matter J59/2023:
(a) the respondent be fined $10,000
In matter J22/2022:
(b) regarding charges 1, 3, 6, 7(a), 7(c), 13 and 15 the respondent be fined
(c) regarding charges 20 and 28, the respondent be fined $10,000;
(d) regarding charges 21, 23, and 25, the respondent be fined $10,000;
(e) regarding charges 29 and 31, the respondent be fined $8,000
(f) regarding charge 35, the respondent be fined $8,000;
(g) within 60 days of the date of these orders, the respondent pay [name], in
her capacity as the enduring power of attorney of [Dorothy]
into a bank account
nominated by [name of attorney], $149,779.89, plus interest at the Victorian
cash rate, calculated from 19 November
2019 inclusive to the date these orders
are made, for the benefit of [Dorothy]; and
(h) within 60 days of the date of these orders, the Respondent is to pay
[Margaret] into a bank account nominated by [her], $149,779.89,
plus interest at
the Victorian cash rate, calculated from 19 November 2019 inclusive to the date
these orders are made.
Commissioner has also sent two ‘without prejudice’ schedules of
J22/2022, the total costs
are $78,558.63,
including Counsel’s fees of $23,850.00.
J59/2023, although the Commissioner’s email gave the total as
that is the sub-total
for Counsel’s fees. The total, on my calculation is $7,150.36.
Mr O’Brien’s responses
O’Brien has not made any formal submissions as to the orders that might be
appropriate, save for the following.
very recent emails from Mr O’Brien dated 24 September 2025 address two
issues – that of costs, and the request for
a payment order to the third
parties, and provide a general summary of Mr O’Brien’s response.
Although they were sent
after the last deadline, given the health issues he
describes, it is appropriate to include them.
In relation to
Please have these costs taxed. They far exceed the bounds of what is fair and
reasonable and [the Commissioner’s] careless
and extravagant use of
Counsel at a rate per hour more than many charge per day is disgraceful. The
Commissioner obviously inhabits
and embraces a legal world so vastly dissimilar
to the one in which I and my contemporaries lived as to be a source of perverse
wonderment.
Other matters:
I have been an inpatient at [clinic name] for the past four weeks and was
discharged today. The reason for my confinement in that
facility and other
medical facilities during the last nine months was my physical and mental health
conditions which prevented my
filing my own submissions or instructing another
to do so on my behalf. Notwithstanding the violence of my prosecution by the
Services Commissioner and the findings of the Tribunal, I took an oath on
1 May 1973 to demean myself honourably at all times as
a legal practitioner and
that oath was honoured by me without exception during the forty-eight years that
followed. No person knew
[M] better than me and she trusted me to carry out her
instructions which I did to the best of my ability. I have been publicly
and my health seriously compromised. My public disgrace has caused my
estrangement from my family, my school friends of seventy years,
my professional
colleagues and my social media connections. I apologise to all persons who I may
have offended.
I also point out that the persons seeking
compensation were warned to obtain legal advice before signing the settlement
but apparently chose not to do so. I have nothing further to add.
an earlier email after the liability hearing, on 13 March 2024, he wrote that he
had no means to pay any fines imposed by the Tribunal
nor would he be able to
pay the legal costs the Commissioner had incurred. He said he is dependent on
the aged pension and has no
property, real or personal.
record here two other emails sent in September 2024 after the liability decision
was published, that are relied on by the Commissioner
for a submission discussed
later, with which I agree, that Mr O’Brien continues to lack insight, and
to show lack of restraint
in his communications.
an email dated 4 September 2024, in the context of advising the Commissioner
that he had been informed that a former client had
died by suicide, Mr
O’Brien appeared to blame the Commissioner and the Supreme Court for his
client’s death:
You and the Supreme Court’s ignorance of the impact of your authoritarian
conduct may not be of interest to either of you but
it is of considerable
interest to me and I intend to make it of public interest in the fullness of
an email dated 26 September 2024 (to VCAT), after the liability decision was
published, he referred to ‘malicious prosecution’
Commissioner, ‘publicly sullying’ his longstanding reputation for
honesty and integrity, and ‘financially
ruining’ him. The email
...accordingly, I will take any action whatsoever within my power to ensure she
does not escape being publicly damaged and held accountable
for the farce she
initiated at public expense. ...
submitted for the Commissioner, this email, and an earlier one dated 4 September
2024, are relevant to the question of insight,
which I discuss later.
the extent it needs to be repeated here, the contents and conclusions of the
liability decision validate the Commissioner’s
decision (and statutory
responsibility) to act on the complaint received in 2017 from one of M’s
nephews about Mr O’Brien’s
conduct in respect of M’s will;
continue the investigation after the nephew withdrew the complaint (following a
threat of retaliation
from Mr O’Brien); and bring the matters before the
turn next to the legal framework around determinations.
DETERMINATIONS
General principles
general principles are well established. The objective of any determination is
primarily the protection of the public and the
maintenance of professional
standards in the eyes of the public (protection of the reputation of the
profession). The focus of the
Tribunal will be on protection, not
punishment.
observed by Warren CJ in
Legal Services Board v
the protective
power extends:
...beyond protection of the public to include the legal profession as a group,
the courts, the justice system and community confidence
in the system.
protection is the focus, any sanctions will necessarily have a punitive effect.
As observed by Maxwell P in
Quinn v Law Institute of
objectives of specific and general deterrence – which serve the protection
of the public – depend upon the sanctions
having punitive effect.
there is a choice of sanctions, however, the Tribunal will choose that sanction
which maximises the protection of the
that protective focus in mind, the Tribunal considers a range of factors in
determining penalty including:
whether the
practitioner pleaded guilty or other evidence of contrition or remorse;
whether there is
a need for specific deterrence (deterring the particular practitioner from
re-offending) or general deterrence (deterring
other practitioners from engaging
in similar conduct);
protection of the public may require in the particular case;
whether there
have been other disciplinary findings before or since the conduct in
evidence of
evidence of
rehabilitation;
any delay from
the time the investigation started to the end of the Tribunal hearing; and
other mitigating
factors such as medical or psychological evidence, family circumstances or
financial issues.
of the above factors will overlap. Specific deterrence, for example, requires
consideration of the likelihood of the practitioner
re-offending, whether
because of:
insight into what occurred;
remorse about what occurred;
a history of
offending conduct as opposed to a one-off explicable departure from otherwise
high standards of conduct; or
other matters
indicating either that a particular sanction is required to deter the
practitioner from re-offending or, conversely,
that rehabilitation has taken
deterrence requires consideration of whether there is a need to signal to other
members of the profession that adverse consequences
will follow such conduct,
and thereby deter them from the same conduct, in the interests of maintaining
professional standards and
public confidence in the profession.
imposed in other cases may be a useful guide to proportionality and parity is
important, but each case necessarily involves
a different combination of
factors. Each case is
the Court of
Appeal considered the common elements in criminal sentencing and the
determination of penalty in disciplinary proceedings.
Those common elements
the importance
of denunciation, specific deterrence and community protection;
Tribunal in formulating an appropriate penalty takes into account all relevant
matters, similar to the synthesis undertaking
by a sentencing judge; and
consideration of
mitigating factors such as mental or psychological impairment
reprimand may be appropriate even where more serious sanctions are imposed. A
reprimand is a professional rebuke and signals that
the conduct is
Suspension,
cancellation or a recommendation that a practitioner be removed from the roll
come into consideration when there are concerns
a person may not be a fit and
proper person to be a legal practitioner.
they are judged to be safe to return to practice after a period out of the
profession to address specific or general deterrence,
then suspension will
usually be appropriate.
their unfitness is judged to be current, then cancellation is likely to be
appropriate (or if they no longer hold a practising
certificate then prohibition
from applying for one for a specified period). If they later wish to return to
practice, they have
the obligation of persuading the regulator that they are no
longer unfit.
they are judged to be likely to remain unfit for an indefinite period, then a
recommendation that they be removed from the roll
is usually appropriate. That
order is sought by the Commissioner in this case.
Removing the name of a practitioner from the roll
s 302(1)(f) of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal may make an order recommending that
the name of the respondent lawyer be removed
from the roll kept by the Supreme
Court of Victoria.
the Tribunal makes that recommendation, the Commissioner then applies to the
Supreme Court.
recommendation of the Tribunal does not, of course, bind the Court. The Court
will determine for itself whether it is necessary
that the lawyer’s name
should be removed from the roll, making its own independent assessment.
recommendation by the Tribunal is likely to be appropriate, however, if the
Tribunal considers that there is a reasonable prospect
that the Court will make
the order and/or the circumstances are such that a removal order appears to be
called for and the question
ought to be referred to the Court for
consideration.
from the roll occurs when the Supreme Court determines that a practitioner is
and indefinitely
unfit to remain on the roll.
High Court considered the meaning of ‘fit and proper’ in the
decision of
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No
The expression “fit and proper person” is of course familiar enough
as traditional words when used with reference to
offices and perhaps vocations.
But their very purpose is to give the widest scope for judgment and indeed for
rejection. “Fit”
(or “idoneus”) with respect to an
office is said to involve three things, honesty knowledge and ability:
to execute it truly, without malice affection or partiality;
knowledge to know what he ought duly to do; and ability as well in estate
body, that he may intend and execute his office, when need is, diligently, and
not for impotency or poverty neglect it”.
When the question was whether a
man was a fit and proper person to hold a licence for the sale of liquor it was
considered that it
ought not to be confined to an inquiry into his character and
that it would be unwise to attempt any definition of the matters which
legitimately be inquired into; each case must depend upon its own circumstances.
Sobey v Commercial and Private Agents
The issue whether an appellant has shown himself to be "a fit and proper person"
... is not capable of being stated with any degree
of precision. But for the
purposes of the case under appeal, I think all I need to say is that, in my
opinion, what is meant by that
expression is that an applicant must show not
only that he is possessed of a requisite knowledge of the duties and
responsibilities
devolving upon him as the holder of the particular licence
under the Act, but also that he is possessed of sufficient moral integrity
rectitude of character as to permit him to be safely accredited to the public,
without further inquiry, as a person to be entrusted
with the sort of work which
the licence entails.
Legal Services Board v
Warren CJ explained
the rationale for a strike off order:
On occasion, the court’s inherent power to discipline members of the legal
profession has been mistakenly characterised as
simply “protective of the
public”, an approach which may gain undeserved strength from the comments
of McHugh J in
Rich v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
While the authorities indicate that the disciplinary power in question is
entirely protective, that protection extends beyond protection
of the public to
include the legal profession as a group, the courts, the justice system and
community confidence in that system.
It is for this reason that striking off
may follow where a practitioner’s conduct shows “a defect of
character incompatible
with membership of a self-respecting profession” or
where a conviction carries:
such a stigma that judges and members of the
profession may be expected to find it too much for their self-respect to share
person convicted the kind and degree of association which membership of
the Bar entails.
However, this protective rationale follows, rather than anticipates, the
court’s inquiry. A practitioner is deemed unfit to
remain on the roll;
therefore, they pose a direct risk to the public, to the legal fraternity, to
the courts, to the system of professional
cooperation and trust on which they
both depend, and to the administration of justice, not vice versa. The
fundamental issue is
whether the practitioner in question is fit and proper, or
Legal Services Commissioner v
Macauley J ordered
the removal of Mr Andrew Nguyen’s name from the roll, followings findings
made at VCAT including that Mr
Nguyen had, in the course of disciplinary
proceedings against him, made false statements to Judge Lacava, sitting as a
Vice-President
in the Legal Practice List, and to the
Commissioner.
, Macauley J
As is apparent from the statements extracted by Bell J, one of the critical
facets of being a fit and proper person is the characteristic
of honesty.
will depend on the facts of the case. As McMillan J observed in
The Court does not demand perfection of practitioners. Nor is it particularly
conduct which demonstrates
that a practitioner is not a ‘fit and proper person’ and conduct
which does not—the
enquiry is a holistic one which depends on undertaking
often a difficult exercise of weighing competence, knowledge, and integrity,
amongst other factors. A lack of competence and knowledge may be paired with a
great deal of honesty, and vice versa. The disciplinary
consequences will
naturally differ. As always, the result turns on the facts of the particular
Global penalties
the Tribunal should impose separate penalties for separate charges. However,
where the charged behaviour is constituted
by a course of conduct where the
facts of the case are so inextricably woven as to make it difficult to meet a
clear standard of
prescription, a global penalty may be appropriate.
my view global penalties are appropriate in each case with separate penalties in
J22/2022 and J59/2023, save that the conduct in
both is relevant when
considering whether a recommendation to the Supreme Court ought to be made.
represents a course of conduct between March 2019 and September 2020 relating to
particular estate matters that were in the
Supreme Court. The allegations
relate to communications with the Court and Court
failing to comply with
court orders; breach of an undertaking given to the Court (on 12 occasions); and
subsequent communications
with the Commissioner.
conduct in J59/2023, including the communications with the Commissioner,
exhibits some of the same features as some of the conduct
in J22/2022.
contrast, however, J22/2022 relates to an extended course of conduct from 2017
to 2021 featuring inextricably interwoven facts,
and interrelated allegations,
which all essentially arise from Mr O’Brien’s improper involvement
in and interference
with the affairs of M and her estate.
Applying the principles: the relevant considerations in
these cases
written submissions from the Commissioner set out in extended detail the conduct
covered by individual charges in both cases,
and the observations I made in the
liability decision about that conduct.
refer to without repeating the content of the liability decision.
General deterrence
submitted by the Commissioner, general deterrence has high importance here,
because of the nature, gravity and range of Mr O’Brien’s
particularly the multiple instances of conduct warranting findings of misconduct
at common law.
deterrence requires that the orders made send a sufficiently clear message to
other practitioners that the most serious consequences
will follow from such
conduct; and reassure the public that such conduct is not tolerated.
disgraceful conduct in relation to M and her estate elevates the importance of
protecting the public from similar conduct.
hold a position of trust in relation to the legal needs of those who are
vulnerable.
guardianship and administration matters they play an important role in a system
which has, as one of its purposes, protecting those
at risk of financial
exploitation or abuse.
system requires those around the person at risk – legal practitioners,
health practitioners, relatives and others, to act
with integrity, focus on the
best interests of the person, and disregard their own.
such as Mr O’Brien, who do not recognise their own conflicts of interest,
and do not see that their judgment is defective,
endanger that protective
put to one side his vicious and unwarranted attacks, in his correspondence and
published writings, on the VCAT member who conducted
the guardianship hearing,
relating to M. They show a different kind of defective judgment.
importance of honesty, integrity and knowledge of what is right to do is no less
in estate matters. The reputation of the profession
suffers when others see
lawyers behave as Mr O’Brien did in relation to the will and the codicil,
and subsequently in relation
to the estate.
repeat my observation in the liability decision that concerned nursing staff at
Box Hill Hospital were right to call security when
Mr O’Brien was
pressuring M to sign the codicil. On Mr O’Brien’s audio recording
of the visit, staff can be heard
clearly expressly escalating concern and
finally having to call security.
nephew, Robert, who complained to the Commissioner after M died about issues
around the will, rightly identified that there were
questions about the will
that needed to be investigated.
daughter and son-in-law were right to be concerned about Mr
O’Brien’s conduct in drafting a Deed in which
he received a 15%
share, and to try to protect Dorothy from signing
other broad category of misconduct in this case, that of Mr
O’Brien’s written communication in a range of contexts,
also raises
the need for general deterrence.
emails to the Supreme Court, the subject of J59/2023 were, as submitted by the
Commissioner, ‘wildly inappropriate’.
They were, as found,
discourteous, gratuitous and in some cases offensive. Those descriptions were
also a feature of the various
communications the subject of multiple charges in
aspect of those communications, relevant to general deterrence and potentially
to professional education, is worth raising.
dreadful emails Mr O’Brien wrote to the Court, the Commissioner, her
staff, members of M’s family, and the unlucky
recipients at State Trustees
Limited; and the consequences for Mr O’Brien in this case, illustrate the
importance of legal
practitioners being alert to the possibility that they have
lost the good judgment and professional restraint needed to continue
practice, and to act in time to step back and out.
Tribunal has seen several cases in recent years where practitioners, towards the
end of a long and uneventful career (in disciplinary
terms), have destroyed
their hard-earned reputation by late in career misconduct.
members and colleagues (and health practitioners) can sometimes play a careful
and respectful role in, essentially, protecting
a practitioner who should no
longer be in practice from themselves.
Mr O’Brien’s case, a family member, who is to be commended,
convinced Mr O’Brien that he should not keep practising
and that he was no
longer fit to do so.
Specific deterrence
Insight and remorse
O’Brien recognised, in hindsight, how inappropriate his correspondence
was, and said he was ashamed of that aspect of his
conduct. The consequence of
not being able to recognise it earlier, however, is that a practitioner with no
other disciplinary history
in a long career in the law has, at the end of that
career, brought professional disgrace to himself.
agree with the submissions of the Commissioner that Mr O’Brien’s
insight and restraint remain imperfect.
emails in September 2024 have echoes of earlier arrogant and offensive
correspondence, including baseless allegations and gratuitous
O’Brien’s inclusion of the Supreme Court as a target of blame, in
the email referring to the death of a former client,
somewhat reduces the credit
for his admissions in J59/2023 of the conduct directed at the Court, and his
stated remorse for that
threat to ‘publicly damage’ the Commissioner for a ‘malicious
prosecution’, shared a thread with earlier
‘destroy’ the VCAT member who in 2017 had rightly questioned his
role in M signing an unusual will Mr O’Brien
drafted between the
guardianship application he made and the hearing.
contrast to his intermittent insight into inappropriate communications, Mr
O’Brien unfortunately demonstrates no insight
into what was wrong with his
conduct in relation to M and her estate, and no remorse. The liability decision
provides several examples
of this from the hearing, set out in the
Commissioner’s
submissions.
include that Mr O’Brien remained adamant that M had testamentary capacity
and that he was the best judge of that. I found
If despite the evidence warranting caution and the absence of any instructions,
Mr O’Brien genuinely believed that he had a
sufficient basis to proceed
straight to preparing a will, then his judgment was impaired and not the
judgment of a person of ...
fit and proper to engage in legal
remained blind to what I found to be an obvious conflict of interest in drafting
a will or codicil for M.
found that:
He did not seem to understand that his evidence that [in 2016, after M told him
in 2016 that she wanted him to benefit] he had ‘chastised’
the fact did not solve the
submitted, being able to identify conflicts between one’s own interests
and one’s client’s interests is a fundamental
aspect of ethical
legal practice.
O’Brien also did not seem to be able to see that his carefully preserved
audio recordings of his hospital
did not support the
conclusion that M had testamentary capacity and that he had behaved
appropriately, and in fact supported the
conclusion.
his recent emails, Mr O’Brien appears to continue to hold the firm belief
that he was upholding his oath in acting as he
Notwithstanding the violence of my prosecution by the Legal Services
Commissioner and the findings of the Tribunal, I took an oath
on 1 May 1973 to
demean myself honourably at all times as a legal practitioner and that oath was
honoured by me without exception
during the forty-eight years that followed. No
person knew [M] better than me and she trusted me to carry out her instructions
I did to the best of my ability.
Mr O’Brien appears to remain oblivious to the havoc and the unwarranted
cost he had caused to M’s estate after
her death, by his actions in
drafting and pressuring M to sign a highly problematic will and codicil;
pursuing probate in respect
of the will; and then drafting and pressuring family
members to sign a Deed under which he received a share in the estate.
Notwithstanding
Mr O’Brien’s undertaking to the Commissioner in 2021 that he would
retire, and Mr O’Brien’s
current health issues, specific deterrence
nevertheless has some importance here.
Mitigating factors
Matters to Mr O’Brien’s credit
O’Brien’s recognition before the liability hearing that his
correspondence was well below professional standards, as
were the false
statements made to the Commissioner, is to his credit, although he lost some of
that credit by correspondence sent
after the liability hearing, as noted above.
fact that, until the findings in these two cases, he had no prior disciplinary
history is also relevant. Unfortunately, it is
also the case that the conduct
the subject of these two cases covered a period of around four years, with
repeated instances of misconduct.
admission of the charges in J59/2023 is to his credit, and is a mitigating
factor, as recognised by the Commissioner; as is his
recognition, in late 2021
that he should stop practising.
is to his credit that, after indicating he would not attend, he attended the
liability hearing and made himself available for cross-examination.
Health matters
O’Brien has referred to his poor health on several occasions during the
VCAT proceedings, and in his correspondence with
the Commissioner during the
investigation.
the liability hearing, I invited him to provide any relevant medical reports and
information.
invitation, objected to by the applicant, came from my observations that,
although capable of responding robustly to some aspects
cross-examination, at times Mr O’Brien had slow or slurred speech and
demonstrated some confusion and inattention.
what I observed may or may not have indicated some underlying cognitive
impairment or other condition, I had a concern about
the reliability of his
evidence, if that were the case.
O’Brien provided a series of reports and letters, most of which were
historical, indicating a history of
and other medical issues,
and psychological conditions including anxiety disorder.
most recent report, dealing with cognitive and other issues, was dated 8
September 2022, by Dr Lawrence Cher, a neurologist.
Cher’s letter to Mr O’Brien’s GP recorded that Mr
presents with unsteadiness and falls with a history of cognitive impairment,
dysarthria [slow or slurred speech] and unsteadiness.
There was a history of
weight loss and some acute progressive dysfunction.
note Dr Cher had performed a Montreal Cognitive Assessment on which Mr
O’Brien scored 25/30. After analysing several aspects
of the assessment
results, however, Dr Cher observed:
[Mr O’Brien] remains with a moderate dysarthria and a little
disinhibited.
Cher’s observations were consistent with the (layperson) observations I
had made at the hearing, which had raised the concern.
I indicated to the parties at the time, the 2022 report was not, however,
directed to Mr O’Brien’s capacity to understand
or participate in
the VCAT proceedings. Its purpose and content were directed elsewhere, and it
was insufficient to conclude that
he did not have that capacity, or that his
evidence was unreliable.
I also indicated to the parties, on the question of penalty, however, it
remained open to Mr O’Brien or any legal representatives
on his behalf, to
make any appropriate submissions about his health that were supported by
relevant medical evidence.
the meantime, from around late 2024, Mr O’Brien’s health, including
his psychological health, deteriorated.
April 2025, in relation to his request for an adjournment of the penalty hearing
because he was in hospital, the Tribunal received
statements from his treating
physicians that, during the hospital stay, which was related to an acute kidney
injury, he had been
diagnosed with major depression by the inpatient psychiatry
team and was waiting to be transferred to a specialist unit.
statements recorded that it was the psychiatric team’s assessment that he
was not suitable to attend any form of hearing
at that time due to his mental
Commissioner opposed the adjournment, giving the following reasons:
The Applicant is concerned about the significant consumer harm which the
Respondent has occasioned and considers that time is of
the essence for a
hearing to occur so orders dealing with that harm can be made. This is
especially important given the age of the
Respondent and the advanced age of
[the two nieces on whose behalf the Commissioner is seeking third party payment
orders]. The
Applicant seeks an order either that the Tribunal appoint a
litigation guardian for the Respondent for April’s
or, if the Tribunal
prefers, that it simply give leave to the Respondent to be represented by a
litigation guardian [at the hearing]
granted the adjournment based on the clear and compelling information from Mr
O’Brien’s treating physicians that he
was in no position to take any
steps necessary for the hearing to proceed.
O’Brien advised in September this year that he had subsequent inpatient
stays in the intervening months and had just been
discharged from the Melbourne
the evidence, I accept that Mr O’Brien is in poor physical and mental
health and has been for some time.
separate question is whether poor mental health may have impacted on his
Commissioner’s written submissions on penalty, filed in December 2024,
referred to the question of whether Mr O’Brien’s
health could be
considered as a mitigating
The respondent has stated at various times to the applicant that he is, or at
least has been, of poor health. However, the applicant
notes that the respondent
is in his seventies and that health conditions are not uncommon at that stage of
life. Should this matter
be relied upon in mitigation, the applicant would
expect that appropriate medical documents would need to be provided to the
and a clear connection be articulated by the respondent between his
misconduct and health condition(s) he suffered or suffers.
reference to ‘a clear connection’ between the misconduct and any
health conditions appears to be a reference to the
principles in
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v
I discussed the
application of the
principles in disciplinary penalty cases. A
summary of the principles is at [42]-[43] of
The Court in
identified six ways that mental impairment may be
relevant to sentencing, the first five of which are relevant here:
It may reduce an
offender’s moral culpability and so affect what is considered to be a just
punishment and lessen the need for
denunciation.
It may have a
bearing on the kind of sentence that is imposed and the conditions under which
it should be served.
deterrence may be moderated or eliminated as a consideration depending on the
nature and severity of the offender’s
symptoms, and the effect of their
impairment at the time of offending, sentence, or both.
deterrence may be similarly moderated or eliminated in the same
circumstances.
The existence of
an impairment at the time of sentencing, or its reasonably foreseeable
reoccurrence, may mean that a specific sentence
may weigh more heavily on the
offender than it would on a person in normal health.
Importantly, for the
principles to apply, a connection must be
established between the relevant mental illness and the offending conduct or
proposed sanction.
Simply pointing to the existence of a mental illness is
insufficient:
[T]he question for the Court is whether the evidence establishes ... that the
impairment of mental functioning did contribute to
the offending in such a way
as to render the offender less blameworthy for the offending than he/she would
otherwise have been.
Very often, this question is approached as one of
causation. Did the evidence establish a causal connection between the
of mental functioning and the offending for which sentence is to be
O’Brien did not make submissions about the extent to which any health or
other conditions had impacted on his conduct.
the references to ‘disinhibition’ in medical reports, in both 2011
and 2022, and cognitive impairment in 2022, it
is of course possible that some
cognitive impairment potentially explains Mr O’Brien’s highly
disinhibited correspondence
the years covered by the charges.
the absence of appropriate expert evidence, however, there is insufficient
evidence for me to conclude that any impaired mental
functioning on Mr
O’Brien’s part had the required connection with the offending
conduct, for the
principles to apply.
ought not, of course, prevent recognition that Mr O’Brien is suffering
from what appears to be serious mental health and
other medical conditions, and
to take that into account, as appropriate, on the question of penalty.
is a relevant issue of delay in this case, which is a mitigating factor.
the Court of Appeal discussed the issue of
raised by the applicant in
observed by Maxwell P in
R v Merrett &
The relevance of delay lies rather in the effect which the lapse of time –
however caused – has on the accused. Delay
constitutes ‘a powerful
mitigating factor’. In particular it focusses on issues of rehabilitation
and fairness.’
Commissioner first received a complaint about Mr O’Brien’s conduct
in late 2017. Proceedings were initiated in 2022
and 2023. They came to
hearing in early 2024, with further submissions received in April 2024. The
liability decision was handed
down in August 2024, with corrections made in
September 2024, and although the Commissioner complied with the subsequent
for penalty submissions, Mr O’Brien was unable to do so.
observe here that complexities were added to the hearing and determination of
the charges by issues with the format and content
of the pleadings, that I
referred to in the liability
agree with the Commissioner, however, that for the most part, the regrettable
delay between the events constituting the alleged
misconduct and the prosecution
and hearing of the allegations, resulted from the complex nature of the
investigations, the occurrence
of other conduct (the subject of J59/2023), and
the breadth of the charges. Mr O’Brien’s intermittently
inappropriate
communications would not have helped.
Nevertheless,
the time it has taken to come to the end of the investigation and these
proceedings has, I accept, taken a toll on Mr
O’Brien. I take this into
account as a mitigating factor.
Financial position
noted earlier, Mr O’Brien referred to his financial position in an email
dated 13 March 2024, stating that he has no means
of paying any fines or costs
the Tribunal might order him to pay, and is dependent on the aged pension.
have no independent or objective information about Mr O’Brien’s
current financial situation, and no information about
what happened to the sums
he received from M’s estate under the Deed, or as costs he charged the
Character evidence
O’Brien had said that he would call up to 13 character witnesses to give
evidence at the penalty hearing, which was one of
the reasons why it was listed
in April for three days.
character references or statements have been provided by him.
the basis of the above factors in this case, I turn now to the orders to be
Recommendation to the Supreme Court of Victoria that Mr
O’Brien’s name be struck off the roll? Yes
refer to without repeating the content of the liability decision; the summary of
the previous findings at the start of these reasons;
and the discussion earlier
the principles
that apply in a decision about whether a person is fit and proper to practise,
those that apply
when the Court considers whether to remove a person’s name from the roll
of practitioners.
noted, a recommendation by the Tribunal is likely to be appropriate, if the
Tribunal considers that there is a reasonable prospect
that the Court will make
the order and/or the circumstances are such that a removal order appears to be
called for and the question
ought to be referred to the Court for
consideration.
am mindful that Mr O’Brien has no past disciplinary history, unlike other
practitioners who have been the subject of such
recommendation.
is nevertheless a case where the recommendation is appropriate, in my view, for
the following reasons.
the liability decision as a whole is considered, Mr O’Brien by his conduct
demonstrated repeated failures in the ‘three
things’ referred to by
the High Court in
Hughes and Vale
: honesty, ability and knowledge (of
what he was required to do, and not do); or, using the language of McMillan J in
, ‘competence, knowledge and integrity’.
conduct demonstrated a fundamental breach of his professional obligations to the
the Commissioner and
her staff, his friend M, M’s relatives, and to others in the legal system.
demonstrated and expressed a profound contempt and disregard for people and
institutions who have a vital role in the administration
of justice and the
protection of the public, including the vulnerable.
If, in his view, they thwarted him or dared to call him into account, his
pattern was to attack, denigrate or threaten.
was conduct which, if tolerated, would bring the legal profession into
it was conduct of the kind described by Warren CJ in
striking off may follow where a practitioner’s conduct shows “a
defect of character incompatible with membership of a
self-respecting
profession”
the question of whether Mr O’Brien is currently not fit and proper, and
likely to be so indefinitely, in my view his continuing
lack of insight
discussed earlier, and the repetition of outrageous communications to the
Commissioner, and in respect of the Supreme
Court, support the necessary
conclusion. There is, unfortunately, a defect of character shown, of the kind
described by Warren CJ
Mr O’Brien himself admitted some time ago that he was no longer fit to
carry on practice, and acknowledged it again
in cross-examination, stating that
his communications to the Commissioner’s office ‘show he is no
longer a fit person,
either physically or mentally to practise law’.
make the recommendation. It will be for the Supreme Court to make its own
decision as to whether the step I recommend is needed.
Prohibition from applying for a practising certificate?
O’Brien is unlikely to ever be capable of practising law again; has not
practised since 2021; and has given an undertaking
to retire, effective December
aside the possibility that he will be struck off the roll, which is a decision
for the Supreme Court, it might seem unnecessary
in those circumstances to make
an order in each case prohibiting him from applying for a practising
certificate.
my view, however, the orders sought by the
Commissioner
are warranted, in
the interests of general deterrence, and protection of the standards and
reputation of the legal profession.
send the message to others that the conduct found here is likely to be
disqualifying conduct if engaged in by a member of the
profession, even if it is
not conduct warranting the practitioner being struck off.
message is particularly important, in my view, for those in the profession who
work in the areas of wills and estates, or who
interact with the Tribunal and
others involved in the protective work of guardianship, administration and other
less formal processes
to safeguard the wellbeing and financial security of
vulnerable adults.
orders also signal to members of the public who encounter lawyers who engage in
conduct such as Mr O’Brien’s, that
this is not conduct tolerated in
the legal profession.
Reprimand? Yes
reprimand is clearly warranted in both proceedings. It is more than a
‘slap on the wrist’ and is a serious matter for
a legal practitioner
to receive. As Hampel J, Vice President, observed in
Victorian Legal
Services Commissioner v
A reprimand is a powerful statement to the practitioner of how far below the
standard of their profession they have fallen by their
misconduct.
each case, the Commissioner sought an order under s 302(1)(l) of the Uniform
Law, that Mr O’Brien pay a fine.
J22/2022, the Commissioner sought fines totalling $46,000, attributable to:
1, 3, 6, 7(a), 7(c), 25 ($10,000); said to be a sum representing a global
penalty for his professional misconduct in respect
20 and 28 ($10,000); said to be a global penalty for his professional misconduct
in respect of dealings concerning M’s
relatives and associates;
charges 21, 23
and 25 ($10,000); a sum said to represent a global penalty for his professional
misconduct with respect to M’s
charges 29 and
31 ($8,000); said to represent a global penalty for his professional misconduct
in respect of his dealings with the
Commissioner; and
J59/2023, the Commissioner sought a fine of $10,000, said to be a sum
representing a global penalty for charges 1, 2, 4 and 6 in
I understand it, no fines are sought in relation to findings of unsatisfactory
conduct (charges 4, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 26).
of the charges referred to had findings of either professional misconduct or
misconduct at common law.
deterrence does not, necessarily, require fines to be ordered in proceedings
where the Tribunal is making a recommendation
that Mr O’Brien’s name
be struck off the roll, and orders prohibiting him from applying for a
practising certificate
in any event for a long period. Nor does protection of
the public, for the same reasons.
may also be little utility in the orders if Mr O’Brien is right and he has
neither the money to pay any fine, nor the
property to attach and sell in aid of
enforcement. Enforcement in those circumstances would be a decision for the
Commissioner to
make based on any additional information that becomes
deterrence, however, is important in these two cases. Orders for fines serve to
signal to others that there will be direct
financial consequences for such
conduct, in addition to the financial and other consequences of being
disqualified from legal practice.
This in turn serves the protective purposes of
fine is certainly punitive in this case, but in the sense observed by Maxwell P
Quinn v Law Institute of Victoria Limited
The available sanctions are, by their nature, punitive, and the objectives of
specific and general deterrence – which serve
the protection of the public
– depend upon the sanctions having punitive
the purposes of general deterrence, I have ordered that Mr O’Brien pay a
fine in each case. I have reduced the amounts
sought by the Board to reflect
the mitigating factors discussed earlier, including the regrettable delay.
J22/2022 it is a global penalty of $25,000 for the conduct that constituted
misconduct at common law and professional misconduct.
J59/2023, it is a global penalty of $5,000.
J22/2022, I did not regard it as necessary or desirable to divide the amount
into sums representing individual groups of charges,
principally because all of
those charges represented a related course of conduct, and because of the
overlap in charges noted in
the liability decision.
stress the fines are not imposed in relation to the lesser charges found to be
unsatisfactory professional conduct, mindful of the
observations of Senior
Member Smithers in
Legal Services Commissioner v
referring in turn
to the observations of Ross J in
Law Institute of Victoria v Brott
Law Institute of Victoria v Brott
Judge Ross (as he then was)
acknowledged that there is a sense of unreality in imposing separate penalties
in relation to less serious
counts, where the Tribunal is asked to impose a
cancellation of a practising certificate for more serious matters brought at the
same time. Similarly here, in relation to some of the charges which are
not as serious as others, which would ordinarily attract
a modest fine, or a
requirement for further CPD or mentoring, no such penalty has been specified, as
it would in any event be subsumed
by the substantial periods of prohibition of
practise which are imposed for the most serious matters.
Orders for payment of monies to Margaret and Dorothy?
order sought by the Commissioner is that Mr O’Brien pay just under
$300,000 to two of M’s family members, M’s
nieces, Margaret and
earlier noted, Margaret and Dorothy were not clients of Mr O’Brien, nor
were they complainants under the Uniform Law.
represent the estate.
were individuals who, along with seven others, signed the Deed that Mr
O’Brien drafted, and once all had signed, received
the share of the estate
specified in the Deed in the distribution of the estate by the administrator.
amount distributed was $1,968,398.59.
the Deed, Margaret and Dorothy each received 10% of the estate. Barry and Robert
(both nephews of M) received 30% and 25% respectively.
received 15%, and four friends/neighbours of M received 2.5% each.
an intestacy Margaret and Dorothy would each have received a 25% share of the
did not make any claim for payment themselves before or during this proceeding.
It appears the Commissioner unilaterally proposed
the order to them, after the
liability decision was
administrator does not make a claim seeking payment by Mr O’Brien to the
estate, and declined an invitation from the Commissioner
to be involved in the
penalty hearing.
any event, the Commissioner is not making a request that monies be paid to the
legal representative for the estate.
as the Commissioner freely acknowledges, the order requested does not meet the
requirements for a compensation order under
the Uniform Law.
the submissions frame it as ‘not compensation’ but ‘a form of
restitution’, able to be made under
s 302(1), under the words that precede
a list of specific orders the tribunal may make:
....the designated tribunal may make any orders it thinks fit, including...
summary, the purpose is said to be to prevent Mr O’Brien from profiting by
his misconduct, by requiring him to disgorge the
15% ‘windfall’ he
received under the Deed; and by paying it to the two nieces to put them closer
to the position they
would have been in but for the Deed (assuming distribution
under an intestacy).
payment amount requested for each also includes some legal costs Mr
O’Brien charged to the estate, divided in two.
my view, it appears to be a well-intentioned, but, respectfully, misconceived
application.
several reasons which I come to later, I am not persuaded it is open to me or,
if open, appropriate to make the orders.
sought are likely to go beyond the proper scope of the discretion in s 302(1) of
the Uniform Law, which is broad but not
limitless, and beyond the
Tribunal’s statutory powers in any event.
The limits on
the Tribunal’s power, under Part 5.5 of the Uniform Law, to make orders
that compensate third parties are relevant
to whether the orders are open to me,
and if open, whether and how the discretion should be exercised.
Even if they are
open to be made, I am not persuaded in the circumstances that the discretion
should be exercised to make them.
Summary of the rationale
I understand it from the
submissions,
the rationale for
the order is as follows:
intestacy M’s two nieces (Margaret and Dorothy) and two nephews (Barry and
Robert) would each have been entitled to
an equal share of M’s
But for the
Deed, the estate would have been distributed under intestacy principles, with
M’s two nieces each receiving 25%.
Instead, the
estate was distributed in accordance with the terms of the Deed.
But for the
Deed, Mr O’Brien would not have received a 15% share of the estate.
The Tribunal
Mr O’Brien engaged
in misconduct at common law in engaging in conduct towards the relatives and
associates of M, that the Tribunal
was satisfied was oppressive and threatening,
and by which he attempted to (and did) obtain a financial benefit.
In receiving 15%
of the estate Mr O’Brien has profited from his misconduct. 15% of the
estate constituted a significant sum,
being $292,295.79.
He should not
profit from his misconduct.
But for the
Deed, Margaret and Dorothy would each have received 25% of the estate. Instead,
they received 10%.
O’Brien’s misconduct ‘therefore’ resulted in Margaret
and Dorothy forgoing receiving from the estate
$292,295.79.
The payment
would be a form of restitution and would put Margaret and Dorothy closer to the
position it was submitted they would have
been in had Mr O’Brien not
engaged in the misconduct.
The Commissioner
does not seek an order that Mr O’Brien
Margaret and
Dorothy for the consequences that flowed from Mr O’Brien misconduct.
Rather, it is sought that he be required
to account for the windfall which he
personally and improperly obtained, at the expense of Margaret and Dorothy, by
paying Margaret
and Dorothy the relevant
Reasons why I am refusing the application
There are limits even on a broad discretion
agree that s 302(1) confers a broad discretion.
provides that the Tribunal may make ‘any orders that it thinks fit’,
any of the orders that a local regulatory authority can make under section 299
in relation to a lawyer and any one or more of the
following— ;
agree with the submission
the list of specified orders, following the words in question, is inclusive but
not necessarily exhaustive.
to the explanatory memorandum for the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Bill 2013
supports that conclusion:
Section 302 provides, in subsection (1), that where a designated tribunal finds
a lawyer guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional
misconduct, it may make
such orders as it thinks fit
. The subsection
provides that the orders that may be made
the orders that a local
regulatory authority can make under section 299 and other specific orders.
Subsection (2) provides that the
tribunal may also make ancillary orders.
Subsection (3) provides that a person may be found guilty of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct even though the complaint or charge alleged professional
misconduct.
does not, however, mean that the discretion is exercised in a vacuum, without
regard to the broader legislative scheme. As observed
by then Deputy President
Macnamara in
Feaks v Cardinia Shire
High authority tells us that even open discretions have to be exercised by
reference to matters that seem appropriately related to
the subject matter of
the discretion and cannot be exercised on whim or for matters that are entirely
irrelevant.
am not suggesting that the payment order sought would or should be granted on a
whim. I recognise that the concern of the Commissioner
is to require, as a
penalty for his misconduct, that Mr O’Brien disgorge his share of the
and to provide
additional payments to two people who were disadvantaged by the Deed and its
terms, compared to the outcome under
an intestacy.
if the listed orders are not exhaustive, however, it is appropriate to have
regard to the overall scheme of the Act when exercising
a broad discretion.
principle is set out in the observations of the High Court in
Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
What factors a decision-maker is bound to consider in making the decision is
determined by construction of the statute confirming
the discretion. If the
statute expressly states the considerations to be taken into account, it will
often be necessary for the Court
to decide whether those enumerated factors are
exhaustive or merely inclusive. If the relevant factors – and in this
I use this expression to refer to the factors which the decision-maker
is bound to consider – are not expressly stated, they
must be determined
by implication from the subject matter, scope and purpose of the Act.
deciding whether to make an order that is not in an inclusive (but not
necessarily exhaustive) list, it is relevant to consider
what is already in the
existing limits put on the Tribunal’s power to make compensation orders,
, relevantly include:
complainant may make the request (s 307(1)(b)).
A compensation
order may only be requested by a complainant in respect of loss suffered by the
complainant or another person who is
a client of the lawyer, referred to as an
‘aggrieved person’ (s 307(2)).
A request may
not be made after proceedings have been commenced in the Tribunal with respect
to the complaint, unless the Tribunal
gives the complainant leave to make the
request (s 307(5)).
here I regard this as an important requirement, in procedural fairness terms, so
the respondent knows at the outset of the
tribunal proceeding what the claim is,
and also to ensure that any questions of fact relevant to the request for
compensation are
before the Tribunal before the evidence is heard or facts
determined.
A compensation
an order to compensate the aggrieved person
for loss suffered because of conduct that is the subject of a complaint and
consists of
one or more of the orders referred to in s 308(2), (3), or (4) (s
Under s 308(2,)
a compensation order may include ‘an order that the respondent lawyer or
law practice pay to the aggrieved person,
by way of monetary compensation for
the loss, a specified amount’.
Where the order
is made by the Tribunal, the amount must not exceed $25,000, unless a greater
amount is agreed to with the consent
of both the complainant and the
respondent.
The relevance of the provisions made for compensation to third
the fact that the statute already provides for orders compensating specified
third parties to the proceedings, for loss suffered
by them because of the
conduct of a lawyer, is a relevant consideration in determining how broad the
discretion might be. And what
might be an inappropriate exercise of it.
other words, the Parliament has already considered:
what might be an
appropriate order for payment to a non-party for loss caused by the conduct of a
who might have
the standing to ask for it from the Tribunal;
what should be
the limits around such an order; and
when such an
application should be
foreshadowed.
operates, in my view, to put a fence around the penalty orders that can properly
be made, where the purpose
is to provide compensation to a
third party. Section 306(2) supports this view:
For the purposes of section 302, the designated tribunal may make a compensation
order against a respondent lawyer in accordance
with this Part.
an illustration, the fact that s 302(1)(l) provides that the Tribunal may order
the lawyer to pay a fine of a specified amount
not exceeding $100,000, would put
a limit on the amount that may be awarded by way of a fine. Notwithstanding the
power to make
‘any order the designated tribunal thinks fit’, the
Tribunal would likely be in error if it ordered a fine of, say $200,000.
my view, the decision already made by Parliament as to when the Tribunal may
make an order for payment by a respondent lawyer to
a third party to the
disciplinary proceeding, is a relevant consideration when determining the scope
of the discretion in s 302(1).
It supports the conclusion that the requested
order is beyond the scope of the discretion.
appreciate that the Commissioner’s submission is that that the orders
sought are not compensation orders, and so the limits
turn next to the question of whether, in fact, this is a request for
compensation, that fails the requirements of
Is this a de facto request for compensation?
Commissioner’s submissions seek to distinguish the present application
from the order made by Senior Member Smithers in
. In that case,
among other orders, Mr Flitner was ordered to pay $5,000 to his client for its
costs arising out of a default judgment,
which occurred through Mr
Flitner’s failure to advise his client of the date of hearing.
Legal Services Commissioner v
is given as another
example of a compensation order. In that case, the solicitor was ordered to pay
$8,666.67 in compensation to
his client, in relation to loss he caused his
client in a proceeding in which he swore and filed a misleading affidavit with
Supreme Court of Victoria.
submission at [145] is:
Here, it is not sought that the respondent compensate Margaret and Dorothy from
the consequences that flowed from his misconduct.
Rather, it is sought that he
be required to account for the windfall which he personally and improperly
obtained, at the expense
of Margaret and Dorothy, by paying Margaret and Dorothy
the relevant amounts. This would have the effect of him no longer having
benefit of the improperly obtained monies, which would be an appropriate means
of general deterrence, by demonstrating to members
of the profession that should
they be minded, in connection with the practice of law, to enrich themselves
unjustly at the expense
of vulnerable and elderly members of the public, they
will be made accountable for that money, and will not be able to enjoy the
benefit of that enrichment indefinitely.
The payments would place Margaret and Dorothy closer to the position they would
have been in had the respondent not engaged in misconduct.
are two parts to the purpose outlined.
first is to require Mr O’Brien to give up an inappropriately obtained
‘windfall’, as a penalty that serves general
deterrence.
second is to require him to pay the amount of the windfall directly to Margaret
and Dorothy. By doing so, the purpose is to:
place Margaret and Dorothy closer to the position they would have been in had
the respondent not engaged in misconduct
my view, the second part of the stated purpose is to compensate them because
they were worse off under the Deed than they would
have been under an intestacy
distribution.
that view it is, in intention or effect, an application for an order to
compensate Margaret and Dorothy for loss alleged to be
suffered because of the
conduct of Mr O’Brien.
does not meet the requirements of
and for that reason alone should be
separate issue arises from the fact that, while part of the purpose is said to
be that Mr O’Brien give up the 15% share of
the estate he obtained,
payment to the estate is not sought.
Why payment to Margaret and Dorothy and not the estate?
question of why Mr O’Brien should be ordered to pay the two nieces and not
the estate itself, is a heading in the submissions,
but not one satisfactorily
answered in the paragraphs that follow the heading, in my
there were any entitlement to claim against Mr O’Brien for monetary loss
(whether in law or equity) arising from his conduct
in relation to the estate,
it would ordinarily be for the legal representative of the estate to make that
claim. And, ordinarily,
any amount awarded would be directed to be paid to the
the VCAT cases involving deceased estates referred to in the
submissions,
primarily to do with executor’s commission wrongly claimed by a
solicitor/executor, the Tribunal ordered that the
payment be made to the
payment is sought on behalf of two people who did not make any claim themselves,
would not appear to have standing to otherwise
bring a claim against Mr
O’Brien in the Tribunal’s general civil jurisdiction, because they
were not clients of Mr O’Brien,
or otherwise in a sufficiently direct
relationship with him; and would not have standing to make a claim for
compensation under
of the National Law.
I understand it,
the rationale
for asking that the money not be paid to the estate is:
O’Brien’s conduct did not affect Robert’s position – he
obtained 25%;
Barry received
30%, 5% more than he would have received under an intestacy;
Four others
received a 2.5% share, a benefit they would not have obtained under an
intestacy; and
Therefore, Mr
O’Brien’s conduct was solely to the detriment of Margaret and
am not persuaded that the rationale leads to the contended conclusion; and the
rationale for not asking for payment to the estate
exposes another problem, in
my respectful view, with the Commissioner’s application.
circumstances where the administrator has declined to seek orders that Mr
O’Brien pay monies to the estate, the Commissioner
is effectively asking
the Tribunal to step in and undertake a
redistribution
of an estate that has already been distributed under a signed
Deed, and not by paying monies to the estate.
is not a role the Tribunal in this jurisdiction should play, and in my view is
itself a reason to decline to make the orders.
course, one of the reasons for not asking for payment to the estate may be that
the administrator of the estate, Barry, did not
wish to make that application or
otherwise be involved in these proceedings.
is apparent from the affidavit of Mr Watts, senior lawyer at the
Commissioner’s office,
that Mr Watts wrote to Barry’s
asking that the
liability decision be drawn to his client’s attention.
letter referred to the possible loss suffered by the estate by Mr
O’Brien’s conduct, and stated that one possible
penalty was that Mr
O’Brien be ordered to reimburse the estate for some of the money he
Watts asked to be informed if Barry as administrator sought that Mr
O’Brien reimburse the estate for the payments received
by him; and if he
wished to provide a witness statement in respect of the penalty to be
administrator’s solicitor in reply, after referring to the health issues
of Barry and his wife, replied:
I am instructed my client does not wish to make representations to the Tribunal
or be involved in the proceedings. He will accept
whatever decision is
ultimately made and carry out his duties as Administrator should funds be paid
into the estate.
Watts wrote again to Barry’s solicitor (and subsequently to Barry)
advising that the Commissioner now proposed to seek orders
that Mr O’Brien
reimburse the sum of $299,559.78 by paying $149,779.89 to each of Margaret and
Dorothy, and asking whether
he had a view. No reply was received.
pause here to say that, despite the problems with the proposed orders, no
criticism is made of Mr Watts who, given the orders proposed,
has properly
advised the administrator (as well as Robert’s widow) and sought their
is any criticism made of any of the relatives who either agreed or declined to
give evidence in support of the proposed payment
orders. Margaret, and
Dorothy’s daughter (on her
) understandably welcomed
the proposed idea of a further payment. Robert’s widow found the inquiry
stressful and did not want
to be involved. Barry’s solicitor referred to
health issues for Barry and his wife.
further issue arises, relevant to the question of whether the proposed orders
may exceed the scope of the discretion in s 302(1).
It is not determinative but
illustrates a further difficulty with stretching the discretion in s 302(1) to
encompass the orders
Is it a remedy in equity?
appreciate that the Commissioner’s request is put as a payment order the
Tribunal can and should make under the discretion
in s 302(1) to make ‘any
orders the designated tribunal thinks fit’.
nature of the order sought and its purpose in respect of Margaret and Dorothy
raise an issue, however, of whether it operates
as some form of equitable
remedy. The references to restitution and unjust enrichment, suggest it may be
so intended. The issue
is potentially relevant to the intended scope and limits
of the discretion in s 302(1).
referred to above, payment is sought on behalf of two people who could probably
not bring a claim against Mr O’Brien in the
Tribunal’s civil
National Law.
speculating what any cause of action might be, it is possible that there is an
application that could be made to the Supreme
Court in its inherent
the Tribunal could properly make such an order under the Uniform Law, as a
decision on penalty, is another question.
what is sought is in the nature of equitable relief, then in determining what
might be the proper limits of the discretion in s
302(1), it is a relevant
consideration that VCAT has no general equitable jurisdiction. It is a
‘creature of statute’,
although it is always open to Parliament, to
the extent seen fit, to ‘clothe VCAT’ with the power to recognise
equitable doctrines and
is unlikely, in my view, that s 302(1) is enough to give VCAT power to make
otherwise unspecified orders, for remedies in the nature
of restitution, to
non-parties who do not otherwise have standing under
any event, I return to the problem identified above: if a payment order were
available, and assuming causation and standing could
be established, why would
any payment order not be paid to the estate.
the submissions note, VCAT has made orders that monies be repaid by solicitors
to a deceased estate, although neither of the three
cases referred
relate to similar conduct.
Relevantly, in all three cases, the money was to be paid to the estate.
, the joint executors of a will were ordered by
Senior Member Butcher to repay to the estate $120,000 in executor’s
they had no basis to receive. Both cases were brought under the
previous legislation.
reasons were given, and it is not clear under what provision the orders were
reasons given note however that in
respondent advised the Commissioner that he did not intend to appear at the
hearing or oppose the orders sought. In
, the respondent
represented himself and did not dispute the alleged facts. (The reasons record
that his only defence was ‘that
he said he believed that [the testator]
would have wanted him to have the
a decision under the current legislation, concerned executor’s commission
breaches and related conduct. In
, as submitted, Senior Member
Butcher ordered the solicitor ‘to make restitution payments’ to
eight different estates,
totalling $300,000. The submissions omit the
information, however, that the payment orders were made with the agreement of
the respondent.
am not persuaded that the payment orders sought are open under the discretion
given in s 302(1), or appropriate, for the reasons
summary, if, as I conclude, the order sought is essentially a compensation
order, it fails the requirements of
are, in any event, relevant to whether it is appropriate to
exercise any discretion to make the orders sought, and weigh against
making such
if it is available, I would decline to make the orders for several reasons:
problematic claim in legal terms, and apart from referring to restitution, a
clear cause of action has not been articulated
entitling Margaret and Dorothy to
directly claim repayment from Mr O’Brien.
While there
might be a claim (not articulated) that Margaret or Dorothy could make in a
Court, there would not appear to be any claim
that could be made at the Tribunal
entitling them to recover any loss established.
While there
might be a claim the estate could make for loss suffered by the estate, the
administrator has declined to make such a
claim either at the Tribunal or in a
court. (There might in any event be issues of causation given that the estate
was distributed
in accordance with a Deed all signed. Mr O’Brien’s
argument that he advised all to obtain independent legal advice might
respect be relevant.)
No claim for
loss had previously been made or intimated by or on behalf of Margaret or
Dorothy (or the estate) before these proceedings
commenced, which might have
allowed for any loss to be evaluated in the investigation and notice given to Mr
O’Brien to enable
him to respond, and no request for the payment orders
was made until after the hearing on the facts concluded.
303(1) of the Uniform Law applies here and provides:
The designated tribunal must make orders requiring a lawyer whom it has found
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct to pay
costs (including costs of the designated local regulatory authority and the
complainant), unless the designated
tribunal is satisfied that exceptional
circumstances exist.
this was a complex and, in some ways an exceptional case, there are no
exceptional circumstances for the purposes of s 303(1)
and an order for costs
will be made.
An order for costs—
(a) may be for a specified amount; or
(b) may be for an unspecified amount but must specify the basis on which the
amount is to be determined.
Commissioner has provided ‘without prejudice’ schedules of costs in
both cases.
O’Brien has raised concerns about the reasonableness of the costs
included, in particular counsel’s fees. He has asked
that the costs be
taxed (now referred to as assessment by the Costs Court).
the liability decision in
I raised concerns
factor may or may not have impacted
on the time spent and claimed.
the circumstances, in default of agreement, it is appropriate that an
independent assessment be made of the Commissioner’s
nevertheless encourage Mr O’Brien to engage someone on his behalf to
review the costs claimed and for the parties
to explore a negotiated
E Wentworth
Senior Member
FINDINGS IN J22/2022
Charges not proved are
Charge 1 – making false statements in a VCAT
guardianship application
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 298(b) of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (
Uniform Law
of rule 4.1.2 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
Uniform Rules
Charge 3 (alternative to charge 2) – drafting a will
in circumstances where the testator might lack testamentary capacity
Misconduct at common law within the inclusive
definition of professional misconduct in section 297(1) of the Uniform Law,
being conduct
occurring in connection with the practice of law and which, taken
with regard to any other relevant matters, would justify a finding
Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice
misconduct at common law
Charge 4 – failing to comply with a written
undertaking in the guardianship application
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 6 (alternative to charge 5) – drafting a
codicil in circumstances where the testator might lack testamentary
Misconduct at common law.
Charge 7 (a) and (c) – drafting the will and codicil
where conflict of interest
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 297(1)(a) of the Uniform Law and within the meaning of section 298(b) of
Uniform Law, ( breach of rule 12 of the Uniform Rules).
Charge 8 – drafting and having the testator sign the
will when uncertain as to the will’s legal effect and validity
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 10 – failing to inform the testator before she
signed of his entitlement to claim executor commission, charge legal costs
administration of the estate, and her option of appointing an executor who might
not claim commission
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 11 – failing to advise the testator of
desirability of seeking independent legal advice before signing the will and
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 13 (alternative to charge 12) – witnessing the
will in the specified circumstances
Misconduct at common law.
Charge 15 (alternative to 14) – witnessing the codicil
in the specified circumstances
Misconduct at common
Charge 16 – failing to give an accurate report about
the guardianship hearing
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 17 – making submissions at the guardianship
hearing without instructions to do so
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 296 of the Uniform Law.
Charge 18 – inappropriate, discourteous, gratuitous
and offensive communications with State Trustees Limited
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, (breach of rule 4.1.2 of the
Charge 20 (alternative to charge 19) – conduct towards
the relatives and associates of the deceased
Misconduct at common law.
Charge 21 (alternative to 22) – knowingly making a
false statement to a bank that the deceased did not leave a will
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, (breach of rule 4.1.2 of the Uniform
Charge 23 (alternative to charge 24) – charging estate
costs where no instructions received to act and will unproven and obtaining
reimbursement for expenses already reimbursed
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 297(1)(a) of the Uniform Law.
Charge 25 – directing sale’s agent to pay
deposit on sale of deceased’s home into his trust account without
instructions
or authority
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 297(1)(a) of the Uniform Law.
Charge 26 – email in breach of rule
Unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of section 296 of the
Uniform Law, and section 298(b) of the Uniform Law (breach
of rule 5.1 of the
Uniform Rules).
Charge 28 – (alternative to charge 27) threats made in
retaliation for a complaint to the VLSC
Misconduct at common law.
Charge 29 – communications with the VLSC justifying
finding that not fit and proper to engage in legal practice
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 297(1)(b).
Charge 31 (alternative to Charge 32) – false
statements to regulator
Professional misconduct
under s 298(b) (breach of rule 43.1).
Charge 35 – written statements demonstrating
disrespect and contempt towards the legal profession, its members, and
institutions
Professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 297(1)(b).
FINDINGS IN J59/2023
(Conduct between March 2019
and September 2020)
The Respondent engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning of:
a) section 297(1)(b) of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
) being conduct occurring in connection with the practice of law that
would, if established, justify a finding that the Respondent
is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice; and
b) section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, in that the Respondent
contravened:
3 of the of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct
(Rules) by failing to observe his paramount duty to the court and
the administration of justice;
4.1.2 of the Rules by failing to be courteous in all dealings in the course of
legal practice; and
5.1 of the Rules by engaging in conduct which demonstrates that the Respondent
is not a fit and proper person to practise law,
or which was likely to a
material degree to be prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the
administration of justice,
or bring the profession into disrepute;
by sending emails to the Supreme Court of Victoria (Court) which were
inappropriate, discourteous, gratuitous, and/or offensive.
(Conduct between June 2019 and September 2020)
The Respondent engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning of:
a) section 297(1)(b) of the Uniform Law, being conduct occurring in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established,
justify a finding that the
Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice; and
b) section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, in that the Respondent
contravened:
3 of the of the Rules by failing to observe his paramount duty to the court and
the administration of justice; and ·
4.1.3 of the Rules by failing to deliver legal services competently, diligently
and as promptly as reasonably possible;
by failing to comply in a timely manner, and/or at all, with Court orders,
requirements and/or requests.
(Conduct between November 2019 and September 2020)
The Respondent engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning of:
a) section 297(1)(b) of the Uniform Law, being conduct occurring in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established,
justify a finding that the
Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice; and
b) section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, in that the Respondent contravened rule
6.1 of the Rules;
by failing to honour an undertaking that he made to the Court on 18 October
2019 in the course of legal practice.
(Conduct between May 2021 and June 2021)
The Respondent engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning
a) section 297(1)(b) of the Uniform Law, being conduct occurring in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established,
justify a finding that the
Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice; and
b) section 298(b) of the Uniform Law, in that the Respondent contravened rule
4.1.2 and/or rule 5.1 of the Rules
by sending emails to the Applicant's office on 19 May 2021 and 4 June 2021
that were inappropriate, discourteous, gratuitous, and/or
The Legal Profession Uniform
Law is set out in Schedule 1 to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application
Application Act
). Under section 4 of the Application
Act, it is referred to as the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(Corrected)
[2024] VCAT 756
(‘liability decision’).
https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2024/756.html
The decision was made and
short reasons given at the start of the hearing in both matters, on 23 January
Including one charge, charge
7, where I found him guilty of parts (a) and (c) but not (b).
Under either or both of ss 297
and 298 of the Uniform Law.
The chronological background
to the charges relating to M and her estate is set out at [17]-[63] of the
liability decision. A summary
of my findings is at [506]-[528].
And which was ultimately
rejected by the Deputy Registrar of Probates, who was not satisfied the deceased
had testamentary capacity
and considered it unsafe to grant probate.
I found that if, in fact, he
believed M had testamentary capacity, his judgement in that (and other matters)
was deeply flawed.
As in the liability decision,
first names are used to protect the privacy of M’s family.
Section 302(1)(k) refers to
compensation orders as an order the Tribunal may make. Sections 306 to 309, set
out later, describe
the limits.
Section 306(5):
‘However a request may not be made after proceedings have been initiated
in the designated tribunal with respect
to the complaint unless the designated
tribunal grants the complainant leave to make the request.’
The Tribunal may award a
greater amount agreed to with the consent of both the complainant and the
respondent lawyer. Section 308(2).
Mr O’Brien had
originally signalled an intention to call 13 character witnesses.
In August 2024, Mr
O’Brien wrote ‘due to ill health, I have not yet read the whole
decision, but I do not doubt it is
balanced and fair and addresses all the
matters I raised in my defence’.
Costs are separately the
subject of s 303.
As at 27 April 2025.
As at 11 October 2023.
See the observations in
Hannebery v Legal Ombudsman
[1998] VSCA 142
(Tadgell JA with
Phillips and Chernov JJA agreeing). Also,
Stirling v Legal Services
Commissioner
[2013] VSCA 374
[2010] VSC 266
[2007] VSCA 122
[2007] VSCA 122
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner v OAG
[2021] VCAT 549
At [64]-[66].
Legal Services
Commissioner v Horak
[2014] VCAT 539
[1955] HCA 28
Hughes and Vale’
). Referred to in
Victorian Legal
Services Commission v Horak
[2016] VSC 780
McMillan J.
(1979) 22 SASR 70
(citation omitted).
[2010] VSC 332
(2010) 29 VR 325
’) 329 [10]-[11].
[2013] VSC 443
Legal Services
Commissioner v Nguyen
[2013] VCAT 345
, SM Smithers.
At [27], referring to the
principles (at [25]-[26] collected and summarised by Bell J in
Legal Services
Board v Rushford
[2012] VSC 632.
Including the Assistant
Registrar of Probates/Deputy Prothonotary; Judicial Registrar Englefield, a
Senior Lawyer and member of
staff; the chambers of Justice McMillan;
As indicated in the
liability decision, Dorothy was at the time experiencing cognitive issues.
Dorothy’s daughter and son
in law resisted the pressure from Mr
O’Brien for her to sign the Deed. The operative pressure ultimately came
from family members
who wanted the Deed signed and the estate distributed,
including a family member who visited Dorothy and obtained her signature.
At [91]-[98].
Liability decision
Ibid [197].
Ibid [200].
He paid $3,500 to have the
audio enhanced, a charge which, outrageously, he passed on to the estate.
Liability decision at [184]
in relation to the May 2017 visit (before drafting the will); at [237]-[242] in
relation to the ‘will
visit’ in June 2017; and at [279]-[290] in
relation to the ‘codicil visit’ in August 2017.
I note he referred to
‘existing heart problems’ in correspondence with the Commissioner in
2019, referred to in the
liability decision at [482].
An earlier report, in 2011,
from a consultant psychiatrist to his GP, had also referred to ‘a
little’ disinhibition
and slurring.
VCAT does not have that
[2007] VSCA 102
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner v OAG
(Corrected)
[2021] VCAT 549
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 150
This is a descriptive not a
clinical observation.
[2013] VSCA 374
See also the comments of Maxwell P in
R v Merrett & Ors
[2007] VSCA 1
(2007) 14 VR 392
, referred to in
[121] as having been relied on by the applicant. Maxwell P observed: ‘The
relevance of delay lies rather in the effect
which the lapse of time –
however caused – has on the accused. Delay constitutes ‘a powerful
mitigating factor’.
In particular it focusses on issues of rehabilitation
and fairness.’
[2009] VSCA 260
on the relevance of delay as
a mitigating factor.
[2007] VSCA 1
(2007) 14 VR 392
at [121] as having been relied on by the applicant.
At [73]-[89].
For example, Mr Horak, and
Mr Telehus in
Legal Services Commissioner v Telehus
[2014] VCAT 24.
Referring to the conduct
the subject of J59/2023.
In its guardianship and
administration jurisdiction.
In J22/2022, 10 years; and
in J59/2023, 5 years.
[2018] VCAT 1498
[2007] VSCA 122
[2014] VCAT 24
Law Institute of Victoria v Brott
[2008] VCAT 1998
) at [48]-[51]. This is a related case to the one the
Commissioner’s submissions referred to at [15], the correct citation
Legal Services Commissioner v Brott
[2008] VCAT 2399.
Based on a) the witness
statements of one niece, and of the other niece’s daughter who jointly
holds her power of attorney.
Both statements were made after the deponents were
shown documents from the tribunal book and paragraphs of the liability decision
were drawn to their attention; and b) the witness statement of Martin Watts and
At [123]-[167].
Charge 20 proved.
Liability decision [314]-[373].
It is put by the
Commissioner’s submissions as a ‘but for’ proposition –
had Mr O’Brien not proposed
the Deed, Margaret and Dorothy would each have
received 15% more of the estate. Strictly, both were in a different position
they would have been under an intestacy as a direct result of both of them,
and all the other beneficiaries, signing the Deed.
Submission at [145].
At [132]-[133].
[2010] VCAT 1436.
I am not suggesting that
the payment order sought, would or should be granted on a whim. I recognise
that the concern of the Commissioner
is to provide payment to two people who
were disadvantaged by the Deed and its terms, and to require, as a penalty for
his misconduct,
I return later to
the question of why payment would not be made to the estate.
[1985-1986] 162 CLR 24
40, paragraph (b) per Mason J.
Here, no claim for loss had
previously been made or intimated by or on behalf of Margaret, Dorothy, or the
estate before these proceedings
commenced, which might have allowed for any loss
to be evaluated in the investigation (and notice given to Mr O’Brien to
him to respond), and no claim was made until after the hearing concluded
including the hearing of evidence as to any relevant facts.
[2021] VCAT 143.
[2019] VCAT 76.
[158]-[167].
This is not to suggest that
a compensation order would necessarily have been available to the estate under
Part 5.5. The estate
was not a complainant, and made no request to the
Commissioner before the VCAT proceedings commenced.
and discussed in more
detail later.
From [166].
Affidavit of Martin Watts 6
December 2024, [5]-[9].
Exhibit MAW 3.
Dorothy has dementia and is
living in aged care.
Tucci v Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal & Anor
[2010] VSC 425
Legal Services
Commissioner v Maguire
[2014] VCAT 974
Legal Services Commissioner v Barlow
[2014] VCAT 973
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v
[2015] VCAT 1546
Legal Profession Act
Noted at [12].
At [210]. No fine was
ordered, however the matter was referred to the Supreme Court of Victoria with a
recommendation that the respondent
be removed from the roll of practitioners.
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v Zaitman
(Corrected)
[2019] VCAT 1100.
At [73]-[89]; and
[450]-[487] in the context of charges 33/34 which were not proved.
Likely to be prejudicial
to, or diminish public confidence in, the administration of justice, or to bring
the profession into disrepute.
Schedule 1 to the
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Charges 3 and 5 were struck
out on the basis that the emails the subject of these charges are included in
the emails the subject
of Charge 1 and the broader findings in relation to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (629 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter