URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Institute of Victoria Limited v Quinn [2005] VLPT 8 (22 November 2005)
[2005] VLPT 8
Tribunal reference: T0165 of
Name, address, and reference Mr Philip Joseph Quinn
of legal practitioner:
Charge referred by: Law Institute of
Victoria Limited
RPA reference: Mr Paul Bean –
Name and address of complainant: Mr Creig
Magistrates’ Court No :
CONCERNING A CHARGE
brought before the Full Tribunal by the Law Institute of Victoria Limited
against Mr Philip Joseph Quinn (“the legal practitioner”)
of a complaint made by Mr Creig Donald (“the complainant”).
REASONS OF FULL TRIBUNAL OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
FOR DECISION GIVEN ON
22 NOVEMBER 2005
(Section 409 Legal
Practice Act)
The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to two charges of misconduct
and two charges of unsatisfactory conduct.
Before commencing practice in
Victoria the legal practitioner had practised law as a solicitor in Tasmania.
On about 12 July 2001
the legal practitioner was instructed in Victoria by Creig
Donald (“the client”) to act on his behalf in relation to
Tasmania against Tassal Limited for workers compensation and common law damages.
A retainer agreement, dated 17 July 2001,
authorised the legal practitioner to
charge professional fees at an hourly rate of $265.00. In fact, the legal
practitioner charged
$275 an hour.
On 25 November 2003 the client’s
claims, both workers compensation and common law, were settled at mediation in
Hobart for $270,000.00
After payments to various
statutory bodies were deducted the sum of $219,876.85 was paid by the solicitors
acting on behalf of Tassal
Limited to the legal practitioner on behalf of the
It had been necessary for an application to be made on behalf of
the client to extend the time for institution of proceedings in Tasmania
common law. That application was successful.
The legal practitioner
charged the client the sum of $17,019.00 costs in relation to the application
for extension of time and the
sum of $135,883.80 in relation to the workers
compensation and common law proceedings, a total of $152,902.80.
Ahern, the well known costs consultant, assessed the reasonable costs to be no
more than $60,000.00 or, at its very highest
and “on a very generous
basis”, $70,000.00.
On the basis of Mr Ahern’s assessment the
legal practitioner charged the client in excess of 100% of what was
reasonable.
The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to misconduct, pursuant to the
provisions of section 137(a)(v) of the
Legal Practice Act 1996
(“the Act”) by the charging of grossly excessive legal
The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to unsatisfactory conduct, within
the meaning of unsatisfactory conduct, as defined in section
137(b) of the Act
in that he, in the course of engaging in legal practice, contravened section
188(1)(a) of the Act by having a deficiency
of $9,447.20 in his trust account
without reasonable excuse.
An examination of relevant entries in the
legal practitioner’s trust account disclosed “receipts of settlement
and “payments made by client for professional fees”
amounted to $262,542.35. Payments out of the trust account to the
client and in
relation to the legal practitioner’s professional fees amounted to
$253,095.15.
At the time of the examination there was an unrestored
deficiency in the Trust Account in the sum of $9,947.20. That deficiency has
now been restored by the legal practitioner.
The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to statutory misconduct by
contravention of rule 31 of the
Trust Account Practice Rules
trust rules”) by applying trust money for or towards payment of his costs
without furnishing details of such costs
and a statement of account showing the
particulars referred to in rule 30 of the trust rules.
Rule 30, in so far
as relevant, provides:
Statements of
A legal practitioner who receives trust money must,
upon the reasonable request of the client, during the course of or
after the completion of a matter,
furnish to the client within a reasonable time after receiving such request, a
statement of account
showing in that statement, or by reference to another
statement of account, particulars of all trust money in connection with the
received by the
legal practitioner from the client or any other
disbursed by the
legal practitioner;
undisbursed.”
Rule 31, in so far as
relevant, provides:
Withdrawal of Costs and
Disbursements
(1) Subject to section 174 of the Legal Practice Act
, a legal practitioner may
apply trust money for the legal practitioner’s own use if, but only if,
the legal practitioner applies
that money –
reimbursements of money already paid by the legal practitioner on behalf of the
relevant client; or
for or towards
payment of the legal practitioner’s costs for work which has been
performed for that client and details of such
costs, and a statement of account
showing the particulars referred to in Rule 30 have been posted or personally
handed to that client
is reasonable within two working days from the day the legal practitioner
applies the money.”
On 47 occasions
between 17 November 2003 and 18 August 2004, without the client’s
authority, the legal practitioner withdrew
a total of $98,252.90 from his trust
account and applied such monies for or towards payment of his costs in
contravention of the
provisions of rules 30 and 31 of the Trust
Charge 4 was withdrawn by Law Institute of Victoria Limited (
The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to unsatisfactory conduct, within
the meaning of unsatisfactory conduct in section 137(b) of
the Act in that he,
in contravention of section 106(1) of the Act, commenced legal proceedings to
recover legal costs from the client
when he was not entitled to do
Section 106 provides:
“Division 4 – Bills of
106. Legal costs cannot be recovered unless bill of costs
has been served
(1) A legal practitioner or firm must not commence legal proceedings to
recover legal costs from a person until at least 30 days after
the practitioner
or firm has given a bill of costs to the person in accordance with section
Section 107
“107. Bill of costs
(1) A bill of costs may be in the form of a lump sum bill or an itemised
(2) A bill of costs –
(a) must be signed by
(i) the legal practitioner; or
(ii) another legal practitioner authorised by the legal practitioner;
(iii) an approved clerk; or”
By tax invoice,
dated 8 September 2004, the legal practitioner supplied to the client
“solicitor client costs (itemised account)
interstate workers compensation
proceedings and common law proceedings”.
In or about September 2004
the legal practitioner issued legal proceedings against the client in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
at Melbourne claiming $2,600.00 for legal
costs (the particulars of claim are dated 27 September 2004).
practitioner was not entitled to issue legal proceedings as
the client did not owe the
legal practitioner $2,600.00 and
30 days had not elapsed from
the legal practitioner giving the client a bill of
The legal practitioner did not serve that
summons and intends to withdraw it.
The two charges of misconduct to
which the legal practitioner pleaded guilty are of the utmost
seriousness.
The charging of grossly excessive legal costs reflects
adversely on the whole profession and has the tendency to bring the profession
into disrepute. Likewise, to have withdrawn moneys from his trust account for
his own benefit in contravention of the provisions
of the Act and the Trust
Rules is a very serious offence.
In our consideration of the charges and
the appropriate outcome, we have been greatly assisted by the very thorough and
by counsel, Mr P. J Riordan S.C., who appeared with Ms K
Judd on behalf of LIV, and Mr S Tatarka who appeared on behalf of the legal
practitioner.
Ms Elizabeth Mary Harris, legal costs consultant, gave
evidence on behalf of the legal practitioner. Ms Harris stated that having
perused the legal practitioner’s file, file notes and correspondence in
relation to the client’s case she calculated
the legal costs, according to
the time recorded, to be the sum of $144,064.68. She said in evidence that she
did not form a view
had taken the legal practitioner’s notes at face value. The bill
prepared by Ms Harris was tendered in evidence before us (exhibit
Mr Tatarka submitted the bill proposed by Ms Harris
served to illustrate the substantial number of hours spent by the legal
practitioner
in his handling of the client’s case. In making the
submission, Mr Tatarka acknowledged the legal practitioner’s admission
plea of guilty to gross overcharging.
It was clear from Ms Harris’
evidence that the task of preparing the bill had been very difficult and
time-consuming owing to
the legal practitioner’s practice of keeping diary
notes in notebooks in relation to all matters attended to, rather than placing
notes on a running file and thus having a chronological record for each file.
This meant that the ‘file’ was effectively
in pieces and had to be
reconstructed. This is a most undesirable practice, creating as it does
significant impediments in the way
of having a bill in taxable form prepared.
Apart from the delays and inconveniences that might result to clients, the state
file and the difficulties encountered by Ms Harris were the reasons for
an adjournment, at the legal practitioner’s cost, of
the original hearing
date for these proceedings.
In relation to the content of the Harris
bill, Mr Riordan said a close examination of it indicated the work charged for
by the legal
practitioner was “over the top”. We have perused the
bill and agree with Mr Riordan’s observation. In many instances
view of the plea of guilty, we do not propose to specify, we are satisfied the
hours claimed and charges calculated thereon
are an “overkill” for
the nature of the work involved.
It is not part of our task to tax a bill
of costs. For the purposes of the orders which we are required to make in these
proceedings,
however, we accept the opinion of Mr Ahern, as expressed in his
affidavit, filed without objection and marked Exhibit ‘C’,
work chargeable by a reasonably competent solicitor in the client’s
matters ought not to have been more than $60,000
or at its very highest, the sum
of $70,000, on a very generous basis.
The legal practitioner is aged 55
years and is married with two children. He has only been in sole practice from
2000. His current
practice consists of 30 to 40 matters and his annual earnings
total about $80,000.00.
He was admitted to practice in Tasmania in 1976.
Until 2000 he had worked as a member of various legal firms both in Tasmania and
Victoria. He has never previously been charged with disciplinary offences. He
is entitled to, and we have given him credit for,
his pleas of
The Full Tribunal heard very compelling character evidence from
reputable witnesses, Mr R H Miller of Counsel, Mr G H Golvan Q.C.,
Taussig and Father Maurice Gerard Cooney, Parish Priest of Our Lady of Good
Counsel, Deepdene. A common thread of their
evidence was that the legal
practitioner was honest but had a tendency to be disorganised and inefficient.
Mr Riordan informed us that LIV did not allege lack of probity against
the legal practitioner. LIV accepted he was honest and did
not allege that the
time recorded was concocted. However, in so far as the organisation of his
practice was concerned, it was said
he lacked judgement. Mr Tatarka submitted,
in relation to the deficiency in the legal practitioner’s trust account
was the result of innocent disorganisation and not dishonesty.
were informed the legal practitioner had been exposed to distressing personal
and family strains, in particular in 2003, and suffered
from major depressive
episodes. He remains under medical treatment.
The legal practitioner
has, since April this year, been subject to a degree of restriction and
supervision in his practice as a result
of undertakings given to LIV and,
importantly, to the Supreme Court. These arose out of an application made by
LIV to the Supreme
Court, pursuant to section 249 of the Act, for the
appointment of a receiver in respect of the legal practitioner, The application
arose out of a period of time last year in which the legal practitioner was not
attending to his practice which in turn coincided
with a period of depressive
On 19 April 2005, the Honourable Justice Hollingworth ordered
(inter alia) that –
“They (the legal practitioner) will
not transfer any moneys from any trust account to any office account
having completed
the relevant work or having paid disbursements; and
having rendered a bill of
costs 48 hours beforehand.”
informed us that the legal practitioner had already incurred substantial
expenses associated with these offences. The
receivership application involved
an expenditure of about $25,000.00. Ms Harris’ fee was $10,000.00. The
legal practitioner
has agreed to pay LIV’s costs of and incidental to
these offences in the sum of $26,000.00 and, in addition, will bear his
costs of this proceeding estimated at $30,000.
Mr Tatarka informed us
that as a result of these matters the legal practitioner has installed software
to the value of about $10,000.00
to control his office expenses and the handling
of trust funds.
The legal practitioner undertook the LIV’s trust
account course in 2002 and a refresher course in 2004.
An accountancy
firm, Parnell Kerr and Foster, LIV approved auditors, have been retained to
investigate and report to LIV in relation
to the legal practitioner’s
handling of his trust account. The legal practitioner pays the accounting firm
$1,500.00 per month
in relation to that service.
Mr Tatarka further
indicated the legal practitioner had introduced a register of his
In leaving the issue of penalty entirely to the discretion of the
Tribunal, LIV did not specifically submit suspension was necessary
in this case.
Our task does not involve punishment of the legal practitioner. Our
task is to provide for the protection of the public, including
deterrence of the
legal practitioner and the profession generally from like conduct.
regard, we have considered a number of options, short of suspension from
practice, that could achieve that result in this
specifically provides that it is misconduct by a legal practitioner to charge a
client grossly excessive legal costs. The
legal practitioner admits the costs
he charged the client were grossly excessive. Further, on 47 occasions he
contravened the provisions
of the Trust Rules.
As a member of the lay
community the client was at a decided disadvantage, viz a viz, the legal
practitioner in relation to the assessment
of costs appropriate in his case.
We find the legal practitioner abused the fiduciary duty he undoubtedly
owed to the client to charge costs that were fair and reasonable
particular, not grossly excessive. Further, the overcharging was achieved by
applying trust moneys towards payment of his
costs without furnishing to the
client the information required by the Trust Rules, which further disadvantaged
the client and is
a separate instance of misconduct.
Conscious of the
necessity to place the barrier high before depriving a member of the profession
of their practising certificate we
have given all the circumstances of this case
the most careful and repeated consideration.
In the final analysis, we
are of the unanimous view that the misconduct to which the legal practitioner
has pleaded guilty was so
grave that the only course open to us in all the
circumstances is to order that the legal practitioner’s practising
certificate
be suspended for a period of 12 months in relation to charges 1 and
3 (as amended). The suspension shall not take effect prior to
23 December
We propose that the following orders shall apply
Charges 1 and 3 (as amended)
practitioner’s practising certificate is suspended for a period of 12
Charge 2 (as amended)
The legal practitioner is
reprimanded.
Charge 5 (as amended)
The legal practitioner is
reprimanded.
The legal practitioner is ordered to pay to LIV its costs of
and incidental to these proceedings fixed in the sum of $21,000.00.
Tribunal was informed that the client had instituted proceedings in the County
Court to recover from the legal practitioner all
moneys paid to or taken by the
legal practitioner for legal costs. The legal practitioner intends to defend
that action which is
yet to be heard. The Full Tribunal is not in a position,
in this case, to make specific findings in relation to costs nor to make
order in relation thereto.
.........................................................................................
Chairperson of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant and the Legal Practice
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
reference: T0165 of 2005
Name, address, and reference Mr Philip
Joseph Quinn
of legal practitioner: Philip Quinn & Associates
535 Flinders Lane
Melbourne Vic 3000
Charge referred by: Law Institute of Victoria
RPA reference: Mrs M Sealy – VLR/04/591
address of complainant: Mr Creig Donald
Inverleigh Vic 3321
Magistrate Court No :
brought before the Full Tribunal by the Law Institute of Victoria
Limited against Mr Philip Joseph Quinn (“the legal practitioner”)
respect of a complaint made by Mr Creig Donald (“the
complainant”).
ORDER OF FULL TRIBUNAL
HEARING BEFORE: Full Tribunal constituted by His Honour E J Cullity A.M.,
Q.C. (Deputy Chairperson) and Ms E Wentworth and Dr P Myers
DATE OF HEARING: 25 August 2005, 16 September 2005, 27 October 2005 2
November 2005, and 22 November 2005
DATE OF ORDER: 22 November
SECTION(S) OF LEGAL PRACTICE
ACT UNDER WHICH HEARD: 157
ATTENDANCES: Mr P J Riordan S.C., with Ms K Judd, appeared on behalf of Law
Institute of Victoria Limited on 25 August 2005, 27 October
2005 and 2 November
Mr P J Riordan S.C. did not appear on behalf of Law Institute of Victoria
Limited on 16 September 2005 and 22 November 2005.
Ms K Judd appeared on behalf of Law Institute of Victoria Limited on 16
September 2005 and 22 November 2005.
Mr S L Tatarka appeared on behalf of the legal practitioner on 25 August
2005, 27 October 2005, 2 November 2005 and 22 November 2005.
Mr R H Miller appeared on behalf of the legal practitioner on 16 September
The legal practitioner attended the hearings in person.
FULL TRIBUNAL
LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
having found the legal
practitioner guilty of –
Misconduct pursuant
to the provisions of section 137 (a) (v) of the
Legal Practice Act 1996
Act”) by the charging of grossly excessive legal
Unsatisfactory conduct within the meaning
of unsatisfactory conduct as defined in section 137 (b) of the Act in that he in
of engaging in legal practice contravened section 188 (1) (a) of the
Act by having a deficiency of $9,447.20 in his Trust Account
without reasonable
Statutory misconduct by contravention of
Rule 31 of the Trust Account Practice Rules (“the trust rules”) by
applying trust
moneys for or towards payment of his costs without furnishing
details of such costs and a statement of account showing the particulars
referred to in rule 30 of the trust rules;
4 was withdrawn;
Unsatisfactory conduct within the
meaning of unsatisfactory conduct in section 137 (b) of the Act in that he in
contravention of section
101 (1) of the Act commenced legal proceedings to
recover legal costs from the client before 30 days after a bill of costs had
given to the client.
ORDERS THAT:
Charges 1 and
3 (as amended)
practitioner’s practising certificate be suspended for a period of 12
The operation of the order
of suspension not take effect before 23 December
Charge 2 (as amended)
legal practitioner is reprimanded.
Charge 5 (as
The legal practitioner is reprimanded.
4. The legal practitioner pay to Law Institute of Victoria Limited its costs of
and incidental to these proceedings fixed in the
$21,000.00.
.................................................................................
Deputy Chairperson of Legal Profession Tribunal
I CERTIFY that this order, signed by me and stamped with the seal of
the Legal Profession Tribunal, correctly and fully sets out the
order made by
the Full Tribunal of the Legal Profession Tribunal on 22 November 2005.
.............................................................
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant, and the Legal Practice
2. Any party may appeal against this order to the Court of Appeal, but only on a
question of law: Legal Practice Act section 170.
3. The Registrar will file a certified copy of this order in the Magistrates'
Court at Melbourne: Legal Practice Act section 164(1)(b).
When filed, this
order will become an order of the Magistrates' Court for the purposes of
enforcement: Legal Practice Act section
4. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Amendment No.
Amendment No.
Amendment No. 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter