URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-022 [2006] VMHRB 4 (1 August 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Hospital – Psychiatric Unit
Date of Hearing:
1 August 2006
Mr J Lesser
Ms V McCutcheon
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(a), (c) and (d) - s
– community treatment order – mental
illness - preparation of treatment plan
A diagnosis had been made that P suffers from schizophrenia - paranoid type.
This matter came before the Board as an appeal lodged
by P on 21 June 2006. P
is currently being treated on a community treatment order, which commenced on 15
September 2005 for a period
of 12 months. P was adamant that he does not have a
mental illness. P stated that the mental health service’s understanding
disease was different from his view. He had a particular understanding and
interpretation of western medicine that provides a
different take on cancer and
other diseases. Doctors and other health practitioners over thousands of years
have held a different
interpretation, which P does not accept. Dr LJ, P’s
doctor, held the belief that P had an “inability to consent to the
treatment (as) a consequence of complete denial of having a mental
(1) The Board noted that P disagrees with the diagnosis and the need for
treatment, but was satisfied that there is considerable evidence
both. In short, the Board accepted that P appeared to be mentally ill, and that
his mental illness is characterised by
a significant disturbance of thought, and
possibly mood.
(2) The Board accepted that there was a significant risk that P’s
health and safety would be compromised if he were not to receive
treatment and monitoring. This was because a relapse consequent upon failure to
maintain adequate treatment would cause
a deterioration in P’s mental
condition. There was also significant concern that, without consistent
treatment, P may act on
his delusional beliefs in a manner which would place
others, particularly his family and his mother's carer, at risk of verbal
and physical harm.
(3) The view expressed by the treating team was clear that P currently has
no, and generally has never had any, capacity to consent
to the treatment for
his mental illness because of his lack of understanding of it and its impact on
his behaviour and effect on
others, especially his family. The Board was of the
view that P is reluctantly accepting medication at present solely due to being
on a community treatment order.
(4) There is, at present, no less restrictive option to ensure the
continuation of adequate treatment in the community, as P has few
supports and has little contact with his family.
(5) Although it was clear that P was uninterested in engaging in a discussion
the Board accepted
that it constitutes a satisfactory treatment plan in the current situation.
Given continuing satisfactory treatment,
it may be capable of further
development in the future.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was unrepresented. Date of Decision:
1 August 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Alfred Hospital - Psychiatric Services Unit
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
1 August 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Mr J Lesser
Community Member: Ms V McCutcheon
Psychiatrist Member: Dr J Carson
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 1 August 2006:
Doctor: Dr LJ
Case Manager: RH
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
1 August 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 17 July 2006 prepared by Dr LJ and presented to the
(Treatment) Plan of P dated 8 May 2006, prepared by RH, P’s case manager,
and presented to the Board.
4. Appeal dated 21 June 2006, lodged by P on 21 June 2006.
5. Oral evidence given at the hearing.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board
must discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
A diagnosis had been made that P suffers from
schizophrenia - paranoid type. This matter came before the Board as an appeal
by P on 21 June 2006. P is currently being treated on a community
treatment order, which commenced on 15 September 2005 for a period
of 12 months.
Information from P
P stated that there was no
change in his situation. He presented additional information to the Board at
the hearing, explaining his
view that his involuntary status arose as a result
of a violent disagreement with his mother's carer who "threatened to stab me".
He went on to say that he is currently working making pizzas, but that the
medication reduces his energy, and he finds his 25 hours
a week at work
exhausting. If he had more energy, he could do more work, as it is
P was adamant that he does not believe that he has a mental illness. He
considered that there are a number of lies in his file, and
denied recently
threatening his mother's carer in court. He currently receives his depot
medication two weekly, and agreed that
he has failed to attend on occasions
because of changes in his work commitments. He made it clear that he does not
support injections
as a method of giving medication. He said that, without a
community treatment order, he was in contact with psychiatric services
Queensland as a result of intoxication with cannabis. He agreed that there was
an incident with a Japanese man, but denied that
it was his fault. P said that
he stopped using marijuana approximately a month and a half before the hearing,
in an attempt to get
off medication. He said it has made no difference, and he
does not miss it.
When asked about his friendship group, P said he had some regular friends,
several of whom have drug issues. P agreed that he had
lost touch with his
sister, whom he has seen once since his return from Queensland in May 2005.
The Board asked P about the history of mental illness. He said that, on one
occasion, he took himself to hospital because of drugs,
but was not admitted.
In 1995, his recorded beliefs were true. He said a number of sections of the
report had been misconstrued.
He was adamant that he had been followed, but
would not elaborate on who or why. However, he said that the mental health
understanding of disease was different from his view. He still
believes that there are people who want other people to die, and
that he was at
risk of being hurt because he had a particular understanding and interpretation
of western medicine that provides
a different take on cancer and other diseases.
Doctors and other health practitioners over thousands of years have held a
interpretation, which P does not accept. At the time, he believed in
his concerns about the lies and his own protection, but not
now. He said that
he has no sense of people wanting to kill him, but held the same beliefs about
western medicine which, he said,
he had read up about at the time that his
Grandmother died after a liver operation.
In summary, P was adamant that his file was full of "pages of lies", and that
the injection was being given against his will and he
found this intrusive.
After the evidence given by Dr LJ, P added that he had trained as an
apprentice plumber, but had rarely worked in the building industry
time. In Queensland, he had worked in hospitality, including as a functions
captain at a resort. He found this demanding,
but handled it. He was adamant
that medication was his main hurdle, although at the time he found cannabis
was so painful. He agreed that he had
inadvertently overdosed on cogentin, leaving him "half blind and delirious".
Having now got
off the cannabis, his main issue is to be off the medication, as
he does not need it.
The Board asked whether P had sought a second opinion about the diagnosis and
treatment. He said he had discussed it with Dr LJ "years
ago", but had not done
so because of how they "classified me with something".
After the evidence given by RH, P said that he had always attended
appointments, except because of work, but on occasions had seen
other staff,
because RH was off work several times. He agreed that he missed one appointment
with the doctor, because of work.
Information from the treating team
In her report, Dr LJ highlighted the long history of
impaired psychosocial functioning and well-documented persecutory and grandiose
delusions, together with related assaultive behaviour. Current mental state was
described as:
"well presented, intimidating at times. Reduced emotional range with
underlying irritability. Denies delusional thinking. No insight
psychotic symptoms and significance of assaultive behaviour".
Dr LJ described the first admission in 1995 when P "felt he was traced by
satellites via coins in his pockets, followed by CIA, found
a cure for cancer
and has written a novel". Current treatment is primarily aimed at preventing P
"acting on his delusional beliefs".
She commented that P "denies having a
mental illness...(and) consistently disagrees with the diagnosis and treatment".
risk, Dr LJ noted the "history of assaultive behaviour", including
assaulting:
"an unknown Asian man in response to delusional beliefs (person was directing
electrical energy at him, person was blocking sunlight
energy, a person has
slapped [P] two weeks prior to the assault)".
Dr LJ held the belief that P had an “inability to consent to the
treatment (as) a consequence of complete denial of having a
illness”. She noted that P has no known social supports.
At the hearing, Dr LJ stated that the medication had helped, as P was not
acting out in his behaviour. In the past, his interactions
with his mother's
carer resulted in reports to the police and previous assaults. She conceded
that there had been little progress
in 12 months, but less aggression. She said
that she had met with several family members, who were concerned but willing to
re-establish
communication, however they felt intimidated by P.
When asked about what might happen without a community treatment order, Dr LJ
was adamant that P would not take medication and risked
getting out of control.
She believed that he held delusional beliefs and risked getting out of control,
by acting on his distress
and anger, which he has controlled for 10 months.
There was a risk that he would further alienate himself, as well as the
for him to assault someone seriously.
RH told the Board that P always referred to his psychotic episodes as "drug
induced". She said he was difficult to assess because
"he doesn't keep
appointments". She said that she tries to fit in around his work, but P often
changes appointments on the day.
She said that he is not open to new ideas that
she suggested.
When asked about her view of P’s mental illness over the last 10
months, RH said that she saw him as being "consistently unwell",
treatment "just containing him", leaving significant risk issues below the
surface. His family has expressed concerns about
their physical well-being,
based on ongoing threats and text messages. When she has spoken to P’s
sister, she always sounds
distressed, particularly over incidents where P has
asked for money.
RH expressed the strong view that it is only the community treatment order
which makes P turn up. Without medication, she would be
very concerned. She
acknowledged the disharmony with P’s mother's carer, but said that P
minimised the aggressive behaviour,
and showed a lack of remorse and a lack of
awareness of his effect on others. In this context, the Board noted that P
rationalised
his antagonism to his mother’s carer by stating that he
believed the carer had moved into his mothers home and may be exploiting
financially.
Finally, Dr LJ commented on the fact that 10 months consistent treatment was
"a huge thing", and noted with some appreciation that
P had chosen not to seek a
transfer of care when he moved to Richmond. Despite his habit of avoiding
treatment, and arguing with
the treating team, P had stayed with them. She
wondered whether, at some level, P thought the treatment was beneficial.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board carefully considered all the medical and clinical information, from
Dr LJ and RH at the hearing and from the clinical file,
and accepted that P had
a mental illness. In doing so, the Board acknowledged that P currently appears
stable, and is able to undertake
a considerable amount of work, notwithstanding
his concerns about the effect of the medication. In terms of lifestyle, the
noted the clear evidence that P’s general functioning was impacted
by the effects of the mental illness over more than 10 years.
The Board noted that P disagrees with the diagnosis and the need for
treatment, but was satisfied that there is considerable evidence
both. In short, the Board accepted that P appeared to be mentally ill, and that
his mental illness is characterised by
a significant disturbance of thought, and
possibly mood.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
As discussed above, the Board accepted evidence that the provision of
consistent treatment over the last 10 months, in particular
regular depot
anti-psychotic medication, has reduced the severity of P’s symptoms of
illness, has improved his capacity to
maintain his work, lifestyle and
functioning at a reasonable level, and has reduced his irritable and potentially
aggressive behaviour
towards others.
The Board found that P did require immediate and ongoing treatment. It was
satisfied that this criterion was met.
Section 8(1)(c)
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P
subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board accepted that there was a significant risk that P’s health
and safety would be compromised if he were not to receive
ongoing treatment and
monitoring. This was because a relapse consequent upon failure to maintain
adequate treatment would cause
a deterioration in P’s mental condition.
There was also significant concern that, without consistent treatment, P may act
his delusional beliefs in a manner which would place others, particularly his
family and his mother's carer, at risk of verbal aggression
and physical harm.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P made it clear to the Board that he did not believe that he had an ongoing
mental illness, explaining past symptoms as related to
significant drug use. He
also stated that continuing treatment is unnecessary, and that his choice would
be to stop treatment immediately,
if he could.
The view expressed by the treating team was clear that P currently has no,
and generally has never had any, capacity to consent to
the treatment for his
mental illness because of his lack of understanding of it and its impact on his
behaviour and effect on others,
especially his family.
The Board was of the view that P is reluctantly accepting medication at
present solely due to being on a community treatment order.
The Board was
satisfied that this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
The Board accepted that, without the coercion of a community treatment order,
P would cease accepting adequate treatment, as P had
a strong view that such
treatment was unnecessary. There is, at present, no less restrictive option to
ensure the continuation of
adequate treatment in the community, as P has few
social supports and has little contact with his family.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Recovery Plan presented to the Board incorporates the statutory treatment
plan. It was prepared by RH and sets out a number of
current issues consistent
with discussions at the hearing. Although it was clear that P was uninterested
in engaging in a discussion
unnecessary, the Board accepted that it constitutes a satisfactory treatment
in the current situation. Given continuing satisfactory treatment, it may
be capable of further development in the future.
The Board considered that the treatment plan complies sufficiently with
section 19A
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
Based on the evidence presented, and the current circumstances, the Board was
satisfied that the plan was capable of being implemented
by the mental health
service, and to the extent possible, is being so implemented.
Therefore, the Board is satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met, the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (61.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter