URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mornington Peninsula C286morn (PSA) [2025] PPV 27 (17 June 2025)
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
17 June 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review
17 June 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair Dianne King, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
the Activity Centre
Sorrento Activity Centre
the Amendment
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn
Built Form Review
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review (May 2024)
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Design and Development Overlay
Design Guidelines
Heritage Design Guidelines: Sorrento Historic Precinct (Expires 30 June
the heritage study
Ocean Beach Road Commercial Precinct Sorrento Heritage Policy (September
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Note: A number following a planning scheme overlay code refers to a schedule
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn
Common name
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review
Brief description
Implements the Ocean Beach Road Built Form Review recommendations
Subject land
Ocean Beach Road commercial precinct, Sorrento (see
Planning Authority
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Authorisation
20 May 2022, with conditions
July to October 2022, re-exhibited: July to September 2024
Submissions
82 submissions from 77 submitters
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair) and Dianne King
Supported by
Chris Brennan, Senior Project Officer
Directions Hearing
By video conference, 28 March 2025
Panel Hearing
Mornington Peninsula Shire Office, Rosebud, with online video
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 6 May 2025
Parties to the Hearing
- Mornington
Peninsula Shire Council represented by David Vorchheimer and Sonia Narduzzo of
Russell Kennedy Lawyers, who called expert
evidence on:
- planning from
John Glossop of Glossop Town Planning
- urban design
from Alastair Campbell of Hansen Partnership
Conservation Group Inc represented by Ursula de Jong
- Service Link
Australia Pty Ltd represented by Eliza Minney of
Best Hooper Lawyers
- Kenneth Grenda
represented by Carly Robertson of Counsel,
instructed by Arnold Bloch
Mornington Peninsula PSA C286morn [2025] PPV
Date of this report
17 June 2025
Executive summary
The Sorrento Activity
Centre (the Activity Centre) is located about 55 road kilometres from Frankston
and about 102 kilometres from
Melbourne’s Central City. At about 3
kilometres from the tip of the Mornington Peninsula (Point Nepean National
Activity Centre is constrained by the Sorrento Ocean Beach sand dunes
In 2019, Council started reviewing its preferred built form for the Sorrento
Activity Centre which resulted in the Ocean Beach Road
Built Form Review report.
Council sought to protect and maintain Sorrento’s heritage fabric while
enabling modest infill development
in the western portion of Ocean Beach Road
where this is presently lower scale development and fewer heritage
An interim Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 was introduced into the
Planning Scheme until Council completed further strategic
work to justify the
permanent provisions including mandatory maximum building heights and mandatory
minimum setbacks.
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn (the Amendment) seeks
to implement the Ocean Beach Road Built Form Review
recommendations by among
other changes, applying a revised Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 to
the Sorrento Activity Centre.
The Amendment was exhibited in 2022 and received
73 submissions. It was re-exhibited in 2024 and received nine further
submissions,
of which four were from original submitters.
Key issues raised in submissions related to the Design and Development
Overlay Schedule 28 provisions regarding the design objectives,
definitions,
amenity provisions, Ocean Beach properties, sites abutting any other street, and
the 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site.
Submissions also requested new
provisions, raised concern about traffic and parking, and wind impact resulting
from new development.
Strategic issues
The Built Form Review approach, including the mix of
recommended mandatory and discretionary provisions that informed the Design and
Development Overlay Schedule 28 provisions is generally appropriate. Council is
commended for its approach to exploring and identifying
its preferred built form
which included three-dimensional modelling to test the potential impacts.
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel concludes that the
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28
Design objectives
The design objectives are generally appropriate for achieving what is sought
through Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28.
However, there is
insufficient justification to protect views from the foreshore to:
all heritage
buildings, noting this outcome will be achieved by the existing 40-metre-wide
road reservation and proposed low scale
mandatory maximum building heights and
minimum setbacks
at 3317 Point Nepean Road because it is a contributory building to a broader
heritage precinct that does not
warrant view protection.
appropriate and justified to protect views from the corner of Point Nepean Road
and Esplanade to the Continental Hotel tower.
The fourth design objective
should be revised to refer to protecting views from this corner to the
Intercontinental Hotel tower
rather than relying on a broader reference to the
entire foreshore.
Definitions and amenity provisions
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 should:
Building Height, Ground Floor Level, Level 1, Level 2 or Abutting
add the relating
storey number to each reference to building level
building elements and a threshold for exempting the need for a permit.
building height exclusions from Definitions to Mandatory Requirements (Entire
DDO28 area).
The proposed amenity provisions that:
differ to the
comparable Clause 55 provisions are generally appropriate for what is sought to
be achieved in the Sorrento Activity
replicate the
Clause 55 objectives and standards (pre-Amendment VC267 or current) should be
excluded so that they do not duplicate
the Commercial 1 Zone decision
guidelines.
Ocean Beach Road properties
The Built Form Review modelling justifies the mandatory maximum building
height of 12 metres and 4 metre minimum upper level setback
for non-heritage
The discretionary setbacks, including no setback to property boundary, in the
final version of Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28 are appropriate and
respond to heritage buildings. Fixtures should be enabled within the mandatory
upper level setback of 4 metres
with a design guideline to consider potential
visual impact of such fixtures.
Sites abutting any other street (excluding Grange Road)
The setback requirement for sites abutting any other street should be revised
to a front setback the same distance of the existing
building on the adjoining
lot, or 4 metres, whichever is the lesser.
3293–3295 Point Nepean Road site
It is appropriate and justified to apply Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 28 to the 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site. The
re-exhibited mandatory
maximum building height requirement for sites fronting Point Nepean Road should
also apply to sites fronting
Grange Road to ensure a consistent built form
approach across the 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site.
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 should include a new decision
guideline to support discretion regarding setbacks from Point
Nepean Road and
views to the Continental Hotel tower.
Requests for new DDO28 provisions
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 should not include additional
provisions relating to building materials, signage or setback
exemptions for
named lanes.
Other issues
The Amendment will not result in negative traffic,
parking or wind impacts.
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 will restrict development capacity
through its mandatory built form provisions compared
to planning provisions
before its interim version was introduced into the Planning Scheme. This will
result in less potential traffic
volume in the local road network. A permit
application proposing development in the Sorrento Activity Centre will be
assessed against
Clause 52.06 to consider car parking and the potential impact
on the surrounding road network.
The proposed planning provisions will enable low scale built form that will
result in negligible wind impact along the 40-metre-wide
Ocean Beach Road
reservation.
It is appropriate to not progress the proposed
changes to Clause 11.03 because existing Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
make them unnecessary.
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 would benefit from drafting
changes that improve its clarity and operation.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn be
adopted as exhibited subject to the following:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C286morn (the Amendment) seeks to implement
the recommendations of the Ocean Beach
Road Sorrento Built Form Review (May
2024) (the Built Form Review) by applying permanent design and development
provisions to the
commercial precinct of Sorrento.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
revise local
policy at Clause 11.03-1L-01 (Activity centres - Mornington Peninsula) to exempt
the Sorrento Activity Centre (the Activity
Centre) from the policy
existing Design and Development Overlay (DDO28) for the Ocean Beach Road
Commercial Precinct to:
- reflect the
design objectives and mandatory design provisions recommended by the Built Form
- remove the
existing expiry date
- incorporate
relevant provisions from existing Design and Development Overlay Schedule 10
remove DDO28
from 52 and 48A-50 Kerferd Avenue, Sorrento
delete DDO10 to
avoid duplication of planning provisions
Heritage Design Guidelines: Sorrento Historic Precinct
(expires 30 June 2026) incorporated document (the Design Guidelines) to state
New buildings should not exceed 12 metres in
Clause 72.04 Schedule to include the amended incorporated document into the
Planning Scheme
Clause 72.08 Schedule to reference the Built Form Review
make associated
changes to the Clause 74.01 Schedule and Planning Scheme maps.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to land in the Activity Centre
shown as ‘Exhibited Amendment’ in
. The Activity Centre is located
towards the western end of the municipality, about 100 kilometres by road (about
62 aerial kilometres)
from Melbourne’s Central City.
The Commercial 1 Zone applies to the Activity Centre and the Heritage Overlay
applies to about half of it.
As shown in
, the subject
land and its defined sub-precincts changed between the interim provisions and
exhibited and re-exhibited Amendment (see
Table 1 – Chronology of events)
as follows:
118 to 154 Ocean
Beach Road did not form part of the interim provisions and were included in the
exhibited Amendment (North-West Sub-Precinct).
48A-50 and 52
Kerferd Avenue in the Central Sub-Precinct of the interim provision were not
included in the exhibited Amendment.
The exhibited
North-West, South-West and Central sub-precincts were consolidated into one area
(Properties Abutting Ocean Beach Road)
in the re-exhibited Amendment, excluding
side street properties that are defined as a separate
Subject land and sub-precincts/areas
Interim provisions
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
Exhibited Amendment
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
sub-precinct
Re-exhibited Amendment
Abutting Ocean Beach Road
Street Properties
Point Nepean Road Site
1.2 Background
Chronology of events
15 Dec 2016
Interim DDO28 introduced into the Planning Scheme [Amendment
25 Jan 2018
A revised interim DDO28 was introduced [Amendment C204morn]
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review started
31 Jul 2019
Interim DDO28 extended by 6 months [Amendment C264morn]
22 Jan 2020
Interim DDO28 extended by 2 years [Amendment C268morn]
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review ended
Council resolved to:
- adopt the
Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review (Nov 2021)
authorisation of Amendment C286morn (the Amendment)
Interim DDO28 extended by 18 months [Amendment C242morn]
Department of Transport and Planning, under ministerial delegation,
authorised the Amendment
Amendment exhibition started
Amendment exhibition ended – Council received 73 submissions
Council officers commission an urban design and planning review of the
Interim DDO28 extended by 1 year [Amendment C299morn]
Review and refresh of Built Form Review document and the Amendment
Council resolved to:
- adopt the
refreshed Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review (May 2024)
- re-exhibit the
revised Amendment
Interim DDO28 extended by 1 year to July 2025 [Amendment C305morn]
Revised Amendment re-exhibition started
Revised Amendment re-exhibition ended – Council received 9
submissions
Council resolved to request the Minister for Planning appoint a Planning
Panel to consider unresolved issues in submissions to the
Council lodged a request to extend the interim DDO28 expiry date by 1
[Amendment C310morn]
1.3 The Panel’s approach
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. It has had to
be selective in referring to the more
relevant or determinative material in the
Report. The Panel has considered all submissions and materials in reaching its
conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Development Overlay Schedule 28
DDO28 versions
Any reference to DDO28 in this report refers to the
proposed DDO28 unless specified otherwise. It does not refer to the existing
interim DDO28 in the Planning Scheme.
The following versions are referred to in this report:
– exhibited July to October 2022, receiving 73 submissions
Re-exhibited
– exhibited July to September 2024, receiving 5 supplementary submissions
and 4 new submissions
Adopted version
– additional proposed changes to the re-exhibited version adopted by
Council on 25 February 2025 (Document 18)
– circulated by Council on 5 May 2025 (Document 33)
– circulated by Council on 9 May 2025 (Document 51)
Final version
– circulated by Council on 15 May 2025 (Document 53).
Panel has considered issues raised in the exhibited and re-exhibited Amendment.
For the purposes of this report, the Panel has
based its recommended provisions
on the re-exhibited version.
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.01
- Clause 02.02
- Clause 02.03-1
(Settlement)
- Clause 02.03-2
(Environmental and landscape values)
- Clause 02.03-5
(Built environment and heritage)
- Clause 02.03-6
(Economic development)
- Clause 02.04
(Strategic framework plan)
Planning Policy Framework
- Clause 11
(Settlement)
- Clause 12
(Environmental and Landscape Values)
- Clause 13
(Environmental Risks and Amenity)
- Clause 15
(Built Environment and Heritage)
- Clause 16
- Clause 17
(Economic Development)
- Clause 18
(Transport)
- Clause 19
(Infrastructure
Other planning strategies and policies
- Mornington
Peninsula Activity Centres Strategy 2018
- Mornington
Peninsula Localised Planning Statement
Commercial Precinct Statement of Significance
- Ocean Beach
Road Commercial Precinct Sorrento Heritage Policy
Design Guidelines Sorrento Historic Precinct
- Plan Melbourne
Planning scheme provisions
Zones and overlays that applying to, or near, the subject land:
- Commercial 1
- Design and
Development Overlay
- Environmental
Significance Overlay
Residential Zone
- Public Park
and Recreation Zone
- Public Use
- Transport Zone
- Transport Zone
Planning scheme amendments
- Amendment
C203morn – Applied built form provisions for Ocean Beach Road Commercial
- Amendment
C204morn – Applied heritage policy for Ocean Beach Road Commercial
Precinct through updated DDO28 (still interim)
- Amendment
C219morn – Implemented
Mornington Peninsula Housing and Settlement
Strategy: Refresh 2030 - 2036
(July 2020)
- Amendment
Implemented Mornington Peninsula Heritage Review: Area 3
(including Sorrento)
- Amendments
C264morn, C268morn, C242morn, C299morn, C305morn and C310morn (proposed) –
Extend expiry for interim built form
provisions for Ocean Beach Road Commercial
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 7(5) (Form and Content of Planning Schemes)
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction 17 (Localised Planning Statements)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 46 (Strategic Assessment Guidelines)
Practice Note 58 (Structure Planning for Activity Centres)
Practice Note 59 (The Role of Mandatory Provisions in Planning Schemes)
Practice Note 60 (Height and Setback Controls for Activity
2.2 Built form review approach
(i) The issue
issue is whether the review approach that informed the built form provisions is
appropriate.
(ii) Built Form Review approach
Physical context
The Built Form Review considers the Activity Centre’s physical context
environmental
considerations
development.
Opportunities and constraints
It then analysed key opportunities and constraints:
Opportunities
consistent sense of spatial containment and streetscape experience.
Improving the
design of new development (including its proportions, form, siting, materiality
and detailing) and its respect for the
existing character.
Providing some
opportunities for growth and change to ensure the Activity Centre continues to
adequately cater for existing and future
residents and
Constraints
The strategic
designation for Sorrento as a low growth area.
Protecting views
to the significant sand dunes to the west from the Activity Centre.
Protecting the
local heritage buildings, including views to the Continental Hotel tower.
Protecting the
fine grain, low scale character in Ocean Beach Road.
visibility and the interface to the foreshore for the site at 3293-3295 Point
Nepean Road.
Providing an
appropriately scaled and designed gateway to the Activity Centre from the
foreshore / Point Nepean Road.
Protecting the
reasonable standards of amenity for existing dwellings adjacent to the Activity
Environmental Significance Overlay at 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road.
The designation
of surrounding land as bushfire prone.
Congested /
limited road access.
Built form testing
Design Urban Pty Ltd conducted built form testing including three-dimensional
modelling to determine the balance between the preferred
character and the
desired spatial enclosure. The Built Form Review explains the modelling adopted
generous floor-to-floor heights
to respond to the character of older buildings
in Ocean Beach Road. Specifically, it applied:
4.5 metres for
the ground floor ceiling height
2.7 metres for
upper levels
allowance for
building structure and a 1 metre parapet.
After testing scenarios
for different building heights and upper level setbacks, the Built Form Review
recommended the following planning
provisions for buildings abutting Ocean Beach
Street wall
height – must not exceed 9 metres or two storeys measured from the centre
of the site’s frontage
Overall building
height – must not exceed 12 metres and only three levels of the building
may be visible from the footpath directly
opposite the relevant site in Ocean
Non-heritage
building upper levels – any third level must be set back a minimum of 4
metres from Ocean Beach Road.
The Built Form Review explains:
These parameters are intended to produce a street wall scale which
perpetuates the existing street wall character and allow modest
growth in a way
which protects this character yet provides improved spatial enclosure.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Campbell’s evidence:
The underpinning
urban rationale is appropriate for Sorrento.
Regarding the
- urban design
is about the relationship between spaces and buildings and how people inhabit
and relate to them
- many urban
design principles of scale relate to either the ‘human scale’ or
proportions and apply to designing good
streets or the spaces between
appropriate for the Built Form Review to apply such international precedents and
principles in Sorrento.
The Built Form
Review analysis found:
- the eastern
portion of Ocean Beach Road is the most enclosed with a ratio of 1:2.6
- two heritage
buildings (Continental Hotel and Stringers store) in the eastern portion
significantly contribute to Sorrento’s
character through their visual
streetscape ratio increases as it goes further west along Ocean Beach Road,
reaching up to 1:12.5
- the sense of
openness and enclosure varies significantly despite the same approximately
40-metre road reservation in the township.
Buildings that
better enclose and define the edge of the streetscape are the most valued
streetscape portions.
The proposed
built form provisions:
protect and maintain Sorrento’s heritage fabric
- will enable
modest infill development in the western portion of Ocean Beach Road where this
is presently lower scale development
and fewer heritage buildings
- will enable a
more consistent streetscape in terms of its sense of enclosure along Ocean Beach
three-dimensional mass modelling of potential built form scenarios:
- is appropriate
for considering and assessing the merits of the proposed planning
- is consistent
with the approach and methodology for Dromana that was successfully implemented
through Amendment C224morn
- represents the
existing built form condition of the township with white, detailed massing which
contain architectural details, such
as building facades, parapets, verandahs and
potential future massing form in an envelope manner without architectural
- is intended to
visually demonstrate the maximum potential built form massing outcome for each
- excludes other
details such as landscaping and planting.
Glossop’s evidence:
Supported the
proposed DDO28 mandatory provisions.
mandatory provisions:
- are justified
by the Activity Centre’s physical and policy context
- meet most of
the mandatory provision criteria set out in Planning Practice Note
maximum building heights are strategically justified to:
- preserve views
to the Continental Hotel tower from the west
reasonable views to the sand dunes west of the Activity
Submissions:
The Built Form
Review did not account for:
- views of the
sides of buildings especially where they are the original limestone
- having places
of interest to gather
- variation in
the streetscape with buildings of different height, bulk and
appearance.
The proposed two
storey / three storey recommendations would negatively impact Sorrento‘s
(iv) Discussion
Council is commended for its Built Form Review
approach. The Review relied on evidence-based data, predominantly
three-dimensional
modelling, to better understand the potential impact of new
built form on existing heritage buildings and key vantage points.
The Amendment appropriately applies mandatory provisions to circumstances
that meet the criteria set out in Planning Practice Note
59. For example,
applying mandatory maximum building heights to appropriately respond to
surrounding heritage buildings and key
vantage points. The three-dimensional
modelling demonstrated how exceeding these heights would most likely result in
an acceptable
design response to the Activity Centre.
The Built Form Review explains why the 4-metre upper level setback will
preserve views to the sand dunes while achieving a proportional
response to a
sense of streetscape enclosure. It does not explain why the 4-metre upper level
setback is sought to be applied only
to non-heritage buildings. The Panel does
not comment further on this matter because this streetscape response was not
any submission.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
Built Form Review approach, including the mix of recommended mandatory and
discretionary provisions that informed
the Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 28 provisions is generally appropriate.
2.3 Strategic justification
(i) Evidence and submissions
submission – the Amendment is:
consistent with
the PE Act section 4(1) planning objectives because it will:
- allow for
infill development in the Ocean Beach Road Commercial Precinct that is
compatible with the role and function of the Sorrento
- ensure that
new development protects and enhances the identified unique heritage and built
form character of this sensitive coastal
- introduce
mandatory and discretionary built form requirements to ensure that these
outcomes are achieved
greater clarity and certainty to the community about development expectations in
the precinct
strategically
supported by State and local policies (summarised in Chapter
Submissions:
development seeking to achieve growth will negatively impact Sorrento’s
Disagree with
the Built Form Review that “
there must be room for growth
along Ocean Beach Road.
Mr Campbell’s evidence – The
strategic planning and design process is well-considered and legitimate.
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
The Amendment is
strategically justified.
strategically justified by the accompanying Built Form Review.
The proposed low
levels of built form change are acceptable.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council and Mr Glossop that
the Amendment is strategically justified.
The Planning Scheme designates Sorrento as a Small Township Activity Centre
that services a population of between 5,000 to 10,000
people with a leasable
floor area of 3,000 to 10,000 square metres. This reflects the Activity
Centre’s constrained location:
just over 3
kilometres east of Point Nepean National Park (near the tip of the Mornington
northeast of the Sorrento Ocean Beach sand dunes
west of Sorrento beach
without regular
convenience public transport as an alternative to a private
The Amendment appropriately responds to policy objectives
and locational constraints by proposing planning provisions that will enable
low level of growth in the Activity Centre. The Panel considers these
provisions in more detail in this report.
(iii) Conclusions
For the reasons set out
in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
supported by and implements the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
well founded and strategically justified
proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
3 Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28
3.1 Design objectives
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed design objectives are appropriate for implementing
the intended built form outcomes.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions to the original exhibited Amendment in
The proposed
DDO28 provisions and restrictive covenant on 3317 Point Nepean Road (Quamby)
seek to achieve a low-scale built form that
‘steps down’ with the
land topography.
objectives should protect important views and vistas including Quamby and the
Continental Hotel.
objectives should provide guidance on the impact of built form on the reasonable
sharing of views.
There are no
design objectives relating to roof design or signage.
The revised
design objectives are too broad and poorly drafted.
Glossop’s evidence:
The re-exhibited
design objectives accurately summarise the preferred built form character.
(Version 1) fourth design objective is not supported because:
Protecting all
views from Ocean Beach Road and the foreshore to all heritage buildings appears
excessive. It also has potential to
significantly impact development outcomes in
a manner which is unclear.
In terms of
Quamby, it is evident from the completed modelling that views to the gable of
Quamby will be available from the opposite
side of the intersection in Point
Nepean Road (refer Figure 45 of the Built Form Review). More views would be
available from further
west. From a town planning perspective, this seems like
adequate protection for a locally significant dwelling.
Campbell’s evidence:
Supported the
proposed building heights and setbacks to deliver an appropriate protection of
views to Quamby, the Continental Hotel
and Stringers Stores.
planting diminishes the current views towards these three heritage
Comfortable with
DDO28 (Version 1) which includes both Quamby and the Continental Hotel in the
fourth design objective.
The north-east
corner would be a fair and reasonable location to reference the protection of
views, but the view location does not
need to be specified.
Council submission – the DDO28 design objectives:
sufficient guidance for the future development
are not too
broad or poorly drafted
framework for achieving a desired outcome in the built environment so that
development is well-designed and contributes
positively to the community
act as guiding
principles and specify the expected design characteristics and qualities
accessible, safe, diverse, enjoyable places
accommodate
various needs, while also respecting the existing character of the area
as re-exhibited,
are appropriate but the fourth objective could be revised to reference
maintaining views to the heritage-listed Quamby
(Final version) fourth design objective was revised to:
To protect views from Ocean Beach Road to the back beach sand dunes to the
west and the foreshore to the east, and views from Ocean
Beach Road and the
foreshore to heritage buildings including the Continental Hotel tower and
‘Quamby’ (3317 Point Nepean
DDO28 (Final version) also included a new Diagram 4 to support this
DDO28 (Final version) Diagram 4
(iii) Discussion
The design objectives generally provide a balanced
approach to guiding future development and delivering what is sought to be
through the Built Form Review.
The fourth design objective aims to protect views towards natural features
and the heritage listed Continental Hotel. DDO28 (Version
1) also seeks to
protect views to all heritage buildings in the Activity Centre including
The Panel considers the fourth objective will be achieved:
because of the
extraordinarily 40-metre-wide road reservation that provides an uninterrupted
view towards the Activity Centre buildings
when standing west in front of the
large row of trees along the foreshore
through the
restrictive mandatory maximum building heights and setbacks proposed in
However, the fourth design objective:
does not have
evident strategic justification to support such a broad objective or associated
planning provisions
redrafted to improve clarity, focus and effectiveness in delivering the
preferred built form outcomes.
On the first issue, there is no clear
support in the Built Form Review or adopted heritage study referenced in the
Planning Scheme
to justify protecting the view to all heritage buildings and for
singling out the Quamby building. Singling out Quamby would elevate
same importance as the Continental Hotel. For reasons explained below, this is
inappropriate.
All the contributory buildings in the Ocean Beach Road heritage precinct are
clearly visible from the public realm when travelling
through the Activity
Centre. This includes the Continental Hotel, Mornington Hotel (now Koonya
Hotel) and Stringers stores which
the heritage study regard as landmark
buildings. People can readily appreciate the historic streetscape that has
existed since Victoria’s
early history. However, no document can clearly
explain why these buildings must be viewed from the foreshore at a significantly
diminished scale up a steep escarpment.
As noted by the Panel at the Hearing, its inspection along the foreshore next
to the review area confirmed that views of Quamby and
the Continental Hotel
were largely
impeded by the pines along Point Nepean Road, and the landscaping further up
Point Nepean Road to the west
between trees due east of Point Nepean Road at its bend, and as you left the
foreshore area along the northern footpath
of Point Nepean Road and at its
intersection with Esplanade.
No party or expert at the Hearing
disputed this.
Council preferred to protect views of the heritage buildings from the eastern
gateway by vehicle and by foot. This is reflected in
DDO28 (final version)
which includes a viewshed from the north-east corner of Point Nepean Road and
Esplanade within the decision
guidelines.
The Panel considers that most visitors to the foreshore will have their
attention directed towards the water and the pier. Protecting
views from the
foreshore, being a large-and-difficult area to define, is too ambiguous and does
not reflect the desired viewing locations
nominated by Council in the DDO28
(Final version) and supported by Mr Campbell at the Hearing.
Another issue is that DDO28 does not apply to properties between the
foreshore, other than 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road and
Constitution
properties. This means DDO28 including the fourth objective would not apply to
most properties within the foreground of
views towards the Activity Centre.
The reference to views from the foreshore to heritage buildings should be
deleted. The Design Objectives provide enough guidance
buildings. Chapter 3.6 discusses what specific views should be protected in the
development of the corner
Council relied on the
Ocean Beach Road Commercial Precinct Sorrento
Heritage Policy
(the heritage study) to justify views towards Quamby. This
document is a heritage study, not a policy, and is referred once as a
guideline in the interim DDO28. It is largely untested to determine whether its
content is suitable to be referred to in
the Planning Scheme. The Panel has
weighted this document accordingly. This is another issue discussed in Chapter
3.6 of this report.
The heritage study categorises 3317 Point Nepean Road (Quamby) as a
contributory property within a broader heritage place –
the Ocean Beach
Road Commercial Heritage Precinct. Unlike the Continental Hotel, it is not an
individually significant heritage
The Built Form Review does not specifically seek to protect of views to
Quamby. Rather, when referring to the appropriate setbacks
for streetscape
character, it states:
‘the design response will moderate built form at the site and also
protect views to the heritage listed ‘Quamby’
(at 3317 Point Nepean
Road) from the foreshore.’
Without relevant strategic work, there is insufficient justification to
protect views to Quamby or to specifically reference it in
For reasons outlined above, the Panel agrees with Mr Glossop regarding the
fourth design objective. The outcome sought through this
objective is excessive
when considering:
the existing
sweeping views of the township from the wide road reservation that will never be
there is no
strategic reason to protect such an extensive view, including Quamby which is
not an individually significant heritage
considerable documentation to support views towards the state heritage protected
and individually listed Continental Hotel.
It was designed as a landmark with a
tower to be viewed at a distance, particularly from the foreshore. The
re-exhibited building
height and setback provisions will not result in a loss of
views to the Continental Hotel tower as demonstrated in the built form
modelling. The Panel supports protecting views to its tower and referencing it
in the fourth design objective, as it reflects what
the built form provisions
are intended to achieve.
The design objective should be revised to clarify which views to the
Continental Hotel tower are sought to be protected.
The Panel considers that building heights and setbacks in Tables 1 and 2 will
appropriately protect the Continental Hotel tower, as
demonstrated by the built
form modelling. However, discretionary minimum setbacks at 3293-3295 Point
Nepean Road may have implications
on those views dependant on the viewpoint.
The viewpoint shown in DDO28 (Final version) from the corner of Point Nepean
Esplanade is appropriate.
The Stringers Stores building is an individually significant heritage place
that can be appreciated through its high exposure at the
corner of Ocean Beach
Road and Point Nepean Road. While there is no strategic basis to protect a view
of it from the foreshore,
the steep topography will achieve this outcome.
Having said that, it would be inappropriate for the fourth objective to refer to
the Stringers Stores building because DDO28 does not apply to any property
between it and the foreshore along the northern side of
Ocean Beach Road.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
Panel concludes:
design objectives are generally appropriate for achieving what is sought through
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28.
is insufficient justification to protect views from the foreshore to all
heritage buildings, noting this outcome will be achieved
by the existing
40-metre-wide road reservation and proposed low scale mandatory maximum building
heights and minimum setbacks.
is insufficient justification to protect views from the foreshore to
‘Quamby’ at 3317 Point Nepean Road because
it is a contributory
building to a broader heritage precinct that does not warrant view
protection.
fourth design objective should be revised to refer to protecting views from the
corner of Point Nepean Road and Esplanade to the
Intercontinental Hotel tower
rather than relying on a broader reference to the entire
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and
Development Overlay Schedule 28, as shown in,
, to revise the fourth design
objective regarding heritage buildings to refer to protecting views from the
corner of Point Nepean
Road and Esplanade to the Continental Hotel
3.2 Definitions
(i) The issues
issues are whether it is appropriate for DDO28 to define:
Building Height
Ground Floor
(ii) Background
The re-exhibited DDO28 includes definitions for
Heritage Building, Ground Floor Level, Level 1 and Level 2, Any Other Street
means a building on or within 200mm of a boundary.
Building height
has the definition set out at Clause 73.01. Building
height excludes architectural features, masts, building services (including
overruns) or stairwells provided:
They do not
exceed the height limits by more than 4 metres; and
The combined
floor area of such features does not exceed 10% of the top storey of a building;
They are setback
at least 2 metres from the edge of the roofline on which they are
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
Supported using
the building height definition of Clause 73.01.
Recommended
enclosed stairwells be removed from the exclusions given this would constitute
an additional ‘storey’.
The definition
of Ground Floor Level in DDO28 (Version 1) appeared to not achieve its desired
outcome, instead reflecting the definition
for Ground Level within Clause
Mr Campbell’s evidence:
appropriate to provide parameters for exclusions to the mandatory maximum
building height for architectural features as proposed
in the building height
definition.
The Version 1
definition for ground floor level is incorrect and suggests that the level would
follow the slope of the land.
Council’s submission: –
DDO28 (Version 1) revised the re-exhibited version to:
definition for Abutting to clarify that a building more than 200 millimetres
from the front boundary does not need to comply
with the mandatory height
definition for building height to avoid unnecessary duplication with the general
definition in Clause 73.01
building height exclusions to the mandatory provisions at Table 1
definition:
Ground Floor Level
means the natural level of a
site at any point.
DDO28 (final version) deleted the definition for Ground Floor Level and
Ground Floor
means the building level closest to the natural ground of
the Ocean Beach Road frontage.
(iv) Discussion
The re-exhibited built form provisions rely on the
Clause 73.01 definition for building height. The Panel supports DDO28 (final
which removes the building height definition to avoid duplication with
other provisions. This approach is consistent with drafting
advice in the
Practitioner’s Guide.
The Panel agrees with Mr Campbell that it is appropriate to apply building
height exclusions such as architectural features that can
exceed the mandatory
maximum building height so that the DDO28 design objectives can be achieved.
The exclusions should be separate
to, but reference the mandatory provisions in
DDO28 Table 1.
The Panel agrees with Mr Glossop to the extent that allowing a room for a
stairwell would mean an additional storey for that portion
of the roof.
However, DDO28 appropriately recognises the need for necessary building
infrastructure including lift overruns, plant
and stairwells. The definition
specifies each exclusion so all other spaces such as rooms would be prohibited.
DDO28 also applies
further parameters such as a maximum height and setbacks to
ensure an appropriate design response. The Panel therefore agrees with
Campbell that the proposed building height exclusion parameters are
appropriate.
The Panel agrees with DDO28 (Version 1) which deleted the
‘Abutting’ definition. This definition is unnecessary because
re-exhibited DDO28 does not vary from the general understanding of the term,
being a property or building that shares a common
The DDO28 (Version 1) definition of Ground Floor Level adds confusion to the
schedule’s operation, as it appears to refer to
the natural ground
Planning Scheme Clause 73.01 does not define Ground Floor, Level 1 or Level
2, however ground floor is commonly referred to in planning
schemes throughout
Victoria, most commonly with regard to activating ground floor levels in
commercial zones.
The DDO28 definition for Ground floor, Level 1 and Level 2 has been applied
to provide clarity for visibility of levels and setbacks
of upper levels in the
mandatory provisions for sites abutting Ocean Beach Road.
For consistency and clarity, DDO28 should adopt the approach taken in the
other Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme DDO schedules,
including DDO13, which
refer to storeys and levels in the built form provisions. Diagram 1 helps to
interpret the built form provisions
by labelling each level.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
Panel concludes that Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 should:
define Building Height, Ground Floor Level, Level 1, Level 2 or Abutting
the relating storey number to each reference to building level
to building elements and a threshold for exempting the need for a permit
Building height exclusions from Definitions to Mandatory Requirements (Entire
DDO28 area).
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and
Development Overlay Schedule 28, as shown in,
a) delete the definitions for Building Height,
Ground Floor Level, Level 1, Level 2 and Abutting
b) move the building height exclusions and
parameters from Definitions to Mandatory Requirements.
3.3 Amenity provisions
(i) The issue
issue is whether the DDO28 provisions that include Clause 55 types of standards
are appropriate and justified.
(ii) Background
The Built Form Review recommended the following
Clause 55 amenity related standards B17, B19, B20, B21, B22 and B24 be reflected
DDO28 as discretionary provisions.
The re-exhibited DDO28 included:
All buildings (irrespective of land use) which have an abuttal to land in a
residential zone should achieve the following standards
set out at Clause 55.04
of the Planning Scheme:
Standard B17
Side and rear setbacks
Standard B19
Daylight to existing windows
Standard B20
North facing windows
Standard B21
Overshadowing open space
Standard B22
Overlooking
Standard B24
Noise impacts.
DDO28 (Version 1) and subsequent versions included
discretionary provisions that replicated or were similar to the Clause 55
without referring to the standards elsewhere in the Planning
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
The proposed
provisions for Ocean Beach Road properties may impact the amenity of
neighbouring properties between George Street and
Point Nepean Road.
Rear building
setbacks are needed to respond to amenity such as
overshadowing.
DDO28 (Version 1) introduced in General
Requirements:
New buildings and works above 4.5 metres in height on sites which abut land
in a residential zone should be set back from the side
or rear boundary 1 metre,
plus 0.3 for every metre of height over 4.5 metres up to 6.9 metres, plus 2
metre for every metre of height
over 6.9 metres. Setbacks are demonstrated in
New buildings and works on sites abutting an unnamed laneway which abut land
in a residential zone should be setback from the boundary
between the laneway
and the land in the residential zone, at least 1 metre, plus 0.3 for every metre
of height over 4.5 metres up
to 6.9 metres, plus 2 metre for every metre of
height over 6.9 metres. Setbacks are demonstrated in Diagram 3.
Council submission:
The DDO28 (from
Version 1) amenity provisions are discretionary and will sufficiently protect
residential properties from unreasonable
amenity impacts such as
overshadowing.
The overlooking,
overshadowing and north-facing window provisions should be written in DDO28
rather than referring to the relevant
Clause 55.04 standards because they
reflect standards that existed before Amendment VC267.
Land abutting
land in a residential zone should achieve standards set out in Clause 55.04 of
the Planning Scheme.
The proposed
setback provisions for these types of properties are appropriate.
Glossop’s evidence:
DDO28 contains
requirements that apply Clause 55 style side and rear setbacks where land
directly abuts residential land or abuts
a laneway that has an abuttal to
residential land.
DDO28 requires
new buildings and works to achieve Clause 55 standards for daylight to new
windows, setbacks from north facing windows,
overshadowing open space,
overlooking and noise impacts.
ensure an acceptable built form relationship through these requirements.
DDO28 should be
revised to reflect the Clause 55 requirements wording introduced through
Amendment C267.
DDO28 provisions
should be updated to reflect the revised Clause 55 requirements, particularly
the standards names, introduced through
Amendment VC267.
Officer’s preference to not duplicate the Clause 55 standards in DDO28 is
It is sufficient
to simply refer to the Clause 55 standards themselves.
(iv) Discussion
The amenity provisions proposed for the DDO28
General Provisions form an appropriate framework for assessing the potential
impact of future development proposals. The Built Form Review broadly
supports these amenity provisions. Many of them reflect,
or are a revised
version of, existing residential amenity standards in Planning Scheme Clause
The discretionary Clause 55 amenity provisions have been applied for decades.
One of them includes Standard B2-3 (formerly B17) regarding
side and rear
setbacks which has an objective:
To ensure that the height and setback of a building from a boundary responds
to the existing or preferred neighbourhood character
and limits the impact on
the amenity of existing dwellings or small second dwellings.
Standard B4-3 (Overshadowing and secluded open space) and Standard B4-4
(Overlooking) are different from the exhibited DDO28 version
but are appropriate
within the Activity Centre context.
The amenity provisions that vary to those found in similar Clause 55
standards should be expressed independently in DDO28. Council’s
for replicating amenity provisions that seek to achieve the same outcomes as
those in Clause 55 are the same reasons why
the Panel considers they should not
be repeated in DDO28.
The Commercial 1 Zone applies to all land affected by DDO28 and, includes the
following decision guidelines for buildings and works
that require a planning
permit (except for minor works or façade alterations):
The objectives, standards and decision guidelines of Clause 54, Clause
55 and Clause 57. This does not apply to an apartment development.
DDO28 should exclude amenity provisions that do not differ from the Clause 55
objectives and standards to avoid duplicating the Commercial
1 Zone decision
guidelines or creating inconsistencies with potential future Clause 55
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
amenity provisions that differ to the comparable Clause 55 provisions are
generally appropriate for what is sought to be achieved
in the Sorrento Activity
amenity provisions that replicate the Clause 55 objectives and standards (pre
Amendment VC267 or current) should be excluded so
that they do not duplicate the
Commercial 1 Zone decision guidelines.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28, as shown in,
a) add new residential interface
b) delete amenity provisions that duplicate the
Clause 55 standards.
3.4 Ocean Beach Road properties
(i) The issues
issues are whether, for buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road excluding heritage
buildings, it is appropriate and justified for
DDO28 to specify:
no setback from
the street boundary
building height of 12 metres
a Level 2 (third
floor) setback of at least 4 metres from Ocean Beach Road except for heritage
(ii) Background
The interim DDO28 that exists in the Planning Scheme
specifies a mandatory:
minimum upper
level setback of 8 metres
maximum building
height of 11 metres.
The re-exhibited DDO28 includes the following
mandatory provisions:
For all buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road:
The street wall
height must not exceed two storeys or 9 metres measured from the centre of the
site’s frontage in Ocean Beach
The overall
building height must not exceed 12 metres and only three building levels may be
visible from directly opposite the relevant
site in Ocean Beach
For all buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road excluding heritage
Any Level 2 must
be set back a minimum of 4 metres from Ocean Beach Road.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submission:
The current
interim DDO28 already allows development of up to 11 metres (three
The Built Form
Review states:
At three storeys overall, the scale presents a better
enclosed streetscape and sense of spatial containment. A two storey street wall,
supported by a setback at the upper level, would also retain view lines towards
the sand dunes and the tower at the Continental Hotel.
The degree of setback of the upper level needs to be carefully managed. The
built form testing demonstrates that a deep (8m) setback
results in a third
storey element being visually recessive from the street, which fails to enclose
and contain the streetscape in
a similar manner as a two storey scale. Equally
though, a third storey with no or minimal setbacks results in a dominant built
that starts to block important view lines towards the sand dunes and
overwhelms the historic buildings in Ocean Beach Road.
A setback of 4 metres for upper level additions on non-heritage buildings has
been shown to balance these objectives and still provides
passive surveillance,
interaction with the street, and improves the streetscape’s height to
width ratio.
Views to the western sand dunes from within the Activity Centre play a
crucial role in defining the character and sense of place of
this area. The 4m
upper level setback for non heritage buildings will ensure that the shape and
form of the dunes are not lost over
new buildings, particularly from the
footpath on either side of Ocean Beach Road at George Street. This setback also
suitably balances
the retention of dune views with the desired enclosure of the
streetscape discussed in this report.
The re-exhibited
DDO28 responds to the Built Form Review justification by applying a 4-metre
upper level setback on non-heritage buildings
that abut Ocean Beach
Submissions:
The mandatory
provisions including the maximum 12-metre building height should be expressed as
discretionary provisions.
The proposed
provisions for Ocean Beach Road properties may result in overdevelopment of the
Stringers Stores sites (2-8 Ocean Beach
The existing
interim 8-metre upper level setback should be retained rather than applying the
proposed 4-metre setback.
Mr Campbell’s evidence – The
proposed DDO28 provisions will:
achieve the
objectives of maintaining Sorrento’s low-rise built form character along
Ocean Beach Road
enable limited
infill development opportunities above and behind the shop fronts
enable upper
level activities for residents and visitors to enjoy Sorrento’s attributes
and attractions
aid passive
public realm surveillance and walkability in and around the Activity
At the Hearing, Mr Campbell confirmed on a map of the
Activity Centre that views towards the sand dunes from Ocean Beach Road would
start emerging from the Continental Hotel.
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
A balance will
always need to be struck between retaining and responding to certain features
and allowing change in a context that
is, to an extent, facilitative.
The combination
of DDO28 provisions will ensure an acceptable built form relationship is
achieved for new development along Ocean
Beach Road.
(iv) Discussion
The Built Form Review explains why a sense of
enclosure is important to the streetscape and for people who use the Activity
Its associated modelling demonstrates why certain heights and setbacks
better respond to achieving this outcome without impacting
on other values it
seeks to achieve such as views towards the sand dunes. The proposed height and
setback provisions faithfully
translate the Built Form Review findings.
The Panel carefully considered issues in submissions regarding these
provisions but could not see how they would negatively impact
surrounding
properties or intended outcomes. Of note, these built form provisions form part
of a framework for considering future
permit applications. A future permit will
only be issued where it meets the necessary policy objectives and associated
provisions.
This means that not all properties are likely to be developed to
the full extent possible.
The Built Form Review modelling demonstrates that views to the sand dunes are
predominantly from the public realm, being the more
central part of the
40-metre-wide Ocean Beach Road reservation. As confirmed by Mr Campbell, when
walking westerly, these views
start to emerge at some point around the
Continental Hotel. The modelling shows no perceptible difference in the
viewshed towards
the sand dunes between the 4-metre and 8-metre upper level long
Ocean Beach Road properties. Accordingly, there is no justification
setback greater than 4 metres.
The Panel agrees with Council’s submission that exceeding the proposed
mandatory provisions would result in unacceptable outcomes
in most instances,
but not for reasons relating to sand dune views. It should be applied as a
mandatory provision to achieve the
appropriate sense of streetscape enclosure
and consistent street wall along Ocean Beach Road.
The DDO28 drafting does not enable non-intrusive fixtures such as balustrades
to edge of balconies or other lower fixtures within
the 4-metre upper level
setback. If this is not the intended outcome, Council should consider
redrafting the DDO28 provisions to
exempt such fixtures and to introduce a new
decision guideline that seeks to consider the visual impact of any protrusion in
upper level setback.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
Built Form Review modelling justifies the mandatory maximum building height of
12 metres and 4 metre minimum upper level setback
for non-heritage
discretionary setbacks, including no setback to property boundary, in the final
version of Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28 are appropriate and
appropriately respond to heritage buildings.
should be enabled within the mandatory upper level setback of 4 metres with a
design guideline to consider potential visual
impact of such
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28, as shown in,
a) revise the mandatory requirements for sites
fronting Ocean Beach Road to allow fixtures in the setback area provided that
are no more than 2 metres in length
b) revise the decision guideline regarding the
upper level setbacks to consider how fixtures in the setback area respond to the
streetscape.
3.5 Sites abutting any other street (excluding Grange
(i) The issue
issue is whether the discretionary built form provisions proposed for sites
abutting any other street (excluding Grange Road)
are appropriate and
(ii) Background
The exhibited DDO28 included the
Constitution
Road properties in the Central sub-precinct. The re-exhibited DDO28 designated
Constitution
Hill Road properties within the Side Streets group.
sub-precinct and re-exhibited Side streets provisions
Requirement
DDO28 version
(Central sub-precinct)
(Central sub-precinct)
Re-exhibited
(Side Streets)
Maximum street wall height
8 metres/2 storeys (mandatory)
9 metres/2 storeys (mandatory)
9 metres/2 storeys (discretionary)
Maximum building height
11 metres/3 storeys (mandatory)
12 metres/3 storeys (mandatory)
12 metres (mandatory)
Minimum building setback
8 metres from the front building line of the second storey below
(mandatory)
For site on a corner with a named road or lane: 3 metres from the side
street building line or the second storey below (mandatory)
0 metres for first two levels (mandatory).
4 metres for third storey (mandatory).
4 metres for third storey from Morce Avenue boundary. (mandatory).
* These provisions do not apply to unnamed lanes.
4 metres from the street above level 1 (discretionary)
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions – 19
Constitution
Hill Road should
be exempt from the mandatory 0 metre upper level mandatory street setback
because it was more in a residential setting
with existing landscape setbacks
than a commercial setting.
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
Agreed with
Council that a small front setback could be an acceptable built form outcome
along Constitutional Hill Road, particularly
if the abutting property is set
back from the street.
Recommended the
requirement be reworded to:
A front setback that is the same
distance as the lesser front wall setback of the existing buildings on the
abutting allotments facing
the front street or 4 metres, whichever is the
Mr Campbell’s evidence:
discretionary setback provisions to
Constitution
Hill Road properties.
setback at 19
Constitution
Hill Road would look out of
Council officers adopted Mr Glossop’s evidence and
included a new general requirement in DDO28 (Version 1):
Buildings should have:
a street wall
height not exceeding two storeys or 9 metres.
a 4 metre street
setback to any level above Level 1.
a front set back
the same distance of the existing building on the adjoining lot, or 4 metres,
whichever is the lesser.
(iv) Discussion
The re-exhibited DDO28 does not specify a mandatory
0 metre setback, but it includes a discretionary street wall height and a
of 4 metres above Level 1. This suggests an outcome of a street wall
built to the property boundary. These provisions apply to
any other street.
DDO28 applies to three properties that front
Constitution
Hill Road. One
being the Continental Hotel on the corner of Ocean Beach Road, followed to the
south by a relatively recent apartment
development which provides a landscaped
Constitution
Hill Road, and the remaining (undeveloped) land at 19
Constitution
Hill Road currently occupied by a Sorrento exchange building.
These provisions are therefore likely to only impact the Sorrento
The setback requirements for ‘Any other street’ also apply to two
properties behind
Constitution
Hill Road off Riley Lane, four properties
fronting Kerferd Avenue, one property fronting Kerferd Avenue and two properties
Melbourne Road. All properties sit within a similar context to
Constitution
Hill Road, being at the periphery of the Activity Centre and
adjoining a residential zone with a streetscape character of landscaped
Constitution
Hill Road’s character comprises landscaped setbacks in the
commercial and residential zoned land. A 0 metre upper level setback
remaining undeveloped parcel would be at odds with the existing streetscape
character. DDO28 (Version 1), which adopts Mr
Glossop’s recommendations,
will result in an appropriate outcome for the streetscape.
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes the
setback requirement for sites abutting any other street should be revised to a
front setback the same distance
of the existing building on the adjoining lot,
or 4 metres, whichever is the lesser.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and
Development Overlay Schedule 28, as shown in,
, to revise the general
requirements to specify a front setback the same distance of the existing
building on the adjoining lot, or
4 metres, whichever is the lesser.
3.6 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether DDO28
should apply to the 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site (former East
sub-precinct)
whether the
Point Nepean Road provisions should also apply to Grange Road (and exclude
Grange Road from the provisions for any other
whether the
proposed maximum building heights and minimum setbacks are appropriate and
(ii) Background
The exhibited and re-exhibited DDO28 included the
mandatory requirements for the East sub-precinct shown in
. The re-exhibited DDO28 renamed
the properties forming the East sub-precinct to ‘3293-3295 Point Nepean
Road Site’.
East sub-precinct and 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road site
Mandatory requirement
DDO28 version
Re-exhibited
Maximum street wall height
8 metres (2 storeys)
9 metres (2 storeys)
Requirement deleted
Maximum building height
8 metres (2 storeys)
12 metres (3 storeys)
9 metres (2 storeys)
Street setback for ground
and second storey
Match the setback of the building on the adjoining lot or the average of
the setback the buildings on either side of the lot
Replaced with a general requirement for new buildings to be set back to
match the building setback on the adjoining lot or 4 metres,
whichever is
Setback for third storey
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions to the original exhibited Amendment in
2022 regarding 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road:
DDO28 and its
proposed discretionary provisions are supported.
The proposed
maximum building heights and minimum setbacks are inappropriate and
disproportionate with adjacent heritage buildings
and foreshore area.
A two-storey
maximum building height with a large setback is appropriate.
Any development
must not diminish the view to Arthur’s Seat and the rest of the
Protrusions
should not be permitted above the maximum building height.
There should be
guidance for using and developing the land next to and within Grange Road,
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
There is a good
planning case to apply DDO28 to 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road.
The Built Form
Review says this site is:
‘... a gateway site into the
Activity Centre and provides a sense of arrival from the Queenscliff-Sorrento
Ferry Terminal and
for vehicles and pedestrians travelling along Point Nepean
recommended that DDO28 not apply to the site, mainly due to concern with the
prospect of it being developed with a three
storey building.
Later supported
DDO28 applying to the site based on the revised parameters set out in schedule
– a two storey height limit and
appropriate setback requirements.
The site is
physically separated from the main shopping strip but plays a role in framing
the arrival experience for visitors to the
activity centre.
Practice Note 58 states that when setting an activity centre boundary, it can be
appropriate to include:
‘... residential areas that are
integrated into the activity centre or surrounded by other uses that have a
strong functional
interrelationship with the activity centre even where limited
development opportunities exist.’
Planning Practice Note 58 principle could be applied to 3293-3295 Point Nepean
Road, even though it is zoned Commercial 1.
Mr Campbell’s
discretionary street setback provisions are appropriate to the site context,
being remote from the Ocean Beach Road precinct,
its position on the inside
‘elbow of the gateway’ and will assist in maintaining views towards
the Continental Hotel
and Quamby.
The two-storey
form compliments and bookends the form of the Koonya Hotel on the opposite
changes to apply the mandatory two-storey and 9-metre height provisions to built
form fronting Grange Road.
The increase
from 8 metres to 9 metres is appropriate because it allows for desired character
elements including a pitched roof.
appropriate to not specify a vantage point for protecting views to enable
discretion.
If a specific
vantage point was nominated, it would be fair and reasonable to nominate views
from the north-east corner of Point Nepean
Council submission:
Applying DDO28
to 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road is consistent with the adopted Ocean Beach Road
Built Form Review.
Not applying
DDO28 could expose the site to inappropriate development.
The built form
testing justifies the proposed building heights and setbacks, considering
surrounding built form character, the site’s
prominence and the need to
maintain the prominent views to the activity centre including the Continental
Hotel Tower.
The increase in
building height between the interim DDO28 and the re-exhibited DDO28 from 8
metres to 9 metres is appropriate to allow
slightly more generous floor to
ceiling heights and roof forms that reflect the area’s heritage
DDO28 (final
- applied the
mandatory building height requirements for ‘sites abutting Point Nepean
Road’ to sites with a Grange Road
Grange Road from the mandatory building height requirements for ‘sites
abutting any other street’
Grange Road from the discretionary provisions for ‘sites abutting any
other street’.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel supports applying DDO28 (Final version) to
3293-3295 Point Nepean Road.
The Built Form Review identifies the site as a visually and functionally
significant gateway site in the Activity Centre. While it
is physically
detached from the main retail area, Planning Practice Note 58 supports including
such land where it plays a contextual
or functional role in framing the Activity
The DDO28 provisions, particularly the highly restrictive mandatory maximum
two-storey building height, can appropriately manage built
considering adjoining and nearby built form and heritage character. There is no
supporting information or planning policy
to restrict development beyond what is
The mandatory maximum building height of 9 metres (two storeys) and
discretionary minimum setbacks appropriately enables design flexibility
built form parameters.
The maximum building height of two storeys rather than three storeys is
appropriate because:
it is supported
by the Built Form Review
the site is
separated from the three-storey Ocean Beach Road precinct and surrounded by one
and two storey built form limited by the
adjoining DDO3
appropriate bookend the site as a gateway to the Activity
The mandatory maximum building height of 9 metres
(re-exhibited DDO28) rather than 8 metres (interim DDO28) is appropriate
it will enable
appropriate built form character including pitched roof elements, parapets and
floor to ceiling heights that reflects
the commercial heritage character,
consistent with typical floor-to-ceiling measures in contemporary
developments
the built form
modelling demonstrates the additional metre will not impact views of the
Continental Hotel tower.
Revising the 0 metre setback (exhibited) to
a context responsive discretionary setback that
matches adjoining
setbacks or defaults to 4 metres (re-exhibited) provides a more sensitive
interface with adjacent buildings and
reinforces visual and heritage character
of this important gateway site.
The Panel has already found there is no strategic basis to protect views from
the foreshore to all heritage buildings in the Activity
Centre including Quamby.
Future development at 3293-3295 Point Nepean Road will not impact views towards
the Continental Hotel tower
from the proposed vantage point at the corner of
Point Nepean Road and Esplanade. Within this context, most proposals not in
with a mandatory setback could achieve acceptable outcomes. Any
potential impact to the Continental Hotel tower is likely to be
from development
on land on the southern side of Point Nepean Road outside DDO28 between
3293-3295 Point Nepean Road and the Continental
A discretionary minimum setback would enable Council to assess permit
applications proposing areas and structures such as outdoor
dining and balconies
within the specified setback that appropriately respond to the site’s
gateway corner site in a commercial
A new decision guideline should be introduced to support discretion in
determining appropriate setbacks for this corner site. It
should seek to
consider the streetscape character and the impact of development on views to the
Continental Hotel tower from the
corner of Point Nepean Road and Esplanade.
The re-exhibited Amendment intended to apply the mandatory maximum building
height of 9 metres (two storeys) to all of the 3293-3295
Point Nepean Road site.
The site also fronts Grange Road so referencing this road would remove any doubt
applies. This will ensure a consistent built form
approach across the entire site. For clarity, DDO28 should clarify that Grange
Road is excluded from mandatory and discretionary requirements for sites
abutting any other street.
There was no supporting information to explain what views of Arthur’s
Seat are available from the Activity Centre or how they
might be impacted by the
proposed built form provisions. The Panel is satisfied that Objective 4
references appropriate views for
protection, consistent with what is sought by
the Built Form Review.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
is appropriate and justified to apply Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28
to the 3293–3295 Point Nepean Road site.
The re-exhibited
mandatory maximum building height requirement for sites fronting Point Nepean
Road should also apply to sites fronting
Grange Road to ensure a consistent
built form approach across the 3293–3295 Point Nepean Road site.
and Development Overlay Schedule 28 should include a new decision guideline to
support discretion regarding setbacks from Point
Nepean Road and views to the
Continental Hotel tower.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28, as shown in,
a) revise the mandatory maximum building height
requirement for sites fronting Point Nepean Road to also apply to sites fronting
b) add a new decision guideline to consider
whether setbacks from Point Nepean Road are in keeping with the streetscape
and whether they will impact views from the corner of Point Nepean
Road and Esplanade to the Continental Hotel tower.
3.7 Requests for new DDO28 provisions
(i) The issues
issues are whether it is appropriate and justified to add provisions that:
development to be constructed in materials similar to heritage buildings
require signage
to protect the heritage and street character
exempt the named
lanes from the setback provisions.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
DDO28 should
- additional
requirements for new development to use materials similar to heritage buildings
such as limestone
- additional
signage requirements to protect heritage and street character
abutting some named lanes should be exempt from the setback
provisions.
Council submissions:
A discretionary
requirement in DDO28, alongside an existing design objective and the decision
guidelines will ensure building facades
respect existing heritage fabric.
Provisions will
ensure new buildings and works will respond to the materiality, colours and
proportions of existing buildings.
The Heritage
Overlay, which applies to most of the Activity Centre, already requires a permit
to construct or display a sign.
The Commercial 1
Zone and Clause 52.05 (Signs) require consideration of the impact of signs on
the character of an area.
The Built Form
Review suggested that a setback exemption for named lanes would result in less
cohesive development.
The proposed
design provisions will maintain a consistent built form in the Activity
Mr Glossop’s evidence:
drafting could be improved to clarify specific building design and materiality
outcomes being sought, including a general
requirement and clearer design
objectives regarding responding to coastal themes, vertical proportions and
colour schemes.
The Built Form
Review does not provide strategic justification to apply signage provisions
through DDO28 and further work would be
required to do so.
There is also
local policy which requires consideration of the impact of signage (Clause
There is no
justification to include signage provisions in DDO28 at this time.
(iii) Discussion
In response to a recommendation in the Built Form
Review, Council included the following requirement in the re-exhibited
Buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road should respond to the materiality,
colours and proportions (including glazing proportions and
floor to floor
heights) of existing buildings (particularly intact heritage buildings) in the
Beyond this, the Panel was not presented with strategic justification for
additional DDO28 requirements regarding building materials.
The proposed DDO28
and existing Heritage Overlay provide a sufficient framework for Council to
assess permit applications with regard
to materiality and building design that
is appropriate to the heritage context of Ocean Beach Road.
The need for additional signage provisions has also not been demonstrated.
Existing Planning Scheme provisions account for this,
including the Heritage
Overlay, Commercial 1 Zone, Clause 52.05 (Signs), and local policy as noted by
Mr Glossop. The Planning Scheme
has considerable provisions to properly assess
the impact of signage in the Activity Centre.
A setback exemption for some named laneways is not supported. The Panel
agrees with the finding of the Built Form Review that exempting
some sites to
allow greater growth opportunities would be illogical and potentially lead to
less cohesive development. Mr Glossop
and Mr Campbell did not identify the need
for any changes to setback requirements in this regard.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
no further changes are required to Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 to
include additional provisions
relating to building materials, signage or setback
exemptions for named lanes.
4 Other issues
4.1 Traffic and parking
(i) The issue
issue is whether the DDO28 provisions will enable development that will result
in reasonable traffic and transport impacts.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
Existing delays
and bottlenecks during the peak holiday season makes it almost impossible for
local residents to access any of Sorrento’s
villages and constrains the
area’s amenity.
Development
should be restricted to two storeys because Sorrento has existing traffic
congestion.
The Amendment
will enable development that will increase traffic and the need for more car
parking in the Sorrento township.
The proposed
maximum building heights will enable built form that will have negative
pedestrian and traffic safety outcomes.
New development
should include car parking because Sorrento has a parking
Council submission:
Traffic and car
parking issues are beyond the scope of the Amendment.
permit application for land in the Amendment Area must be assessed against
Clause 52.06 (Car Parking) of the Planning Scheme.
Clause 52.06
seeks to ensure the provision of an appropriate number of car parking spaces
having regard to likely car parking demand,
sustainable transport alternatives,
the efficient use of car parking spaces, while ensuring car parking does not
negatively affect
continues to investigate initiatives to assist in resolving existing traffic and
car parking related issues in Sorrento.
The Amendment
will not have unreasonable or significant impacts on traffic and car parking in
the Amendment Area and immediate vicinity.
No changes are
required to the Amendment in response to traffic and car parking
(iii) Discussion
The Amendment will not increase traffic and parking
issues through further development. Before interim DDO28 was introduced in
2016, the Activity Centre had less restrictions than what is proposed
through DDO28 provisions. The Amendment will therefore reduce
development
capacity thereby reducing the extent of traffic that would have otherwise been
The Activity Centre will experience modest growth because:
provisions will restrict development within building envelopes comprising
mandatory maximum building heights and minimum
property owner will take the opportunity to develop land to that
This extent of traffic associated with future development is
unlikely to result in notable impacts to the road network.
Having said that, the Panel agrees with Council that a planning permit
application in the Activity Centre will have to be assessed
against Clause
52.06. The application would need to demonstrate how car parking and traffic
generation can be accommodated without
negatively affecting amenity. Council
will be able to monitor traffic and parking matters through these ongoing
assessments.
(iv) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
and Development Overlay Schedule 28 will restrict development capacity through
its mandatory built form provisions compared
to planning provisions before its
interim version was introduced into the Planning Scheme, resulting in less
potential traffic volume
in the local road network.
permit application proposing development in the Activity Centre will be assessed
against Clause 52.06 to consider car parking and
the potential impact on the
surrounding road network.
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed DDO28 planning provisions will enable built form
that will result in unreasonable wind impact along
Ocean Beach Road.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submission – The Amendment did not consider
the impact of wind along Ocean Beach Road from future three-storey development
Council submission – The maximum building heights specified in DDO28
are unlikely to have any significant or unreasonable wind
impact at this
Mr Davies did not respond to this issue in his expert report. At the
Hearing, he agreed that DDO28 would not enable built form of
the scale that
would require any wind assessment.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council and Mr Davies. Ocean
Beach Road has a 40-metre-wide road reservation, while DDO28:
building heights to 12 metres (only one metre taller than the maximum height of
the General Residential Zone)
requires upper
level setbacks
will not enable
any tower which may result in the need to assess wind impact.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
proposed Design and Development Overlay Schedule 28 planning provisions will
enable low-scale built form that
will result in negligible wind impact along the
40-metre-wide Ocean Beach Road reservation.
DDO28 provisions need to be drafted to align with the Ministerial Direction 7(5)
and to include provisions enabled by the head
provisions in the parent DDO.
5.1.1 Structure
The Practitioner’s Guide states:
6.5.6 Using tables in a schedule – Defining land areas and
specifying conditions
Where specified, tables can be used in schedules to define particular land
and specify requirements that relate to the land.
The existing interim DDO28: Includes Table 1 which groups provisions by
sub-precinct then by provision type (maximum building heights
and minimum
Re-exhibited DDO28: Grouped provisions by provision type (mandatory and
discretionary).
DDO28 (Final version): Grouped provisions by provision type (mandatory and
discretionary) with a table for each that groups provisions
by location.
At the Hearing, the Panel referred to DDO28 which separates requirements for
a property into two locations – mandatory and general
requirement. The
Panel asked Council whether the requirements could be structured more clearly
and provided a sample DDO28 table
structure for Council to consider. Council
agreed that a tabulated form was easier to navigate. It included a table
structure in
DDO28 (Version 2) which continued to separate requirements for a
property in two different locations.
The Panel considers DDO28 should be structured so that a permit applicant can
easily navigate through the provisions. This can be
achieved by grouping the
provisions by location so the information for a property is one place. Grouping
them by whether they are
mandatory or discretionary requires having to browse
different parts of DDO28 to find provisions for the same property.
The table format for the mandatory and discretionary provisions (Tables 1 and
2) is clearer and therefore faster to navigate. However,
it does not assist
with finding provisions for a property in one place like DDO26 (Rosebud Activity
Centre) of the Planning Scheme
Council’s preferred format exists in some other DDO schedules in the
Planning Scheme and in other planning schemes. This does
not mean the format in
those schedules is the best way to communicate the DDO28 provisions or they
should be applied as the benchmark
for consistency across future DDO
5.1.2 New Diagram 4
DDO28 (Final version) included a new Diagram 4 (see
of this report).
At the Hearing, there was considerable discussion regarding the broad
requirement to consider the view of heritage buildings including
‘Quamby’ from the foreshore. As drafted, it appeared that a view
from any point along the foreshore should be considered.
Council subsequently
proposed a new Diagram 4 that indicated a single viewpoint and viewshed towards
where the Quamby building is
If the Panel found the view towards Quamby to be justified, the new Diagram 4
would have been helpful to explain where to measure
the visual impact from. The
previous broad reference to the foreshore was unhelpful. Diagram 4 helped
explain the viewpoint was
in fact not from the foreshore, as sought by the DDO28
design objectives, but rather from the corner of Point Nepean Road and
Nonetheless, with the benefit of seeing this location in the
proposed Diagram 4, the Panel considers it more easily described in
provisions without the need for a map.
5.1.3 Building and works
DDO28 includes in 2.0 (Buildings and works):
An application for buildings and works that does not meet a General
Requirement must demonstrate how the development will meet the
relevant Design
Objectives and Decision Guidelines.
A heritage building is defined as “
a building graded as either
‘contributory’ or ‘significant’ in a Heritage
In this instance, the first application requirement already requires an
application to demonstrate how the proposal achieves the design
objectives. It
is not appropriate for a permit application to demonstrate how it meets the
decision guidelines because they apply
to the responsible authority (Council).
Any decision guideline would relate to a provision elsewhere in DDO28 so there
to duplicate it in Clause 2.0 (Buildings and works).
Regarding a heritage building, Council has understandably applied the term
‘graded’ that appears in Planning Practice
Note 1. However,
Planning Practice Note 1 incorrectly regards ‘contributory’ and
‘significant’ as gradings.
A contributory property is one which
contributes to the precinct’s overall heritage significance whereas a
non-contributory
does not but new development may impact the surrounding
heritage fabric. These are not grades so the Panel suggests referring to
as ‘categories’.
5.1.4 Decision guidelines
Regarding decision guidelines, the
Practitioner’s Guide states:
Sets out, in policy neutral terms, matters that, if relevant, should be
considered by the decision-maker when exercising a discretion.
Decision guidelines should relate to the schedule objectives that they serve
and any statement of significance, if one is present.
They may refer to a
document but only if the document is incorporated in the scheme. A decision
guideline should not refer to a background
A decision guideline should not include an informal referral requirement.
Practitioner’s Guide section 6.5.11 provides examples of correct and
incorrect decision guidelines:
Correct: Whether
the siting, height and appearance of a building or works detrimentally affect
the landscape qualities of the area.
Incorrect: The
impact of the development on coastal scenic vantage points.
Panel notes Council’s changes to DDO28 to avoid duplication with other
provisions and to align with current drafting practice.
Similarly, the Panel
considers the decision guideline “
The impact of the proposal upon the
amenity of land in a residential zone”
should be deleted because it
duplicates:
the Commercial 1
Zone which includes a decision guideline to consider:
The interface
with adjoining zones, especially the relationship with residential areas.
(Decision guidelines) which requires a responsible authority to
The effect on the environment, human health and amenity of
The decision guidelines should be redrafted to:
align with the
drafting advice in the Practitioner’s Guide by expressing them in policy
neutral terms
not include any
5.2 Other drafting
5.2.1 2015 heritage study
interim DDO28 requires a permit application to demonstrate how the proposal
achieves the design objectives and the requirements of this schedule
and set out in the background document Ocean Beach Road Commercial
Sorrento Heritage Policy – For Planning Applications for Places in the
Heritage Overlay – September 2015 by
HLCD Pty Ltd
The re-exhibited Amendment excluded reference to this heritage study from
The 2015 heritage study was referred to often during the Hearing. Having
reviewed its contents, the Panel questioned this document
being referred to as
‘policy’. Council noted the document is not proposed to be an
incorporated or background document
in the Planning Scheme.
The Panel acknowledges the Amendment will delete reference to the 2015
heritage study once the revised DDO28 is introduced into the
Planning Scheme.
This is a good outcome because the 2015 heritage study provides content that is
typically found in similar studies.
It includes further explanatory information
and guidance in sections titled ‘Policy’. However, this content
present as policy. Accordingly, referring to the document as policy
can mislead people into thinking it includes policy content
and that it has some
statutory weight.
5.2.2 Clause 11.03
The re-exhibited Amendment proposed to revise local
policy at Clause 11.03-1L-01 (Activity centres - Mornington Peninsula) to exempt
the Activity Centre from the policy guidelines. Council subsequently proposed
to not progress these changes. It submitted:
the current
Planning Scheme wording is adequate, and the previously proposed changes are no
longer necessary
this resulted
from the changes introduced by Planning Scheme Amendment C271morn which
simplified the wording of this policy exemption.
The Panel agrees
with Council’s proposal to no longer revise Clause 11.03 for reasons set
out in its submission.
5.2.3 Heritage Design Guidelines
In response to a Panel question, Council confirmed
that adding “
New buildings should not exceed twelve metres in
” was not needed because the proposed mandatory maximum building
height of 12 metres would not enable such an outcome. The
Panel agrees.
5.3 Recommendations
recommends:
Delete all changes proposed to Clause
Amend Design and Development Overlay Schedule
28, as shown in,
a) make drafting changes that improve its clarity
and operation
b) structure the mandatory and general
requirements in a clearer and more intuitive format.
Amend the Heritage Design Guidelines: Sorrento Historic Precinct (Expires
30 June 2026) to delete the proposed “New buildings
should not exceed
twelve metres in height”.
A Document list
Description
Presented by
Panel Directions Hearing notice letter
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Submitter location map (Confidential for Panel use only)
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council (Council)
Hearing Timetable (version 2)
Part A submission with attachments (see Documents 6 to 24)
D5 Attachment A – Exhibited Planning Scheme Map No. 22DDO
D5 Attachment B – Amendment C286morn Submissions 1 to 35
D5 Attachment C – Amendment C286morn Submissions 36 to 77
D5 Attachment D – Submissions summary and officers' response
D5 Attachment E – Response to key submission themes
D5 Attachment F(a) – Mornington Peninsula Activity Centres Strategy
D5 Attachment F(b) – Mornington Peninsula Activity Centres Strategy
Appendices (May 2018)
D5 Attachment G – Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review (May
D5 Attachment H – Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built Form Review
(November 2021)
D5 Attachment I – Minister for Planning's authorisation letter (20
D5 Attachment J – Statement of Significance: Sorrento Commercial
Precinct (February 2022)
D5 Attachment K – Council meeting minutes (25 February 2025)
D5 Attachment L – Council adopted Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 28 (DDO28) (post re-exhibition track changes)
D5 Attachment M – Council meeting minutes (13 December 2021)
D5 Attachment N – Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Commercial Precinct
heritage policy (September 2015)
D5 Attachment O – Summary document of proposed built form and design
provisions (undated)
D5 Attachment P – Summary document of key changes to proposed DDO28
D5 Attachment Q – Department of Transport and Planning's informal
comments (19 July 2024)
D5 Attachment R – Summary of permit applications and permits
Site inspection plan
Hearing Timetable (version 3)
Email – with Addendum to Heritage Victoria submission
Expert report – John Glossop
Expert report – Alastair Campbell
Part B submission
Version 1 – Clause 11.03 (Planning for Places) [further changes from
re-exhibition shown in track]
Version 1 – Design and Development Overlay Schedule 10 (DDO10) [no
change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – DDO28 [further changes from re-exhibition shown in
Version 1 – Clause 72.04 Schedule (Incorporated Documents) [no
change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Clause 72.08 Schedule (Background Documents) [no change
from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Clause 74.01 Schedule (Application of Zones, Overlays
and Provisions) [no change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Incorporated Document - Heritage Design Guidelines [no
change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Background Document - Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built
Form Review Report May 2024 (Appendix A - Built Form Modelling)
[no change from
re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Background Document - Ocean Beach Road Sorrento Built
Form Review (Mornington Peninsula Shire, May 2024) [no change
re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Explanatory Report [no change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Instruction Sheet [no change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Map Sheet No 22DDO (amend areas which are affected by
DDO28) [no change from re-exhibition]
Version 1 – Map Sheet No 22DDO (showing areas to be deleted from
DDO10 and DDO28) [no change from re-exhibition]
Presentation – John Glossop
Panel site inspection photos
Hearing submission
Kenneth Grenda
Hearing submission
Nepean Conservation Group Inc
DDO28 – Panel draft
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C204 Panel Report
closing submission
DDO28 (Version 2)
Email with attachments (see Documents 53 to 55)
DDO28 (Final version) – tracked changes
DDO28 (Final version) – clean
Extract, Council meeting minutes dated 12 October 2025 regarding Sorrento
Heritage Policy 2015
Appendix B Panel
recommended DDO28
The Panel recommended changes are based on the re-exhibited version of the
planning provisions and are shown as:
Tracked Added
Tracked Deleted
SCHEDULE 28 TO CLAUSE 43.02 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as
OCEAN BEACH ROAD COMMERCIAL PRECINCT
1.0 Design objectives
To ensure development makes a positive contribution to the fine-grain,
low-scale character of the Ocean Beach Road commercial precinct,
allowing for limited growth opportunities.
To support a well proportioned and consistent building interface to Ocean
Beach Road, with two generous storeys creating a street
wall (outside of
heritage places) and up to one recessive upper level.
To ensure development responds to the proportions, form, siting, materiality
and detailing of intact heritage buildings, including
the existing limestone
buildings and the converted former dwellings at the western end of Ocean Beach
To protect views from Ocean Beach Road to
the surrounding environs,
the back beach sand dunes to the west and the foreshore to
the east, and
views from Ocean Beach Road and the corner of Point Nepean Road
and Esplanade to
heritage buildings including
ontinental Hotel tower
views from the
To ensure development makes a positive contribution to the public realm and
enhances the local sense of a coastal village.
2.0 Buildings and works
This overlay contains Mandatory Requirements, which must be met and General
Requirements, which should be met.
A permit cannot be granted to construct a building or construct or carry out
works which are not in accordance with a Mandatory Requirement
except in any of
the following circumstances:
The building is
listed on the Victorian Heritage Register.
Alterations or
additions to a lawfully existing building that exceeds the height limits set out
in this overlay, provided the existing
maximum building height is not increased
and the development is consistent with the Design Objectives and Decision
Guidelines of
this schedule.
reconstruction of heritage buildings and features.
construction of g
round floor verandahs over the
An application for buildings and works that does
not meet a General Requirement must demonstrate how the development will meet
relevant Design Objectives and Decision Guidelines.
Definitions
means a building on or within 200mm
of a boundary.
Building height has the definition set out at
Clause 73.01. Building height excludes architectural features, masts, building
(including lift overruns) or stairwells provided:
not exceed the height limits by more than 4 metres; and
combined floor area of such features does not exceed 10% of the top storey of a
building; and
setback at least 2 metres from the edge of the roofline on which they are
Heritage building
means a building
categorised
as either ‘contributory’
or ‘significant’ in a Heritage Overlay.
Ground Floor Level
means the natural level of
a site at any point.
means the second floor of a building
or the first floor above ground level.
means the third floor of a building
or the second floor above ground level.
Any other street
refers to a side street or named laneway but excludes
Ocean Beach Road, Point Nepean Road,
Grange Road
and Morce Avenue.
Mandatory Requirements
Table 1: Buildings and works
requirements
Mandatory requirements
General requirements
Entire DDO28 area
A permit must not be granted for new buildings, including the
replacement of an existing building, and/or works which exceed the maximum
building heights specified below. The maximum building height excludes
architectural features, masts, building services (including
lift overruns) or
stairwells provided:
They do not
exceed the height limits by more than 4 metres.
The combined
floor area of such features does not exceed 10% of the top storey of a
setback at least 2 metres from the edge of the roofline facing the street
frontage or any side street/s on which they are
level additions to heritage buildings should be set back behind the primary roof
form of the building.
pedestrian connections linking Ocean Beach Road to Morce Avenue should be
maintained.
should provide an active interface at street level.
services including waste, loading, parking and service cabinets should be
located away from streets and public spaces.
Sites abutting Ocean Beach Road
wall height must not exceed two storeys or 9 metres measured from the centre of
the site’s frontage in Ocean Beach
The overall
building height, as measured from the Ocean Beach Road frontage, must not exceed
12 metres and only three storeys may
be visible when viewed from 1.6 metres
above natural ground level at the street boundary of the site (or sites)
directly opposite
the centre of the subject site in Ocean Beach Road, as shown
in Diagram 1. If there is no site directly opposite (if there is a road)
view line should be taken from what would be the continuation of the street
boundary directly opposite the relevant site in Ocean
Beach Road.
heritage buildings, any Level 2 (third storey) must be set back a minimum of 4
metres from the front wall of the Ground
Floor and Level 1
Fixtures may extend into the setback area provided
that they are no more than 2 metres in length.
built to the street boundary.
situated at a
corner, should have a setback from any side street above Level 1 (second storey)
to express and respond to the primary
two level character of Ocean Beach
respond to the materiality, colours and proportions (including glazing
proportions and floor to floor heights) of existing
buildings (particularly
intact heritage buildings) in the street.
Sites with a frontage to Point Nepean Road or Grange Road
The overall building height must not exceed two storeys or 9
Sites with a frontage to Point Nepean Road
Buildings should be set back from Point Nepean Road the same distance as
the setback of the front wall of the existing building on
the adjoining lot, or
4 metres, whichever is greater.
Sites that abut Morce Avenue or any other street
The overall building height must not exceed 12 metres.
Sites adjoining a heritage building
wall of building should be set back to match the front wall of the adjoining
heritage building.
Sites adjoining a heritage building on both sites
setback of the building from Ocean Beach Road should match the setback of the
greater of the two front walls of the adjoining
Sites abutting any other street
Buildings should have:
a street wall
height not exceeding two storeys or 9 metres.
street setback to any level above Level 1 (second storey).
a front set
back the same distance of the existing building on the adjoining lot, or 4
metres, whichever is the lesser.
Sites which abut land in a residential zone
above 4.5 metres in height should be set back from the side or rear boundary 1
metre, plus 0.3 for every metre of height
over 4.5 metres up to 6.9 metres, plus
1 metre for every metre of height over 6.9 metres. Setbacks are demonstrated in
Sites abutting an unnamed laneway which abut land in a residential
should be setback from the boundary between the laneway and the land in the
residential zone, at least 1 metre, plus 0.3
for every metre of height over 4.5
metres up to 6.9 metres, plus 1 metre for every metre of height over 6.9 metres.
Setbacks are
demonstrated in Diagram 3.
Sites which abut land in a residential zone (or abut an unnamed
laneway which abuts land in a residential zone)
Buildings should meet the following requirements:
B4-1 Daylight to existing windows
B4-2 Existing north-facing windows
B4-3 Overshadowing and secluded open space
B4-4 Overlooking
B5-6 Noise impacts
For all buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road:
street wall height must not exceed two storeys or 9 metres measured from the
centre of the site’s frontage in Ocean Beach
overall building height must not exceed 12 metres and only three building levels
may be visible from directly opposite the relevant
site in Ocean Beach
For all buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road
excluding heritage buildings:
Level 2 must be set back a minimum of 4 metres from Ocean Beach
For buildings fronting Point Nepean
overall building height must not exceed two storeys or 9
For buildings abutting Morce Avenue or any
other street:
overall building height must not exceed 12
Diagram 2 – Setbacks for sites directly abutting residential
Diagram 3 – Setbacks for sites directly abutting unnamed laneway
that directly abuts residential land
General Requirements
New buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road should be built to the street
boundary except for sites adjoining a heritage building, where
the front walls
of new buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road should be set back to match the front
street setback of the adjoining
heritage building. Where adjoining a heritage
building on both sides, the front setback from Ocean Beach Road should match the
of the two front street setbacks of the adjoining
New buildings in Point Nepean Road should be set back the same
distance as the setback of the front wall of the existing building
adjoining lot, or 4 metres, whichever is greater.
New buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road and situated at a corner
should have a setback from any side street above Level 1 to express
and respond
to the primary two level character of Ocean Beach Road.
Any upper level additions to heritage buildings should be set back
behind the primary roof form of the building.
Buildings abutting Ocean Beach Road should respond to the
materiality, colours and proportions (including glazing proportions and
floor heights) of existing buildings (particularly intact heritage buildings) in
the street.
The existing pedestrian connections linking Ocean Beach Road to Morce
Avenue should be maintained.
Buildings abutting any other street should have:
wall height not exceeding two storeys or 9 metres.
metre street setback to any level above Level
All buildings (irrespective of land use) which
have an abuttal to land in a residential zone should achieve the following
set out at Clause 55.04 of the Planning Scheme:
B17 Side and rear setbacks
B19 Daylight to existing windows
B20 North facing windows
B21 Overshadowing open space
B22 Overlooking
B24 Noise impacts.
Buildings should provide an
active interface at ground floor level to all streets.
Building services including waste, loading, parking and service
cabinets should be located away from streets and public spaces.
3.0 Subdivision
None specified.
None specified.
5.0 Application requirements
The following application requirements apply to an application for a permit
under Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified elsewhere
in the scheme and
must accompany an application, as appropriate, to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority:
report, site context analysis and design response report that demonstrates how
the proposal achieves the design objectives
and requirements of this
Detailed plans,
including a palette of materials and finishes.
An accurate
perspective image or photomontage showing the proposal in its streetscape
6.0 Decision guidelines
The following decision guidelines apply to an application for a permit under
Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified in Clause
43.02 and elsewhere in
the scheme which must be considered, as appropriate, by the responsible
The detailing
and proportions of the proposed Ocean Beach Road street wall (including the
proportion of glazed versus solid finishes
and the floor to floor heights) and
its response to the characteristics of the street’s valued, intact, early
shopfronts.
For buildings
outside the Heritage Overlay whether a proposal will have an impact on heritage
significance.
Whether the
setback of upper level
additions to
buildings impact
on view lines to the back
beach sand dunes.
The response of
the material and colour palette to the local, coastal village character.
impact of the proposal upon the amenity of land in a residential
The extent to
which building features (architectural features, masts, building services, lift
overruns, stairwells)
and fixtures in upper level setbacks
obscure views
to the back beach sand dunes when viewed from
both sides of the footpath
the pedestrian network
in Ocean Beach Road.
setbacks from Point Nepean Road are in keeping with the streetscape character
and whether they will impact views from the
corner of Point Nepean Road and
Esplanade to the Continental Hotel
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (18 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter