URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report [2022] VicSAC 4; (3 May 2022)
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety
Notices: Third Monitoring Report
Sentencing Advisory Council, May 2022
Contributors
McGorrery, Zsombor Bathy, Octavian Simu, Paul Schollum, Anna Chalton
Sentencing Advisory Council
Arie Freiberg AM
Deputy-Chair
Council Directors
Carmel Arthur OAM, Hugh de Kretser, Fiona Dowsley,
Helen Fatouros, David Grace AM QC, Brendan Kissane QC, Dan Nicholson, Susanna
Wendy Steendam
Chief Executive Officer
Cynthia Marwood
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Court Services Victoria and
the Crime Statistics Agency for providing the data used in this report. We would
also like to thank all those consulted (see Appendix 2) on the findings in this
report for their invaluable insights and feedback.
Executive summary
In February 2021, the
government asked the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) to investigate
criminal justice responses to stalking
and breaches of intervention orders,
including how those offences are sentenced in Victorian courts. The Council
agreed to produce
three reports to assist the VLRC in developing its
recommendations. The first two reports – on stalking and breaches of
safety intervention orders (PSIOs) – were published earlier this
year. This is the third and final report, and it focuses on
breaches of family
violence safety notices (FVSNs) and intervention orders
It has been a number of years since the Council published its last report on
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs. Much has happened since
then, including the ongoing
implementation of the 227 recommendations of the Royal Commission into Family
Violence, described as
a ‘catalytic’ inquiry, ‘an instigator
of significant policy
This report presents
police and court data on how many FVSNs and FVIOs were issued in Victoria in the
10 years to 2020 (the reference
period), how many breaches were recorded by
police and sentenced by courts, and how those breaches were sentenced.
Altogether, there were 631,000 FVSNs, interim FVIOs and final FVIOs issued,
317,000 recorded breaches (by 84,000 people) and 113,000
sentenced breaches (by
39,000 people). While no doubt of significant interest to readers, how many
FVSNs and FVIOs were or were not
breached (to give an indication of overall
breach rates) could not be identified because this would have required
prohibitively resource-intensive
data linkage.
Family violence safety notices and intervention orders in Victoria, 2011
Applications, orders and breaches
Magistrates’ Court
Children’s Court
Higher courts
FVIO applications
FVSNs issued
Interim FVIOs issued
Final FVIOs issued
Recorded breaches
Sentenced breaches
The effect of a changing policy setting in Victoria
The decade to 2020 was a period of significant
transformation in responses to family violence in Victoria. Confirming recent
by Satyen et al.,
was a considerable increase in help-seeking behaviours. In particular, there was
a remarkable increase in the yearly number
of FVIO applications, FVIOs and
recorded and sentenced breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs during the reference period:
the number of
FVSNs issued by police between 2012 and 2020 more than doubled, most of which
was due to a correspondingly significant
increase in the number of family
incidents attended by police;
the number of
FVIO applications in the Magistrates’ Court between 2011 and 2020
increased from 31,966 to 38,254, almost all
of which was due to the increase in
FVSNs issued by police (a FVSN is treated as an application for a FVIO);
the number of
FVIOs issued by the Magistrates’ Court between 2011 and 2019 increased
each year, with interim FVIOs increasing
by 47% and final FVIOs increasing by
44% (2020 is excluded due to the effect of COVID-19 on court operations);
five times as
many breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs were recorded by police in 2020 than in 2011 (a
402% increase);
the number of
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced by courts between 2011 and 2020 more than
doubled (a 103% increase), such that
Magistrates’ Court each year now involves a breach of a FVSN or FVIO; and
the number of
sentenced cases involving breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs between 2011 and 2019 more
than doubled in the Children’s
Court (from 97 to 245), more than
quadrupled in the County and Supreme Courts (from 16 to 65) and more than
tripled in the Magistrates’
Court (from 2,769 to 8,419) (again excluding
2020 due to the effect of COVID-19 on court operations).
roundtable that the Council hosted in February 2022, stakeholders said they were
not surprised at these increases.
They said they have observed ‘greater willingness [for victim survivors
and others] to report’ and ‘greater willingness
for police to lay
charges’, particularly for behaviours that ‘might in the past have
been considered minor contraventions
such as sending a text’. And this is,
at least in part, because the Royal Commission, especially ‘the form in
was conducted, as a public inquiry’, led to ‘greater
awareness’ about family violence, the relationships within
which family
violence occurs, and the broad range of abusive behaviours that family violence
can involve, particularly non-physical
abuse and coercive control.
Incidents, applications, orders, breaches and sentencing
Family incidents attended
FVSNs issued by police
Applications in the Magistrates’ Court
Interim FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court
Final FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court
Applications in the Children’s Court
Interim FVIOs in the Children’s Court
Final FVIOs in the Children’s Court
Recorded breach offences
Sentenced charges
Sentenced cases
The gendered nature of family violence
There is no question that family violence is an
extremely gendered phenomenon. It is overwhelmingly perpetrated by males and
predominantly
experienced by females, especially in the context of intimate
partner relationships. The findings of this report provide further
evidence of
males made up
the clear majority of respondents to FVSNs (82%), respondents to FVIOs issued in
the Magistrates’ Court (82%),
breach offenders recorded by police (85%)
and breach offenders sentenced by courts (87%);
in contrast,
females made up the majority of protected persons in both FVSNs issued by police
(76%) and FVIOs issued in the Magistrates’
Court (80%); and
most protected
persons in FVIOs issued in the Magistrates’ Court were either the
respondent’s children or step-children
(41%) or the respondent’s
current or former partner (together 37%).
The rate at which females
were respondents to a FVIO (18%) was higher than the rate at which they were
recorded as breaching a FVSN
or FVIO (15%) or sentenced for breaching a FVSN or
FVIO (13%). The lower proportion of breaches may be explained by some of the
FVSNs and FVIOs being issued in circumstances (through either mistaken
identification or a cross-application) where the male was
actually the primary
Family violence intervention orders in the Children’s
While sharing similar traits, family violence
committed by adolescents often differs from that committed by adults. It is more
perpetrated against parents and siblings than against intimate
partners, it is less gendered, and it often coincides with property
offences. Key findings in relation to FVIOs in the Children’s Court
include that:
three-quarters of respondents to FVIOs were male (73%) and two-thirds of
protected persons were female (66%);
there was an
overrepresentation of rural and regional child respondents in FVIOs, with
children living in rural and regional Victoria
accounting for 48% of child
respondents to final FVIOs despite just 24% of Victoria’s child population
living in those areas;
most protected
persons were either the respondent’s parents/step-parents (27%) or
siblings/step-siblings (25%);
damage offence was co-sentenced with a breach of a FVSN or FVIO in 53% of cases
in the Children’s Court, compared
with 20% of cases in the
Magistrates’ Court; and
across the whole
reference period, the most common outcomes for breach of a FVSN or FVIO were
probation (27%) and a good behaviour
bond (26%), but as of 2020, diversion was
the most common, accounting for over one-third of outcomes.
Changes in sentencing practices: Magistrates’
The vast majority of breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
were sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court (97%). The most common sentencing
outcome in the Magistrates’ Court was imprisonment (26%), though community
orders (24%) and fines (21%) were also common. There
were, though, changes in
the rate of imprisonment and community orders, while the rate of fines remained
The stable rate of fines
The Council has observed on multiple occasions that
it is concerning to see so many breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs receiving fines.
there seemed to be a decrease in the use of fines in the late 2000s, there
has been a fairly stable rate of fines of between 21%
and 25% imposed on
non-aggravated breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs each year since 2011. The Council
again reiterates its cautions against
the use of fines in a family violence
context (especially if fines are likely to be paid out of communal family funds
or affect the
ability of the offender to pay child support) and also notes the
protective advantages – as one roundtable stakeholder observed
a court-ordered good behaviour order ‘hanging over [the offender’s]
The increasing rate of imprisonment
There was a significant increase in prison sentences
for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs during the reference period. Whereas just 14%
breach offences had received a term of imprisonment in 2011, that increased to
40% by 2020. Part of that can be explained by the
introduction in 2013 of new
aggravated and persistent breach offences, which carry a higher maximum penalty
of five years’
imprisonment than the maximum penalty of two years’
imprisonment for non-aggravated breach offences. But the imprisonment rate
non-aggravated breach offences
increased, to 34%, independently of
those new offences.
The report finds that the increase in imprisonment is not attributable to
gender, age, region or co-sentenced violence. Instead, it
appears to be due to a
change in the lengths of prison sentences being imposed. In particular, there
has been a tenfold increase
in the number of offenders receiving
prison sentences (less than six months), especially prison sentences shorter
than four months. And while half of the increase in short
prison sentences seems
to be driven by an increase in time served prison sentences, it is almost
equally being driven by an increase
in short prison sentences requiring
offenders to spend more time in custody after already having spent
time on remand. Stakeholders at the Council’s roundtable cautioned,
however, against assuming that short prison sentences requiring
more time in
custody are not appropriate. Such sentences may be the product of discussions
between offenders, the court and corrections
staff about the time required to
put an appropriate plan in place for an offender’s safe transition back
into the community.
1 Introduction
1.1 This is the seventh report the Council has published on breaches of
family violence safety notices (FVSNs) and/or family violence
intervention
orders (FVIOs).
The family violence
landscape, including how family violence is sentenced, has shifted considerably
since the Council’s last
report was published. The current report analyses
how many FVSNs were issued by police and how many FVIOs were issued by the
in the 10 years to 2020, how many breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs were
recorded by police, how many breaches were sentenced by courts,
sentencing outcomes for those breaches.
Context of the report
1.2 On 17 February 2021, the Victorian Law Reform
Commission (VLRC) received terms of reference from the Victorian Government to
investigate
responses to stalking, harassment and similar conduct, and the
related use of personal safety intervention orders
The VLRC was specifically
asked to consider, among other things:
the law on stalking, harassment or similar conduct including:
operation of the
Personal Safety Intervention Orders Act 2010
, including consideration of
how the legislative framework and operation differs from the scheme for Family
Violence Safety Notices
and Family Violence Intervention Orders under the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
• sentencing practices and available sentencing
1.3 To assist
the VLRC to understand current sentencing practices relating to these various
offences, the Council agreed to publish
three statistical reports: one on
stalking contrary to
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), one on
breaches of PSIOs contrary to
section 100
Personal Safety Intervention
Orders Act 2010
(Vic) and one on breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs under the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Aim and research questions
aim of this report is to examine current sentencing practices for breaches of
FVSNs and FVIOs contrary to
sections 37
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Chapter 2 presents an overview
of the legal framework within which FVSNs and FVIOs are issued and breaches of
FVSNs and FVIOs
are sentenced. Then, using police and court data for the 10
years to 2020 (the reference period), the remainder of this report addresses
following research questions:
1. FVSNs issued by police and FVIOs
issued by courts (Chapter 3):
During the reference period, how many FVSNs
were issued by police? How many interim and final FVIOs were issued by courts?
the demographics of respondents and protected persons? What was the
relationship between respondents and protected persons?
2. Breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs recorded by police (Chapter 4):
the reference period, how many breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs were recorded by
police? What were the demographics of recorded
breach offenders?
3. Breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced by courts (Chapter 5):
the reference period, how many breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs were sentenced in
Victoria? What were the demographics of breach
offenders? What types of offences
were breaches co-sentenced with? How were breaches sentenced when co-sentenced
with other offences?
1.5 While reoffending was a focus in the reports on stalking and breaches of
PSIOs, there is no analysis of reoffending in this report
as the Council has
already conducted an in-depth analysis of reoffending by people sentenced for
breaching FVSNs and FVIOs.
2 Legal framework for family violence
intervention orders and safety notices and sentencing breaches of those
2.1 This chapter
provides an overview of the legislative framework within which family violence
safety notices (FVSNs) and family
violence intervention orders (FVIOs) are
issued in Victoria and how breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs are sentenced.
Scope of family violence safety notices and intervention orders
in Victoria
2.2 Legislation in Victoria provides for family
violence safety notices and intervention orders. The more common is a FVIO. This
issued by the Magistrates’ Court or Children’s Court and may be
made on an interim or final basis.
In comparison, a FVSN is a temporary notice issued by police until a court can
decide whether to issue an interim or a final FVIO.
Both FVSNs and FVIOs are
designed to respond to
arises between
If an order is
required to ensure a person’s personal safety but no family relationship
is involved, the personal safety intervention
order (PSIO) framework applies
What is family violence?
2.3 The term
family violence
expansively in Victoria’s legislation, and the definition is generally
considered clear and
comprehensive.
Family violence
includes behaviour directed at a family member that is physically, sexually,
emotionally, psychologically or economically
abusive; is threatening; is
coercive; or in any other way controls or dominates the family member and causes
that family member to
feel fear for their own or another person’s safety
or wellbeing.
Family violence
also includes conduct that causes a child to witness or be exposed to such
Behaviour may also
constitute family violence even if it does not otherwise constitute a criminal
Who are family members?
2.4 The term
family member
is also defined
expansively. As well as spouses and domestic partners, relatives and children,
family members include former spouses,
relatives and children; people who have,
or have had, an intimate personal relationship with the relevant person;
children of such
people; and children who currently reside, or previously
resided, with the relevant person on a normal or regular
Family members also
include anyone a person reasonably regards as being like a family
such as a carer in the
person’s home or residential facility, or anyone who under Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander tradition
or contemporary social practice is the
person’s relative.
Family violence safety notices
2.5 FVSNs are issued by police officers.
Specifically, police officers responding to a family violence incident may apply
officer of the rank of sergeant or higher to issue a
An officer must not make
an application if they have reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent is
a child or has a cognitive
impairment, a FVIO is already in
or the proposed terms of
the FVSN would be inconsistent with the conditions of a community correction
order (CCO) or the conditions
of a child protection order under the
Law Act 1975
2.6 The officer who receives the application can then issue a FVSN if they
believe on reasonable grounds that the FVSN is necessary
to ensure the safety of
the affected family member, to preserve their property or to protect a child who
has been subjected to family
violence by the
respondent.
The officer may also
choose to hear from the respondent or affected family member before making a
The previous
requirement that FVSNs could only be applied for outside court hours was removed
2.7 A FVSN may include any of the conditions that can be included in a FVIO,
except some conditions about weapons and
Any condition
restricting the respondent from being near certain places must be practical in
the circumstances.
Police must
consider the accommodation needs of the respondent, the protected person and any
dependent children in deciding whether
to impose a residence exclusion
condition; police must also take reasonable steps to ensure access to temporary
accommodation if
2.8 If the FVSN is granted, it must be served on, and explained to, the
respondent and protected person.
The FVSN is treated as an application for a FVIO, and the respondent is required
to attend the first court date for that
application.
A FVSN comes into
effect when it is served on the respondent. It continues until the first court
date, at which time the court may
dismiss the application, adjourn the
proceeding and make an interim FVIO, or replace the FVSN with a
The maximum duration of a
FVSN is 14 days, having been increased in 2018 from five
Family violence intervention orders
affected family member
can apply to
the Children’s Court or the Magistrates’ Court for a FVIO to protect
themselves from harm committed by another
With the affected family
member’s consent, another person (including a police officer or a
prosecutor at a sentencing hearing)
may also apply on an affected family
member’s behalf.
and guardians can also apply on behalf of children, and children can be included
in an application that relates to their
The court can also make
a FVIO on its own initiative when hearing applications or appeals relating to
or in a criminal
proceeding.
Interim FVIOs
2.10 At any time before deciding whether to make a
final FVIO, a court can make an interim
if it is satisfied, on the
balance of probabilities, that:
an interim FVIO
is necessary pending a final decision to ensure the safety or preserve the
property of the affected family member
or to protect an affected family member
who is a child and has been subjected to family violence by the respondent;
the parties
consent to, or do not oppose, the making of an interim FVIO; or
• a FVSN has been issued and there are no circumstances that would
justify discontinuing the protection of the person before
a final decision about
the FVIO application is
2.11 When an interim FVIO is made, it must be explained to the respondent and
the protected person.
must list the hearing for a decision about the final FVIO ‘as soon as
practicable’.
interim FVIO is made on the court’s own motion in the course of a criminal
proceeding, the court must list the hearing
within 14 days of making the interim
FVIO or the interim FVIO being served on the
respondent.
The interim FVIO
remains in force until a final FVIO is made and (where applicable) served on the
respondent, the application for
a final FVIO is refused, the application for a
final FVIO is withdrawn, or the interim FVIO is revoked by the
Final FVIOs
2.12 A court hearing an application for a FVIO may
make a final order if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the
has committed family violence against the affected family member and
is likely to continue to do so or do so
The court may also make a
final FVIO if the parties consent to, or do not oppose, the making of the
2.13 Courts deciding whether to make a final FVIO must consider whether any
children have been subjected to family violence committed
respondent.
If a child has been
subjected to family violence, the court must list the child as a protected
person under the final FVIO if the
child’s need for protection is
substantially the same as the primary affected family member’s, or it must
make a separate
FVIO for the
Even if the court does
not make a final FVIO for the primary affected family member(s), the court may
still make a final FVIO protecting
2.14 The court may specify the period for which a final FVIO remains in
force. In making this decision, the court’s paramount
consideration is the
safety of the protected person.
The court must also take into account any assessment by the applicant of the
level and duration of the risk from the respondent.
If the applicant is not the
protected person, the court considers the protected person’s views,
including their assessment
of the level and duration of the risk from the
respondent.
The court may also
take into account any matters raised by the respondent that are relevant to the
duration of the order.
respondent is a child, the maximum duration of the final FVIO is 12 months
unless there are exceptional
circumstances.
If the court does
not specify the period for which the final FVIO remains in force, unless the
order is varied, it endures until
it is revoked by the court or set aside on
2.15 When a court makes a final FVIO, it may also make
associated final
against additional respondents who would fall under the
Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) if they were a family member of the
applicant, or in favour of additional applicants if they were a family member of
the respondent.
Conditions of orders
2.16 A court imposing an interim or final
can include any conditions
that appear to be necessary or desirable in the
circumstances.
This may include
conditions:
prohibiting the
respondent from committing family violence against the protected person;
excluding the
respondent from the protected person’s residence;
relating to the
use of personal property;
restricting
prohibiting the
respondent from being anywhere within a specified distance of the protected
person or a specified place;
prohibiting the
respondent from causing another person to engage in conduct prohibited by the
• suspending or cancelling firearms authorities, weapons approvals or
weapons exemptions.
2.17 In making a decision about whether to include a residence exclusion
condition, the court must have regard to all the circumstances
Additional considerations
apply to exclusion conditions if the respondent is a
The court must also
enquire as to the existence of any firearms authority, weapons approval or
weapons exemption that the respondent
2.18 If a final FVIO is made and the affected family member is a legally
competent adult who does not consent to the making of the
order, the conditions
that can be imposed are
restricted.
If the court decides
to make a FVIO and the protected person or respondent is the parent of a child,
the court must also enquire
as to whether there is a
Family Law Act
or child protection order in relation to the child, and vary any
order if necessary.
court must also decide whether or not the safety of the protected person or
child may be jeopardised by the child living with,
spending time with or
communicating with the
respondent.
Interaction between FVSNs, FVIOs and other orders
2.19 A respondent in a FVSN or FVIO may from time to
time be subject to a number of court orders, such as a PSIO, a CCO, bail,
a post-sentence supervision order, a
Family Law Act
order and/or
a child protection order. FVIO conditions prevail over those of a
a child protection
and they prevail over
certain conditions of a CCO
certain conditions of a supervision order under the
Serious Offenders Act
(Vic) unless the condition of the supervision order is necessary to
reduce the risk of reoffending or address a reasonable concern
of a victim of
the offender,
to the extent of
any inconsistency. A
Family Law Act
order that provides for a child to
spend time with a person takes precedence over a FVIO if there is
inconsistency;
however, both the
court making the
Family Law Act
order and the court making the FVIO have
a shared power to vary the order in such
circumstances.
conditions, FVSN conditions prevail over bail
conditions,
but legislation is
silent as to whether they prevail over a PSIO, a child protection order, CCO
conditions or a supervision
Interstate and New Zealand domestic violence
2.20 On 25 November 2017, a National Domestic
Violence Order Scheme was introduced to recognise and enforce all domestic
orders (DVOs) issued in Australia. The scheme allows for interstate and
New Zealand DVOs to be recognised in Victoria as if they
were FVIOs. A FVSN can
be issued even if there is a recognised DVO in
and the respondent must
comply with both the recognised DVO and the FVSN unless there is a conflict, in
which case the FVSN prevails.
Similarly, a FVIO can be made even if there is an existing recognised
Respondents who have been
punished elsewhere for conduct that is a breach of both a recognised DVO and a
FVSN or FVIO may not be
punished again for the same
The breach offences
are five breach offences under the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic): two each in respect of FVIOs and FVSNs (an aggravated and a
non-aggravated breach offence), as well as one persistent breach
offence, which
applies in respect of persistent breach of either a FVSN or FVIO or both. The
five breach offences, their relevant
sections of the
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) and maximum penalties are set out in Table
Table 1: Breach offences, statutory references and maximum
Maximum penalty
Breach of a FVSN
2 years’ imprisonment and/or 240 penalty units
Breach of a FVIO
2 years’ imprisonment and/or 240 penalty units
Breach of a FVSN while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
5 years’ imprisonment and/or 600 penalty units
Breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
5 years’ imprisonment and/or 600 penalty units
Persistent breach of FVSNs and FVIOs
5 years’ imprisonment and/or 600 penalty units
2.22 The non-aggravated breach offences do not require a specific mental
element; however, a recent Magistrates’ Court decision
suggests that they
are not, at least, strict liability
The aggravated breach
offences in
sections 37A
apply if the respondent committed the breach
while intending to cause, or knowing their conduct would probably cause, harm
mental harm) to the protected person or cause the protected person to
fear for their own or anyone else’s
2.23 Persistent breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs were added as a separate offence
The offence requires
at least three distinct breaches within a 28-day period, and each breach must
amount to a breach of a FVSN or
If the breaches persist longer than 28 days, the legislation requires
that the further behaviours be prosecuted as multiple offences,
despite the
behaviour appearing to be a single, continuous course of
If the elements of the
persistent breach offence are not proven, but one of the other breach offences
is, the accused may be convicted
of the other breach
Otherwise, the accused
cannot be separately prosecuted for an individual breach that makes up part of
the alleged persistent breach
Sentencing breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
2.24 In 2009, the Council published
Principles for Sentencing Contraventions of Family Violence Intervention
, suggesting that the primary purpose of sentencing for breach of a
FVIO should be to achieve compliance with the order (or future
orders), which
ensures the safety and protection of the victim
2.25 The Council
also recommended certain factors that should be considered relevant in
sentencing breaches of FVIOs, including:
the nature of
the breach and its impact on the victim survivor;
whether the
offender used violence;
whether the
breach occurred in the home;
any abuse of
the presence of
any special
vulnerability of the victim survivor;
offender’s culpability; and
convictions, especially for other
2.26 The Council further recommended that the attitude of the victim survivor
should not generally influence the sentence. However,
depending on the dynamics
of the relationship and contact, the fact that the victim survivor initiated
and the offender’s previous good character
should be given very little weight where there is a proven pattern of family
2.27 The Victorian Government submitted the Council’s approach to the
Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law
Commission’s wide-ranging review into family violence, and noted that the
guidelines were developed in consultation
with stakeholders, including judicial
officers, were not intended to displace judicial discretion and were endorsed by
Magistrate at the
The Commissions considered
these guidelines ‘an instructive model for guiding judicial discretion in
the sentencing for breach
of protection order offences’ and suggested that
they ‘could form the basis of material to be included in a national
2.28 Since then, the
National Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book
has been created, and it is regularly
It specifies a number
of considerations that may be relevant to sentencing breaches of family violence
orders, specifically building
on the Council’s guiding principles
published in 2009.
2.29 The Judicial College of Victoria has also published its own
Violence Bench Book
, which outlines similar principles and cites with
approval the Council’s 2009
Sentencing Practices for Breach of Family
Violence Intervention Orders: Final
Violence Bench Book
also notes the importance of the effective enforcement
of intervention orders and imposition of appropriate sentences for breaches
ensuring that victim survivors are
as well as the
general social importance of dissuading violence by males against females in the
context of a current or former
relationship.
Co-sentencing other offences with breaches of FVSNs and
2.30 In some instances, breach offences (such as
sending a non-threatening text message in breach of a non-contact condition) are
only criminal because there is an intervention order in place, while other
breaches are premised on behaviour that also constitutes
a crime in its own
right (for example, a property damage offence or a threat to kill). Where this
occurs, there are two possible
charging options. First, the offender can be
with the breach offence, such that the court typically
imposes a relatively severe sentence to reflect the additional criminality
the breach. Second, the offender can
be charged with the other
offence, such that some cumulation is appropriate between the two offences,
particularly given that the
distinct element of the behaviour occurred in
disobedience of a court order.
However, the cumulation must not be so significant as to amount to double
punishment.
3 Family violence safety notices issued by
police and family violence intervention orders issued by courts
3.1 This chapter
family violence safety notices
(FVSNs) issued by police between
2012 and 2020 (data was available for nine years of the 10-year reference
period) and
family violence intervention orders
(FVIOs) issued by courts
between 2011 and 2020 (data was available for the whole 10-year reference
period). The chapter includes
how many FVSNs and FVIOs were issued each year,
the age and gender of respondents, the age and gender of primary affected family
members (in FVSNs) and protected persons (in FVIOs), and the basis on which
were issued. Data relating to FVSNs was provided by the Crime
Statistics Agency, and data relating to FVIOs was provided by Court
FVSNs issued by police
the nine years from 2012 to 2020, Victoria Police attended 672,381 family
incidents, on average almost 75,000 per year. As
shown in Figure 1, police
issued a FVSN following 13.9% of attendances (93,510 family incidents). While
the number of family incidents
attended by police each year increased –
from about 57,000 to 93,000 – the proportion of incidents resulting in a
remained relatively stable at between 13% and 15% every year since
Police issued over 93,500 FVSNs between 2012 and
Figure 1: Number of family incidents attended by Victoria Police, 2012 to
2020, by whether the attendance resulted in a FVSN being
issued (672,381 family
incidents, 93,510 FVSNs)
FVSN not issued
FVSN issued
Age and gender of respondents in FVSNs
the 93,510 FVSNs issued, the age and gender of the respondent were recorded for
over 99% (92,772 FVSNs). Of those, respondents
in 81.6% were male (Figure 3).
82% of respondents in FVSNs were male
3.4 There was a slight increase in the rate of females recorded as
respondents in FVSNs in recent years, increasing steadily from
17.1% in 2012 to
20.0% in 2020 (Figure 2). This is largely driven by an increase in the number of
female respondents aged 20 to 39.
At first glance, this would appear to be
inconsistent with the intentional policy of trying to
of female respondents in FVSNs and FVIOs who are misidentified as the primary
(or reciprocal) aggressor in the
relationship.
For instance, the
Royal Commission into Family Violence recommended trying to reduce the rate of
mistaken identification of females
as predominant aggressors by providing police
with ‘suitable guidance on identifying family violence primary
aggressors’.
Figure 2: Percentage of female respondents in FVSNs issued by police, 2012
Percentage of female respondents
3.5 Victoria’s Family Violence Reform Implementation Monitor recently
noted that it is difficult to measure the exact prevalence
misidentification.
However, they
also observed that there is evidence that misidentification does occur: Victoria
Police believes it occurs in about
12% of family incidents attended; the Crime
Statistics Agency has identified a high rate of recent victimisation for female
respondents
named as perpetrators during police call-outs; research by
Women’s Legal Service Victoria shows that 10% of their clients had
misidentified as respondents in police applications for FVIOs; and FVIO
applications are more than twice as likely to be struck
out or withdrawn when
the respondent is female.
3.6 The issue may also be especially pronounced in culturally and
linguistically diverse communities. In February 2022, InTouch Multicultural
Centre Against Family Violence estimated ‘that at least one-third of our
clients have experienced misidentification at some
point during their engagement
with law enforcement and the justice
Stakeholders
at the Council’s roundtable also suggested that, anecdotally,
misidentification of females as FVSN respondents
was ‘becoming more and
more prevalent’:
I think it’s become a bit of a tactic, too. Male respondents commit family
violence and then they ring police and say ‘look,
she’s out of
control, she’s hysterical, you need to get around here’. And then
police turn up, and that’s
what they see. The person who’s contacted
police is calm and behaving themselves, and the other person’s upset and
3.7 There is an important caveat to the data in Figure 2 on the gender of
FVSN respondents. It does not distinguish the relationships
between respondents
and affected family members. More research would be required to understand
whether this is an increase in females
being named as respondents in
contexts, which would be concerning, or whether this instead
reflects an increase in the number of females named as respondents in
family relationships, such as adolescent family
or parents whose
female child is the respondent. That said, the low number of FVSN respondents
aged 0 to 19 (Figure 3) suggests that
family violence perpetrated by young
females is not a common context in which FVSNs are issued.
Figure 3: Age and gender of respondents in FVSNs issued by police, 2012 to
2020 (92,772 respondents)
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55-59 years
60-64 years
65 years and over
Age and gender of primary affected family members in
3.8 When police issue a FVSN, they also record a
primary affected family member. This is the person police have ‘deemed to
[most] affected by events occurring during the incident’, that is, the
person who most needs
protection.
Sometimes they
record additional family members as well, such as children, but the data below
relates only to primary affected family
93,518 FVSNs issued, the age and gender of the primary affected family member
were recorded in 92,266 (98.7%) FVSNs. The
rate at which females were primary
affected family members was stable from 2012 to 2020, at between 75% and 77%
each year. Females
were most likely to be primary affected family members while
aged 20 to 39, whereas male affected family members were more evenly
distributed
across the age groups, from 20 to 54 years (Figure 4). Therefore, while age
seems to be a key risk factor for females
being named a primary affected family
member in a FVSN (with the risk declining from age 35 onwards), it is less of a
risk factor
76% of primary affected family members in
FVSNs were female
Figure 4: Age and gender of primary affected family members in FVSNs
issued by police, 2012 to 2020 (92,266 affected family members)
15-19 years
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55-59 years
60-64 years
65 years and over
Relationships between respondents and primary affected
family members in FVSNs
police issue a FVSN, they also record the relationship between the respondent
and the primary affected family member, with
the options of current partner,
former partner, family, non-family member and unknown (Figure 5). Across the
reference period, current
partners made up 51.0% of respondents, family members
made up 34.0%, former partners made up 14.0%, and non-family members and unknown
together made up just 1.0%. The rates did, though, change during the reference
3.11 There are two interesting observations to make about
how those rates changed. The first is that, while the number of respondents
partner more than doubled from 2,348 to 5,988, the number
of respondents who were a
partner increased even more
substantially, from 410 to
Alongside an increase
in family violence between current partners, the quintupling in the number of
former partners who were respondents
in FVSNs most likely reflects a positive
and changing perception by police of the serious risk posed by former partners,
an increased response by police, particularly in the period
immediately following the end of a relationship.
3.12 The second
observation is that the number of ‘family’ members other than
current or former intimate partners also
more than quadrupled, from 1,100 to
4,794. This could reflect any number of possible relationship types. However, if
the data on
relationship types in FVIOs issued in the Magistrates’ Court
is indicative (see [3.21]), then this could reflect an increased
children and step-children being named as primary affected family members in
FVSNs. Whatever the case, the data suggests
that there has been a significant
broadening in the types of relationships that police conceptualise as family
violence: whereas
current partners made up more than half (56%) of FVSN
respondents in 2011, the proportion steadily declined to less than half (46%)
2020. This could represent a welcome by-product of the ongoing campaign to
educate the community about not only the prevalence
of family violence but also
what it looks like and the relationships within which it occurs.
Figure 5: Relationships between respondents and primary affected
family members in FVSNs issued by police, 2011 to 2020 (97,638 recorded
relationships)
Current Partner (51.0%)
Former Partner (14.0%)
Family (34.0%)
Non-family or unknown (1.0%)
FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court
FVIO applications
were 334,689 applications for FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court between 2011
and 2020, an average of about 33,000 each
year. The number of FVIO applications
made each year, though, increased steadily. Almost all of this increase is
because of the increase
in FVSNs issued by police (see [3.2]). When police issue
a FVSN, this is taken to be a FVIO application (see [2.8]). By 2020, there
just over 8,000 more FVSNs issued by police compared to the number in 2012,
which is effectively identical to there being just
over 8,000 more FVIO
applications in 2020 than in 2012.
Figure 6: Number of FVIO
applications in the Magistrates’ Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (334,689
FVIO applications)
FVIOs issued
3.14 Between 2011 and 2020, just over 227,000
interim FVIOs and 283,000 final FVIOs were issued by the Magistrates’
Court (Figure
7). The number of interim and final FVIOs issued increased each
year, with a few exceptions. Of particular note, the number of final
issued in 2020 dropped considerably (a 19.6% reduction from 2019). This was
almost certainly due to COVID-19 limiting the ability
of courts to hear and
determine FVIO applications. However, in 2020 the number of interim FVIOs
increased by 20%, suggesting that
courts issued interim FVIOs to ensure victim
survivors were protected despite disruptions to court processes caused by the
This is consistent with the trend in interim and final
family violence intervention orders in
Figure 7: Number of interim FVIOs and final FVIOs issued in the
Magistrates’ Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (227,098 interim FVIOs
283,058 final FVIOs)
Interim FVIOs
Final FVIOs
FVIO applications and FVIOs issued: a regional
3.15 During the 10-year period, almost two-thirds of
applications
(64.6%) were made in courts in the Greater Melbourne
area, while the other 35.4% were made in rural and regional Victoria (Figure
This is disproportionate to the 24% of Victoria’s population living in
rural and regional areas, with the disparity most
apparent in Gippsland. This
accords with, and provides further specificity around, research consistently
finding that ‘[r]ates
of domestic and family violence in regional, rural
and remote locations are higher than in urban areas’ due to a combination
of geographical factors (for example, limited service availability) and social
norms and attitudes.
Royal Commission into Family Violence also heard that family violence is more
prevalent in non-urban areas. This is due to a
combination of geographical and
social isolation, the position of the perpetrator within the community, higher
rates of economic
vulnerability and dependence, the increased rate of firearm
ownership in non-urban communities, the enhanced effects of natural disasters,
the increased potential for people to live in close proximity to state borders,
which results in administrative complexity in recognising
domestic violence
orders from other jurisdictions, and cultural norms and gendered
stereotypes.
Figure 8: Number and proportion of FVIO applications, interim FVIOs and
final FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020
(334,689 applications,
227,098 interim FVIOs, 283,058 final FVIOs)
Justice region
Applications
Interim FVIOs
Final FVIOs
Greater Melbourne
216,267 (64.6%)
158,703 (69.9%)
180,267 (63.7%)
Loddon Mallee
26,647 (8.0%)
15,381 (6.8%)
22,992 (8.1%)
20,571 (6.1%)
11,899 (5.2%)
17,099 (6.0%)
17,740 (5.3%)
7,920 (3.5%)
14,643 (5.2%)
27,763 (8.3%)
17,979 (7.9%)
25,899 (9.1%)
Barwon South West
25,701 (7.7%)
15,216 (6.7%)
22,158 (7.8%)
3.16 These disparities highlight the importance of rolling out specialist
family violence courts across Victoria. There are currently
five specialist
family violence courts in operation across Victoria, three in the Greater
Melbourne area (Frankston, Heidelberg,
Moorabbin), one in Hume (Shepparton) and
one in the Grampians (Ballarat). There is currently no specialist family
violence court
in Loddon Mallee, Barwon South West or Gippsland. But following a
recommendation of the Royal Commission into Family Violence, additional
violence courts are expected to be in operation or development in those regions
by the end of 2022.
Duration of final FVIOs
3.17 When courts issue a final FVIO, they must
specify how long the FVIO is to be in place. The data suggests that just over
of all FVIOs (50.9%) were six months to less than one year (Figure 9).
Following discussions with stakeholders and the Magistrates’
Council is of the view that many of the FVIOs appearing as six months to less
than one year would actually be precisely
12 months, and that this small
disconnect stems from how the data is
As one stakeholder
said during the Council’s roundtable:
I’m really surprised by that. I think you would find the vast majority of
that 144,000 are 12 months.
I think the ‘12 months’ is a culture that’s developed whereby
it’s become the standard thing. Lawyers will
advise their clients
that’s the usual length of time for an intervention order, rather than
being based on anything else. And
I think that’s probably a culture shared
between police and lawyers, and magistrates making the
[o]ne of the things I found in practice was that people seem to believe, on a
misread of the legislation, that 12 months is the recommended
timeframe. And I
think that comes from the fact that an order against a child cannot be made for
more than 12 months.
Figure 9: Duration of FVIOs issued in the Magistrates’ Court, 2011
to 2020 (283,058 FVIOs)
Less than 6 months
6 months to less than a year
1 to less than 1.5 years
1.5 to less than 2 years
2 years or longer
No specified expiry date
3.18 There was
relatively little variation in the proportion of FVIOs within each duration
during the reference period; FVIOs did
not get tangibly longer or
3.19 Given the short lifespan of many of these FVIOs, it
may be that many FVIO applications each year are in fact applications to
expired FVIOs rather than entirely new FVIO applications, particularly as an
extension application can require a certain amount
of advance planning.
Applications to extend or renew a final FVIO require victim survivors to stay
aware of expiry dates, undertake
the not insubstantial administrative
of reapplying for, or
extending, the FVIO (even with the new online application
and potentially
re-engage with the
perpetrator.
stakeholder observed: ‘sometimes there’s been a break in contact
between the two and the order’s been working
but the re-initiation puts
them back in the same room
3.20 Further research would be required to determine how many FVIOs are in
fact extended/renewed. But if the proportion is significant,
it may be that
court efficiency and victim survivor safety could each be improved through the
issuing of longer FVIOs in appropriate
cases, especially perhaps where an
intimate relationship has ended with no related children, and the burden on the
respondent would
be minimal. It would also be useful to know, but it was beyond
the scope of this report to discover, how long FVIOs were truly in
adding the duration of interim FVIOs and final FVIOs together. Some stakeholders
advised the Council of some interim FVIOs
being in force for up to two years,
such that a 12-month final FVIO might actually represent three years of a FVIO
being in force.
Protected persons in final FVIOs
3.21 Data on the number of protected persons in each
FVIO was available for 89.7% of FVIOs (Figure 10). There were at
616,311 people named as
protected persons in FVIOs during the reference period. Just under half of all
FVIOs named a single person
as being protected by the order (48.9%). Another
fifth named two protected persons (19.7%). Almost one-third (31.4%) named three
or more people as protected persons, with over 25,000 FVIOs naming six or more
as protected persons.
80% of adult protected persons in FVIOs were female
Figure 10: Number of people named as protected persons in final FVIOs in
the Magistrates’ Court (254,016 FVIOs)
Number of protected persons
Number of FVIOs
3.22 Data on age
and gender was available for 518,472 of those protected persons (Figure 11).
This includes
protected persons, not just
persons. While one-third of protected persons were male (34.2%), they were
mostly constituted by male children aged 19 and
under, who were probably the
children of primary protected persons. In contrast, males made up just 19.9% of
protected persons (aged 20 and over).
Figure 11: Age
and gender of protected persons named in FVIOs issued in the Magistrates’
Court, 2011 to 2020 (518,472 protected
10-19 years
20-29 years
30-39 years
40-49 years
50-59 years
60 and over years
3.23 For 483,235 protected persons, the data specified their relationship to
the respondent (Figure 12). The most common relationship
was for the protected
person to be a child or step-child of the respondent (40.6% of protected
persons). As mentioned, they would
often have been the children of the primary
protected person, but there has been an increased willingness ‘to include
the children
in the order ... because they’re being exposed to the effects
of family violence’.
Current and former partners were the next most common, at relatively similar
rates (37.2% together). After that were parents and
step-parents of the
respondent (8.0%), siblings and step-siblings (5.1%) and children of the
respondents’ ex-partner (3.2%).
Figure 12: Relationship of protected persons to respondents in FVIOs
issued in the Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020 (483,235
Relationship to protected person
Child/step-child
Current intimate partner
Ex-partner's child
Former intimate partner
Grandparent
Niece/nephew
Parent/step-parent
Sibling/step-sibling
Son-in-law/daughter-in-law
Uncle/aunt (including in-laws)
Respondents in final FVIOs
3.24 Data was available to identify the gender of
the respondent in 171,420 final
More than four in five
respondents were male (81.9%). Between 2013 and 2019, there was a slight but
stable trend of females increasingly
being named as respondents, from 16.8% to
82% of respondents in final FVIOs in the Magistrates’ Court were
FVIOs in the Children’s Court
FVIO applications
were 18,278 FVIO applications in the Children’s Court between 2011 and
2020. After a drop in the number of FVIO applications
in 2012 (largely in
Geelong and Bendigo), the number of applications stayed fairly stable until
2018. There was an increase in the
number of applications in 2019 and 2020
(again, largely in Geelong and Bendigo), which may be indicative of an emerging
Figure 13: Number of FVIO applications in the
Children’s Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (18,278 FVIO applications)
Number of applications
FVIOs issued
3.26 During the reference period, 27,556 FVIOs were
issued in the Children’s Court, including 16,023 interim FVIOs (58.1%) and
11,533 final FVIOs (41.9%). That is, unlike in the Magistrates’ Court, in
the Children’s Court there were more interim
FVIOs than there were final
FVIOs, particularly since 2017 (Figure 14). This seems to suggest that there are
a significant number
of interim FVIOs being issued in the Children’s Court
that, for whatever reason, do not become final FVIOs. Stakeholders suggested
this may be due to magistrates in the Children’s Court keeping a close eye
on respondents’ progress through some form
of judicial monitoring during
the period of an interim FVIO, and ‘if the interim [FVIO] has dealt with
the issue, there’s
no need for a final [FVIO], because it’s a pretty
serious order against a
Figure 14: Number of interim FVIOs and final FVIOs issued in the
Children’s Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (16,023 interim FVIOs
final FVIOs)
Interim FVIOs
Final FVIOs
FVIO applications and FVIOs issued: a regional
disproportionate number of FVIO applications, interim FVIOs and final FVIOs in
rural and regional Victoria was particularly
pronounced in the Children’s
Court. Just 24.2% of Victoria’s child population lives in rural and
regional Victoria, but
they accounted for 44.9% of FVIO applications, 37.7% of
interim FVIOs and 47.6% of final FVIOs (Figure 15). A child in rural and
regional Victoria is effectively more than twice as likely as a child in the
Greater Melbourne area to be a respondent to a FVIO,
especially in Gippsland,
Loddon Mallee and Barwon South West. Stakeholders indicated that this can often
[un]availability of services ... [E]verybody would be focused on a therapeutic
outcome for children and finding a good outcome for
the family [but] if the
services aren’t available, that may lead to more of a default to the
intervention order.
Figure 15: Number and proportion of FVIO applications, interim
FVIOs and final FVIOs in the Children’s Court, 2011 to 2020 (18,278
applications, 16,023 interim FVIOs, 11,533 final FVIOs)
Justice region
Applications
Interim FVIOs
Final FVIOs
1,936 (10.6%)
1,697 (10.6%)
1,349 (11.7%)
Loddon Mallee
1,824 (10.0%)
1,372 (8.6%)
1,254 (10.9%)
Barwon South West
2,046 (11.2%)
1,559 (9.7%)
1,373 (11.9%)
1,406 (7.7%)
Greater Melbourne area
10,077 (55.1%)
9,986 (62.3%)
6,041 (52.4%)
Duration of final FVIOs
3.28 The most common durations of final FVIOs
issued in the Children’s Court were six to less than 12 months (64.9%), 12
less than 18 months (20.5%) and less than six months (7.8%). The remaining
6.8% of orders were 18 months and over (Figure 16). The
short duration of most
of these final FVIOs is not surprising given that legislation does not permit a
final FVIO to remain in force
for longer than 12 months if the respondent is a
child, unless there are exceptional
circumstances.
Figure 16: Duration of final FVIOs issued in the Children’s Court,
2011 to 2020 (11,533 final FVIOs)
Less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
18 to less than 24 months
2 years or more
No specified expiry date
Protected persons in final FVIOs
3.29 Data on the number of protected persons in
each final FVIO was available for all 11,533 final FVIOs (Figure 17). There were
21,154 people named
as protected persons in those FVIOs. Just over half of all final FVIOs in the
Children’s Court named a
single person as the protected person (55.0%).
Another quarter named two people (23.5%). There were, though, 2,479 final FVIOs
that named three or more people as protected persons.
Figure 17: Number of protected persons named in final FVIOs in the
Children’s Court (11,533 final FVIOs)
Number of protected persons
Number of FVIOs
3.30 Data on age and gender was available for 19,482 protected persons named
in final FVIOs issued in the Children’s Court (Figure
18). Two-thirds of
protected persons were female (66.4%) and one-third were male (33.6%). The most
common age range for both male
and female protected persons was 10 to 19 (40.2%
for males and 36.4% for females). However, the second most common age range for
female protected persons was 40 to 49 (23.5%) while for males it was 0 to 9
(27.5%). As to why a significant number of women aged
30 to 59 may be seeking
FVIOs in the Children’s Court, stakeholders suggested this was most likely
due to higher rates of adolescent
family violence committed by children against
adult females. This, in turn, would mainly be attributable to the continually
rates of women in primary caregiver
Figure 18: Age and gender of protected persons named in final FVIOs issued
in the Children’s Court, 2011 to 2020 (19,482 protected
60 or older
3.31 For 21,190 protected persons, the data specified their relationship to
the respondent (Figure 12). Siblings and parents were
the most commonly
protected persons in final FVIOs issued in the Children’s Court. Together,
parents and step-parents
and siblings and
step-siblings (23.1%) made up more than half of all protected persons in final
FVIOs issued in the Children’s
Figure 19: Relationship of protected persons to respondents in final FVIOs
issued in the Children’s Court, 2011 to 2020 (21,190
Relationship to protected person
Percentage %
Child/step-child
Child who resides at the household
Current intimate partner
Former intimate partner
Grandparent
Parent/step-parent
Sibling/step-sibling/half-sibling
Grand Total
Respondents in final FVIOs
3.32 Data was available to identify the gender of
the respondent in 11,523 final FVIOs (all except 10
Almost three-quarters
of respondents were male (73.1% or 8,423 respondents). This gender ratio stayed
stable each year of the reference
73% of respondents in final FVIOs issued in Children’s Court were
4 Breaches of family violence intervention
orders and safety notices recorded by police
4.1 This chapter
discusses the number of breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs) and
family violence intervention orders
(FVIOs) recorded by police in the 10 years
Number of recorded offences
were 316,688 recorded breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs between 2011 and 2020, at
breach offences, meaning
the offender intended to cause, or was reckless about causing, harm or fear for
safety. Another 8.5% were
persistent breach offences, meaning the offender
breached a FVSN or FVIO at least three times in a 28-day period.
4.3 During the 10-year reference period, the number of breach
offences recorded by police each year increased more than fivefold,
10,000 in 2011 to over 53,000 in 2020. Police also more regularly recorded the
breach offence type. The breach offence
contravene FVIO (unspecified)
accounted for 9,424 of the 13,495 breach offences in 2012, but by 2015, no
breach offences of this type were
Between 2015 (the
first year in which each breach offence type was reliably recorded) and 2020,
almost all breach offence types
breaches of
interim FVIOs increased by almost 300%, from 6,216 to 17,385;
breaches of
final FVIOs increased by almost 50%, from 17,070 to 24,582;
breaches of
FVSNs almost doubled, from 1,274 to 2,437;
breaches of
FVSNs while intending to cause harm or fear for safety doubled, from 153 to 308;
breaches of FVIOs more than doubled, from 2,523 to 5,478.
4.4 There was a consensus at the Council’s roundtable that these
increases are due to an ‘increased awareness and willingness
breaches’: ‘police ... [are] called more often, even by neighbours
who are overhearing things’, partly
because there is ‘more
confidence in the justice system overall’, and police then more frequently
‘[take] those
seriously’.
Figure 20: Breach offences recorded by police, 2011 to 2020, by breach
offence type (316,688 recorded breach offences)
Persistently contravene FVIO
Contravene FVIO (intending harm or fear for
Contravene FVIO (final)
Contravene FVIO (interim)
Contravene FVIO (unspecified)
Contravene FVSN (intending harm or fear for
Contravene FVSN
Age and gender of recorded breach offenders
4.5 There were 84,237 people recorded as committing
the 316,688 breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs between 2011 and
Data on age and gender
was available for over 99% of breach offenders (83,702). Of those, 85.3% were
male. The gender distribution
of recorded breach offenders was relatively stable
over time. About half of male (47.8%) and female (44.4%) recorded breach
were aged 30 to 44 (Figure 21).
85% of recorded breach offenders were male
Figure 21: Age and gender of people recorded by police for breach of a
FVIO or FVSN, 2011 to 2020 (83,702 people)
10-19 years
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55 years and over
Duration of recorded breach offences
22 shows the duration of persistent and non-persistent breaches of FVSNs and
FVIOs during the reference period. About three-quarters
of non-persistent breach
offences were recorded as occurring on a single day (73.3%). In contrast, just
21.2% of persistent breach
offences had a single offence date recorded. At the
other end of the spectrum, almost 11,500 breach offences were recorded as
longer than 12 weeks, with each breach most likely encapsulating a
significant amount of breach behaviour over that period.
recorded almost 5,000 persistent breach offences as lasting longer than the
maximum 28-day period set by the legislation.
This is most likely just a
reflection of police recording the true duration of the alleged breaching
behaviours at the time, but
later prosecuting those behaviours via multiple
consecutive (or near-consecutive) persistent breach charges in 28-day
Figure 22: Duration of breach offences recorded by police, by whether the
offence was a persistent or non-persistent breach, 2011
to 2020 (316,688 breach
Persistent breaches (26,784 breaches)
Non-persistent breaches (289,904 breaches)
5,680 (21.2%)
212,431 (73.3%)
More than 1 to 7 Days
7,423 (27.7%)
30,482 (10.5%)
More than 7 to 14 Days
3,769 (14.1%)
10,092 (3.5%)
More than 2 to 4 Weeks
5,188 (19.4%)
11,076 (3.8%)
More than 4 to 8 Weeks
2,605 (9.7%)
10,460 (3.6%)
More than 8 to 12 Weeks
5,293 (1.8%)
More than 12 Weeks
1,404 (5.2%)
10,070 (3.5%)
5 Breaches of family violence intervention
orders and safety notices sentenced by courts
5.1 This chapter
describes the number of breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs) and
intervention orders (FVIOs) sentenced
in Victorian courts during the reference
period. It includes the age and gender of offenders sentenced for breach
offences, the other
offences co-sentenced with breach offences and the
sentencing outcomes breach offenders received. Cases sentenced in the
Court, Magistrates’ Court and higher courts (the County
and Supreme Courts) are analysed separately wherever possible.
Sentenced charges and cases
2 outlines the number of breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced in the
Children’s Court, Magistrates’ Court and
higher courts each year
from 2011 to 2020, both by jurisdiction and by the specific breach offence. Some
key points emerge from that
112,988 breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced in Victoria from 2011 to 2020, at
an average of about 11,300 per year;
majority of breach offences were sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court
(96.5%), followed by the Children’s Court
(2.8%) and the higher courts
the number of
breach offences sentenced in each jurisdiction increased markedly between 2011
and 2019 (excluding 2020 because of the
effect of COVID-19 on court
operations):
313% in the
higher courts, from 24 to 99;
128% in the
Children’s Court, from 176 to 402; and
167% in the
Magistrates’ Court, from 5,429 to 14,482;
the most common
breach offence sentenced in each jurisdiction was the non-aggravated offence of
breach of a FVIO (84.5% in the Children’s
Court, 72.3% in the
Magistrates’ Court and 61.1% in the higher courts); and
the second most
common breach offence sentenced in the adult jurisdictions was persistent breach
of FVSNs and FVIOs (15.5% in the
Magistrates’ Court and 20.9% in the
higher courts), while in the Children’s Court it was breach of a FVIO
while intending
to cause harm or fear for safety
112,988 breach offences were sentenced in
62,298 cases involving 38,612 unique offenders
Table 2: Number of breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced in Victoria, by
Breach offence
Children’s Court
Breach of a FVSN
Breach of a FVSN while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
Breach of a FVIO
2,669 (84.5%)
Breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
Persistent breach of FVSNs and FVIOs
3,158 (100%)
Magistrates’ Court
Breach of a FVSN
5,440 (5.0%)
Breach of a FVSN while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
Breach of a FVIO
78,856 (72.3%)
Breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
7,275 (6.7%)
Persistent breach of FVSNs and FVIOs
16,922 (15.5%)
109,084 (100%)
Higher courts
Breach of a FVSN
Breach of a FVSN while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
Breach of a FVIO
456 (61.1%)
Breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
101 (13.5%)
Persistent breach of FVSNs and FVIOs
156 (20.9%)
5.3 Most of the
increase in breach offences sentenced each year occurred from 2011 to 2016,
after which the numbers stabilised, with
the exception of 2020, during which the
number dropped due to COVID-19 (Figure 23).
Figure 23: Yearly
number of breach offences sentenced in Victoria, 2011 to 2020 (112,988
5.4 Figure 24
shows the number of cases in each jurisdiction in which at least one breach
offence was sentenced between 2011 and 2020.
There were 62,298 total cases
involving at least one breach offence sentenced during the reference period:
60,040 in the Magistrates’
Court, 1,776 in the Children’s Court and
482 in the higher courts. In each of those jurisdictions, the specific number of
sentenced in 2011 and 2019 are shown, as these are indicative of a trend.
The numbers for 2020 have also been included to illustrate
the effect of
COVID-19 on that trend and normal court operations, significantly reducing the
number of cases sentenced that year.
Figure 24: Number of
sentenced cases involving at least one breach offence each year, by
Children’s Court cases
Magistrates’ Court cases
Higher courts cases
5.5 There was a significant increase in the number of cases with a breach
offence sentenced each year from 2011 to 2019: cases more
than doubled in the
Children’s Court, more than tripled in the Magistrates’ Court and
more than quadrupled in the higher
courts. Stakeholders suggested this could be
partly due to changes in charging practices: ‘what might in the past have
charged as an unlawful assault is now charged as an unlawful assault
a breach of an intervention
But they also
suggested it was due to police taking ‘coercive control type
behaviour’ more seriously. Where previously
charges might have only been
laid if there was physical violence of some sort, police are now laying charges
for behaviours such
as ‘the sending of texts, the driving past houses,
those sorts of things’.
police are probably a bit more proactive in asking ... if there’s an
intervention order in place, they’ll ask if there’s
been unwanted
texts or calls, then they’ll ask to check the phone, and it’s a lot
easier for police to prosecute because
they’ve got the record of all the
calls on all the dates over the
5.6 In addition to the increase in the
of cases involving
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced each year, there was also an increase in
cases sentenced each year that involved at
least one breach offence (Figure 25). Due to reporting differences, the number
of all cases
sentenced each year is measured in financial
while the number of
cases with a breach offence is measured in calendar years, consistent with the
rest of this report. Figure 25
should therefore be seen as indicative of a trend
rather than precisely accurate, particularly the number of sentenced cases with
breach offences in 2020, which would have been considerably reduced due to
Figure 25: Proportion of all cases sentenced in Victoria involving a
breach offence, by year and jurisdiction, 2011 to 2020 (944,359
total cases,
62,298 cases with breach offences)
Children’s Court
Magistrates’ Court
Higher courts
5.7 Nevertheless,
the trend in each jurisdiction was consistent. In the higher courts, the
proportion of cases with a breach offence
increased from 0.8% of cases in 2011
to 3.4% in 2019. In the Children’s Court, the proportion increased from
1.8% to 7.0% of
all cases. And in the Magistrates’ Court, the proportion
of cases with a breach offence more than doubled, from 3.6% to 9.2%,
now involves a breach offence.
Age and gender of sentenced breach offenders
5.8 Of the 62,297 cases in which the breach
offender’s gender was
12.7% involved
female offenders (7,919 cases) while the other 87.3% involved male offenders
(54,378 cases). This varied by jurisdiction,
though: female offenders
represented 3.7% of breach offenders in the higher courts, 12.5% in the
Magistrates’ Court and 21.9%
in the Children’s Court. During the
reference period, the proportion of females sentenced in the Children’s
breach of a FVSN or FVIO declined from 29.9% in 2011 to 23.3% in 2019,
while the proportion of females sentenced in the Magistrates’
fluctuated within a small and stable range of between 11.2% and 13.7% each year.
There were too few breach offenders sentenced
in the higher courts for the
yearly data to be indicative of a trend.
Figure 26: Proportion of cases with breach offences involving a female
offender sentenced in Victoria, by year and jurisdiction, 2011
Magistrates' Court cases (% female)
Children's Court cases (% female)
Higher courts cases (% female)
5.9 In the Magistrates’ Court, data on age and gender was available for
59,896 cases (Figure 27).
Both males and females were most likely to be sentenced for breach of a FVSN or
FVIO while aged 25 to 44, the number of breach offenders
thereafter declining
with age. With the small exception of breach offenders aged under 20 (16.7% of
whom were female), the proportion
of female breach offenders in each age range
was remarkably consistent (between 12% and 13%). The oldest females sentenced in
Magistrates’ Court for breach of a FVSN or FVIO were aged 80 (three
cases), while the oldest males were aged 87 (4 cases).
87% of sentenced breach offenders were male
Figure 27: Age and gender of breach offenders in sentenced cases involving
at least one breach offence, Magistrates’ Court,
2011 to 2020 (59,896
Male: 52,402 cases
Female: 7,494 cases
20–24 years
25–29 years
30–34 years
35–39 years
40–44 years
45–49 years
50–54 years
55–59 years
5.10 Figure 28 shows the age and gender of the 1,776 children sentenced for
breach of a FVSN or FVIO. There were 39 children, 32 of
whom were male,
sentenced for a breach offence while aged under 14 (all of the 11- and
12-year-olds were male). The number of male
children sentenced for breach of a
FVSN or FVIO increased markedly for those aged 13 to 17, whereas the number of
female children
sentenced was quite stable for those aged 15 to 17. This is
consistent with past research showing the disproportionate engagement
justice system (and child protection system) by female children aged 14 to 15
compared with male children of the same
Figure 28: Age and gender of breach offenders in sentenced cases involving
at least one breach offence, Children’s Court, 2011
to 2020 (1,776
Male: 1,387 cases
Female: 389 cases
5.11 There were not enough people sentenced in the higher courts to warrant a
detailed analysis of the age of sentenced breach offenders.
However, the median
age of male breach offenders (463 cases) and female breach offenders (18 cases)
was similar: 34 for males and
35 for females, with the oldest female being
and the oldest male being
Offences co-sentenced with breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
5.12 Figure 29 shows the number of breach charges
per case in each jurisdiction. While cases with a single breach charge were rare
in the higher courts (1.1% of cases), they made up 12.5% of cases with breach
offences in the Children’s Court and 28.6% in
the Magistrates’
Court. Nevertheless, it was still far more common in each jurisdiction for
someone to be co-sentenced for
at least one other offence alongside the breach
offence. High-volume cases (those with 10 charges or more of any offence type)
common in the adult jurisdictions (13.3% in the Magistrates’ Court
and 15.5% in the higher courts) and even more so in the
Children’s Court
(25.6%). The most charges sentenced in a single case in each jurisdiction were
28 charges in the higher
129 charges in the
Children’s Court and 393 charges in the Magistrates’ Court (this was
an outlier case; the next highest
number of charges in the Magistrates’
Court was 128).
Figure 29: Number of charges in cases involving at least one breach
offence, by jurisdiction, 2011 to 2020
Number of charges
Magistrates' Court
Children's Court
Higher courts
5.13 Table 3 shows which offence types were most commonly co-sentenced with
breach offences in each jurisdiction, including a comparison
of gender for
breach offenders in the Children’s Court and the Magistrates’ Court
(there were too few females sentenced
in the higher courts for a reliable
comparison). These offence types are largely based on the Australian Bureau of
Statistics’
offence classification
but with some minor
variations.
Table 3: Offence types most commonly co-sentenced with breaches of FVSNs
and FVIOs, by jurisdiction, 2011 to 2020
Total number and percentage of cases
Number and percentage of cases with male breach
Number and percentage of cases with female breach
Magistrates’ Court
100% (60,040)
100% (52,528)
100% (7,512)
1. Additional breach of a FVSN or FVIO
38.1% (22,880)
38.7% (20,281)
34.6% (2,599)
2. Assault and injury offences
29.6% (17,756)
30.2% (15,866)
25.2% (1,890)
3. Bail-related offences
26.8% (16,087)
27.0% (14,172)
25.5% (1,915)
4. Property damage offences
19.5% (11,723)
19.9% (10,411)
17.5% (1,312)
5. Theft offences
10.3% (6214)
11.3% (5,942)
Children’s Court
100% (1,776)
100% (1,387)
1. Assault and injury offences
53.6% (952)
52.4% (727)
57.8% (225)
2. Property damage offences
53.0% (942)
53.8% (746)
50.4% (196)
3. Additional breach of a FVSN or FVIO
38.5% (683)
38.6% (535)
38.0% (148)
4. Bail-related offences
28.9% (512)
29.3% (407)
27.0% (105)
5. Theft offences
26.1% (464)
25.8% (358)
27.2% (106)
Higher courts
1. Assault and injury offences
63.1% (304)
2. Burglary offences
36.9% (178)
3. Property damage offences
33.6% (162)
4. Additional breach of a FVSN or FVIO
28.4% (137)
5. Threat offences
25.3% (122)
5.14 In the Magistrates’ Court, the most commonly co-sentenced offence
breach of a FVSN or FVIO, in 38.1% of cases, and
the rate was slightly higher for males (38.7%) than for females (34.6%). There
no way to tell whether these additional breaches related to the same victim
survivor, but they often do.
This should not be viewed as indicative of police unresponsiveness to initial
breaches; the presence of multiple breach offences
in a case is often because,
as a psychologist at the Council’s roundtable observed, ‘from a
behavioural perspective,
women will tolerate a few breaches ... and when there
are multiple breaches, that’s when they might actually report
5.15 In the
Children’s Court, assault and injury offences were the most common
co-sentenced offences, which, along with property
damage offences, appeared in
more than half of all cases. Stakeholders suggested that one explanation for the
high rate of assault
and injury offences and property damage offences in
Children’s Court cases is that:
often the children are still living with the parent ... so you’re not
going to have the texts and the like because they’re
in the same house ...
it might be a breach that only reflects the violence and property
5.16 And in the higher courts, the most common co-sentenced
offences were assault and injury offences (in more than half of all cases)
burglary offences (in 36.9% of cases). As to the high rate of burglary offences,
the Council has previously observed a pattern
of cases in the higher courts
involving men aged 20 to 44 who attend their former partner’s home (often
where children are
present), aggressively demand entry (often in an inebriated
state) and eventually gain entry (often by damaging a door or window)
intention of confronting, threatening and/or assaulting the victim
Most serious offence (higher courts)
noted at [5.12], very few cases with a breach offence in the higher courts
involved a single offence. This is largely because
the maximum penalty for a
breach offence means the offence would almost invariably be sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court if
it was the sole offence in the case. Cases are only
sentenced in the higher courts when either there is an indictable offence that
is not triable summarily in the case (such as armed robbery, with a 25-year
maximum penalty) or the most serious offence is triable
summarily but the
prosecution and/or defence prefer to have the matter finalised in the higher
courts (for example, the prosecution
may believe the sentencing limits in the
Magistrates’ Court are not sufficient in that case).
is therefore not surprising to find that very few of the 482 breach cases in the
higher courts involved a single offence (five
cases). There were also very few
cases in which a breach offence was the most serious offence in the case (28
and most of those
were persistent breach offences (17 cases). Instead, the most serious offences
tended to be assault and injury
offences, especially causing injury
intentionally or recklessly (130 cases or 27.0%), burglary offences, especially
aggravated burglary
(124 cases or 25.7%) and sexual assault offences, especially
child sex offences (61 cases or 12.7%).
Case examples in the higher courts
1 to 4 provide examples of breaches of FVIOs that resulted in a non-custodial
sentence (Case 1:
), a brief and wholly concurrent prison sentence
), a median and partly cumulative prison sentence (Case 3:
) and a lengthy and partly cumulative prison sentence (Case 4:
). These cases have been chosen to illustrate the range of sentences
imposed for breach
; sentences for cases involving breach
offences, especially in the higher courts, are too influenced by other offences
co-sentenced
in the same case to provide any useful comparison.
Case 1: Three-year community correction order for breach of
a FVIO (and other offences)
The offender was the respondent in a FVIO naming
his former partner as a protected person. In breach of the order, he attended
She told him to leave, but he didn’t. He became aggressive, dragged her
by her hair, threatened to ‘slit her throat’
and ripped a gold chain
from her neck (robbery). He then called her more than 500 times over the next
week (stalking). When she answered
the phone on some occasions, he threatened to
kill her (threats to kill – rolled up charge).
He pleaded guilty and was assessed as having an intellectual disability. He
received a three-year community correction order with
200 hours of community
work, an order to attend drug rehabilitation, an order to attend mental health
assessment, supervision by
correction officers, judicial monitoring for three
months after sentence and a justice plan condition.
DPP v Ahern
[2014] VCC 849
Case 2: Two weeks’ imprisonment for breach of a FVIO
while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
Following a ‘tumultuous’ relationship
with the offender (a 49-year-old man), his partner sought a FVIO prohibiting him
from being at her house or engaging in family violence against her.
A few weeks later, he was still living with her. One night, when she refused
to have sexual intercourse with him, he became verbally
and physically abusive,
punching, kneeing and biting her. She left the home afterward. He then sent over
600 messages over the next
five days pleading for her to return, insulting her,
threatening her and threatening to kill himself (charged as stalking).
He received a total effective sentence of 18 months, including 16 months for
the assault, six months for stalking (two months cumulative)
and two weeks for
the two FVIO breaches (wholly concurrent).
DPP v Brien
[2017] VCC 89
Case 3: Nine months’ imprisonment for breach of an
interim FVIO with intent to cause harm or fear for safety
The offender was the respondent in an interim FVIO
naming his partner and their daughter as protected persons. In breach of that
he picked up his partner from work and drove erratically with her in the
car, causing her to fear for her life and to plead with
him to stop. He punched
her and threatened to put her in the boot. He then drove to her mother’s
house and took their daughter
from the home, leaving his partner there.
He was sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment for kidnapping and nine
months for breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm
or fear for safety, of
which four months were cumulative, resulting in a total effective sentence of 22
months’ imprisonment.
DPP v Castillo (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 289
Case 4: Two years’ imprisonment for breach of a FVIO
while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
The offender (a 39-year-old male) was the
respondent in a final FVIO naming his former partner and their children as
protected persons.
He attended her house in breach of the order, and while there
argued with her, threw an MP3 player at her face, threatened to ‘crack
[her] head open and put a bullet in [her] head’, wrapped a cord around his
hand and threatened to ‘use it’, and
threatened to ‘blow [her]
brains out’. He had also threatened her with a gun in 2017.
The court said breaches of FVIOs ‘must be given effect in sentencing if
they are to achieve their desired objectives’
and imposed a total
effective sentence of six years and four months’ imprisonment, including
two years for the breach (six
months cumulative).
DPP v Bao (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1508
Sentencing outcomes: Magistrates’ Court
5.20 Figure 30 shows the types of sentences imposed
throughout the reference period for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs. Half received
either a term of imprisonment (26.2%) or a community order (24.5%), currently
the two most serious sentencing outcomes for adults
in Victoria. Fines (21.3%)
and adjourned undertakings (18.4%) were also common, whereas discharge with or
without conviction, diversion
and ‘other’ sentence
were relatively
Figure 30: Sentence types imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs, by breach offence type, 2011 to
2020 (109,084
Breach FVSN/FVIO (not aggravated) 84,296 charges
Breach FVSN/FVIO (aggravated) 7,866 charges
Persistently breach FVSN/FVIO 16,922 charges
Imprisonment
22.0% (18,562 )
42.5% (3,341)
39.3% (6,644)
Community order
23.6% (19,864)
28.3% (2,229)
27.2% (4,607)
Adjourned undertaking
19.8% (16,710)
11.5% (904)
14.3% (2,428)
Discharge/ dismissal
2.1% (1,746)
23.1% (19,470)
13.1% (1,027)
16.1% (2,717)
3.8% (3,218)
5.6% (4,726)
5.21 There was a significant difference in the sentences imposed on male and
female offenders (Figure 31). Males were almost three
times more likely than
females to receive imprisonment for breach of a FVSN or FVIO, and more than
twice as likely to receive a suspended
sentence of imprisonment, whereas females
were much more likely than males to receive what are sometimes described as
orders’: adjourned undertakings, discharge with or without
conviction, and court-ordered diversion. As stakeholders observed
Council’s roundtable, the distinct sentencing outcomes for males and
females are likely to reflect a combination of
factors. In particular, the
gendered nature of family violence, especially intimate partner abuse, means
that men’s breach
offending (both the breach itself and co-sentenced
offending) is frequently more serious than women’s, and men typically have
lengthier criminal histories than women
Figure 31: Sentence types imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs, by gender of breach offenders and
total breach
offenders, 2011 to 2020 (109,084 charges)
Male (95,802 charges)
Female (13,282 charges)
Total (109,084 charges)
Imprisonment
28.3% (27,127)
10.7% (1,420)
26.2% (28,547)
Community order
24.7% (23,630)
23.1% (3,070)
24.5% (26,700)
21.8% (20,924)
17.2% (2,290)
21.3% (23,214)
Adjourned undertaking
16.1% (15,419)
34.8% (4,623)
18.4% (20,042)
Discharge/ dismissal
1.4% (1,364)
1.7% (1,876)
2.5% (2,391)
8.3% (1,109)
3.2% (3,500)
5.2% (4,947)
4.8% (5,205)
5.22 Stakeholders also suggested that some of the low-end orders that females
received for breach offences may be occurring in cases
of misidentification.
That is, females have been misidentified as the primary aggressor prior to a
charge being laid, and although
the error is later identified, the charge
proceeds to sentencing because of the breach. The fact of misidentification then
contributes
to a low-end order being
Victoria Police is
aware of this issue in some cases and noted that they are trying to reduce its
occurrence, instead withdrawing
charges in appropriate cases:
What we try and do is get our teams to identify a possible misidentification
early, by looking at LEAP records, checking out the
entire history of the
relationship ... [T]here’s a number of projects that we’re working
with the Magistrates’
Court ... We’re also trying to re-align our
decision-making in terms of withdrawals on the day. So if our lawyers have all
the information they need on the day to accept that it’s a
misidentification, then we can do that [withdraw the charge(s)].
But also, what
we’re encouraging our lawyers to do is, if we don’t have that
information, is to work with the respondent
lawyers and the courts, to get quick
adjournments back, so that we can have the information, assess it, and get them
out of the system
practicable.
5.23 It was also observed that prosecution decision-making in Victoria, at
least by the Director of Public Prosecutions, is not simply
based on an
assessment of whether there is a reasonable prospect of conviction; it is also
based on whether a prosecution is in the
And if a woman
charged with a breach offence has been misidentified as a primary aggressor,
this would be a key factor in deciding
that it would not be in the public
interest to proceed with the charge:
From the indictable perspective ... misidentification is considered often,
considered carefully, and would fit squarely in the Director’s
looking at discontinuance of charges that fall within either her purview or in
the summary stream if we’re involved
in the matter. This is a public
interest consideration.
Trends in sentencing outcomes in the Magistrates’
Court (2011–2020)
4 shows the sentence types imposed for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs each year
between 2011 and 2020. As would be expected,
the non-aggravated breach offences
with two-year maximum penalties had a much lower imprisonment rate than the
imprisonment rates
for the persistent and aggravated breach offences:
non-aggravated breaches of a FVSN or FVIO
(sections 37
imprisonment rate of 22.0%, whereas breaches of a FVSN or FVIO while intending
to cause harm or fear for safety
(sections 37A
) had an imprisonment
rate of 42.4%, and persistent breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
(section 125A)
imprisonment rate of 39.3%. Non-aggravated breach offences were almost equally
as likely to receive imprisonment as they were
a community order (23.6%), an
adjourned undertaking (19.8%) or a fine (23.1%).
Sentence types imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for breaches of FVSNs and
FVIOs, 2011 to 2020, by breach offence type
Breach offence type and sentencing outcome
Breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
Imprisonment
783 (14.4%)
1,150 (16.8%)
1,406 (16.9%)
1,320 (16.4%)
1,614 (19.9%)
2,223 (23.1%)
2,553 (24.7%)
2,503 (24.5%)
2,525 (25.1%)
2,485 (34.2%)
18,562 (22.0%)
Community order
942 (17.4%)
1,603 (23.4%)
1,940 (23.4%)
2,029 (25.1%)
2,515 (30.9%)
2,670 (27.7%)
2,463 (23.8%)
2,341 (22.9%)
1,999 (19.9%)
1,362 (18.7%)
19,864 (23.6%)
1,189 (21.9%)
1,587 (23.2%)
1,997 (23.2%)
1,949 (24.2%)
1,933 (23.8%)
2,448 (25.4%)
2,335 (22.6%)
2,258 (22.1%)
2,250 (22.4%)
1,524 (21.0%)
19,470 (23.1%)
Adjourned undertaking
1,247 (23.0%)
1,187 (17.3%)
1,304 (17.3%)
1,302 (16.1%)
1,418 (17.4%)
1,669 (17.3%)
2,201 (21.3%)
2,412 (23.6%)
2,564 (25.5%)
1,406 (19.3%)
16,710 (19.8%)
3,218 (3.8%)
1,103 (20.3%)
1,106 (16.1%)
1,397 (16.1%)
1,249 (15.5%)
6,472 (7.7%)
5,429 (100%)
6,852 (100%)
8,296 (100%)
8,070 (100%)
8,128 (100%)
9,623 (100%)
10,332 (100%)
10,232 (100%)
10,067 (100%)
7,267 (100%)
84,296 (100%)
Breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs while intending to cause harm or fear for
Imprisonment
258 (29.6%)
374 (30.3%)
501 (36.9%)
552 (45.4%)
492 (51.4%)
576 (53.7%)
538 (56.0%)
3,341 (42.5%)
Community order
229 (26.3%)
455 (36.9%)
417 (30.7%)
338 (27.8%)
256 (26.8%)
246 (22.9%)
232 (24.1%)
2,229 (28.3%)
144 (16.5%)
224 (18.2%)
226 (16.6%)
125 (10.3%)
101 (10.6%)
107 (10.0%)
1,027 (13.1%)
Adjourned undertaking
126 (10.2%)
174 (12.8%)
164 (13.5%)
133 (12.4%)
102 (10.6%)
904 (11.5%)
141 (16.2%)
1,234 (100%)
1,359 (100%)
1,215 (100%)
1,073 (100%)
7,866 (100%)
Persistent breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
Imprisonment
238 (28.0%)
536 (33.8%)
868 (37.0%)
1,037 (36.6%)
1,128 (38.4%)
1,344 (40.2%)
1,438 (51.1%)
6,644 (39.3%)
Community order
266 (31.3%)
571 (36.0%)
791 (33.7%)
825 (29.1%)
765 (26.0%)
755 (22.6%)
583 (20.7%)
4,607 (27.2%)
131 (15.4%)
275 (17.4%)
367 (15.7%)
503 (17.7%)
493 (16.8%)
520 (15.6%)
400 (14.2%)
2,717 (16.1%)
Adjourned undertaking
278 (11.9%)
404 (14.2%)
497 (16.9%)
655 (19.6%)
344 (12.2%)
2,428 (14.3%)
121 (14.2%)
1,577 (100%)
2,339 (100%)
2,820 (100%)
2,922 (100%)
3,320 (100%)
2,800 (100%)
16,922 (100%)
5.25 The higher rate of suspended sentences in the ‘other’
for non-aggravated
breach offences was in large part due to those offences being operational for
the entirety of the reference period
(from 1 January 2011). The aggravated and
persistent breach offences were only concurrently operational with the
availability of
suspended sentences for a year and a half between 17 April 2013
(when the offences came into
) and 1 September
2014 (when offences committed on or after this date could no longer receive
suspended sentences).
The stable rate of fines
5.26 The rate of fines for breaches of FVSNs and
FVIOs remains a point of concern. In 2009, the Council raised concerns that
for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs can often punish victim survivors as much
as they punish offenders; at the time, fines represented
37% of sentencing
outcomes for breach offences.
Later, in 2013, the Council found that there had been ‘a [positive] shift
from financial penalties to sentences with greater
potential for intervention in
the lives of offenders and, in turn, community and victim protection’;
fines had dropped to about
26% of sentencing outcomes by
Then in 2016, the
Council found that the rate of fines had stabilised at about 27% between
2011–12 and 2014–15 and again
reiterated its concerns about the use
of fines to sentence breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs, especially the new persistent
and aggravated
5.27 These past
rates of fines are not entirely comparable with the rates in this report because
counting rules vary between them
(for example, the 2016 report only counted one
breach offence per case). Nevertheless, the trends are somewhat similar. There
a drop in the rate of fines for
breach offences in the
last five years (from 17%–18% to 8%–11%). However, from 2011 to
2020, there was a fairly stable
rate, of between 21% and 25%, of non-aggravated
breach offences receiving a fine, with no apparent trend; this is consistent
the observation in 2016 that rates of fines had stabilised. At the
Council’s roundtable, stakeholders echoed previous concerns
the context of family violence, particularly for women:
I’m a bit concerned at the high number of sentences that were dealt with
by way of a fine. Women may often still have children
in their care. And fines
often impact persons other than the accused. And the adjourned undertakings and
corrections orders both
have the good behaviour component to them, where it
leaves something hanging over head for a period of time, and the ability to
treatment conditions ... [Fines may be appropriate] where parties have
separated, are living separate lives, the former husband has
been breaching in a
lower level way, but hasn’t been doing so persistently ... it may be that
a fine, if they’ve got
means, and it’s not going to impact on
others, they’re living on their own, not paying child support, it might be
that can be considered. [However] I would still probably prefer the
good behaviour component you could attach to a
5.28 Stakeholders also suggested that, while anecdotally it was not
a particularly prevalent issue, one possible contributor to the
rate of fines
for breach offending could be that adjourned undertakings and community
correction orders (CCOs) require the offender’s
‘so if someone
is not going to consent ... you’re left with either imprisonment or a
There was a
clear appetite from multiple stakeholders for a new intermediate order between
imprisonment and a CCO, one that does
not require the offender’s consent,
similar to the now abolished suspended sentence but with mandatory conditions
Other jurisdictions sometimes call these conditional suspended
The declining rate of community orders
5.29 As will be discussed below, the proportion of
breach offences receiving a term of imprisonment increased significantly over
reference period. In part, this was due to the abolition of suspended
sentences for offences committed prior to September 2014. It
also, however,
appears to have occurred alongside a decrease in the rate of community orders
(Figure 32). As the Council has found
in its previous reports on breaches of
FVSNs and FVIOs,
community orders increased when CCOs were introduced (in
and spiked the year
after the Court of Appeal’s guideline judgment encouraging their increased
use (in 2015).
orders have declined steadily since then (from 32.3% of outcomes to 19.7%). The
decline in CCOs in particular stands in
stark contrast to recommendations made
in 2016 by magistrates specialising in family violence. They suggested that
sentencing outcomes
in family violence matters should not only prioritise
general deterrence, as has been emphasised in many judgments over the last
but also prioritise
orders that keep offenders within the court’s ‘web of
accountability’,
such as adjourned undertakings for low-risk, first-time offenders and CCOs (with
or without imprisonment) for higher risk
Figure 32: Proportion of sentence types imposed for breach offences, 2011
Imprisonment
Community order
Adjourned undertaking
The increase in prison sentences
of the key aims in preparing this report was to examine what has been driving
the recent increase in prison sentences for
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs. As
shown in Figure 33, not only did the
of breach offences receiving
imprisonment increase in the last decade (see Table 4) but the
of all breach offences receiving imprisonment also increased. Even excluding the
spike in imprisonment in 2020 (due to COVID-19 requiring
courts to prioritise
more serious cases), the imprisonment rate almost doubled for persistent and
non-aggravated breach offences,
and it more than doubled for aggravated breach
Figure 33: Proportion (%) of breach offences receiving
imprisonment, by breach offence type, 2011 to 2020
Immediate custodial sentence rate
Breach FVSN/FVIO
Breach FVSN/FVIO intending to cause harm or fear
Persistently breach FVSN/FVIO
All breach offences
5.31 To some extent, this increase in imprisonment is consistent with an
overall trend in the Magistrates’ Court: whereas 4.4%
of cases resulted in
imprisonment in 2010–11, that tripled to 13.1% by
stakeholders attributed these increasing imprisonment rates to changes in bail
laws in recent years:
The changes in the
made it harder for people to get bail ...
Often when someone’s been in custody for a certain period you’ll
record a term
of imprisonment to reflect the fact of a breach of the court order
and the behaviour, but you’ll also attach a community correction
focus on supervision in the community and
[o]ur experience is that once somebody is in prison, if they haven’t been
bailed, they’re more likely to receive a sentence
of imprisonment ...
[But] that person hasn’t had the opportunity to start any rehabilitation
process, or address any of the
underlying causes of their offending ... People
who are in prison, particularly if you are on remand, you really haven’t
access to any programs or opportunity to do so. So, I think that kind of
feeds into the sentences that are appropriate and available
5.32 In order to
understand what might be specifically driving the increasing imprisonment rates
for breach offences, the following
figures present the number of breach offences
receiving imprisonment by the characteristics of offenders, their offending and
they were sentenced.
5.33 While males
received the vast bulk of prison sentences each year, both males and females
were much more likely to receive imprisonment
by the end of the reference period
(Figure 34). The rate of imprisonment for males doubled from 15.9% of all breach
offences to 33.3%,
and the rate of imprisonment for females almost quadrupled
from 3.5% to 13.0% of all breach offences. The overall imprisonment rate
males was 28.3% (27,127 of 95,802 charges) while the overall imprisonment rate
for females was 10.7% (1,420 of 13,282 charges).
Number of prison sentences imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for breach
offences, by gender
5.34 There was
also a significant increase in the number and rate of prison sentences for both
breach offenders aged 34 and under
and breach offenders aged 35 and over (Figure
35). The imprisonment rate doubled from 16.9% to 33.5% for breach offenders aged
and under, and more than doubled from 12.7% to 28.5% for breach offenders
aged 35 and over. The overall imprisonment rate for breach
offenders aged 34 and
under was 29.2% (14,354 of 49,219 charges) while the overall imprisonment rate
for breach offenders aged 35
and over was 23.7% (14,119 of 59,622 charges).
Figure 35: Number of prison sentences imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court for breach offences, by age
34 and under
35 and over
proportion of breach offences receiving imprisonment in both the Greater
Melbourne area and rural and regional Victoria more
than doubled (Figure 36). In
2011, 13.1% of breach offences sentenced in the Greater Melbourne area received
imprisonment, as did
16.8% of breach offences sentenced in rural and regional
Victoria. By 2019, imprisonment rates had increased to 30.1% in the Greater
Melbourne area and 31.6% in rural and regional Victoria. The overall
imprisonment rate was 25.6% (17,242 of 67,470 charges) in the
Greater Melbourne
area and 27.2% (11,305 of 41,614 charges) in rural and regional
Figure 36: Number of prison sentences imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court on breach offences, by region
Greater Melbourne area
Rural and regional
5.36 Finally,
while breach offences were much more likely to receive imprisonment when
co-sentenced with assault and injury offences
co-sentenced
with assault and injury offences, the likelihood of imprisonment almost doubled
for both: from 25.4% in 2011 to 49.6%
in 2019 for breach offences that
co-sentenced with an assault and injury offence and from 10.1% in
2011 to 22.4% in 2019 for breach offences that were not co-sentenced
assault and injury offence. The overall imprisonment rate was 41.2% (14,815 of
35,957 charges) for breach offences co-sentenced
with assault and injury
offences, while the overall imprisonment rate was 18.8% (13,732 of 73,163
charges) for breach offences
co-sentenced with assault and injury
Figure 37: Number of prison sentences imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court on breach offences, by co-sentenced violence
Charges co-sentenced with assault/injury receiving
Charges not co-sentenced with assault/injury receiving
5.37 In effect,
the number and rate of breach offences receiving imprisonment have increased at
a fairly stable rate regardless of
the breach offenders’ gender, age or
geographic location, or whether the breach offence was co-sentenced with a
violent offence.
An increase in short prison sentences
5.38 Instead, it seems that the driver of the
increase in prison sentences has been an increase in
short prison
specifically
sentences of six months’ imprisonment or less. Figure 38 shows the yearly
number of cases in which a breach offender
received a total effective sentence
of imprisonment (for all the offences in their case) that was either
than six months
months and over. While short prison sentences were almost as common as longer
prison sentences in 2011, they have increased
significantly since then (there
was a tenfold increase in short prison sentences by 2020). Longer prison
sentences increased as well
but by nowhere near that magnitude, and they have
even declined since 2017. By 2020, short prison sentences made up four-fifths
of all breach offenders’ total effective sentences of imprisonment
(compared to 55.1% in 2011).
Figure 38: Number of cases involving breach offences receiving
imprisonment each year in the Magistrates’ Court, by imprisonment
2011 to 2020
Prison sentences less than 6 months
Prison sentences 6 months or longer
5.39 The Council has previously found a significant increase in time served
prison sentences in recent years, 96% of which were shorter
Figure 39 examines
whether time served prison sentences could explain some of the increase in short
prison sentences for breach offenders.
For data recording and reliability
reasons, this analysis is limited to the period from 2017 to 2020. In those four
years, there
were 8,324 cases in which an offender was sentenced to imprisonment
for breach of a FVSN or FVIO.
Figure 39: Proportion of cases involving breach offences receiving
imprisonment in the Magistrates’ Court, by length of sentence
for the case
and relationship between time served on remand and the total effective sentence
of imprisonment, 2017 to 2020 (8,751
Sentence length
2017 (1,987 cases)
2018 (2,143 cases)
2019 (2,344 cases)
2020 (2,277 cases)
Prison sentences 6 months or more
Prison sentences less than 6 months (no time served)
Prison sentences less than 6 months (total effective sentence less than
time served)
Prison sentences less than 6 months (total effective sentence equals time
Prison sentences less than 6 months (more time to serve)
proportion of total effective sentences of imprisonment that were longer than
six months decreased significantly, from 29.6%
in 2017 to 19.6% in 2020. The
proportion of cases also decreased (from 12.4% to 4.7%) where a breach offender
had not spent any time
on remand but received a total effective sentence of less
than six months. Conversely, there was an increase in breach offenders
a total effective sentence that was shorter than six months when (a) the time
the breach offender spent on remand was longer
than the sentence they received
(from 2.1% to 3.3%), (b) the breach offender received a time served prison
sentence (from 30.6% to
40.1%) and (c) the breach offender still had more time
to serve (from 25.4% to 32.2%). In effect, the increase in short prison
was driven by both time served prison sentences
requiring more time in custody.
5.41 Stakeholders
cautioned against viewing these short prison sentences, constituted by a
combination of time on remand and some
additional time in custody, as
necessarily inappropriate. Sometimes they can be indicative of a court avoiding
artificial outcomes
for the sake of expediency:
Sometimes it’s a bit artificial to set a term of imprisonment on the day,
of the pre-sentence detention. So if you think something
is worth four months in
prison and [the offender has] served 110 days, you’re not going to say
‘well I’ll release
you’ ... It’s more likely that if a
magistrate forms a view that they’ve served more than enough time, more
the sentence you’d have imposed, that’s when you’d
release them on a time served
5.42 But more
importantly, these short prison sentences – involving a brief amount of
time in custody beyond the sentencing
date – can sometimes be
intentionally designed to allow adequate time to plan the offender’s
transition back into the
Sometimes that little bit of extra time, if you’re close to the period
you’ve got in mind, is beneficial in assisting
some stabilisation, so
arrangements for accommodation or family to go and collect them, or the like ...
If it’s late in the
day ... [and] you’re sentencing someone at four
o’clock, [the prison has] got limited capacity to do that, so it may
actually be in the interests of the person you’re sentencing and the
community in general, even if it’s a day
[i]t’s quite common for there to be a collaborative relationship between
the parties and the magistrate. ‘Are you ready
to come out now? Do you
need an extra few days to arrange for some housing?’ That does happen, for
that planning period to
be released, so that [they’re] not going back out
onto the street, likely to commit more
5.43 Stakeholders also suggested that defence counsel sometimes request that
the overall term of imprisonment be shorter than six
months. This is to ensure
that the person has accommodation to return to if they are living in public
housing, as there is a six-month
cap on how long a public housing property can
be held while someone is in prison (or in a rehabilitation facility or nursing
Community correction orders in the Magistrates’ Court
came into effect in January 2012, replacing community-based orders (among other
orders). This section analyses the CCOs
that were imposed on breaches of FVSNs
and FVIOs in the nine years from 2012 to 2020. Each CCO is counted once per case
if the breach offence itself received a CCO. There were 12,750 cases in
which a breach offender received a CCO, with 25,741 breach
offences in those
cases. Below is an analysis of the duration and conditions of those 12,750
5.45 The most
common duration of those CCOs was 12 to less than 18 months (63.8%). Very few
CCOs were less than six months (1.1%)
or two years and over
Figure 40: Duration of CCOs imposed on breach offenders
in the Magistrates’ Court, 2012 to 2020 (12,750 CCOs)
Less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
18 to less than 24 months
24 months or more
5.46 Most of the possible conditions that can be attached to
were attached to less
than 1% of CCOs: an association restriction (0.8%), a residence restriction
(0.3%), a place restriction (0.5%),
a curfew condition (0.2%) and an alcohol
exclusion condition (0.6%). Justice plan conditions were also fairly uncommon
(2.0%). Four
conditions were, though, either very or fairly common, and the same
four conditions are often attached to CCOs (Figure
The most common
condition was assessment and treatment, requiring offenders to undergo
assessment for, and/or participate in, treatment
and rehabilitation of some sort
(82.7%). The next most common were unpaid community work (63.3%) and supervision
by correction officers
(63.4%). And a judicial monitoring condition was attached
to 16.3% of CCOs.
Figure 41: Proportion of CCOs with certain conditions attached imposed in
the Magistrates’ Court, by different groups of offenders,
2012 to 2020
(12,750 CCOs)
Assessment and treatment
Community work
Supervision
Judicial monitoring
CCO first monitoring report (2014)
CCO second monitoring report (2015)
CCO third monitoring report (2016)
Animal cruelty offenders (2019)
PSIO breach offenders (2022)
FVSN / FVIO breach offenders (2022)
5.47 As the Council recently found with CCOs imposed for breaches of
family violence intervention
CCOs imposed for
breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs had a slightly higher rate of assessment and
treatment, a slightly lower rate of community
work and a slightly higher rate of
supervision and judicial monitoring than the rates for all CCOs. This suggests a
prioritisation
of conditions that facilitate protection of the victim and the
community over primarily punitive conditions such as community work.
5.48 A number of
stakeholders raised concerns about the limited availability of men’s
behaviour change programs in Victoria,
and how that affects the ability of
courts to confidently mandate participation in a treatment program as a
condition of a breach
offender’s sentence:
One of the big problems with contraventions is the lack of funding for
Corrections and for behavioural change programs. When we sentence
someone to a
good behaviour bond or a corrections order and make it a mandatory condition
that they must engage in drug or alcohol
counselling, or men’s behaviour
change programs, we often get breaches coming back. Or judicial monitoring where
[still] in the queue waiting for a program. We might have someone
on an 18-month order and we’re six months in and they still
started their counselling ... I think often we see breaches of these sentences
because the problems are not addressed
at the start. And I think in combination
sentences, where people are imprisoned and they’re sober or drug-free,
one of the best times to start programs. You could start them in
custody, continue on release, but ... funding is a huge problem.
And I think we
would see far fewer breaches if treatment was front-ended. If treatment went for
longer. If we didn’t have people
waiting in queues. It’s months
before they can start them, and breaches happen in that time, and people’s
safety is affected
every day because these programs can’t
Sentencing outcomes: Children’s Court
5.49 There were 3,158 breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs
sentenced in 1,776 cases in the Children’s Court. Figure 42 shows that,
both male and female children, the most common outcomes were probation and
good behaviour bonds. Until recently, they were also the
two most common
outcomes generally in the Children’s Court; diversion, which first became
available in 2015 and was rolled
out statewide in 2017, now makes up more than
one-third of all outcomes for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs, and more than
of all outcomes in the Children’s Court
Male children were
more than twice as likely as female children to receive both a youth justice
centre order or a youth justice residential
centre order (4.2%) and a youth
attendance order or a youth supervision order (20.0%); these orders represent
the most severe sentencing
options in the Children’s Court. In comparison,
female children were much more likely than male children to receive a good
behaviour bond or diversion.
Figure 42: Sentence types imposed in the Children’s Court for breach
offences, by gender, 2011 to 2020 (3,158 charges)
Total (3,158 charges)
Female (709 charges)
Male (2,449 charges)
Youth justice centre order or residential centre order
Youth attendance order or youth supervision order
17.4% (550)
20.0% (491)
Youth control order
27.1% (855)
27.6% (196)
26.9% (659)
Good behaviour bond
26.0% (820)
32.0% (227)
24.2% (593)
Undertaking
Discharge/dismissal
Youth diversion
17.4% (550)
21.4% (152)
16.3% (398)
5.50 While the
rate of custodial sentences was low in the Children’s Court overall
(3.6%), it varied by breach offence type:
9.1% for persistent breach offences,
5.2% for aggravated breach offences and 3.1% for non-aggravated breach offences.
It also varied
by age. None of the 344 breach offences committed by children
aged under 15 received a custodial sentence, and custodial sentences
imposed for only three of the 526 breach offences committed by children aged
Sentencing outcomes: higher courts
most common sentence imposed in the higher courts for breaches of FVSNs and
FVIOs was imprisonment (82.8% or 618 of 746 charges),
with a high rate of
imprisonment for each breach offence type. This was followed by community orders
(8.4% or 63 charges) and fines
(4.3% or 32 charges). The other 33 charges
received conviction and discharge (12 charges), a youth justice centre order or
training centre order (6), a partially suspended sentence (6), an
adjourned undertaking (5), dismissal without conviction (2), discharge
conviction (1) and a hospital security order (1). Male offenders had a higher
proportion of prison sentences (83.7%) than
did female offenders (60.9% of the
23 female offenders).
83% imprisonment, 81% non-aggravated
breach offences, 83% persistent breach offences, 91% aggravated breach
Imprisonment lengths
5.52 Imprisonment lengths varied between the breach
offence types. The median duration of non-aggregate prison sentences was three
months for non-aggravated breach offences, but it was six months for both
aggravated breach offences and persistent breach offences.
The longest prison
sentences for a breach offence were two and a half years (a persistent breach
two years and two
months (a persistent breach offence) and two years (two persistent breach
and three aggravated
breach offences
). The longest
prison sentence for a non-aggravated breach offence was 18 months (five charges
in three cases
5.53 Sentencing remarks were available for 219 non-aggregate prison sentences
imposed in the higher courts for breach offences. Of
these, 99 (45.2%) were
wholly concurrent with other prison sentences in the case, 109 (49.8%) were
partly concurrent and partly cumulative,
and just six (2.7%) were either the
most severe sentence in the
(three prison sentences)
or wholly cumulative (three prison sentences). For five charges, the extent of
cumulation was unclear.
Figure 43: Lengths of non-aggregate prison sentences imposed in the higher
courts for breach offences, 2011 to 2020 (481 non-aggregate
prison sentences)
Breach FVSN/FVIO (non-aggravated) (310 prison
Breach FVSN/FVIO (aggravated) (67 prison
Persistently breach FVSN/FVIO (104 prison
Less than 3 months
3 to less than 6 months
6 to less than 9 months
9 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 15 months
15 to less than 18 months
18 months or more
Appendix 1: Methodology
This report utilises
data provided by the Crime Statistics Agency and Court Services Victoria. Unless
otherwise specified, the reference
period for the data examined in this report
is the 10 years from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2020.
Data on family violence safety notices issued by police
In response to a data request, the Crime Statistics
Agency provided the Council with the following data in relation to family
safety notices (FVSNs) issued during the reference period:
the number of
FVSNs issued by police each year;
the relationship
between the primary affected family member and the respondent in each FVSN;
the age and
gender of each primary affected family member; and
the age and
gender of each respondent.
Data on family violence intervention orders issued by
In response to a data request, Court Services
Victoria provided the Council with the following data in relation to family
intervention order (FVIO) applications and FVIOs during the reference
the number of
applications
made each year and the court in which each application
the number of
FVIOs issued by courts each year, and the court issuing the
the number of
FVIOs issued by courts each year and for each of those:
the justice
region in which the FVIO was issued;
the number of
protected persons named in the order;
the age and
gender of the protected person(s);
the age and
gender of the respondent;
the relationship
between the respondent and the protected person(s); and
the duration of
Data on breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs recorded by police
In response to a data request, the Crime Statistics
Agency provided the Council with the following data in relation to the offences
of breach of a FVSN or FVIO contrary to
sections 37
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
the number of
breach offences recorded by police during the reference period;
the duration of
recorded breach offences; and
the age and
gender of the alleged breach offender.
Demographic details of any
complainants involved in a breach offence are not recorded by police. Neither is
the relationship between
the respondent and any complainants involved.
Data on breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs sentenced by courts
Court Services Victoria routinely provides the
Council with data on sentencing outcomes. The Council cleans and checks the data
it is received. This report incorporates data from all Victorian courts:
the Children’s Court, the Magistrates’ Court,
the County Court and
the Supreme Court.
Reference is occasionally made in this report to sentencing remarks from
cases sentenced in the higher courts. Those references are
based on sentencing
remarks publicly available via the Australasian Legal Information Institute
Unless otherwise specified,
sentence types
presented in this report
represent the most serious penalty imposed for a charge or case. For example, if
an offender received imprisonment
combined with a community correction order
(CCO) pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), this would
be counted as a sentence of imprisonment rather than a community order.
At various points in this report, some of the breach offences have been
combined for the purpose of simplifying the analysis. In particular,
analysing sentencing outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court, the offences of
breach of a FVSN and breach of a FVIO
(sections 37
Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic)) have been combined (described as
non-aggravated breach offences
). This is because the breach offences are
almost identical in nature and share a two-year maximum penalty; they differ
almost exclusively
in who issued the order: police or the courts. Similarly, the
aggravated offences of breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs while intending
to cause harm
or fear for safety have been combined
(sections 37A
Due to data availability and reliability, lengths of prison sentences imposed
in the Magistrates’ Court for breaches of FVSNs
and FVIOs are not provided
in this report. This is because sentence lengths for charges can only be
discerned if the court has imposed
a non-aggregate (discrete) sentence on the
particular offence. There is an extremely high rate of aggregate sentences (over
in the Magistrates’ Court, both generally and for breaches of FVSNs
and FVIOs. Many of the remaining 10% of sentences for breach
charges appear to
also be part of aggregate prison sentences despite not being recorded as
Time spent on remand
The higher courts record total effective sentences
of imprisonment in months and pre-sentence detention in days. The
Magistrates’
Court records sentence length in months and days and records
pre-sentence detention in days. To equate these, a month was considered
30.4 days (365 days across 12 months equals 30.4 days per month). To account for
differences in measurement, data entry errors
and any delays in administrative
processing, a total effective sentence of imprisonment was considered equal to
the time spent on
time served prison sentence
) if they were
within three days (inclusive) of each other.
Classifying co-sentenced offences
The offences recorded in each court’s
Classification (ANZSOC)
group number, which are defined by the Australian Bureau
of Statistics.
The Council
undertakes some quality assurance regarding the ANZSOC codes associated with
each offence recorded in the sentencing
data. Throughout this report, the
discussion of ‘offence types’ refers to ANZSOC subdivisions, being
the second-broadest
category of offence classification. There are, though, four
occasions where customised offence groupings were used to ensure that
is as meaningful as possible. In particular, most breaches of community orders
are bail-related offences, so bail-related
offences were analysed separately
from other offences relating to breaches of community orders. Similarly, most
harassment and threat
offences are threat offences, so threat offences were
grouped separately from other offences in that category, and this included
threats to distribute intimate images, which are otherwise classified in ANZSOC
as non-contact sex offences. Finally, breaches of
family violence intervention
orders and safety notices, the focus of this report, were also analysed
separately, as they are otherwise
classified as justice procedures offences.
Ethnicity data
While it would be ideal to include data on
ethnicity of respondents, affected family members and breach offenders, that
data is currently
either unavailable or not easily accessible. It is not
recorded by police issuing FVSNs or courts issuing FVIOs, nor by courts
breach offenders. It is recorded by corrections staff upon intake of
an offender into a correctional facility, but the data would
prohibitively resource-intensive data linkage in order to match it with
sentencing outcomes; even then, it would only represent
those breach offenders
who entered a correctional facility.
Police also often record data on country of birth for recorded offenders;
however, as the Crime Statistics Agency has observed, ‘knowing
person’s country of birth does not necessarily tell you anything
definitive about a person’s ... ethnic or racial background
The need for
improved collection of data on ethnicity by criminal justice agencies, both
generally and in the context of family violence
offending, was raised as a
concern at the Council’s roundtable:
We need better data. In relation to ethnicity and cultural differences.
It’s absolutely essential. Because without that data
actually develop enough intervention programs that are culturally relevant, and
provide all those other help-seeking
services to people from all these different
backgrounds.
Appendix 2: Consultation
6 December 2021
Meeting with Geraldine Bilston, Deputy Chairperson, Victim Survivor
Advisory Council
(via Teams)
4 February 2022
Stakeholder Roundtable
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria
Victoria Legal
Aboriginal Legal Service
Criminal Bar
Association
Victorian Law
Reform Commission
Family Safety
Deakin Research
on Violence Against Women (DRVAW) Hub
Office of Public
Prosecutions
Law Institute of
Affected family
A person deemed in need of protection by a FVSN or in a FVIO
application.
Aggravated breach offence:
A collective term used to describe the
offences of breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs while intending to cause, or knowing the
conduct will
probably cause, physical or mental harm, apprehension or fear for
safety, contrary to
sections 37A
Family Violence Protection
Breach charge:
In this report, a charge of breaching a FVSN or
Breach offence:
In this report, an offence of breaching a FVSN or
Breach offender:
In this report, a person who has breached a FVSN or a
One or more charges against a person that are prosecuted,
sentenced or diverted at one hearing.
A single count of an offence.
Family incident:
An incident attended by Victoria Police where a
Victoria Police Risk Assessment and Risk Management Report (also known as an L17
was completed and recorded on LEAP.
Family Law Act
An order, injunction or arrangement referred to
Family Law Act 1975
Family violence intervention order (FVIO):
As defined in
section 11(1)
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic), an interim FVIO or a
final FVIO as per
sections 11(2)
Family Violence Protection
Family violence safety notice (FVSN):
As defined in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic), a FVSN issued under
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Higher courts:
In this report, the County and Supreme Courts of
Non-aggravated breach offence:
A collective term used to describe the
offences of breaching a FVSN or breaching a FVIO contrary to
sections 37
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Protected person:
In this report, a person protected by a FVSN or
Primary affected family member:
The person deemed to be most in need
of protection by a FVSN or FVIO either before or after an order is in force.
Primary protected person:
The person deemed to be most in need of
protection by a FVSN or FVIO that is in force.
Recorded offence:
As defined by the Crime Statistics Agency,
‘any criminal act or omission by a person or organization for which a
penalty could
be imposed by the Victorian legal system ... An offence is counted
and included in the data where it: was reported to, or detected
by, Victoria
Reference period:
In this report, the 10-year period from 1 January
2011 to 31 December 2020.
Respondent:
In this report, a person who has had a FVSN, FVIO
application or FVIO made against them.
Total effective sentence:
The total term of imprisonment that an
offender receives after a sentencing judicial officer has combined all
individual terms of
imprisonment imposed on charges within a case.
Victim survivor:
In this report, a person who has been a victim of
family violence.
Bibliography
Broadcasting Corporation, ‘When Police Misjudge Domestic Violence, Victims
Are Slapped with Intervention Order Applications’,
(Melbourne) 15 August 2018
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-15/domestic-violence-victims-mistaken-for-perpetrators/10120240>.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘1234.0 – Australian and New
Zealand Standard Offence Classification (ANZSOC)’
(3rd ed., 2011)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1234.0>.
Australian Institute of Judicial Administration,
National Domestic and
Family Violence Bench Book
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration,
2021) <https://dfvbenchbook.aija.org.au/contents>.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Incarceration Rates of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Peoples
, Discussion Paper 84 (Australian Law Reform
Commission, 2017)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publication/incarceration-rates-of-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-peoples-dp-84/>.
Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence – A National Legal Response: Final Report,
ALRC Report No 114, NSWLRC Report 128 (Commonwealth of Australia, 2010)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publication/family-violence-a-national-legal-response-alrc-report-114/>.
Campbell, Elena, Jessica Richter, Jo Howard and Helen Cockburn,
Project: Positive Interventions for Perpetrators of Adolescent Violence in the
(ANROWS, 2020)
<https://www.anrows.org.au/publication/the-pipa-project-positive-interventions-for-perpetrators-of-adolescent-violence-in-the-home-avith/>.
Campo, Monica and Sarah Tayton,
Domestic and Family Violence in Regional,
Rural and Remote Communities: An Overview of Key Issues
(Australian
Institute of Family Studies, 2015)
<https://aifs.gov.au/cfca/publications/domestic-and-family-violence-regional-rural-and-remote-communities>.
Christensen, Julian, Lene Aarøe, Martin Baekgaard, Pamela Herd and
Donald P. Moynihan, ‘Human Capital and Administrative
Burden: The Role of
Cognitive Resources in Citizen-State Interactions’ (2020) 80(1)
Administration Review
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Explanatory Notes & Definitions’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/family-violence-data-portal/explanatory-notes-definitions>.
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘What Is Country of Birth Information in
Police Recorded Crime Statistics and What Can it Tell You?’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/media-centre/news/what-is-country-of-birth-information-in-police-recorded-crime-statistics-and-what>.
Department of Health and Human Services,
Tenancy Management Manual:
Temporary Absence Operational Guidelines
(Department of Health and Human
Services, 2018)
<https://providers.dffh.vic.gov.au/tenancy-management-manual-temporary-absence-operational-guidelines-word>.
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
(Director of Public Prosecutions, 2022)
<https://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policy-of-the-Director-of-Public-Prosecutions-for-/Policy-of-the-Director-of-Public-Prosecutions-for>.
Douglas, Heather, ‘Not a Crime Like Any Other: Sentencing Breaches of
Domestic Violence Protection Orders’
(2007) 31(4)
Criminal Law Journal
Family Violence Reform Implementation Monitor,
Monitoring Victoria’s
Family Violence Reforms: Accurate Identification of the Predominant Aggressor
(Office of the Family Violence Reform Implementation Monitor, 2021)
<https://www.fvrim.vic.gov.au/monitoring-victorias-family-violence-reforms-accurate-identification-predominant-aggressor>.
Gelb, Karen, Nigel Stobbs and Russell Hogg,
Community-Based Sentencing
Orders and Parole: A Review of Literature and Evaluations Across Jurisdictions
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/615018/edited-final-literature-review.pdf>.
Halliday, John, Cecilia French and Christina Goodwin,
Making Punishments
Work: Report of a Review of the Sentencing Framework for England and Wales
<https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ukgwa/+/http:/www.homeoffice.gov.uk/documents/halliday-report-sppu/chap-1-2-halliday2835.pdf>.
Hawkins, Kate and Felicity Broughton, ‘Sentencing in Family Violence
Cases’ (Paper presented at ‘Current Issues
in Sentencing’,
National Judicial College of Australia Conference, Canberra, 6–7 February
<https://njca.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Hawkins-Kate-Sentencing-in-Domestic-Violence-Cases-paper.pdf>.
Herd, Pamela and Donald P. Moynihan,
Administrative Burden: Policymaking
by Other Means
(Russel Sage Foundation, 2018).
InTouch Multicultural Centre Against Family Violence,
The Causes and
Consequences of Misidentification on Women from Migrant and Refugee Communities
Experiencing Family Violence
, Position Paper (InTouch Multicultural Centre
Against Family Violence, 2022).
Parliament of New South Wales, Joint Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive Control in Domestic Relationships
, Report no. 1/57 (Parliament
of New South Wales, 2021)
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/listofcommittees/Pages/committee-details.aspx?pk=271>.
Judicial College of Victoria,
Family Violence Bench Book
College of Victoria, 2010–)
<https://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/FVBBWeb/index.htm#34143.htm>.
Lind, Bronwyn and Simon Eyland,
The Impact of Abolishing Short Prison
, Contemporary Issues in Crime and Justice no. 73 (NSW Bureau of
Crime Statistics and Research, 2002)
<https://www.bocsar.nsw.gov.au/Publications/CJB/cjb73.pdf>.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Apply for a Family Violence
Intervention Order (FVIO)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://fvio.mcv.vic.gov.au/>.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, Report no. 139 (New
South Wales Law Reform Commission, 2013)
<https://www.lawreform.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Publications/Reports/Report-139.pdf>.
No to Violence,
Predominant Aggressor Identification and Victim
Misidentification: Discussion Paper
(No to Violence, 2019)
<https://ntv.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/20191121-NTV-Discussion-Paper-Predominant-Aggressor-FINAL.pdf>.
New South Wales Sentencing Council,
Abolishing Prison Sentences of 6
Months or Less
(New South Wales Sentencing Council, 2004)
http://www.sentencingcouncil.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/Completed-projects-and-publications/completed_projects/short-prison-sentences.aspx
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Report
(Productivity Commission, 2021)
<https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/prison-dilemma>.
Reeves, Ellen, ‘Family Violence, Protection Orders and Systems Abuse:
Views of Legal Practitioners’
(2020) 32(1)
Current Issues in Criminal
Reeves, Ellen, ‘“I’m Not at All Protected and I Think Other
Women Should Know That, That They’re Not Protected
Victim-Survivors’ Experiences of “Misidentification” In
Victoria’s Family Violence System’
(2021) 10(2)
International
Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Satyen, Lata, John W. Toumbourou, Jess Heerde, Meu Supol and Archna
Ranganathan, ‘The Royal Commission into Family Violence:
Trends in the
Reporting of Intimate Partner Violence and Help-Seeking Behavior’ (2021)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Scottish Government,
Extended Presumption Against Short Prison Sentences:
Monitoring Information July 2019 – December 2019
(Scottish Government,
<https://www.gov.scot/publications/extended-presumption-against-short-sentences-monitoring-information-july-2019-december-2019/pages/2/>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Aggravated Burglary: Current Sentencing
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2011)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/aggravated-burglary-current-sentencing-practices>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Animal Cruelty Offences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/animal-cruelty-offences-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Breaching Intervention Orders: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/breaching-intervention-orders-report>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Children Held on Remand in Victoria: A Report
on Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/children-held-on-remand-in-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2014)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-monitoring-report>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Second
Monitoring Report (Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-second-monitoring-report-pre-guideline-judgment>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-third-monitoring-report-post-guideline-judgment>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention
Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2016)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/contravention-family-violence-intervention-orders-and-safety-notices-prior-offences>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
‘Crossover Kids’: Vulnerable
Children in the Youth Justice System Report 2: Children at the Intersection of
Child Protection
and Youth Justice Across Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2020)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/crossover-kids-vulnerable-children-youth-justice-system-report-2>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Exploring the Relationship Between
Community-Based Order Conditions and Reoffending
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2014)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/exploring-relationship-between-community-based-order-conditions-and-reoffending>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Family Violence Intervention Orders and
Safety Notices: Sentencing for Contravention: Monitoring Report
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2013)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/family-violence-intervention-orders-and-safety-notices-sentencing-for-contravention>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2010)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/gender-differences-sentencing-outcomes>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘General Trends in Sentencing for
Victorian Courts’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/general-trends-sentencing-for-victorian-courts>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Guiding Principles for Sentencing
Contraventions of Family Violence Intervention Orders
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2009)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/guiding-principles-for-sentencing-contraventions-of-family-violence-intervention-orders>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety
Intervention Orders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-breaches-of-personal-safety-intervention-orders-in-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing for Contravention of Family
Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Second Monitoring Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-for-contravention-family-violence-intervention-orders-and-safety-notices>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Children’s Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-childrens-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Practices for Breach of Family
Violence Intervention Orders: Final Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-practices-for-breach-family-violence-intervention-orders-final-report>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-stalking-in-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/time-served-prison-sentences-victoria>.
Spencer, Pauline, ‘Strengthening the Web of Accountability: Criminal
Courts and Family Violence Offenders’ (2016) 41(4)
Alternative Law
State of Victoria, ‘Extend the Functions of Family Violence Court
Division Courts to Other Courts’ (vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.vic.gov.au/family-violence-recommendations/extend-functions-family-violence-court-division-courts-other-courts>.
State of Victoria, ‘Magistrates’ Court Roll Out an Online
Application Form for Intervention Orders’ (vic.gov.au,
<https://www.vic.gov.au/family-violence-recommendations/magistrates-court-roll-out-online-application-form-intervention>.
State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence
, Volume I: Report
and Recommendations
(State of Victoria, 2016)
http://rcfv.archive.royalcommission.vic.gov.au/MediaLibraries/RCFamilyViolence/Reports/Final/RCFV-Vol-I.pdf
State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
Volume III:
Report and Recommendations
(State of Victoria, 2016)
http://rcfv.archive.royalcommission.vic.gov.au/MediaLibraries/RCFamilyViolence/Reports/Final/RCFV-Vol-III.pdf
State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence
, Volume V: Report
and Recommendations
(State of Victoria, 2016)
http://rcfv.archive.royalcommission.vic.gov.au/MediaLibraries/RCFamilyViolence/Reports/Final/RCFV-Vol-V.pdf
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Consultation Paper
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021)
<https://www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/VLRC_stalking-consultation-paper-forweb_1.pdf>.
Ulbrick, Madeleine and Marianne Jago,
‘Officer She’s Psychotic
and I Need Protection’: Police Misidentification of the ‘Primary
in Family Violence Incidents in Victoria
, Policy Paper 1
(Women’s Legal Service Victoria and Monash University, 2018)
<https://womenslegal.org.au/files/file/WLSV%20Policy%20Brief%201%20MisID%20July%202018.pdf>.
Yates, Sophie, ‘A Critical Frame Analysis of Victoria’s Royal
Commission into Family Violence’
(PhD Thesis, University of New
South Wales, 2018).
Yates, Sophie, ‘Public Inquiries as Procedural Policy Tools’
(2021) 40(3)
Policy and Society
Boulton & Ors v The Queen
[2014] VSCA
DPP v Afolayan (A Pseudonym)
[2016] VCC 250
DPP v Ahern
[2014] VCC 849
DPP v Alexander (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 124
DPP v Allen & Diaz
[2014] VCC 1662
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075
DPP v Bao (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1508
DPP v Brien
[2017] VCC 89
DPP v Brunning (A Pseudonym)
[2016] VCC 1286
DPP v Caldwell (A Pseudonym)
[2021] VCC 760
DPP v Castillo (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 289
[2016] VCC 1006
DPP v Cope (A Pseudonym)
[2021] VMC 14
DPP v Ferguson (A Pseudonym)
[2014] VCC 1993
DPP v Field (A Pseudonym)
[2018] VCC 1550
DPP v Grima
[2014] VCC 1700
DPP v Johnson
[2011] VSCA 288
DPP v Meyers
[2014] VSCA 314
DPP v Saunders
[2020] VCC 1859
DPP v Smeaton
[2007] VSCA 256
DPP v Sumbul
[2017] VCC 1974
DPP v Swanson
[2020] VCC 2073
Filiz v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 212
Forbes (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 341
Hill v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 220
Laa v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 136
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136
Pasinis v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 97
[2007] VSCA 137
Saxton v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 357
Woods v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 34
Legislation
Bail Act 1977
Crimes Act 1958
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family Violence Protection Amendment Act 2014
Family Violence Protection Amendment Act 2017
Justice Legislation Amendment (Family Violence and Other Matters) Act
National Domestic Violence Order Scheme Act 2016
Personal Safety Intervention Orders Act 2010
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Amendment (Abolition of Suspended Sentences and Other Matters)
Sentencing Amendment (Community Correction Reform) Act 2011
Serious Offenders Act 2018
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
Other jurisdictions
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Code Act 1924
Criminal Code Act Compilation Act 1913
Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
Family Law Act 1975
Family Violence Legislation Reform Act 2020
Sentencing Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 2003
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may be
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-67-2 (online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
Publications of the Sentencing Advisory Council follow the Melbourne
University Law Review Association Inc
Australian Guide to Legal Citation
(3rd ed., 2010).
This report reflects the law as at 31 December 2021.
. There are five distinct
offences for breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic): breach of a FVSN
(section 37)
, breach of a FVSN while
intending to cause harm or fear for safety
(section 37A)
, breach of a FVIO
(section 123)
, breach of a FVIO while intending to cause harm or fear for safety
(section 123A)
and persistent breach of FVSNs and FVIOs
(section 125A).
. Sophie Yates, ‘A
Critical Frame Analysis of Victoria’s Royal Commission into Family
(PhD Thesis, University of New South Wales, 2018) 125.
See also Sophie Yates, ‘Public Inquiries as Procedural Policy Tools’
(2021) 40(3)
Policy and Society
. Lata Satyen et al., ‘The
Royal Commission into Family Violence: Trends in the Reporting of Intimate
Partner Violence and Help-Seeking
Behavior’ (2021) 36(23–24)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
. Stakeholder Roundtable (4
February 2022).
. Sentencing Advisory Council,
Breaching Intervention Orders: Report
(2008); Sentencing Advisory
Sentencing Practices for Breach of Family Violence Intervention
Orders: Final Report
(2009); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Principles for Sentencing Contraventions of Family Violence Intervention Orders
(2009); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Family Violence Intervention Orders
and Safety Notices: Sentencing for Contravention: Monitoring Report
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing for Contravention of Family Violence
Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Second Monitoring Report
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention
Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
. Pursuant to
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
. Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Consultation Paper
(2021) viii–ix.
. Sentencing Advisory Council
(2016), above n 5.
. The County Court and Supreme
Court can, in certain circumstances, issue an interim FVIO, but the proceeding
for the final order
must be transferred to the Magistrates’ Court or
Children’s Court for determination:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family violence
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family member
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
. See Sentencing Advisory
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety Intervention Orders in
. See, for example,
Parliament of New South Wales, Joint Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive Control in Domestic Relationships
, Report 1/57
29–31; State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
I: Report and Recommendations
(2016) 15–16.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
An ‘intimate personal
relationship’ need not be sexual in nature:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
s 10(1)(b).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. A FVSN can be made despite
a recognised domestic violence order being in place between the same respondent
and protected person:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
If the police officer believes such an order is in place, they must make
reasonable enquiries before the first mention date:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
s 26(2)(c).
Family Violence
Protection Amendment Act 2014
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(2)(a)–(f).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
, as amended by
Family Violence
Protection Amendment Act 2017
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. Interim FVIOs may be made for more than
one affected family member:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
There are special requirements when children are involved:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
This includes the issuing of a FVSN, which
automatically becomes a police application for a FVIO.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. If there is a PSIO in place
and either the respondent or the affected family member is a respondent under
that PSIO, the court cannot
make an interim PSIO:
Family Violence Protection
An exception exists whereby an interim FVIO can be
made if there is an existing
PSIO protecting the respondent in
the FVIO application:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
if the respondent is a child, the
application must meet the conditions in
, as applicable. A final
cannot, however, be made where there is an existing PSIO in place
between the affected family member and the respondent:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. The same conditions are
available whether the order is interim or final:
Family Violence Protection
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
The conditions cannot include a residence
exclusion, a condition relating to the use of personal property, contact
restriction or
a condition prohibiting the respondent from being anywhere within
a specified distance of the protected person or a specified place.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) 176C.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
However, when hearing a child protection
order application, the Children’s Court may vary or revoke the FVIO to the
that the FVIO would be inconsistent with the proposed child protection
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
A child protection order also prevails
over bail conditions:
Sentencing Act
Serious Offenders Act
ss 30(1)(b)
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Bail Act 1977
5AAA(2)(c).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Sentencing Act 1991
Serious Offenders Act 2018
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
National Domestic
Violence Order Scheme Act 2016
(Vic) s 14.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
DPP v Cope (A
[2021] VMC 14.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Justice Legislation
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Matters) Act 2012
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. See, for example,
Alexander (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 124
, in which the offender was sentenced
for four consecutive 28-day persistent breach offences over a four-month period.
[2016] VCC 1006
, [12], in which a single persistent
breach offence covered a two-and-a-half-month period. As a point of comparison,
the recently
enacted offence of persistently engaging in family violence in
Western Australia requires three or more occasions in a 10-year period:
Family Violence Legislation Reform Act 2020
, inserting
Criminal Code Act Compilation Act 1913
(WA) ss 299–300. And in
Tasmania, the offence of persistent family violence requires the offender to
have committed unlawful
family violence against their spouse or partner on at
least three occasions, without a specified time period:
Criminal Code Act
(Tas) s 170A.
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
. Sentencing Advisory Council
(2009), above n 5, 3.
. Ibid 4–5.
. Australian Law Reform
Commission and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Family Violence –
A National Legal Response: Final Report
, vol. 1 (2010) 545.
. Ibid 555.
. Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
National Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, 2021)
<https://dfvbenchbook.aija.org.au/contents> at 15 March 2022.
. Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration, ‘9.3.1 Sentencing Considerations – Breaches
of Protection Orders’,
National Domestic and Family Violence Bench
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, 2021)
<https://dfvbenchbook.aija.org.au/sentencing/sentencing-considerations-breaches-of-protection-orders/>
at 15 March 2022.
. Judicial College of
Victoria, ‘4.1.1.2 – Sentencing Contravention Offences’,
Family Violence Bench Book
(Judicial College of Victoria, 2020)
<https://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/FVBBWeb/index.htm#34471.htm>
at 15 March
2022, citing
DPP v Johnson
[2011] VSCA 288
, [5], referring to
Sentencing Advisory Council
(2009), above n 5, 135.
. Judicial College of
Victoria, ‘4.1.1.2 – Sentencing Contravention Offences’,
Family Violence Bench Book
(Judicial College of Victoria, 2020)
<https://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/FVBBWeb/index.htm#34471.htm>
at 15 March
2022, citing DPP v Johnson
[2011] VSCA 288
. Ibid, citing
[2007] VSCA 256
Filiz v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 212
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136
DPP v Johnson
[2011] VSCA 288
Woods v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 34
, [18]–[33];
[2007] VSCA 137.
. Madeleine Ulbrick and
Marianne Jago,
‘Officer She’s Psychotic and I Need
Protection’: Police Misidentification of the ‘Primary
in Family Violence Incidents in Victoria
(2018); Ellen
Reeves, ‘Family Violence, Protection Orders and Systems Abuse: Views of
Legal Practitioners’
(2020) 32(1)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
; Ellen Reeves, ‘“I’m Not at All Protected and I Think
Other Women Should Know That, That They’re Not Protected
Victim-Survivors’ Experiences of “Misidentification” In
Victoria’s Family Violence System’
(2021) 10(2)
International
Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
No to Violence,
Predominant Aggressor Identification and Victim Misidentification:
Discussion Paper
(2019); Australian Broadcasting Corporation, ‘When
Police Misjudge Domestic Violence, Victims Are Slapped with Intervention
Applications’,
(Melbourne) 15 August 2018
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-15/domestic-violence-victims-mistaken-for-perpetrators/10120240>
at 15 March 2022.
. State of Victoria, Royal
Commission into Family Violence,
Volume III:
Recommendations
(2016) 37–38 (Recommendation 41).
. Family Violence Reform
Implementation Monitor,
Monitoring Victoria’s Family Violence Reforms:
Accurate Identification of the Predominant Aggressor
. Ibid 11 (citations
. InTouch Multicultural
Centre Against Family Violence,
The Causes and Consequences of
Misidentification on Women from Migrant and Refugee Communities Experiencing
Family Violence: Position
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. For instance, the
Council recently found that more than half of crossover children (53%), that is,
children who have contact with
both the child protection and the youth justice
systems, were sentenced for breach of an intervention order: Sentencing Advisory
‘Crossover Kids’: Vulnerable Children in the Youth
Justice System Report 2: Children at the Intersection of Child Protection
Youth Justice across Victoria
(2020) 41–46.
. Crime Statistics Agency,
‘Explanatory Notes & Definitions’ (crimestatistics.vic.gov.au,
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/family-violence-data-portal/explanatory-notes-definitions>
at 15 March 2022.
. Similarly, the number of
stalkers in recorded police data who were former partners has increased
significantly in the last 10 years,
while the number of current partners has
remained stable, even declining slightly in recent years: Sentencing Advisory
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2022), above n 12, 77.
. Monica Campo and Sarah
Domestic and Family Violence in Regional, Rural and Remote
Communities: An Overview of Key Issues
. State of Victoria, Royal
Commission into Family Violence,
Report and Recommendations
(2016) 216–219.
. The Victorian Government
maintains a website about progress of recommendations of the Royal Commission
into Family Violence: State
of Victoria, ‘Extend the Functions of Family
Violence Court Division Courts to Other Courts’ (vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.vic.gov.au/family-violence-recommendations/extend-functions-family-violence-court-division-courts-other-courts>
at 17 March 2022. Regional family violence court locations will include Geelong,
Latrobe Valley and Bendigo.
. The Council received
duration data as days from issue to expiry of FVIO: less than 180 days, 180 to
365 days, 365 to 544 days, 545
to 729 days and 730 days or longer. For
convenience, these have been translated into increments of month and year.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. See, for example, Pamela
Herd and Donald P. Moynihan,
Administrative Burden: Policymaking by Other
(2018); Julian Christensen et al., ‘Human Capital and
Administrative Burden: The Role of Cognitive Resources in Citizen-State
Interactions’ (2020) 80(1)
Public Administration Review
. State of Victoria,
‘Magistrates’ Court Roll Out an Online Application Form for
Intervention Orders’ (vic.gov.au,
<https://www.vic.gov.au/family-violence-recommendations/magistrates-court-roll-out-online-application-form-intervention>
at 15 March 2022; Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Apply for a
Family Violence Intervention Order (FVIO)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au,
<https://fvio.mcv.vic.gov.au/> at 15 March 2022.
. Meeting with Geraldine
Bilston, Deputy Chair of the Victim Survivor Advisory Council (6 December 2021).
The person applying to extend
the FVIO must again establish on the balance of
probabilities that the respondent is likely to commit family violence against
protected person if the FVIO is not extended:
Family Violence Protection
The court can impose an interim extension order for up
to 28 days pending the decision whether to extend the final FVIO, but only
the final FVIO has not already expired:
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. There were 29,042 FVIOs
for which data on the number of protected persons was not available. In
addition, there were 5,005 FVIOs
for which the number of protected persons was
recorded as ‘11 or more’, so to report on minimum numbers it was
that each of these had precisely 11 people recorded as protected
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Data relating to the
of respondents was considered too unreliable to report. There was
also a steadily declining rate of FVIOs for which data on the gender
respondent was available, from 77.9% in 2011 to 52.0% in 2020.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
As mentioned at [3.17], some or many of
those FVIOs of six to less than 12 months may also be precisely 12 months
despite not appearing
as such in the data.
. There were 83 FVIOs for
which the number of protected persons was recorded as ‘seven or
more’, so to report on minimum
numbers it was assumed that each of these
had precisely seven people recorded as protected persons.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022). See also Elena Campbell et al.,
The PIPA Project: Positive
Interventions for Perpetrators of Adolescent Violence in the Home (AVITH)
(2020) 21 (noting that adolescent family violence ‘is also highly
structurally
gendered ... in part because most “parenting”
labour in many families is still undertaken by women and because the
relationships
affected by an adolescent’s use of violence are therefore
more likely to involve women as caregiver victims/survivors’).
. This is most likely an
underestimation. While mothers, fathers and step-fathers were specified in the
data, the number of protected
-mothers was not specified. Nor were
uncles or aunts. They may have all been included in the ‘other’
category, which made
up 21% of final FVIOs.
. Data relating to the age
of respondents was not available.
. Victoria Police advised
the Council that this option was removed from the system in 2015 so that
officers had to specify whether
the breach was of an interim FVIO or final
. The only breach offence
that did not increase between 2015 and 2020 was breach of a FVIO while intending
to cause harm or fear for
safety, which decreased from 3,790 to 3,020.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. These are not
necessarily unique offenders. If the same person was recorded as breaching a
FVSN or FVIO in two separate years, they
would be counted twice. This should
therefore be considered an overestimation of the number of unique people who
breached a FVSN
or FVIO during the reference period.
. See, for example,
v Alexander (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 124
, [7]–[11], [15]–[18];
DPP v Swanson
[2020] VCC 2073
DPP v Caldwell (A Pseudonym)
, [11]–[19].
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. The number of cases
sentenced each financial year are sourced from Court Services Victoria data
published on our website: Sentencing
Advisory Council, ‘General Trends in
Sentencing for Victorian Courts’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/general-trends-sentencing-for-victorian-courts>
at 15 March 2022.
. Gender was not recorded
in one case in the higher courts.
. Data was unavailable or
unreliable in 144 cases.
. See, for example,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Children Held on Remand in Victoria: A Report on
Sentencing Outcomes
(2020) 35; Sentencing Advisory Council (2020), above n
DPP v Allen &
[2014] VCC 1662.
DPP v Field (A
[2018] VCC 1550
(involving dangerous driving while pursued by
police, theft, property damage, making a threat to kill, causing injury
intentionally,
common assault, attempted aggravated burglary, committing an
indictable offence whilst on bail, breach of a FVIO, trespass and road
. Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
1234.0 – Australian and New Zealand Standard Offence
Classification (ANZSOC)
(abs.gov.au, 2011)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1234.0> at 15 March 2022.
. In particular,
additional breaches of FVSNs and FVIOs, which are otherwise a subset of
‘breaches of violence and non-violence
orders’ are counted
separately; so too are bail-related offences, which are otherwise a subset of
‘breaches of community-based
orders’, and threat offences, which are
otherwise a subset of ‘harassment and threatening behaviour’.
. As was observed at the
Council’s roundtable: ‘say you’ve got 20 messages across a
number of days, generally it’s
a charge per day’: Stakeholder
Roundtable (4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Sentencing Advisory
Aggravated Burglary: Current Sentencing Practices
. See, for example,
v Afolayan (A Pseudonym)
[2016] VCC 250
(involving a man who attended his
former partner’s house, punched a hole in the pane of glass near the front
door when she
refused him entry, and spat in her face multiple times while
arguing once he gained entry);
DPP v Brunning (A Pseudonym)
(the offender received 12 months’ imprisonment for breaching an
intervention order, in the context of a history of breach behaviours
his former partner, and nine months for aggravated burglary, making the
intervention order breach the most serious offence).
. Other sentence types
primarily comprised suspended sentences, which were abolished by 2014:
Sentencing Amendment (Abolition of Suspended Sentences and Other Matters) Act
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022). See also Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences
in Sentencing Outcomes
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Director of Public
Prosecutions,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
residential centre orders, and dismissals
or discharges.
Justice Legislation
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Matters) Act 2012
Sentencing Amendment
(Abolition of Suspended Sentences and Other Matters) Act 2013
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2009), above n 5, viii, ix, 44, 51–55 (citing extensively from
Heather Douglas, ‘Not a
Crime Like Any Other: Sentencing Breaches of
Domestic Violence Protection Orders’
(2007) 31(4)
Criminal Law Journal
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2013), above n 5, 32, 51.
. Sentencing Advisory
(2015), above n 5, 31, 49.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
Sentencing Act
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. See Karen Gelb et al.,
Community-Based Sentencing Orders and Parole: A Review of Literature and
Evaluations Across Jurisdictions
(2019) 118–120 (noting the dearth of
literature on the effectiveness of conditional suspended sentences).
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2013), above n 5, 31; Sentencing Advisory Council (2016), above n 5,
Sentencing Amendment
(Community Correction Reform) Act 2011
Boulton & Ors v
[2014] VSCA 342.
. See, for example,
Hill v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 220
Laa v The Queen
[2020] VSCA
Forbes (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 341
Saxton v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 357
Filiz v The Queen
DPP v Meyers
[2014] VSCA 314
Pasinis v The Queen
DPP v Johnson
[2011] VSCA 288.
. Pauline Spencer,
‘Strengthening the Web of Accountability: Criminal Courts and Family
Violence Offenders’ (2016) 41(4)
Alternative Law Journal
. Kate Hawkins and
Felicity Broughton, ‘Sentencing in Family Violence Cases’ (Paper
presented at ‘Current Issues
in Sentencing’, National Judicial
College of Australia Conference, Canberra, 6–7 February 2016)
. Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>
at 17 March 2022.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. See, for example,
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Report
(2021) 38; New South Wales Sentencing Council,
Abolishing Prison
Sentences of 6 Months or Less
(2004); Bronwyn Lind and Simon Eyland,
Impact of Abolishing Short Prison Sentences,
Contemporary Issues in Crime
and Justice no. 73 (2002); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, Report no. 139 (2013); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Incarceration Rates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Discussion Paper 84 (2017) 81–88;
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Short prison sentences of six months or less are
abolished in Western Australia:
Sentencing Legislation Amendment and Repeal
Sometimes sentences of 12 months or less are also
referred to as short prison sentences, particularly in the UK: see, for example,
John Halliday et al.,
Making Punishments Work: Report of a Review of the
Sentencing Framework for England and Wales
Criminal Justice and
Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
(Scot) (creating a presumption against prison
sentences shorter than 12 months); Scottish Government,
Extended Presumption
Against Short Sentences: Monitoring Information July 2019 – December 2019
. Throughout the reference
period, short prison sentences of six months or less included 2,346 sentences
shorter than one month (22.8%
of the 10,266 prison sentences shorter than six
months), 2,182 prison sentences of one to less than two months (21.3%), 1,807
sentences of two to less than three months (17.6%), 2,121 prison
sentences of three to less than four months (20.7%), 1,296 prison
sentences of
four to less than five months (12.6%) and 514 prison sentences of five to less
than six months (5.0%). These proportions
did not vary substantially for each
year of the reference period.
. Sentencing Advisory
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022). See also Department of Health and Human Services,
Management Manual: Temporary Absence Operational Guidelines
Sentencing Act 1991
. Notably, the conditions
attached to CCOs differ from the conditions attached to the now repealed
community-based orders. The most
common condition attached to community-based
orders was community work (82%), followed by supervision (45%) and assessment
and treatment
(38%): Sentencing Advisory Council,
Exploring the Relationship
Between Community-Based Order Conditions and Reoffending
(2014) 14. The
conditions attached to CCOs therefore represent a significant shift away from
unpaid community work towards more supervisory
and rehabilitative
conditions.
. Sentencing Advisory
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring Report
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Second Monitoring
Report (Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(2015) 16; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring Report (Post-Guideline
(2016) 17; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Animal Cruelty Offences
in Victoria
(2019) 36–37; Sentencing Advisory Council
above n 12, 58.
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2022), above n 12, 58.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
. Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Children’s Court’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-childrens-court>
at 17 March 2022.
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075.
. The sentencing remarks
in one of these cases are publicly available:
DPP v Sumbul
DPP v Ferguson (A
[2014] VCC 1993
(a rolled up charge);
DPP v Bao (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1508.
. The sentencing remarks
in one of these cases are publicly available:
DPP v Grima
. The sentencing remarks
in one of these cases were publicly available. The offender suffered from
significant mental health issues
to the point that they were not fit to stand
trial, had been remanded for more than 600 days, pleaded guilty and received a
prison sentence for two charges of persistent breach of a FVIO. The
judge considered imposing a time served prison sentence to be
proportion’:
DPP v Saunders
[2020] VCC 1859.
. Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2011), above n 143.
. Crime Statistics Agency,
‘What is Country of Birth Information in Police Recorded Crime Statistics
and What Can it Tell You?’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/media-centre/news/what-is-country-of-birth-information-in-police-recorded-crime-statistics-and-what>
at 17 March 2022.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(4 February 2022).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.09 MB)
PDF format (2.32 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter