URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QHH [2025] VMHT 1 (11 February 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Emma Montgomery (Legal Member)
Mark Arber (Psychiatrist Member)
John Griffin (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made a community
treatment order with a duration of 26 Weeks expiring on
08/07/2025.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your advocate requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy
of this statement of reasons will
be given to your treating team, your advocate
as well as to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your treating team
applied for another treatment order. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
whether or not to make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
– You are reluctant to see the doctors or to engage with your
case manager at the community mental health service, however you
do attend the
clinic to receive your monthly injection as required under the community
treatment order.
Diversity of
– You are independent, and your goal is to find work and to have
your own family. The Tribunal was advised that have been a
successful athlete,
you have a bachelor’s degree, and you have worked in a professional
capacity. The report stated that you
found your supported residential service
unsuitable. You are currently living with a family member, and you are much more
comfortable
and contented with this arrangement.
restriction
– You do not accept that you have a mental health problem
needing treatment and you do not like discussing your mental health
– The Tribunal considered whether the risks of harm to you and
others justified the making of a compulsory treatment order.
Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your rights under the
of Human Rights and Responsibilities
Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human
rights protected under the Charter including
medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being treated in
hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights
protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable, the
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Your treating team spoke to and
answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing. This statement
does not summarise all that information, but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make
its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences, however
as you did not attend the hearing the Tribunal had no direct
information from
you. From what your treating team told the Tribunal and the materials we read,
we understand that whilst you attend
the clinic to have your injection when it
is due, you do not want to have discussions with anyone from your treating team
mental health treatment and you are unwilling to remain at the clinic
to have a medical review. You have missed several appointments
that were made
for you to have a review with a doctor from your treating team. The last formal
review by your Consultant Psychiatrist
was in November 2023. However, on 8
October 2024, when you attended the clinic for an injection there was an
opportunistic review
by the Consultant Psychiatrist. You have previously said
that your presentations and admissions to the mental health ward were solely
because you had used drugs. You do not accept that you have a psychotic illness,
and you do not believe the treatment you are having
is helpful. You would not
continue the treatment and would not see your treating team if there was no
treatment order in place.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
We understood from the information in the report
that you experience significant disturbance of thought characterised by paranoid
delusions and formal thought disorder. In June 2023 you had delusional and
persecutory thoughts that your food was being poisoned,
and you were confused,
suspicious and fearful about who was involved. The report says that when you are
unwell your thoughts become
disorganised. In the past you believed that you
could interact with dead people, and you also become preoccupied with the belief
that you may have been sexually assaulted by your father and brother. We also
understand that you have experienced prominent symptoms
of severe mood
disturbance including a rapid cycling mood, extreme irritability, aggression,
hostility, agitation and explosive anger.
The report and documentation from your
clinical file also say that you have a disorder of perception and notes that you
observed responding to internal stimuli.
Based on the
information before the Tribunal, we accepted that you have a mental illness that
causes a significant disturbance to
your thinking, mood and perception when you
are not treated. We were also satisfied that these symptoms of mental illness
are significant
as your life has been disrupted by hospital admissions and
relapses that have impacted your psychosocial functioning including your
employment.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
The Tribunal accepted the information from your
treating team that you require immediate treatment to prevent a serious
deterioration
in your mental health, and to prevent serious harm to yourself and
to others. When you have been unwell and have needed to be admitted
to hospital
you have shown distressing paranoid and persecutory delusional beliefs, and your
family have reported that you were verbally
abusive and threatening. Your
behaviour in response to paranoid and persecutory beliefs put you at serious
risk of harm through misadventure.
Your ongoing use of methamphetamines also
adds to the severity of symptoms when your mental health deteriorates. Your
functioning
has also been impacted with poor self-care and withdrawal from
social activities as well as property damage and fire setting. Your
work has also impacted your professional reputation. When unwell you have been
hostile to staff and others, and you have
been agitated and aggressive which has
put others at risk of harm. In the past your mother has not felt safe residing
with you and
has relocated.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
You are currently being treated with a monthly
aripiprazole injection antipsychotic and mood stabilising medications and case
by your community team.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Based on all the available evidence the Tribunal
concluded there was no less restrictive way for you to receive immediate
You do not believe that you have a mental illness which involves
psychotic symptoms, and you do not accept that you need treatment.
adamant that without a treatment order, you would stop the medication, and you
will not engage with the treating team. We
accepted that in the past you have
stopped taking oral medication as a voluntary patient and you experienced a
relapse in your mental
health requiring an admission to hospital. You have been
unwilling to have any discussion with your treating team about your mental
health and mental health treatment, and you are also unwilling to have medical
reviews by any doctor on your treating team.
We accepted TD’s
evidence that your monthly aripiprazole injection ensures that you receive the
treatment you need and that
this treatment is playing a critical role in keeping
you out of hospital. TD described your relationship with the treating team as
tenuous, but she said there were some small but significant signs of improvement
since you had been allocated a new case manager.
Your new case manager says that
you are engaging quite well with him, and he was impressed with your
self-reliance including that
you had independently completed forms and other
paperwork to apply for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
your views about treatment, and your statements to the treating team that you
will stop taking the prescribed medication if
there was no treatment order in
place, we accepted that an order was the least restrictive option available to
ensure that you receive
the treatment you need to manage your mental health
symptoms and to support your recovery.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
no suggestion that your treatment could not be provided in the community and so
the Tribunal made a community treatment
Length of the Treatment
The Act sets a maximum duration of six months for treatment
orders. Your treating team requested a treatment order to run for 26
In deciding the length of your treatment order, we placed weight on evidence
have stopped
treatment when you have been taken off treatment orders in the past and you have
experienced mental health symptoms with
a high degree of acuity which has caused
you distress and you have required treatment in hospital; and
need a further
period of treatment in the community to continue to build your relationship with
the treating team to support your
recovery with a focus on your strengths and
goals for independence and to return to work.
For these reasons, we decided to make the treatment order for 26 weeks. This
is the longest period that this treatment order can last.
It cannot be extended
beyond 8 July 2025. Your treating doctor must revoke your treatment order at any
time if they believe the treatment
criteria no longer apply.
determination: 08-01-2025
[Signed by the legal member]
Emma Montgomery
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 11 February 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (519 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter