URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AIP Consultancy No.2 [1998] VADT 2 (28 August 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Exemption No. 52 of 1998
In the matter of:
AIP CONSULTANCY
MS C. McKENZIE
, Deputy President
MR G. CARLETON
MS Y. KLEMPFNER
TRANSCRIPT OF DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON FRIDAY 28 AUGUST 1998 AT 9.35 AM
MR I. WALLER appeared on behalf of AIP Consultancy.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Waller, you continue to appear for the
MR WALLER: I do, yes.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: We said we would reserve our decision and hand it down
as soon as possible, and we said that we would do that in
oral form. We do so
now. I assume, Mr Waller, however, that you would like transcript of the
MR WALLER: Yes, if that were possible, yes.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, thank you. However, we deliver them orally now.
We propose to grant this exemption and we have prepared an instrument of
exemption which will, in due course, be published in the
Government Gazette.
That is the responsibility of the Tribunal, so the applicant need not worry
of the instrument of exemption is available
for the parties and the registrar is now in a position to be able to give
copies, and
we now give our reasons for this decision.
This is an application by Miss Ann Ivamy-Phillips, trading as AIP
Consultancy, for exemption from ss.42, 100 and 195 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
, which we call the Act.
The terms in which the exemption is sought are to enable the applicant:
(1) to refuse to provide services - the services are for an
introduction agency
- to a person who does not identify himself or herself as Jewish;
(2) to obtain information from clients and potential clients of her
introduction agency for the purpose of matching those clients
and potential
clients, including information about the attributes, as the term is used in the
Act, of those clients, her potential
clients, and
(3) to advise clients and potential clients that because of their
attribute, and the attributes preferred by the clients of her introduction
agency, it will be difficult to find a match for them where this is based on
information in the possession of the applicant.
The terms in which the application is framed go on to say that paragraphs
2 and 3 do not permit the applicant to refuse to provide
the services of her
introduction agency to any person. The form in which the exemption has
eventually been granted is somewhat different
from that, and the reasons for
this will appear in the course of our reasons.
The material that we have before us consists of affidavits in support of
the application. There is an affidavit from the applicant,
an affidavit from
Mr Rosenblum, an affidavit from Rabbi Heilbrunn who is the Chief Minister
of the St Kilda Hebrew congregation and
the President of the Association of
Rabbis of Australia and New Zealand; an affidavit from Jeremy Jones who is the
Vice-president
of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, which is the
representative organisation of Australian Jewry, and the Tribunal heard
evidence from the applicant from Professor Rector, who is Director of The
Australian Centre for Jewish Civilisation at Monash
University. There are also a
large number of exhibits to the affidavits and there are submissions from Mr
Waller of counsel on behalf
of the applicant and from Dr Maddison.
We first summarise the material before us, and then we deal with the
relevant law and submissions. This is the second application
Ivamy-Phillips made to this Tribunal for an exemption of this kind. The first
application was refused by the Tribunal in June
1998 on the basis of
insufficient material to support the application. In its decision on that
application, the Tribunal indicated
that Ms Ivamy-Phillips could, if she wished,
make a fresh application supported by other material, and this in fact is that
application, and the material in support of it is the material that we
have just mentioned.
Ms Ivamy-Phillips wishes to be able to establish an introduction agency
catering solely for people who identify themselves as Jewish,
whether that
identification is religious, cultural, ethnic or otherwise. She wants to be able
to ask potential clients of this agency
whether or not they identify themselves
as Jewish. She also wants to be able to ask potential clients, and clients of
the agency,
them and provide her introduction services to them.
The services which the introduction agency is to provide involve the
matching of clients with other clients for the purposes of introducing
meet someone who they will, hopefully, eventually be able to marry. The agency
that this applicant proposes to conduct is
specifically directed to assist
single, divorced, widowed or separated Jewish people to find Jewish marriage
partners. It doesn't
concern itself with facilitating other relationships. It
follows from Ms Ivamy-Phillips' desire to be able to conduct an agency that
solely caters for Jewish clients, that she wants to be able to refuse the
services of the agency to people to who not identify themselves
The material before us shows that concern about finding Jewish marriage
partners is a widespread concern of the Jewish community in
Victoria, both for
individuals who are searching for marriage partners, for other individuals in
the community, and for community
leaders and representatives, whether those
leaders and representatives come from the lay or the religious sector of the
The concern ranges across all ages and across all degrees of
religious commitment.
All the sectors of that community identify Jewish family life, that is,
the family life that exists within a marriage between two
Jewish partners, as
very important for the preservation and transmission of Jewish religion and
traditions, and for the preservation
of Jewish identify. These matters are
particularly important to the Jewish community in Australia, which is a minority
group forming
particularly important, because the nucleus of the Australian Jewish community
consists largely of survivors of the holocaust
and their descendants.
The small size and the dispersion of the Jewish community throughout
Australia, and of course throughout Victoria, makes it relatively
more difficult
for Jews to meet prospective Jewish marriage partners. More difficult, that is,
than it would be for members of the
larger parts of the population to meet
prospective marriage partners. This is not to say, of course, that the Jewish
population is
more concentrated in larger urban centres than it is in the
country. It is, on the material before us, quite heavily concentrated
centres such as Melbourne and Sydney, but our comments apply
nevertheless.
For religious Jews, marriage to a Jewish partner is vitally important,
and indeed imperative, because as Rabbi Heilbrunn has said
in his affidavit, the
Bible requires it. The affidavit of Mr Rosenblum illustrates the difficulty
which Jewish individuals who are
seeking Jewish marriage partners have in
finding them, particularly through the somewhat irregular and haphazard
assistance of nevertheless
well-meaning friends and relations.
We were referred to and have before us a survey of the Victorian Jewish
community, conducted in 1991. That survey was conducted from
a carefully
selected and representative sample of Victorian Jews, and its aim was to
ascertain the views of the Victorian Jewish
community, and this representative
sample in particular, about the problems facing that community and about its
future needs. The
answers to some of the questions which this survey asked
illustrate what we have just said about the importance of Jewish family
the maintenance of Jewish identity, religion and traditions.
When asked what was the bond between the Jews who responded to the survey
and other Jewish people, 63 per cent of respondents answered
that it was the
Jewish culture and traditions, and 41 per cent of the respondents to the survey
also said it was Jewish religion.
30.5 per cent of respondents to the survey
identified as the three major problems facing the Jewish community today as
assimilation
inter-marriage and the loss of Jewish identity. 10 per cent of the
women respondents to the survey said that finding a Jewish marriage
partner was
a major issue affecting Jewish women. 90 per cent of respondents to the survey
said that they would prefer their grandchildren
to be brought up as Jews. More
than 64 per cent of respondents to the survey said that they would have
reservations or feel regret
if told by a close Jewish friend that that friend
was going to marry someone who was non-Jewish. Almost 90 per cent of the
respondents
to the survey said that being Jewish was important in their lives,
and almost 95 per cent of the respondents felt positive about
being Jewish. More
than 93 per cent of respondents felt it important that their children received a
Jewish education.
We are satisfied on the material before us that there is a clear need
within the Jewish community for a service such as this applicant
proposes to
provide, and that there is no agency, at least in Melbourne, which caters solely
for this need; that is, which caters
solely for people in the Jewish community
who are seeking Jewish marriage partners. The provision of this proposed service
is supported
by the community as a whole, and particularly by its lay and
religious leaders.
The evidence before us and material before us show, of course, that there
is a significant percentage of the Victorian Jewish community
that doesn't have
a marriage partner, either because these people are single, divorced, separated
or widowed, so that there is a
sizeable group that might benefit from this
potential service.
Turning now to the law, and some of the submissions made was about the
law. Section 83 of the Act permits the tribunal to grant exemptions
from any of
the provisions of the Act in relation to a person or class of persons, or an
activity or class of activities or in any
other circumstances specified by the
Tribunal. The place of s.83 in the overall scheme of the Act is made clear by
s.12 which provides
that if an exemption applies, what is permitted by the
exemption is not prohibited by the Act, so the effect of an exemption granted
the Tribunal is to take the relevant conduct out of the prohibitions of the Act.
This is a serious matter, but it's clear that
the effect of an exemption then is
to make lawful what otherwise would be unlawful under the Act.
The Tribunal has considered its exemption power on a number of occasions.
Relevantly for our purposes in
Stevens v. Fernwood
(1996) Equal
Opportunity Cases, 92-782.
In re Moridara Pty Ltd
(1998) Equal
Opportunity Cases, 92-920,
In re City of Brunswick
(1992) Equal
Opportunity cases, 92-450, and
In re People Matching Pty Ltd & Ors
decision of the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, as it was then, delivered on 12
August 1997.
In the light of these cases and the submissions made to us, we now make
some comments on the exemption power. We have talked about
its effect. Its
extent is very wide, but it must be read in the context of the Act as a
The first thing that the Tribunal has said on a number of occasions about
the power is that it wouldn't be used unnecessarily. In
other words, if the
relevant conduct falls outside the scope of the Act it can't be discrimination,
or if the relevant conduct is
clearly covered by some other statutory exception
in the Act, then it would be unnecessary to grant an exemption.
Then, as we have said, the exemption power doesn't exist in isolation, it
must be read in the context of the rest of the Act. Part
of the rest of the Act
are the number of express exceptions contained in it, and another vital part of
the rest of the Act are its
objectives set out in s.3. Those objectives include:
to promote recognition and acceptance of everyone's right to equality of
opportunity
and to eliminate, as far as possible, discrimination by prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of various attributes.
In these objectives, Parliament recognises that inequality of opportunity
exists, otherwise it wouldn't be necessary to promote the
recognition and
acceptance of everyone's right to equality of opportunity. It also seems to
recognise that it may not be possible
to eliminate discrimination entirely. It
may only be possible to eliminate it as far as possible.
The way in which discrimination is to be eliminated is by prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of various attributes, and "discrimination"
"attribute" are defined in the Act. It is important to realise that the Act is
not absolute in its terms. It only applies to
a finite number of listed
attributes such as age, race, sex and so on, race including colour, descent,
ancestry, nationality, national
origin, ethnicity and ethnic origin, religious
belief and activity and so on, and discrimination doesn't simply mean unfair
Discrimination is a comparative concept. It involves either less
favourable treatment when compared with others who don't have the
same attribute
and are placed in similar circumstances, or it involves the imposing of an
unreasonable requirement, condition or
practice with which people who have the
particular attribute do not, or cannot comply, and with which a higher
proportion of those
who don't have that attribute, do or can comply.
Discrimination is also only prohibited in various fields: in
accommodation, in education, in goods and services, in clubs of certain
in sport and so on. So the Act doesn't prohibit discrimination in absolute
terms, it doesn't prohibit unfair treatment in
absolute terms. It deals with a
comparative concept, and nor does it prohibit discrimination in all fields. It
may be that sometimes
the objective of eliminating discrimination and promoting
the recognition and acceptance of the right to equality of opportunity
collide rather than coexisting in harmony.
If a person is at a disadvantage with respect to others, or is in an
inferior position with respect to others, it may be necessary
to give that
person a positive advantage to rectify the imbalance, and so to achieve the
purpose of promoting equality of opportunity.
And to do this it may be, in turn,
necessary to discriminate against the people who have the advantage or who are
in the superior
position. It is possible, therefore, that in that way the
objectives may clash, and one way in which the exemption power given to
Tribunal may be used is to resolve that clash by taking the relevant conduct out
of the prohibitions on discrimination.
It is not the objective of the Act to provide equality, or for that
matter uniformity. Differences are permissible so long as they
do not infringe
the prohibitions of the Act, and the Tribunal, by granting exemptions, can
recognise those differences if to do so
would promote the other objective of
promoting equality of opportunity.
It seems to us that the Act looked at as a whole, and with the exemption
power included, reflects the position that is sometimes applicable
in society,
where differences or distinctions can sometimes be unfair and destructive, but
can at other times be enriching because
they represent diversity.
Turning now the scheme of the exception provisions in the Act, the Act
contains a number of express exceptions from its prohibition.
We do not propose
to examine all of them. We only examine those that are relevant to this
particular application.
The first category of these relate to private life. The fields in which
the Act operates do not include private life. The second reading
speech for the
Bill that introduced the Act into Parliament indicates that the Act does not
attempt to regulate spheres of private
activity. So the Act does not regulate
who a person can choose as a friend or as a marriage partner; how a person
proposes to educate
their children and other private aspects of life. Some of
the express exceptions in the Act reflect this. For example, s.16 permits
employer to discriminate in employing a person to perform domestic or personal
services in a person's home. Again, s.54 of the
Act permits a person to
discriminate in determining who is to share residential accommodation that the
person proposes to occupy,
or his or her relative occupies or proposes to
The second broad category of exception provisions as relevant for the
purpose of this application, relates to relative disadvantage
or inequality. For
example, s.61, which deals with clubs, provides that if a club operates
principally to prevent or reduce disadvantage
suffered by people with a
particular attribute, or to preserve a minority culture, the club may exclude
from its membership people
who do not have that attribute. Again, under s.82(1)
of the Act, the prohibitions of discrimination do not apply to anything done
the provision of special services, benefits or facilities to people with a
particular attribute, that is designed to meet the
special needs of those people
or to prevent or reduce disadvantage suffered by those people in education,
accommodation, training
or welfare.
The Tribunal, as well as looking at the objectives and scheme of the Act
when it considers an exemption, also looks to the public
interest, to whether
some compelling public interest justifies the exemption, and finally, the
Tribunal, of course, looks to any
other circumstances in the case that may be
relevant to the exemption.
Turning now to the particular application, the first question is whether
- and we need decide only so far, whether the proposed refusal
of the agency's
services to those who do not identify themselves as Jewish, would amount to
possible discrimination. That is all
we need to do to be certain of on this
occasion, and whether the asking of the questions that this applicant proposes
to ask would
amount to discrimination in contravention of s.42 or 100 of the
Act. Section 42 of the Act deals with the provision of services.
There is no
doubt, in our view, that this would possibly be the provision of a service.
Section 100 deals with the request - we might
summarise it by saying
discriminatory request for information. We have got no doubt that subject to
what we are about to say, those
two sections would possibly apply. And, of
course, the question of being Jewish or not Jewish would, in our view, be picked
the attributes of either race or religion or both. So there is possible
discrimination, subject to what we are about to say.
Mr Waller, of counsel, in his submissions, raised the question of whether
the asking of the questions about attributes, asking clients
those questions,
might be permitted by the Introduction Agencies Act 1997, under which this
applicant will operate, and so in turn
be authorised by s.69 of the Act. Section
Equal Opportunity Act
permits a person to discriminate if this is
necessary to comply with, or is authorised by a provision of an Act other than
that is, other than the
Equal Opportunity Act
. So the question is
whether the Introduction Agents Act 1997 authorises this kind of discrimination.
That Act came into operation on 1 July 1998. Its purpose in Section 1 is
stated to be to regulate fair trading in the introduction
industry. It does a
number of things. One of them is to deal with agreements, which of course are
introduction agreements, entered
into between an introduction agent - and we
have no doubt that what Ms Ivamy-Phillips proposes to do would fall within the
definition of the Act - and a client of that agent, and what the Act
also regulates is the provision of an introduction service which
provided under an introduction agreement.
Section 33(1) provides that an introduction agent must not enter into an
introduction agreement with a person if there is no reasonable
chance that the
provision of an introduction service by the agent to the person will result in
the person obtaining the introductions
that the person is seeking, unless before
entering into the agreement, the agent - this is so far as relevant - (a) warns
in writing of that fact, and (b) obtains from the person written
acknowledgment that the person has been given the warning notice.
Section 34 is headed, "Agent may ask questions about relevant
attributes." Sub-section 1 provides, "An introduction agent may ask
a person any
question that is necessary to enable the agent to determine whether or not the
reasonable chance referred to in s.33(1)
exists", and sub-s.(2) provides,
"Nothing in sub-s.(1) requires a person to answer any question that an
introduction agent may ask
under sub-s.(1)."
From an examination of the relevant Parliamentary debates reported in
Hansard at Victorian Parliamentary Debates, p.402, 11 November
1997, debates in
the Legislative Council, it is clear from what The Honourable Louise Asher said
when proposing the amendment of
the relevant Bill by inserting what have now
become ss.33 and 34, that the purpose of those two provisions is to follow and
and earlier decision of the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal in which it
permitted another introduction agency to ask similar questions.
It is also clear
that the purpose of asking these questions is where the introduction agents
believes there may be a difficulty in
matching a person, because of whatever
attribute, and the speech given by the Minister, it specifically refers to
attributes under
Equal Opportunity Act
, and to other matters such as
geographical location. Questions under s.34, it is clear from that speech, were
intended to be able
to relate to matters such as impairment and other
attributes.
For the purpose of this application, again we do not have to decide
finally whether or not s.69 applies, but if there is a doubt,
then of course we
will go on to consider the exemption application.
In our view, as far as questions concerning attributes other than whether
a person identifies himself or herself as Jewish, are in
fact authorised by s.34
of the Introduction Agents Act, and in turn are picked up and authorised by s.69
Equal Opportunity Act
. In our view, s.34 of the Introduction Agents Act
is wide enough to authorise those questions, and any ambiguity is resolved by
at the speech that the Minister gave when introducing the relevant
amendments in the Legislative Council.
But there is a doubt, in our view, that s.34 covers a question as to
whether or not a potential client identifies himself or herself
as Jewish, and
that is because the Introduction Agents Act does not deal with refusal by an
introduction agent to enter into a relevant
introduction agreement. Still less
does it deal with a refusal to enter into such an agreement which would
constitute discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
. Section 34 of the
Introduction Agents Act only permits an introduction agent to ask questions
or potential client, for the purpose of
s.33(1). That is, to find out whether there is a reasonable chance that the
introduction
agent can provide the person with a match. So that the warning
required by s.33(1) can be given. It does not permit an introduction
ask these questions for the purpose of refusing an introduction service, in our
view, and because of this interpretation
of the two provisions, there is,
therefore, doubt, as to whether questions of that kind are authorised by the
Introduction Agents
Act, and so there is doubt about whether s.69 of the
Opportunity Act
applies to those questions, and it follows that we then proceed
to deal with this application for exemption on that basis.
We have said there is a clear need and a wish within the Jewish community
for this proposed service. It is a service which although
covered by the
Opportunity Act
, because it is a service and it is provided by business, touches
on the most personal of matters: the choice by one person of his
or her life
partner. If the person themselves makes this choice for whatever reason, whether
discriminatory or not, the
Equal Opportunity Act
would not cover it, and it is
for this reason that we have said that this service is on the borderline of the
scope of the Act.
Then we take into account that the service will enable those who are
Jewish to find marriage partners and to establish a Jewish family
fundamental means on the material before us, by which Jewish religion and
culture and traditions are maintained and passed
We also take into account that this is a minority culture and that the
preservation of minority cultures in the club context is specifically
by an exception to the prohibitions of the Act and that taking this exception as
showing the spirit of the Act, an exemption
extending this concept would be
within the spirit, although, of course, not within the letter of the statutory
exceptions scheme.
This is a minority culture in this context and a culture
which has in the past been subject to persecution. The wish to maintain
culture is strong throughout the whole of the Jewish community, and given what
we have said about earlier persecutions, the strength
of this desire is
perfectly understandable.
Then, within the larger population, there are a large number of
introduction agencies which cater for the needs of that larger population.
were referred to the Victorian Yellow Pages which show at least 50 of them, but
Jewish people who wish to find Jewish life partners,
are in terms of this larger
population, at a disadvantage. Their small numbers in the wider population
which, we would assume, would
be reflected in the clientele of the other
introduction agencies, means that they will have difficulty finding matches with
other agencies, because they cater for the population as a whole, and
given the small numbers of the Jewish population, suitable
matches will be
likely to be few. This service will cater only for Jews and will give them the
same equality of access to a matching
service that the wider population has
because of the more generalist match-making agencies. So there is a question of
rectification
of disadvantage.
Then we have considered the very difficult question of whether the
granting of this exemption might be seen as itself promoting racial
discrimination by Jews against non-Jews, and so be contrary to the objectives of
the Act, that objective which is to eliminate, as
far as possible,
discrimination. We have considered whether the granting of this exemption might,
in fact, increase discrimination,
and whether other racial or religious groups,
or ethnic groups, might in future want to apply for similar exemptions from the
of the Act, not only from the provisions concerning services of this
kind, but from provisions concerning other services, and whether
eventually, the
granting of all these exemptions might lead to the compartmentalisation, or
segmentation of society through the permission
of the conducting of services
along religious and racial lines, and whether this might eventually lead to the
fostering of the very
discrimination which the Act is designed to eliminate, and
eventually to the undermining of the legislation.
These are very serious matters, but after considering them, we are of the
view that on balance, this exemption should be granted.
First, the Act itself clearly recognises that discrimination is not
prohibited in absolute terms, but in comparative terms in a limited
fields, and with a number of exceptions. Then the Tribunal's power to exempt is
clearly given, and clearly takes the relevant
conduct out of the prohibitions of
Also, the reason for this exemption is to permit a service to facilitate
conduct which, when engaged in by the individuals concerned,
is outside the
scope of the Act, so it is on the borderline of the scope. There is a clear need
within the population that the service
is to deal with, for the provision of
this service, and it facilitates also the preservation of a minority culture and
disadvantage.
We are satisfied that the application is made genuinely and not for
reasons of prejudice against non-Jews. Indeed, if an application
solely for that reason, the Tribunal would, of course, reject it, because it
undermines the fundamental purpose of the
This application is made to promote equality of opportunity. The
Tribunal, if it is faced with applications in the future, must deal
with them on
the material which is then submitted and in accordance with the issues that are
raised. Our conclusion on this application
should not be used as a basis for
drawing wider conclusions about what the Tribunal might do in the future. They
must, as we say,
be based on the material which is then provided and the issues
which are then raised.
It follows that we conclude that this exemption is, in substance,
granted, but that the exemption sought in relation to the answering
of questions
will not be granted because it is unnecessary
because of the combined operation
of s.34 of the Introduction Agents Act, and s.69 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
The exemption also covers a refusal, if the applicant desires, to give the
introduction service to those who are married and not
separated. This provision
has been included because we were referred in submissions by Mr Waller to the
people-matching exemption,
and that was a refusal power that was included in
that exemption, on the basis that it is not good public policy to interfere with
or undermine existing viable and ongoing marriage relationships, so that
provision has also been included in this exemption.
In conclusion we would say the exemption does not operate until notice of
it is published in the Government Gazette, but when notice
is published will
operate for a period of three years. The Tribunal will inform the applicant when
that notice has been published.
Thank you very much.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (34.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter