URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
06-135 [2006] VMHRB 2 (15 May 2006)
In the review of P
an involuntary patient at Northern
[2006] VMHRB 2
15 May 2006
Board Members
Ms G Nihill
Dr M Cameron
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
– community treatment order – treatment plan – request
for revision of treatment plan – reduction in medication.
P was a 46 year old involuntary patient at the Northern CCU, who appeared
before the Board in relation to the extension of his community
treatment order,
and the annual review of his involuntary patient status. He was diagnosed with
schizophrenia, and had suffered
from the illness for approximately 20 years.
P’s legal representative made submission in relation to
(e) of the Act, stating that P was of no risk to himself, and that he could be
treated in a less restrictive manner. Ms Mutha
also submitted that the Board
ought to order revision of the treatment plan under
of the Act,
particularly in respect of the medication received by P. She proposed that the
dose of his medication be reduced from
400mg of clozapine to 350mg of
P told the Board that he had never suffered from a mental illness, and that
he was concerned that the medication at the current levels
made him more prone
to illnesses such as colds and flu, because of the effect it had on his immune
system and white blood cell count.
P suffered from a mental illness, namely schizophrenia, which required immediate
there was a significant risk to P’s health and safety that would be
compromised if he were not receiving ongoing treatment
and monitoring. In
particular, a relapse consequent upon failure to maintain adequate treatment
would cause a deterioration in P’s
mental condition.
did not have the required capacity to consent to treatment, and that without the
coercion of a community treatment order, P was
likely to cease medication. Thus
treatment in a less restrictive setting was not currently available.
were significant issues raised in the various reports provided to the Board that
were not discussed with P in the preparation
of the treatment plan, and the
treatment plan had not been prepared in consultation with P. However, the Board
did not consider
that it would be appropriate for it to make an order to revise
the treatment plan to reflect a reduction in medication. The Board
revision of the treatment plan in order for it to be reviewed to include
consultation and collaboration with P in its preparation.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued
treatment of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
Review of Treatment Plan – The Board ordered the authorised
psychiatrist to review the treatment plan.
P was represented by Ms P Mutha, of the Mental Health Legal
Date of Decision:
15 May 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Northern CCU
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
15 May 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms G Nihill
Community Member: Mr J Gardiner
Psychiatrist Member: Dr M Cameron
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 15 May 2006:
Legal Representative Ms P Mutha
Doctor: Dr ST (by telephone)
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
The Board ordered that the authorised psychiatrist review the treatment plan
so as to allow for treatment options be discussed with
the patient at the
earliest possible opportunity, in accordance with
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
15 May 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continued to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 9 May 2006 prepared by Dr ST and presented to the
Plan of P dated 3 May 2006, prepared by MI, case manager, and presented to the
4. Report prepared by Dr SS, dated 30 November 2005.
5. Oral evidence at the hearing.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board
must discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
The current hearing was an annual review of the
involuntary status of P, and a review of the extension of P’s community
order. The extension was made on 7 February 2006, and the order was
due to expire on 6 February 2007. The matter had been previously
adjourned, as
the service indicated that a particular document ought not be provided to the
patient. The document, a “second
opinion” report that is discussed
below, was subsequently provided to the patient.
A diagnosis had been made that P had the illness schizophrenia, and has had
this illness for at least twenty years. He was 46 years
old, and a volunteer
hospital worker.
Submissions by P’s legal representative
Ms Mutha made submissions in relation to
and (e) of the
In relation to the issue of risk, Ms Mutha submitted that there was no risk
to P himself or others. Ms Mutha submitted that any benefit
P may receive from
the treatment was outweighed by the negative impact of the treatment.
Ms Mutha submitted that the negative impact of the treatment was experienced
by P in terms of side effects of the medication he was
receiving. She described
the side effects experienced by P as including blurred vision, sedation, loss of
co-ordination and incontinence.
She said that P found these side effects to be
very distressing.
Ms Mutha submitted that there was no risk to P himself. She said that though
the report to the Board stated that P had expressed
thoughts of suicide in the
past, there was no evidence of this, and P had never attempted suicide. Ms
Mutha said that it was incorrect
and misleading to state, as the report did,
that P was at a higher risk of suicide because of his age and gender, as these
generalised factors and had no proven bearing on P’s
Ms Mutha submitted that there was no risk posed to others by P, and noted
that the statement in the report about P making threats
to staff was made out of
context. She said that P had never posed a risk to staff, and that the verbal
threat reported was three
years old, and needed to be understood in the context
of P being extremely distressed about being taken to hospital.
Ms Mutha submitted that P could be treated in a less restrictive manner. She
said that he was happy to allow the mobile support team
to visit three times per
week, and was happy to be monitored while his medication was reduced. She said
that P’s instructions
were that he would like the medication to be reduced
over a six month period.
In addition, Ms Mutha submitted that as P volunteered at the Northern
Hospital every day, staff there would be able to monitor his
mental state
informally, and alert the treating team if there were any signs of relapse.
In relation to the treatment plan, Ms Mutha submitted that the Board ought
consider ordering a review of the plan, particularly in
respect of the
medication received by P, and proposed that the dose ought be reduced from 400mg
of clozapine to 350mg. She referred
the Board to the report by Dr SS, which she
said had been requested by Dr ST to look at the difficulties P was experiencing
side effects of the medication, but which had not been provided to P until
just prior to the hearing. In particular, Ms Mutha said,
the report proposed a
reduction in medication as a means of dealing with the side effects experienced
by P, and this recommendation
had not been followed. Instead, she said the
report had been withheld.
Information from Dr ST
Dr ST explained to the Board that P did very good
work at the hospital, and his contribution was highly valued. However, P
chronically unwell and his insight into the nature of his illness
remained very limited. He said that it would be very difficult
P’s illness at all without the community treatment order, and the
intensive involvement of the mobile support team,
who visited three times each
week to ensure that P took his medication. Dr ST said that no less restrictive
management of P’s
illness was possible, and that the mobile support team
was struggling as it was to ensure that P was maintained on adequate
In relation to the recommendations in Dr SS’s report, Dr ST said that
the opinion given was that if P’s clozapine blood
levels were
satisfactory, then a slight reduction in the dose of clozpine might be
warranted. However, said Dr ST, the levels were
very much lower than expected
and than was ideal, and a reduction, even by the small amount proposed, was not
clinically justified
and would lead to sub optimal treatment. Dr ST noted that
the recommendation in the report about splitting the dose, that is that
part of the dose in the morning and the rest in the evening, was offered to P
but P did not want to have his dose split.
In discussion with the Board, Dr ST said that the risks of P not receiving
treatment were significant for P himself. He said that
P’s functioning
would decline and he would be very likely to relapse into acute illness. Dr ST
said that there was a high
risk that P would not recover from another relapse to
the same state he was in at present; for example he said that he may not be
to maintain his volunteer work if he endured another relapse of his illness.
Dr ST said that P had been treatment resistant on other medications, and that
clozapine had been a last resort. Any other treatment,
he said, would be less
than optimal. On clozapine P was able to maintain his volunteer work and remain
pretty well.
Dr ST said that a reduction had not been tried because 400mg was a low
average dose, and the blood levels taken indicated that P was
only barely
receiving enough, and because there was a high risk that P would relapse and
have to undergo a traumatic admission to
hospital which may have a long term
negative impact on his life.
Dr ST noted that the Board discharged P from involuntary status in 2002, on
the basis that he could be monitored by hospital staff,
and that he had relapsed
after reducing his medication, and required admission to hospital in 2003. Dr
ST said that it was an unrealistic
expectation to place on staff at the Northern
Hospital that they monitor P when he is there in the capacity of a volunteer
Report of Dr SS
The Board considered this report, dated 30 November
2005, presented to the Board by P’s legal representative and also on the
clinical file.
The report, requested by Dr ST, noted that P had been taking clozapine for
six years, and that the dose was increased two years ago
from 300mg to 400mg.
The report detailed the side effects experienced by P, which did not appear to
have changed with the change
of dose except for increased sedation. Tests
investigating the cause of the side effects described had not revealed any
information,
except for a persistently elevated white blood cell count.
Recommendations made included that clozapine and norclozapine level tests
to be done, and if there was any capacity to reduce the dose even slightly this
could be tried. Dose splitting was recommended
as a possible means of dealing
with P’s nocturnal incontinence.
Information from P
P told the Board that he had never had a mental illness. He said someone had
told him he had a mental illness years ago, because
he had been on the dole for
more than five years, and then the label stuck. He was concerned that the
clozapine made him more prone
to illnesses such as colds and flu, because of the
effect on his immune system, and his lowered white blood cell count.
response to Dr ST’s comment that only clozapine kept him reasonably well,
P noted that he had been working at the hospital
when he was on olanzapine.
said that if he were a voluntary patient, he would continue to receive the
medication for a six-month period, gradually weaning
himself off it rather than
going off it straight away.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board carefully considered all the medical information, from Dr ST at the
hearing and from the clinical file, and also the information
from P himself, and
accepted that P had a mental illness. The Board accepted that the diagnosis of
P’s schizophrenia was long
standing and well established, and that it was
characterised by a significant disturbance of thought and perception.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board accepted evidence that the provision of consistent treatment in
particular anti psychotic medication had reduced the severity
symptoms of illness. The Board was satisfied that the provision of anti
psychotic medication and close supervision and
support from the mobile support
team was necessary for the ongoing treatment of P’s illness.
The Board found that P did require immediate and ongoing treatment.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board accepted that there was a significant risk that P’s health
and safety that would be compromised if he were not to
receive ongoing treatment
and monitoring. This was because a relapse consequent upon failure to maintain
adequate treatment would
cause deterioration in P’s mental condition. The
Board accepted the evidence that without ongoing treatment and monitoring,
become very unwell in the past, and most recently in 2002 and 2003.
There was no evidence put to the Board to suggest that there was any risk to
members of the public.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P told the Board that he did not think that he had a mental illness, and that
he would reduce the medication over a six-month period
if he were a voluntary
patient, as he did not think the medication did him any good and thought it did
him considerable harm.
The Board found that it was more probable than not that P would not continue
to accept treatment if the community treatment order
were not in place.
The Board, having accepted that P had a well established mental illness, was
satisfied after discussion with P that he did not understand
the nature of his
illness. He did not see any need for ongoing treatment and would not continue
to accept it if he were a voluntary
patient. The Board therefore considered
that P did not have the capacity to provide fully informed consent to
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Section 8(1)(e)
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a
manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and action?
The Board accepted that without the coercion of a community treatment order,
P was very likely to cease accepting adequate treatment,
at least over a
six-month period of time, as P did not consider that he had a mental illness,
and did not want to continue to receive
the treatment prescribed.
The Board considered the submission that P was attending regularly at the
Northern Hospital and that staff there could monitor his
mental state. The
Board had no doubt as to P’s regular attendance at the hospital, and were
very impressed with his commitment
and the contribution he made. However, the
Board considered that this contact did not represent a less restrictive means by
treatment could be provided, as P had clearly indicated that he would
reduce and then stop his medication, and the hospital staff
would have no
authority to encourage a different course of action. The role played by P and
the staff at the hospital when he was
there in a volunteer capacity was not one
of patient and treating team, and it would be an inappropriate and unreasonable
expectation
that staff could provide monitoring and treatment in that
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The treatment plan prepared by MI, case manager, on 3 May 2006, and signed by
Dr ST on 9 May 2006, was reasonably thorough and addressed
many of P’s
current needs. The problem with the treatment plan, in terms of
it had not been discussed with P, or seen by him. P did not have any
involvement in the preparation of the treatment plan.
There were significant issues raised in the discussion at the hearing about
the report prepared by Dr SS that do not appear to have
been discussed with P in
the preparation of the treatment plan.
With respect to the submission by P’s legal representative that the
Board order that the treatment plan be revised to ensure
a reduction in the dose
of clozapine, the Board did not consider that it would be appropriate for it to
make such an order based
on the very limited clinical information available to
it at the hearing.
The Board did order that the treatment plan be reviewed, so as to allow for
treatment options be discussed with the patient at the
earliest possible
opportunity, in accordance with
. The matter was not
adjourned for further hearing by the Board.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board found that the plan was capable of being implemented by the mental
health service.
criteria having been met, the Board made the determination set
out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (61.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter