URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
80Proof Australia Pty Ltd [2024] VicLiqComm 13; (3 September 2024)
80Proof Australia Pty Ltd [2024] VicLiqComm 13 (3 September 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by 80Proof Australia Pty Ltd for an internal review
of a decision by a member of the Commission to ban the advertising or promotion
of the supply of the liquor product known by the name of ‘Wet
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Ms Thu-Trang Tran, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Philip Cadman of Counsel (instructed by Zervos Lawyers) for the
Ms Karan Kahlon, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 15 February 2024
Date of Decision: 3 September 2024
Date of Reasons: 3 September 2024
The Commission has determined to affirm the Original
Decision with a variation to the Effective Date to 28 days after the date of
this decision
Original Decision
Australia Pty Ltd (
) holds a ‘pre-retail licence’
number 33766338 pursuant to the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
). A pre-retail licence under section 12 of the LCR Act
authorises the Licensee to, among other things, supply liquor at any time
any premises to a person who holds a licence under the LCR Act (such as 80Proof
Online Pty Ltd).
Licensee sells a pre-mixed beverage, containing peach and cranberry liqueur.
The Licensee sells that beverage under the name
‘Wet Pussy’
). The Product is also sometimes known as a ‘Wet Pussy
8 August 2023, the Victorian Liquor Commission (
) sent a letter
Show Cause Letter
) to the Licensee advising that the Commission has the
power to ban inappropriate advertising or promotions in accordance with section
115A of the LCR Act and sought submissions as to why it should not ban any
advertising or promotion of the Product, including any
advertising or promotion,
being static, online or otherwise, which contains the text ‘Wet
Show Cause Letter, among other things:
(1) clarified that the Commission considered the name of a liquor product, as
well as the wording on its label, and also the name
of any website used to
promote/purchase the Product, were ‘advertising or promoting’ for
the purposes of section 115A
of the LCR Act;
(2) enclosed a copy of the Victorian Gambling and Casino Control
Commission’s Responsible Liquor Advertising and Promotion
), drawing particular attention to Principle 4 of
those Guidelines;
(3) provided some examples of the relevant images of the Product contained on
the Licensee’s website and social media platforms;
(4) enclosed a copy of a determination of November 2021 by the Alcohol Beverages
Advertising Code Scheme Ltd’s Adjudication
Determination
). Within that ABAC Determination, a number of matters were
raised, including:
(a) reference to the determination dated 8 September 2021 of a complaint by
the Community Panel of Ad Standards Ltd (
Ad Standards Determination
relating to the Product, which was responded to by the Licensee; and
(b) that the ABAC Determination found that a reasonable person would
recognise the Product’s name on its packaging (and the
bar cocktail list
version) “as referencing the vagina of a sexually aroused
the Ad Standards Determination, the Community Panel considered that the name of
the Product, in combination with the gross exaggeration
of female arousal is a
portrayal which vilifies a section of the community on account of gender in that
it humiliates and incites
found that the brand and product name, ‘Wet Pussy Shot’ in
conjunction with the line ‘ready to be naughty with
a little bit of
nice’ was a reference to sexual arousal and sexual matters which would
constitute sexual appeal’. It
considered the name of the Product was
directly related to female sexual arousal. In the context of the phrases used
in the advertisement,
the Community Panel considered that the advertisement as a
whole, did employ sexual appeal in a manner which was degrading to women.
the ABAC Determination, the ABAC Panel accepted the Product name (and the bar
cocktail list versions) would be recognised by a
reasonable person as referring
to the vagina of a sexually aroused woman. It referred to the Ad Standards
Determination, having
also accepted that the product name drew attention to
female sexual arousal and the slang term for a woman’s genitals, and
rejected the submission that the recognition of ‘wet pussy’ as slang
for the vagina of a sexually aroused woman was
merely a subjective opinion. The
Panel found that the product name would be considered offensive and demeaning by
some in the community
but noted that it was not a matter for consideration by
30 August 2023, the Licensee provided a response to the Show Cause Letter.
18 October 2023, a member of the Commission gave a notice to the Licensee under
section 115A(1) banning it from advertising or
promoting the supply of the
). The Original Decision was to
take effect on and from 16 November 2023 (
Effective Date
the request of the Licensee, the Effective Date for compliance with the Original
Decision was extended to 13 December
Application for Internal Review
16 November 2023, the Licensee applied for an internal review of the Original
Review Application
) determined by a member of the Commission on
16 October 2024.
part of the Review Application, the Applicant sought a stay of the Original
Decision. The Commission granted the stay application
on 22 November
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the decision made by the member of the
Commission in the
Original Decision is a reviewable decision and the Licensee is an eligible
person to apply for a review of that
Original Decision. The Review Application
was made pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Decision.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound the rules of natural
Prohibition on advertising or promotion under section
115A of the LCR Act states as follows:
(1) The Commission may give a notice to a licensee banning the licensee
advertising or promoting—
(a) the supply of liquor by the licensee; or
(b) the conduct of licensed premises by the licensee—
if, in the opinion of the Commission, the advertising or promotion, or the
proposed advertising or promotion, is likely to encourage
irresponsible
consumption of alcohol or is otherwise not in the public interest.
(1A) For the purposes of subsection (1), advertising or promotion that is
not in the public interest includes the following—
(a) advertising or promotion that is likely to appeal to minors;
(b) advertising or promotion that is likely to encourage or condone
violence or antisocial behaviour;
(c) advertising or promotion that is directly or indirectly sexual,
degrading or sexist;
(d) any other prescribed advertising or promotion.
(2) A licensee to whom a notice applies must comply with the
LCR Act defines ‘supply’ of
includes sell, offer or expose for sale, exchange, dispose of and give away.
The LCR Act does not define what
is ‘sexual, degrading or sexist.’
They take their ordinary meanings. The Macquarie Dictionary defines
to mean, relevantly to this context ‘having a strong
sex drive or having the ability to arouse strong sexual
‘degrading’ as lowering in character or quality, or to lower in
dignity or estimation;
‘sexist’ as ‘of an attitude which stereotypes a person
according to gender or sexual preference, rather than
judging on individual
115A refers to ‘advertising or promotion’. Neither term is defined,
however section 115B defines ‘alcohol
advertising’ for the purposes
of that section (not for section 115A) as ‘any information, term,
expression, symbol or
other thing that gives publicity to, or otherwise promotes
ordinary meaning of ‘advertise’ is the act or practice of bringing
anything, such as one’s requirements or one’s
business or products
into public notice, including by paid announcements in periodicals, on posters
etc, or on television.
is not the same as ‘advertising’. Its ordinary meaning as set out
in the Macquarie Dictionary, includes to
‘advance, or to further the
growth, development, progress etc of,’
power at section 115A was inserted into the LCR Act by the
Liquor Control
Reform Amendment Act 2007
(Vic). The Second Reading Speech to the
Control Reform Amendment Bill 2007
(Vic) indicates that it arose from a number
of instances where the nature of liquor advertising or promotion or conduct in
to liquor consumption has caused community concern, the example there
given being ‘inappropriate promotion of free alcohol
supply to those women
prepared to wear a bikini to the venue’.
115(1A) was inserted into the LCR Act by the
Liquor Control Reform Amendment
(Vic) (the Amending Act). It commenced operation on 15 March 2022.
In her Second Reading Speech to the
Liquor Control Reform Amendment Bill 2021
(Vic), the Minister said this:
The Bill will further strengthen
the harm minimisation provisions of the Act by clarifying what advertising and
promotions are not
in the public interest, and therefore able to be banned. This
will include advertising that promotes violence or advertising that
directly or
indirectly appeals to minors or is of a sexual, degrading or sexist
in considering whether or not to exercise its power under section 115A, the
Commission may have regard to Liquor Control
Victoria’s Responsible
Alcohol Advertising and Promotion Guidelines (
LCV Guidelines
replaced the VGCCC Guidelines following the commencement of the Commission.
Principle 4 of the LCV Guidelines describes
the following principle:
The advertising or promotion of alcohol must not contain any
directly or indirectly sexual, degrading, sexist, offensive or discriminatory
content, such as sexual, degrading, sexist or offensive images, symbols, figures
or innuendo which imply sexual or social success.
the LCV Guidelines, the rationale for the prohibition of sexual, degrading, or
sexist advertising under Principle 4 is said
to be this:
liquor promotion explicitly or implicitly with messages about achieving sexual
or social success may contribute to a culture
around alcohol use that places
pressure on people to either drink more or to rely on liquor as a “social
lubricant” and
a way of achieving social acceptance.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
member of the Commission. The Commission also
received and considered the
following materials:
(a) Original Decision and Reasons for the Original Decision dated 18 October
(b) Review Application and supporting submissions received on 16 November
(c) submissions presented at the hearing of the Review Application on 15
February 2024; and
(d) further submissions received by email on 29 February 2024, including a
signed undertaking by the Licensee.
hearing was held in relation to the Review Application on 15 February 2024
). Mr Philip Cadman of Counsel appeared on behalf of the
Licensee and was instructed by Zervos Lawyers.
the Hearing, no witnesses were called and no further evidence presented.
However, Mr Cadman elaborated on the written submissions
accompanying the Review
Application.
Applicant’s Submissions at the Hearing
Cadman submitted that the effect of the Commission’s banning notice was to
ban a product itself, rather than banning advertising
. He submitted that
section 115A empowers the Commission to “give a notice banning the
licensee from advertising or promoting
the supply of liquor by the licensee or
the conduct of licensed premises by the licensee. So, really, the subject of
the supply or the conduct.... that’s quite different from
banning a product”.
Commission agrees that it is not empowered to ban a product. The Product is a
pre-mixed peach and cranberry liquor product.
The Commission has not and is not
considering banning this product. The subject of the ban being considered by
the Commission is
the advertising or promotion of this premixed product by the
Licensee which uses the words ‘Wet Pussy’. This is considered
detail below. For further clarification, the Commission has never banned and is
not currently considering banning the Licensee
from advertising or promotion of
the Product other than using the words ‘Wet Pussy’.
Cadman also submitted that the fact that, in real terms, the Product can be
understood to have a sexual reference, is not the end
of the inquiry. He
submitted that the Commission must also separately and additionally consider
whether the advertising or promotion
is ‘not in the public
interest’. He submitted that although subsection (1A) “goes on to
list advertising or promotion
that is directly or indirectly sexual, degrading
or sexist’, which appears to give a free-standing head of power in
to sexual advertising, it “still requires this additional
consideration of whether sexual advertising or promotion is in the
interest, or more particularly, the banning power is only engaged where that
advertising or promotion, that may be sexual,
is not in the public
Commission does not agree with Mr Cadman’s submission. Section 115A
clearly states that for the purposes of the Commission’s
consideration of
banning of advertising or promotion, such advertising or promotion is ‘not
in the public interest’ if
it is ‘directly or indirectly sexual,
sexist or degrading’.
Commission, however, notes that, in accordance with s172D(3), “The
Commission, when performing functions or duties or exercising
powers, must have
regard to the objects of this Act” and, in accordance with section 4(2)
“every power, authority, discretion,
imposed by this Act must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation”.
Commission does accept the broad proposition that the fact that advertising or
promotion is “directly or indirectly sexual”
does not conclusively
mean the Commission should ban it. The Commission accepts that there is a
further step of the broad consideration
and balancing of all the objects of the
LCR Act, with harm minimisation as the primary object. This is the case in
deciding whether
or not to issue a notice banning advertising and promoting the
supply of the Product using the words ‘Wet Pussy’.
Cadman also submitted on behalf of the Licensee that it was possible to have
advertising and promoting of the supply of the Product
using the words
‘Wet Pussy’ in a way that is not sexual advertising. He gave the
example that “a black bottle
with Wet Pussy written on it does not
necessarily become sexual advertising, merely because it has that name”.
Although he
conceded that “a large proportion of over 18s, who are in the
bracket of liquor consumers in Victoria, might well make the
link to the sexual
reference of the words ‘Wet Pussy’, others may not. He submitted
that if “any person were to
enter into Google ‘wet pussy’,
they may get pictures of literally soaking cats, cats that have been in the
Cadman conceded that there may have been some promotions in the past that were
problematic
. He submitted that
the Licensee would be willing to give the Commission an undertaking that it
would not advertise or promote in
a way that is sexual, and therefore not in the
public interest and would use its best endeavours to prevent that occurring in
circumstance.
Commission does not accept the proposition that it is possible to use the words
‘Wet Pussy’ in advertising and promoting
the Product in a way that
is not directly or indirectly sexual. The mere fact that it may be possible for
a google search to produce
an image of a soaking wet cat does not deprive the
words ‘wet pussy’ from having a directly or indirectly sexual
characterisation.
Licensee’s further written submissions
29 February 2024, Zervos Lawyers provided further written submissions on behalf
of the Licensee, which:
(a) referred to the discussion before the Commission during the Hearing and
re-emphasised that:
(i) the Licensee does not currently, nor does it have any future intention to,
advertise or promote the supply of the Product (or
the conduct of licensed
premises) in a manner that is directly or indirectly sexual, degrading or sexist
and therefore not in the
public interest;
(ii) the advertising or promotion of concern to the Commission identified at
paragraphs [57] and [58] of the Statement of Reasons
for the Original Decision
has ceased and the images referred to are no longer on display on social media
or elsewhere;
(iii) the Licensee has taken steps, including by changing its website name and
ceasing the social media advertising, to prevent any
advertising or promotion of
the Product that is directly or indirectly sexual, degrading or sexist;
(iv) the Licensee sells the Product wholesale to retailers, and sells the
Product direct to customers solely via its website;
(v) in addition to refraining from undertaking any sexual advertising or
promotion itself, the Licensee is prepared to use its best
endeavours to ensure
that retailers to whom it sells the Product do not advertise or promote the
supply of the Product, or the conduct
of their licensed premises involving the
Product, in any manner that is directly or indirectly sexual, degrading or
(b) submitted that:
(i) the Commission has the power under section 133F(1)(a) to accept a written
undertaking given by a licensee in connection with
a matter in relation to which
the Commission has a power or function under the LCR Act, including in this
instance. Reference was
made to the matter of Pizza Religion (Geelong) Pty Ltd
at Pizza Religion (Geelong) premises (Liquor - Internal Review) [2018] VCGLR
(8 February 2018), in which the Commission’s predecessor, the Victorian
Commission for Liquor and Gambling Regulation accepted
an undertaking from a
liquor licensee to resolve an internal review application of a non-disciplinary
licensing decision;
(ii) given the breach of an undertaking under section 133F of the LCR Act is a
ground for taking disciplinary action, the giving
of an undertaking by the
Licensee is a serious matter that has the potential to attract serious
repercussions for the Licensee.
As a result, it is more than sufficient to
allay any concerns the Commission may have that the Product will be advertised
or promoted
in a manner that is not in the public interest in future;
(iii) the Licensee has included in the undertaking that its best endeavours
referred to will include not only refraining from planning
or engaging in any
directly or indirectly sexual advertising or promotion together with its
customers, but will also include notifying
any customer of its commitment not to
advertise or promote the Product in a sexual manner, immediately that the
Licensee becomes
aware of any such directly or indirectly sexual advertising or
(iv) the acceptance of the attached undertaking by the Commission will address
any of the potential harms that may be thought to
arise from the advertising or
promotion of the Product, and serve the same purpose as any appropriate action
under section 115A of
the Act to ban particular advertising or promotion (rather
than banning the Product itself); and
(v) in these circumstances, it is appropriate for the Commission to set aside
the Original Decision and substitute a decision to
accept the written
undertaking of the Licensee.
signed written undertaking was provided by the Licensee essentially addressing
the matters set out in paragraph 44(a)(iii) above.
Reasons for
decision on review
Issues for determination on review
making its decision on review, the Commission must determine the following
issues in exercising its powers under section 115A of
the LCR Act:
(a) Is the name of a product, in this case ‘Wet Pussy’, advertising
or promotion?
(b) Is such
advertising and promotion made in respect of the supply of
(c) Are the words ‘Wet Pussy’ (in a product name) advertising or
promotion that is - directly or indirectly sexual, degrading
or sexist and thus
not in the public interest?
making its decision on review, the Commission must consider the objects of the
LCR Act, with harm minimisation as the primary object.
of these issues are discussed in turn.
Is the name of a product,
in this case ‘Wet Pussy’, advertising or promotion?
115A of the LCR Act refers to ‘advertising or promotion’. Neither
term is defined, however section 115B defines
‘alcohol advertising’
for the purposes of that section (not for section 115A) as ‘any
information, term, expression,
symbol or other thing that gives publicity to, or
otherwise promotes liquor’.
ordinary meaning of ‘advertise’ is the act or practice of bringing
anything, such as one’s requirements or one’s
business or products
into public notice, for example by paid announcements in periodicals, on posters
etc, or on television.
is not the same as ‘advertising’. Its ordinary meaning as set out
in the Macquarie Dictionary, includes to
‘advance, or to further the
growth, development, progress etc of,’
Commission considers that the label/packaging of the Product and the name of the
Product are each intended to draw public attention
and attraction to the Product
and are powerful factors in the ultimate decision of the customer to purchase
the Product and accordingly
are considered by the Commission to be
‘advertising’ of the Product.
Commission notes that this is consistent with the Licensee’s submissions
(a) there is a significant familiarity and popularity with the Product amongst
the liquor consuming community, and in particular
with the name ‘Wet
Pussy’; and
(b) ‘Wet Pussy’ identifies as an established brand name.
Is such advertising and promotion made in respect of the supply of liquor?
Licensee attracts potential customers and sells and supplies the Product to
customers (whether they be individuals or retailers
etc) including via its
website. As such, the Licensee is supplying the Product. The Licensee makes
its potential customers aware
of the availability of the Product and attracts
them to purchase the Product by listing it for sale by the name ‘Wet
and also by having images of it including on its website, using the
words ‘Wet Pussy’. Accordingly, the Commission considers
Licensee is advertising or promoting the supply of liquor using the words
“Wet Pussy”.
Commission notes that the Licensee has amended the name of the website to remove
the words ‘Wet Pussy’; however, once
on the website, the name of the
Product as ‘Wet Pussy’ is still clearly visible. The Commission
considers that the Licensee
is advertising or promoting supply of the Product,
through its website and through the name and label/packaging of the Product.
Are the words ‘Wet Pussy’ (in a product name)
advertising or promotion that is - directly or indirectly sexual, degrading
sexist and thus not in the public interest?
Commission agrees with the ABAC Adjudication Panel finding that ‘wet
pussy’ is a commonly recognised slang term denoting
the vagina of a
sexually aroused woman.
stated above, the Licensee conceded that “a large proportion of over 18s,
who are in the bracket of liquor consumers in Victoria,
might well make the link
to the sexual reference of the words ‘Wet Pussy’. However, the
Licensee also submitted that
if “any person were to enter into Google
‘wet pussy’, they may get pictures of literally soaking cats, cats
have been in the
allowing for the possibility that a google search may throw up a non-sexual
image, this does not in any way alleviate the Commission’s
concern that
the expression ‘wet pussy’ has a well known and assuredly sexual
connotation.
Accordingly,
the Commission finds that advertising and promoting the supply of liquor using
the words ‘Wet Pussy’ is ‘directly
or indirectly sexual’
and accordingly not in the public interest in accordance with section 115(1A)(c)
of the LCR Act.
Consideration of the objects of the LCR Act, with
harm minimisation as the primary object.
Commission considers that the term ‘wet pussy’, in addition to its
explicit connotations of a sexual nature described
above, also appears to
objectify women. As the name of the Product, the term suggests that one can
achieve sexual arousal or sexual
success from the consumption of the beverage.
The Commission acknowledges that both the ABAC Panel and the Ad Standards
Panel accepted the Product name would be recognised by a reasonable
person as referring the vagina of a sexually aroused woman and
considered as offensive by some in the community.
Licensee has submitted that the name of the Product, properly understood against
a background of current community standards,
is not offensive to a significant
portion of the community and can be considered as positive and empowering for
women. There is
no evidence before the Commission in this regard and the
Commission does not accept this proposition.
fact, as submitted by the Licensee, the Product has been around a very long time
and is well known as ‘Wet Pussy’.
Over the years, in addition to
the advertising through the name of the Product (including those attached to the
Show Cause Letter
in this matter), there have been numerous static and video
promotions (including on Instagram, websites, social media etc), whether
by the Licensee, some of which the Licensee itself admits were
“problematic”. Thus, through this history of promotions,
association of the words ‘wet pussy’ with the objectification of
women and the promotion of sexual success for men
by the consumption of this
Product by women has been further forged. This association remains even though
previous promotions may
have now ceased.
Commission considers that the words ’wet pussy’ objectifies women by
focussing on one particular body part and sexualising
that body part.
the Commission considers that permitting advertising or promotion of liquor in a
manner that seeks to exploit the idea of
sexual success or normalise attitudes
of lubricating” women through alcohol to achieve sexual success is
inconsistent with
the objectives of the LCR Act. In particular, it is
inconsistent with the principal object of minimising harm arising from the
and abuse of alcohol to vulnerable persons including women.
Additionally,
the Commission considers that advertising or promotion of the Product that uses
the words ‘wet pussy’ does
not contribute to the responsible
development of the liquor industry and is therefore inconsistent with this
object of the LCR Act.
is not in the public interest to condone advertising or promotion of liquor that
objectifies woman and promotes the idea that consumption
of liquor is linked to
sexual success or is a social or sexual lubricant (as stated in LCV’s
Guidelines)
light of all available material, in the opinion of the Commission the
Licensee’s advertising and promoting the supply of
the liquor using the
words ‘Wet Pussy’, (including on the label/packaging) is directly or
indirectly sexual, degrading
or sexist, and thus not in the public interest.
Consideration of an Undertaking from the Licensee
Commission acknowledges that the Licensee has proposed and provided a signed
undertaking. However, the Commission considers that
ultimately the undertaking
does not address or ameliorate concerns regarding the Licensee’s
advertising or promoting supply
of the Product which uses the words ‘Wet
the undertaking offers a commitment by the Licensee to not advertise or promote
the supply of the Product in a manner that is
directly or indirectly sexual,
degrading or sexist, the Product bearing the name ‘Wet Pussy’ does
and will remain, for
sale on the Licensee’s website. Therefore, even if
additional sexual text or images in an advertisement or promotion of the
are removed, the sexual connotations and innuendo connected to the supply of the
Product remain.
Decision on review
the reasons set out above, the Commission affirms the Original Decision of the
issuing of a notice under section 115A(1) banning
the Licensee from advertising
or promoting supply of liquor using the words ‘Wet Pussy’; and that
such a ban is appropriate
in all the circumstances.
Commission on review has therefore determined to affirm the Original Decision
and vary the Effective Date to take effect 28 days
after the date of this
decision. This is to allow the Licensee time to fully comply with the notice
under section 115A(1), including
with respect to its current stock labels,
website and any other advertising or promotion which includes the words
‘Wet Pussy’.
The preceding 71 paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Acting Chair), Mr
James O’Halloran
(Deputy Commissioner) and Ms Thu-Trang Tran
(Commissioner)
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
The Commission notes there
are no Ministerial Guidelines applicable in this matter.
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
section 157(2).
section 157(3).
LCR Act, s 3.
Macquarie Dictionary Online, at
paragraph [4] of ‘sexual’.
Ibid, at paragraphs [2] and [3]
of ‘degrade’.
Macquarie Dictionary
Macquarie Dictionary
Victorian Parliamentary
Debates, Legislative Assembly, 23 June 2021, p2308 (Horne).
Transcript of Hearing, p3,
Transcript of Hearing, p3,
lines 40-45.
Transcript of Hearing, p4,
lines 18-23.
Section 115A(1A)(c).
Transcript of Hearing, p8
lines 34-44.
Transcript of Hearing, p4,
Transcript of Hearing, p17,
lines 40-43.
acknowledged that issues related to the conduct of licensed premises being
s115A[1][b] have no application to this matter.
Macquarie Dictionary
Macquarie Dictionary
See example, ABAC
Adjudication Panel Final Determination No 216 and 217/21 dated November 2021
(the ABAC Determination), at [46].
Transcript of Hearing, p9,
lines 34-44.
LCV Guidelines, Principle
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter