URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2008/574.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ghosn v Principle Focus Pty Ltd & Ors (No. 2) [2008] VSC 574 (19 December 2008)
THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
No. 8070 of 2008
MICHEL ABI GHOSN
PRINCIPLE FOCUS PTY LTD & ORS
DATE OF HEARING
21, 22, 23, 27, 30 and 31 October
DATE OF JUDGMENT
19 December 2008
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Ghosn v Principle Focus Pty Ltd & Ors
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2008] VSC 574 (No.2
INSTRUMENTS – Foreign Power of Attorney – Declaration sought as
to validity pursuant to Victorian law – Capacity
of donor of Power of
Attorney – Onus of proof - Trust property – Donor’s failure to
give evidence – Application
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr A. Panna SC
Starnet Legal Pty Ltd
For the First and Second Defendants
Mr S. McNab
Coulter Roache
For the Third Defendant
Mr W. Houghton QC with
Mr S. Anger
Alfred P Mayuka
For the Fourth Defendant
Mrs S. Marks
Lander & Rogers
Introduction
1 In August and September 2008, Antoine Moussi, who is now 76 years old,
executed three Powers of Attorney in Lebanon in favour of
his nephew, the
plaintiff Jean Michel Abi Ghosn. Mr Abi Ghosn now seeks a declaration in this
Court that the Powers of Attorney
are valid. He also seeks delivery up of a
range of documents from his uncle’s former solicitors and accountants,
Focus Pty Ltd and Coulter Roache respectively.
2 Mr James Nott is a
director of Principle Focus and he, along with Kevin Roache, a partner of
Coulter Roache, both oppose the relief
sought by Mr Abi Ghosn. They are joined
in that opposition by Ms Sophie Moussi, Antoine Moussi’s daughter, who, on
her application,
was joined to the proceeding as a party.
3 I also ordered at
a previous hearing that Mr Moussi be joined as a party and served with the
relevant documents. He, through his
counsel, supports Mr Abi Ghosn’s
applications.
4 Although there are a number of side issues which need to be
resolved, the central issue is that of Mr Moussi’s capacity to
execute the
Powers of Attorney, two in Arabic which were signed on 7 August 2008 in a Beirut
hospital where Mr Moussi was a patient,
the third in English signed on
18 September 2008 at the Australian Embassy in Beirut.
5 It might be
thought that where the donor and the Attorney both contend that the Power of
Attorney is valid, the resolution of the
application would be relatively
straightforward. This is not such a case. Mr Moussi, although represented, did
not give evidence
either in person or by video link. Mr Abi Ghosn, for reasons
which I will set out later, is not a witness of credit and I propose
make recommendations to relevant regulatory bodies in relation to his
6 Much, if not all, of the evidence that I am about to set out was not in
dispute between the parties.
7 Antoine Moussi was born in Lebanon in 1932 and
came to this country at a young age. From what were apparently humble
beginnings,
he became an extremely successful businessman both in Melbourne and
Geelong. He owned and operated a large number of hotels, restaurants,
centres and the like over many years. He amassed a considerable fortune. Since
1974, Mr Nott has acted as his accountant
and would meet with him at least
weekly, if not more often.
Mr Roache was his
solicitor over the past year, and has known him for over 50
Both were responsible for providing
him with commercial advice.
8 Mr Moussi married whilst in Australia, however
he and his wife, Nina, separated in October 2003. Their daughter, Sophie, lived
with her mother after the separation. She is now 21 years of age and is a
9 In the years preceding Mr Moussi’s departure for Lebanon in
May of 2008, he had set up a number of discretionary trusts.
In particular, the
Antoine Moussi Family Trust No. 2, established in December 1995 of which Huitre
Pty Ltd was the trustee and the
Antoine Moussi Discretionary Trust of which
Ferndown Pty Ltd was the trustee established in February 2002. Neither company
in its own right. In each case, Mr Moussi was the appointer of the
trust and the sole director of the two trustee companies. Each
company owned a
significant asset. In the case of Huitre, it was the registered proprietor of
the Carlton Hotel located in Mallop
Street, Geelong, with an estimated value of
somewhere between $8 million to $10 million. In the case of Ferndown, it was
the registered
proprietor of Comfort Inn, also in Geelong, which was estimated
to be worth approximately $3 million.
10 On 4 September 2002, Mr Moussi executed
a “global” Power of Attorney to Louis Fleyfel, a Lebanese resident
who in earlier
years had been a prominent restaurateur in Melbourne.
January this year, a new Will was executed by Mr Moussi, as well as an enduring
Power of Attorney (financial) appointing
James Nott as his
This Power of Attorney conformed
with Part XIA of the
Instruments Act 1958
12 Prior to Mr
Moussi’s departure to Lebanon, there is no suggestion of any incapacity,
lack of mental functioning, nor any
change of his approach to the conservation
of his assets.
13 On 5 May 2008, Mr Moussi left Melbourne and went to Lebanon
for a holiday. He has not returned since and has clearly become quite
By 9 May, he had been admitted to Hospital St Charles and subsequently has been
in and out of hospitals in Beirut.
it is not altogether clear, it appears that he is having cardiac problems and
difficulties with shortness of breath which
require constant administration of
oxygen via nasal tubes. Between May and July 2008, Sophie Moussi spoke on
occasions to her father,
as did Mr Nott.
14 From 13 July 2008 to 9 August
2008, Mr Moussi was confined to
15 On 7 August 2008, and whilst a
patient at the St Martine Hospital, Mr Moussi executed two Powers of Attorney:
“a general,
total and absolute Power of Attorney No. 122241/2008
“and ”an irrevocable Power of Attorney for selling real estate,
valid to be used in both Lebanon and Australia, No. 12242/2008” to his
nephew, Mr Abi Ghosn.
At the time of the
execution of the two Powers of Attorney, a number of his relatives were present
at the hospital, including Mr
Abi Ghosn and Mr Eli Moussi, Mr
Moussi’s brother. Mr Moussi was, prior to the signing of the Powers of
Attorney, examined
by a Dr Saliba, who subsequently gave evidence by video link
from Lebanon. A notary, a Miss Daoud, was also present and notarised
original and the copies, which were ultimately certified by the Australian
Embassy in Beirut.
16 On 16 August 2008, Mr Abi Ghosn left Lebanon and
travelled to Melbourne, arriving on the 18th. He immediately met with a Mr
Nahour, a developer, Mr Alex Vovos, an accountant, and his lawyer, Ms Hina
Pasha of Starnet Legal
. On the same day,
Mr Moussi spoke with his daughter Sophie by
17 On the next day, the 19th, Mr
Abi Ghosn executed a number of transfers purporting to use the Lebanese Powers
of Attorney. By means
of a search, he identified companies in which Mr Moussi
had shareholdings and transferred all the shares in those companies into
name. A number of the companies, including Ferndown and Huitre, were sole
director companies. Mr Abi Ghosn then removed
Mr Moussi as the sole director
and appointed himself to that position. He appointed himself as secretary of
each of the companies.
He also removed Mr Nott, who was the secretary of
several of the companies. He changed the registered address of the companies
from that of Principle Focus, Mr Nott’s company, to that of Meridian
Financial Services. In all the documents submitted to
ASIC, he gave his address
as 7 Blue Ridge Drive, Mooroolbark, apparently the address of
18 On 20 August, Mr Abi
Ghosn, with an associate, went to Mr Nott’s offices in Geelong and
demanded company and personal documents
He produced a letter purportedly
from Mr Moussi, but in fact signed by Mr Abi Ghosn, authorising release of the
documents. Mr Nott
was overseas at the time. Mr Abi Ghosn was not provided
with documents from Mr Nott’s office understandably, as Mr Nott still
his own Power of Attorney for Mr Moussi.
19 In the afternoon of 20 August,
Huitre sold the Carlton Hotel to Mirayco Pty Ltd (a company apparently
controlled by Mr Nahour)
for the sum of $1 million with $1,000 deposit paid in
cash. At the same time, Ferndown sold the Comfort Inn to Mirayco for $800,000
with $1,000 deposit in cash.
Mr Abi Ghosn
executed the contracts of sale on behalf of the two companies. On that day,
Mirayco lodged a caveat over “all
estate and fees simple” of both
properties.
20 On 25 August, Mr Abi
Ghosn transferred $140,035 from four of the former Moussi companies into Starnet
Legal’s trust account.
following day, Starnet requested delivery up of Mr Moussi’s files to Mr
Abi Ghosn. It sought release of the files
by 3.00 p.m. that day.
following day, Mr Abi Ghosn issued a generally endorsed writ seeking a
declaration in relation to the two Lebanese Powers of
Attorney and an order
requesting the defendants to deliver up all documents belonging to Mr Eli
Moussi. On the same day, a summons
was issued seeking a declaration in respect
of both Powers of Attorney and an order directing delivery up of all documents
to Mr Antoine Moussi. It was returnable in the Practice Court that
22 Mr Abi Ghosn swore an affidavit on 26 August in support of the
application. The affidavit gave his address as 7 Blue Ridge Drive,
Mooroolbark,
and deposed to the circumstances surrounding the execution of the two Lebanese
Powers of Attorney and the demand made
upon Mr Nott for delivery up of the
documents. There was no mention in the affidavit of Mr Abi Ghosn’s
correct address, the
transfer of the shares, the change of directorship, Mr
Nott’s removal as secretary, or the sale of the two trust
properties.
23 The matter came on before Vickery J in the Practice Court in
the afternoon of the 27th. Counsel for Mr Abi Ghosn, at the outset
hearing, stated that the sole purpose of the hearing was to obtain an injunction
compelling delivery up of all documents belonging
to Mr Moussi. It was said to
his Honour that there were urgent circumstances justifying the order, a matter
that was queried by
his Honour. In fact, it was counsel for Mr Roache and
Mr Nott, who appraised the Court of the fact that Mr Abi Ghosn had appointed
himself as director of the Moussi companies and had “got rid” of Mr
When the matter was stood down,
counsel for Mr Abi Ghosn advised the other parties of the sale of the two
properties, and the judge
was then informed. His Honour declined to make the
orders sought by Mr Abi Ghosn; undertakings were given by Mr Abi Ghosn in
to the moneys transferred from Mr Moussi’s account, and as to the
exercise of his powers as a director or secretary and the
provision of copies of
the contracts of sale.
24 In late August and early September, Mr Nott tried
to speak to Mr Moussi from France, where he was vacationing, but was told Mr
Moussi was not well enough to talk. Mr Nott had several conversations with Mr
Moussi’s brother, Lee, prior to speaking to
Mr Moussi on 5 September by
telephone in company with Mr Roache. I shall refer to that conversation in
greater detail later as I
shall to a conversation that Mr Moussi had with his
daughter, Sophie, that evening.
25 On 2 September, Mr Moussi revoked the
Power of Attorney that had been granted to Louis Fleyfel in September
On the same day, he was examined
again at his home by Dr
26 Meanwhile, Mr Abi Ghosn had
returned to Lebanon. He told me that he had spoken to Mr Moussi about the sale
of the properties and
I shall also refer to that evidence in a little more
detail later.
27 On 7 September, Mr Moussi completed a videotape declaring
his satisfaction with Mr Abi Ghosn’s actions and confirming his
as his attorney.
28 On 9 September, Mr
Moussi signed a revocation of Mr Nott’s enduring Power of
On the same day, Mr Moussi
signed a document in which he stated that he was aware of the sale of the two
properties and that he
was “happy and satisfied for the sale to proceed,
and it is my wish that Mr James Nott or Kevin Ro[a]che do not interfere or
to prevent the sale to go
29 On the following day,
the 10th, Mr Moussi signed a petition written in English requesting that moneys
which had been the subject
of the freezing order be released and stating that
“all the drafts, money transfers made previously by my attorney,
Michel Abi Ghosn have been made with my full, comprehensive,
unrestricted and definitive knowledge, approval and will – without
objection or any reserve”.
17 September, this application came before me in the Practice Court.
I directed that Miss Moussi be served with the relevant
documentation and
that the funds that had been frozen be forwarded to Mr Moussi in
31 On 18 September, Mr Moussi executed a general Power of Attorney
in favour of Mr Abi Ghosn.
appears to conform with the
Instruments Act
and it was sworn by him at the
Australian Embassy.
32 On 19 September, on the application of Sophie Moussi,
I ordered that she be joined as a party to the proceeding. I also ordered
Mrs Moussi be joined as a party and fixed the date for trial on 21 October. On
that day (the 19th), Sophie Moussi spoke again
by phone to her father in
Lebanon. I shall say more about this conversation later.
33 On 1 October, Mr
Anger of counsel, who appeared with Mr Houghton QC for Mr Moussi at the
trial, met Mr Moussi in Lebanon and conferred
with him on several occasions
during that week.
34 On 2 October, Dr
Abi Akl, a medical practitioner, examined Mr Moussi at his house and
subsequently provided a report in relation
examination.
Dr Abi Akl later gave
evidence by video link from Lebanon.
35 Mr Abi Ghosn swore one affidavit on 25 August 2008 and gave further oral
evidence at the hearing. He also gave viva voce evidence-in-chief
cross-examined. Ms Sophie Moussi swore two affidavits. She also gave some
viva voce evidence-in-chief and was cross-examined.
Mr Roche swore two
affidavits and was cross-examined on a particular issue which was not the
subject of submissions in final addresses.
Mr Nott swore two affidavits and was
not cross-examined. Evidence by video link was given by Dr Saliba and Dr
Abi Akl, resident
in Lebanon and their medical reports were tendered.
The Australian
Powers of Attorney
36 In this country, Powers of Attorney fall into two categories; general and
special. A general Power authorises the Attorney to
do all things which the
principal can do and which are capable of delegation. A special Power is one
restricted to authority to
do specified things or classes of
At common law, the loss of mental
capacity by the donor results in the immediate revocation of the Power of
Attorney. However,
Instruments Act
(Vic) permits the making of
an enduring Power of Attorney which provides, in essence, that an
Attorney’s authority will continue
notwithstanding that the donor becomes
incapacitated.
37 In this case, there are two relevant enduring Powers of
Attorney executed under Australian law, namely that executed by Mr Moussi
favour of Mr Roache on 10 January, purportedly revoked on 9 September 2008,
and a general Power of Attorney executed by Mr Moussi
at the Australian Embassy
in favour of Mr Abi Ghosn on 18 September. It was not suggested in the
course of argument that, at least
in a formal sense, either Power of Attorney
did not conform with the
Instruments Act
provisions.
The Lebanese Powers of Attorney
38 Copies of the originals
Lebanese Powers of Attorney executed by Mr Moussi on 7 August were
notarised by Vera Daoud, a public notary in Jbeil,
Lebanon. The Powers of
Attorney were stipulated as being intended for use in both Lebanon and
Australia. The Powers of Attorney
were certified by her as true copies of the
originals executed by Mr Moussi. The Australian Embassy in Beirut then
certified the
signature of an officer of the Legislation Office of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and the seal impressed on the documents appears
official seal of the Lebanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs. A translation of
each of the Powers of Attorney has also been
39 Victorian Courts
have, in the past, made declarations as to the validity of instruments executed
in foreign countries, although
not, as far as I can determine, in respect of
Powers of Attorney.
I accept that there is
a common law power to recognise the validity of a foreign Power of Attorney.
Applicable law
40 No evidence was adduced by the parties as to Lebanese law concerning either
the formal validity of the Power of Attorney or as
to requirements relevant to
the capacity of the donor of a Power of Attorney and how that power may be
affected under Lebanese law
if the donor’s capacity is impaired. In these
circumstances the Court assumes that foreign law is the same as the law of the
41 Ultimately the formal validity
of the Powers of Attorney was not an issue. The central issue is that of the
capacity of Mr Moussi
to execute the respective powers. This is to be
determined under Victorian law.
The evidence adduced
42 Mr Abi Ghosn swore an affidavit on 25 August and gave viva voce evidence
before me. In his affidavit he deposed as to Mr Moussi’s
capacity at the
time that he executed the Power of Attorney, having been present in the hospital
room with others when it was executed
on 7 August. He also deposed as to his
arrival in Australia and demands made upon Mr Nott of Principle Focus in
relation to handing
over Mr Moussi’s documents. In his viva voce
evidence, he gave evidence as to the sale of the two trust properties which he
had entered into, having become the sole director of the two relevant
He said that this was part of a
larger scheme involving a Mr Nahoum, who was the principal of the purchaser,
Mirayco Pty Ltd. It
was a $60 million
development.
He accepted that the sale
prices of the two properties were nothing like their real value, but said that
this was because there
was, notwithstanding the terms of the contracts of sale,
a 50-50 deal with Mr Nahoum and that other properties were to be developed
as part of an ongoing venture. He said that part of the deal was to allow for
Mr Moussi to be a joint venturer, in effect, with
Mr Nahoum in a project at
Ringwood. This arrangement was the basis for the discounted prices of the two
properties. He accepted
that there was not a jot in writing in relation to the
arrangement with Mr Nahoum,
but produced
some documentation related to the development about which he seemed to have
known very little – indeed, in answer
to a question from me he could not
even tell me where in Ringwood the development was located despite having
visited the property.
He said that upon
his return to Lebanon, he had seen Mr Moussi and had discussed the sales of
the properties with him and had received,
in effect, his blessing for the
43 I do not accept any of Mr Abi
Ghosn’s evidence unless there is reliable independent verification of the
facts that he has
deposed to. The following matters are relevant to this
(a) In the only affidavit he swore in this court he provided a false
address, namely, that of Mr Nahoum at 7 Blue Ridge Drive, Mooroolbark.
never lived or carried on business at this
That affidavit was sworn before a
solicitor of this court with whom he conferred on the day on which he arrived in
Melbourne from
his home in Lebanon.
(b) When he arrived in Australia, he
arranged for company searches to be
undertaken.
This does not accord readily
with an Attorney who has a clear knowledge of the donor’s financial
affairs as he suggested.
In any event, having conducted those searches, he
determined that he would transfer the shares in each company held by
into his own name and also take over the directorship of those
companies, a number of which were sole director companies. He provided
totally implausible reason for engaging in this conduct within a day of his
arrival in Australia, namely, that he was shocked to
find that Mrs Moussi,
Mr Moussi’s divorced spouse, held 49% of the shares in one of the
companies. Accordingly, to use his
words, for “ease of
he transferred the shares in
all the companies held by Mr Moussi of which he was aware into his own name
using the Lebanese Powers
of Attorney. I regard his explanation for this
conduct as absurd, particularly when he removed Mr Nott, Mr Moussi’s
for 30 years, as company secretary of several of the companies.
Clearly the true purpose was to give himself total control of the
(c) When he transferred the shares into his own name, he gave a
false address, the address of Mr Nahoum at 7 Blue Ridge Drive, Mooroolbark.
gave this as his address as a shareholder, director and secretary of the
relevant companies. This is particularly relevant to
the transfers in relation
to the two trustee companies, which were sole director companies; the rules of
ASIC require that a sole
director be an Australian
He was a resident of Lebanon.
I think it clear that he lied again in relation to the address so that he
could be registered as
a sole director of these companies.
(d) The affidavit he filed in this court seeking urgent interim relief failed
to disclose many matters relevant to the disposition
of that application. He
did not depose as to his correct address, the transfer of shares, the transfer
of directorship and secretary,
the sale of the two properties effected by him,
nor was there any mention of the fact that these companies were trustee
with attendant fiduciary obligations. This was at a time when he was
seeking urgent relief from the court in relation to the delivery
up of documents
belonging to both Mr Moussi and, it would seem, to the companies controlled by
him. I do not regard these significant
omissions as matters that were simply
overlooked in haste as contended by his counsel. Rather it is consistent with
his determination
to conceal his activities whilst in this country.
(e) His evidence about the deal with Mr Nahoum concerning the Ringwood
property was inconsistent and, to a large extent unbelievable.
disclosed in his affidavit. It only emerged when he gave
evidence. At times, he has sworn that Mr Nahoum or his companies had only
received a 50% interest in the
in fact, the contracts of sale reflected a sale of the total interest of the two
trustee companies to the Mirayco, Nahoum
does the caveat lodged by
the production of some documentation which supported the proposition that
Mr Nahoum was involved in a development at Ringwood,
it went no further
than that. There was no documentation relating to any of the Moussi companies
being involved in the
development
any documentation of the Moussi interests in relation to the sale of the two
Geelong properties being in some way interlinked
with the Ringwood development,
notwithstanding the sale of assets worth up to $10 million. The expression he
used of a “gentlemen’s
agreement” was extraordinary given that
he was dealing with trust
properties.
(f) There is no rational explanation for the urgency which Mr Abi Ghosn said
was necessary to carry out the deal with Mr Nahoum.
He met Mr Nahoum on the
, executed the share transfers on the
and the companies sold the properties on the
. He had little, if any, knowledge about the
development and no familiarity with those documents that existed. At no time
give any valid explanation for the haste in which the sales were
effected. He has not paid a cent to his uncle for the sale of the
(g) Assuming that Mr Abi Ghosn was a properly appointed Attorney of
Mr Moussi, I accept that it may have been within his power to
transfer the
shares and the directorships and then execute the sales at significant
discounts, nevertheless the manner in which the
whole exercise was carried out
causes one to have real doubts about Mr Abi Ghosn’s credit in the light of
the other matters
I have referred to. Within two days of his arrival in
Australia, he had sold two properties on behalf of Mr Moussi for $1.8
when their combined value was no less than $11 million. Not a word to
the long standing accountant who was the other person holding
Attorney. Not only that, but the properties were owned by trustee companies
with consequent fiduciary obligations of
which he professed ignorance.
44 I should say, although it is by no means determinative, Mr Abi Ghosn’s
demeanour and approach in Court was such that one
could have no confidence
whatsoever in the answers he gave.
45 In short, I do not accept any part of
his evidence and any facts deposed to by him and, as I have said, I would
only be prepared
to accept his evidence on particular matters provided there was
reliable independent evidence. The practical effect of this finding
evidence as to Mr Moussi’s capacity and approval of his dealings with the
trust properties is to be put to one side.
46 On the other hand, I think that
his cousin, Ms Sophie Moussi, gave reliable and honest evidence. Although I
agree with the submission
made by Mr Houghton QC that her motivation for
involvement in the proceeding is primarily a concern with the sales of the
by Mr Abi Ghosn (she is a beneficiary of the trusts), I think that
she does have a genuine perception that her father lacks understanding
being prevailed upon by those in Lebanon, and particularly by her cousin Mr Abi
Ghosn. Not only was she a convincing witness,
but on occasions when challenged
in cross-examination, it was clear that her version of events was correct,
particularly as to the
content of the phone calls to her father in September and
October of this year.
47 Her unchallenged affidavit evidence is that she
spoke to her father in July of 2008 after he had been re-admitted to hospital;
he “seemed confused and forgetful” and was unable, at times, to
recognise her voice and repeatedly asked “Who?”.
He told her that
he was in hospital in Melbourne, Australia, and remained adamant notwithstanding
her advising him to the contrary.
this evidence.
48 I also accept that on 29 August she spoke to her father and
told him of the sales of the Comfort Inn and Carlton Hotel, to which
“That’s not right, that’s not right”, and then asked Ms
Moussi to have Mr Nott and Mr Roache call
49 Ms Moussi was cross-examined
her that certain aspects
of the conversation were incorrect. The
cross-examination appeared to be based upon detailed instructions as to what was
not said during the course of the phone call. In fact, it transpired
that Ms Moussi had recorded the conversation on her mobile
phone. The relevant
parts were as follows:
“SOPHIE: Johnny sold the Carlton Hotel for $1
ANTOINNE: Five million?
SOPHIE: One, one.
ANTOINNE: No, not that.
SOPHIE: And he sold the Comfort Inn for $800,000.
ANTOINNE: Nothing’s sold, Sophie.
SOPHIE: It has been sold.
ANTOINNE: Who?
SOPHIE: It’s been sold to Elie’s partner Salim Naoul.
ANTOINNE: No.
SOPHIE: Salim Naoul, it’s been sold.
ANTOINNE: No, no, is it? I’ll check it
And then later in the conversation:
“SOPHIE: Did you make an affidavit, did you sign
a power of attorney to Johnny?
ANTOINNE: He told me nothing’s been sold, everything’s still there.
I’ll check with him.
SOPHIE: Who told you?
ANTOINNE: Johnny.
SOPHIE: Dad, do you really believe what he’s telling you?
ANTOINNE: Well, I don’t know, we’ll have to check.
SOPHIE: Dad, who are you going to believe? Me, your own daughter that’s
never lied to you, or your lawyer, or this scumbag
that has been scamming?
ANTOINNE: Tell Kevin Roach to ring me.
SOPHIE: I will.
ANTOINNE: OK? If they did that, I put them in gaol.
SOPHIE: Dad, we’re working on it, believe you me.
ANTOINNE: Huh?
SOPHIE: We’re working on getting them in gaol, don’t you worry.
ANTOINNE: All right,
50 It also emerged in the cross-examination that Ms Moussi had recorded a
further telephone call with her father on 15 October.
In the course of that
phone call, Mr Moussi told her “I don’t want anybody to
interfere in my business except for Johnny”
and reminded by Ms Moussi of
the sale of the properties, said “I’m aware of all of this.
It’s nobody’s
51 The evidence
relating to the two phone calls cuts both ways. Whilst it demonstrates Sophie
Moussi’s accuracy in terms of
her version of the phone calls it also
illustrates that her father had, at least on the second occasion, an awareness
of the events
surrounding this hearing and the sale of the properties.
accept the evidence of both Mr Nott and Mr Roache which was not the subject of
challenge. The significant parts of their evidence
can be stated succinctly.
Mr Nott had been appointed as Mr Moussi’s Attorney earlier in the year
with an enduring Power of
until Mr Moussi’s departure for Lebanon, there had not been a
suggestion that Mr Moussi was unhappy or dissatisfied with
Mr Nott, who had
been an advisor, confidante and friend for several
Nor was there any suggestion of a
change of heart in terms of the arrangements set in place at the start of the
year. After Mr
Abi Ghosn’s unannounced visit on 20 August, both Mr Nott
and Mr Roache endeavoured to get in contact with Mr Moussi to determine
wishes. In a phone call on 5 September when Mr Moussi was at the hospital, each
of them regarded him as being confused. Mr
Roache’s unchallenged evidence
of the conversation (to which both he and Mr Nott were a party on a loudspeaker
phone) is as
“He asked me what was going on and I asked him whether he wanted James and
myself to continue to act on his behalf and he stated
quite definitely that he
did, that he had not authorised the sale of either the Carlton Hotel or the
Comfort Inn and that he did
not authorise the transfer of any money from his
accounts. Without any warning, he asked if I could ring him back in fifteen
I returned the call after about seventeen (17) minutes and the telephone was
answered by his brother Lee Moussi (“Lee”)
who said Antoine was too
sick to speak to me, he was being attended to by the medical staff and that I
should ring back in a couple
Approximately one (1) hour later when I was in my car travelling to Melbourne I
took a call on my mobile phone and it was Antoine
who said rather hurriedly that
John was to be responsible but that he wanted James to continue to be his
Accountant and he would
like to sit down with James and John and sort everything
out. The call ended after the brief comments but during that conversation
the first conversation with Antoine, there were voices in the
background.”
53 I accept their evidence on this issue. I also accept their evidence in
relation to the difficulties they have had in getting
in touch with
Mr Moussi whilst in Lebanon, which seems, in the absence of a desire by
others to prevent contact with him, to be difficult
to comprehend.
significant reservations about the several documents signed by Mr Moussi which
endeavour to explain the conversation with
Mr Nott and Mr Roache as being due to
medical treatment or, assert his desire to remove Mr Nott as his
For reasons that I will explain
shortly, I have no confidence in these documents being a true expression of
his intentions, albeit
that I accept that the documents bear his
55 Dr Saliba examined Mr Moussi on 7 August, 2 September and 26
October. Two of his medical reports were
and he also gave evidence via
video link. Dr Saliba appears to be a general practitioner with no
specialist qualifications in neurology
or neuropsychology. He does not appear
to have any specialty experience in the assessment of the mental capacity of
aged patients.
He was not a treating doctor and had no knowledge of
Mr Moussi until that day. He had, however, reviewed Mr Moussi’s
56 Dr Saliba was requested by members of Mr Moussi’s
family to attend the hospital and examine Mr Moussi on 7 August. He described
Mr Moussi as being in hospital for dyspnoea and chest pain. He said that he was
in good general health and that he was –
“fully conscious, he answers all questions
precisely and clearly, he also has normal will and awareness which makes him
of commitment and responsible of every act, procedure and contract he
makes. He has infallible memory, he remembers the far and
near past. He is
also aware of his properties and the way he wants to use the same. He is well
directed in time and space, he knows
the current day, month, season and year.
He knows where he lives and the people living with
57 He concluded that Mr Moussi enjoyed normal mental and psychological capacity
and was capable of legally performing any procedure
Dr Saliba examined Mr Moussi
again on 2 September 2008 at his home and reached the same conclusion. He
stayed on with him after
the examination and discussed
He saw him again on 26 October
and was of a similar view.
58 Dr Saliba did not carry out a physical
examination. No tests to determine his mental functioning were carried
His evidence is based on questions
and answers of Mr Moussi.
Mr Moussi told
him that he had properties in Australia, was divorced with a daughter and wanted
to make a Power of Attorney in
case his condition worsened.
59 Dr Abi Akl
examined Mr Moussi on 2 October 2008 at his
He also has, as far as I can
tell, no specialist qualifications other than that of a doctor of internal
diseases. His evidence
was that Mr Moussi had, at that time, full knowledge of
time and place, enjoyed all his mental powers and he had the capacity to
legal procedures such as executing Powers of Attorney with full awareness,
consciousness and responsibility.
60 Dr Abi Akl carried out a physical
examination, however no tests to determine his mental functioning were
administered. He, it
appears, simply asked Mr Moussi a series of questions
concerning date and place of birth, certain events and his current
circumstances.
The first issue: Did
Mr Moussi have the relevant capacity to execute the three Powers of
The submissions of the parties
61 Mr Panna SC, who appeared for Mr Abi Ghosn, correctly pointed out that the
issue was not the manner in which Mr Abi Ghosn had
exercised his Powers of
Attorney, nor was it related to whether there was any breach of his duty. He
submitted that the central
issue was that of Mr Moussi’s capacity at the
time of the execution of the three Powers of Attorney. If the court was
that Mr Moussi had the relevant capacity, then it should make
declarations accordingly and order delivery up of the documents held
Roache and Principle Focus. He argued that the appropriate test for determining
capacity was that set out by the High
Court in Gibbons v
which required the donor to
understand the nature of the transaction relative to the particular instrument
being executed. He contended
that there was no cogent evidence that Mr Moussi
did not understand the nature of the Powers of Attorney that he was executing.
He relied upon the evidence of Dr Saliba and Dr Abi Akl. He asserted that the
discussions between Sophie Moussi and her father by
telephone which became
demonstrated that, far from being
confused, Mr Moussi knew what was going on. He pointed out that Sophie
Moussi’s opposition
was not so much based upon a real issue as to capacity
but rather as to the disposition of properties in which she had, at least,
arguable interest being a beneficiary under the discretionary trusts. He also
argued that parts of Mr Abi Ghosn’s evidence
and Sophie Moussi’s
evidence demonstrated ratification of the actions of Mr Abi Ghosn. Finally, he
contended that provided
the court was satisfied as to capacity, then there was
no good reason for it not to make the declaration sought by his client.
Houghton QC, who appeared with Mr Anger for Mr Moussi, adopted the arguments of
Mr Panna and posited that the relevant test
as to capacity was that the court
only need be satisfied that the mind and memory of Mr Moussi was
sufficiently sound to enable
him to know and understand the purport of the
respective Powers of Attorney at the time he executed them. Any suggestion that
understanding should be more specific was, he contended contrary to
authority. He contended, relying upon the evidence of the medical
practitioners, Mr Moussi had more than adequate mental capacity at the time
he executed the two Powers of Attorney on 7 August 2008
and on 18 September
2008. He pointed to certain aspects of Dr Saliba’s various examinations.
He submitted that the Court
should draw no adverse inference from Mr
Moussi’s failure to give evidence by video link, contending also that one
should infer
that he was not capable of giving such
63 Mr McNab who appeared for Principle Focus and Coulter
Roache, accepted that Gibbons v Wright was the starting point on the issue
the capacity, but that the decisions in Re
and Ranclaud v
refined the test and that this court
should give effect, particularly, to the test posited by Young J in Ranclaud.
This required
the donor to know not only of the general effect of the Powers of
Attorney but also the specific things that could or could not be
done without
further reference to the donor. The nub of his submission was that if the
donor’s affairs are complex, the question
of capacity needs to be
determined in the context of an understanding of specific transactions that
might be entered into by the
Attorney. It was on this issue, he contended, the
evidence led to support the proposition that Mr Moussi had capacity should be
analysed closely. He pointed to the evidence of both Mr Nott and Mr
Roache, which was in effect unchallenged, as to conversations
they had with
Mr Moussi which demonstrated a degree of confusion. He also pointed to
inconsistencies in Mr Moussi’s conduct
in relation to the revocation of
Mr Nott’s Power of Attorney, as well as deficiencies in the detail of
the medical evidence.
He also argued that, in addition to determining the
question of capacity in relation to the execution of the three Powers of
it was also necessary to resolve whether Mr Nott’s Power of
Attorney had been validly revoked. He also submitted that it was
necessary to
determine whether the purported exercise by Mr Abi Ghosn of the Powers of
Attorney was for the proper purpose of the
Powers. He concluded his submissions
by reciting the valid concerns (in my view) of each of his clients as to the
actions of Mr
Abi Ghosn but accepted that if the court finds that the Powers of
Attorney are valid, then his clients will deliver up documents
as required by
64 Mrs Marks, on behalf of Ms Moussi, initially contended that
there was an issue surrounding the formalities of the execution of
Lebanese Powers of Attorney. I understood her ultimately to accept that
the documents before the court were notarised as
true copies of the original and
not to persist with this submission. In relation to capacity, she also pointed
to a number of inconsistencies
in the behaviour of Mr Moussi and emphasised
his failure to give evidence. She focused, as had Mr McNab, on the
behaviour of Mr
Abi Ghosn and his lack of credibility. She, like Mr McNab,
contended that the medical evidence did not take the plaintiff’s
enough. The issue was more than that of a general capacity to understand what
he was doing, she said, but that he needed
to understand exactly what specific
transactions Mr Abi Ghosn was entering into on his behalf. There was no
legal basis, she argued,
for a ratification of the powers of attorney if the
donor did not have capacity at the time of execution of the power. In any
she disputed that any of Mr Moussi’s subsequent actions could
constitute a ratification of the Power of Attorney.
Burden of proof
65 In Kantor v Vosahlo,
Ormiston J, in the
context of an argument as to the capacity of a testator, said as follows in
relation to the burden of proof:
“... if circumstances are shown to have existed which throw doubt on the
capacity of a testator or testatrix validly to have
executed a will, whether
raised by evidence of old age, mental infirmity, suspicion of undue influence or
of fraud, or the like,
then that prima facie case of the propounder will be held
not to be sufficient to justify a grant to the propounder. As the High
Worth v Clasohm
, ‘A doubt being raised as to the existence
of testamentary capacity at the relevant time, there undoubtedly rested upon the
plaintiff the burden of satisfying the conscience of the court that the
testatrix retained her mental powers to the requisite
66 Buchanan and Phillips JJA said as follows:
“One starts with the proposition that, for a
deceased to have acted with testamentary capacity, he or she must have acted
sound mind, memory and understanding with reference to the particular will.
Williams, J. put it succinctly when he said – ‘Usually the evidence
is such that the question upon whom the onus of
proof lies is immaterial, but it
is clear to my mind that, although proof that the will was properly executed is
prima facie evidence
of testamentary capacity, where the evidence as a whole is
sufficient to throw a doubt upon the testator’s competency, then
must decide against the validity of the will unless it is satisfied
affirmatively that he was of sound mind, memory and
understanding when he
executed it...’
As indicated, there is ample authority of long standing to justify this
statement of the law... [In]
Symes v Green
... Cresswell, J. said...
“If a will, rational on the face of [it is] shewn to have been executed
and attested in the manner
prescribed by law, it is presumed, in the absence of
any evidence to the contrary, to have been made by a person of competent
understanding.
But if there are circumstances in evidence which counterbalance
that presumption, the decree of the Court must be against its validity,
the evidence on the whole is sufficient to establish affirmatively that the
testator was of sound mind when he executed
67 I note, in passing, that McKenzie J, in Caldwell v
McClelland,
took a differing view in
relation to a Power of Attorney executed under the Powers of Attorney Act 1988
(Qld), but under that Act
there was a statutory presumption in favour of lawful
68 In relation to the burden of proof there is no reason, as far
as I can see, for the purpose of determining capacity to distinguish
testamentary capacity and the capacity to execute a Power of Attorney. I will
apply, therefore, the approach taken by the
Court of Appeal in Kantor.
Accordingly, once the question of Mr Moussi’s capacity to exercise
the Power of Attorney is challenged
and there is prima facie evidence to support
the challenge, then the onus of proof rests upon Mr Abi Ghosn to
demonstrate that Mr
Moussi had the capacity to execute the Powers of
Attorney. Mr Nott had known Mr Moussi for over 30 years and was one of his
business confidantes. Mr Roache also knew him well. I am
satisfied on the basis of the unchallenged evidence of Mr Roache and Mr
to the contents of the phone call of 5 September, as well as Ms
Moussi’s evidence as to the state of her father’s
mind in July and
August that there is a genuine doubt as to Mr Moussi’s capacity to
understand what he was authorising when
he executed the various Powers of
Attorney in August and September 2008.
The test of capacity
69 In Gibbons
Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ
said as follows:
“that the mental capacity required by the law in respect of any instrument
is relative to the particular transaction which
is being effected by means of
the instrument and may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of
that transaction when
it is explained... Ordinarily the nature of the
transaction means in this connection the broad operation, the ‘general
of the instrument; but in some cases it may mean the effect of a
wider transaction which the instrument is a means of carrying
70 Gibbons stands for the proposition Mr Houghton and Mr Panna argued, that the
Court need only be satisfied that Mr Moussi at the
time of execution of each of
the relevant Powers of Attorney had an understanding of the general purport of
the relevant Power of
Attorney and no more. However, the qualification
contained in the closing words means that the rule is not without
exceptions.
71 In two cases decided since Gibbons in the context of Powers of
Attorney in the United Kingdom and New South Wales, somewhat differing
approaches have been taken to the test.
Lord Hoffman held that the understanding
of the nature and effect of an enduring Power of Attorney will be satisfied if
understood:
attorney would have complete authority over the donor’s affairs;
attorney could do anything with the donor’s property that the donor could
have done himself or herself;
authority would continue if the donor became mentally incapacitated; and
in that event,
the power would become irrevocable without confirmation by the court.
73 His Lordship referred to two extreme examples. At one end of the scale the
donor could not be expected to pass an exam on the
provisions of the Enduring
Powers of Attorney Act. On the other hand, it would not be sufficient if all
that was appreciated was
that “It gave Cousin William power to look after
his property”.
74 In Ranclaud v
Cabban Young J said:
“Such a power permits the donee to exercise any
function which the donor may lawfully authorise an attorney to do. When
considering
whether a person is capable of giving that sort of power one would
have to be sure not only that she understood that she was authorising
look after her affairs but also what sort of things the attorney could do
without further reference to
His Honour went on to say:
“It would seem that no one explained to these
doctors before they gave their opinion the words of Cockburn CJ in his classical
exposition of the law in Banks v Goodfellow
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
is essential to the exercise of such a power that a testator shall understand
the nature of the act and its effects;
shall understand the extent of the
property of which he is disposing; shall be able to comprehend and appreciate
the claims to which
he ought to give effect
75 In Gibbons v Wright, the High Court referred with apparent approval to what
was said by Hodson LJ in In the Estate of
“One cannot consider soundness of mind in the air, so to speak, but only
in relation to the facts and the subject-matter of
the particular
76 In a recent article in “Mental Capacity Powers of Attorney and Advance
Health Directives",
the authors suggest
that if the Ranclaud test is to be applied, it necessitates the following
considerations:
the nature and
extent of the assets to be managed (at least in a broad sense);
the decisions
likely to be made on the donor’s behalf; and
• the ability of the attorney to carry out the tasks involved.
the general Gibbons test is applied, then the question is, did Mr Moussi
understand the purport of the Power of Attorney at
the time of execution on
7 August 2008 and 18 September 2008. On the other hand, if the Ranclaud
test was to be applied, I would
need to be satisfied that Mr Moussi had a
more intricate understanding of the consequences of the Powers of Attorney, and
in particular
the actions that could be taken by Mr Abi Ghosn in relation to the
companies and the trust properties.
78 In my view, the Ranclaud test should
be accepted. It is consistent with Re K in requiring more than just an
appreciation of the
purport of a Power of Attorney and is not inconsistent with
what was said in Gibbons particularly in the light of the reference to
Estate of Park. Each instrument and its execution is to be examined in
accordance with the accompanying circumstances. Indeed,
the facts of this case
demonstrate amply why the Ranclaud test should be applied in relation to complex
matters. The two properties
which have been sold are the property of two
trustee companies which owe fiduciary obligations to the beneficiaries. As Mr
was the sole director of the companies, he in a practical sense was the
trustee. Application of the Ranclaud test means, I think,
that it must be
proved that Mr Moussi knew that when he executed the Powers of Attorney, he
was giving Mr Abi Ghosn control over
trust properties in a real, if not
legal, sense. He did not, in my view, need to understand all the intricate
parts of the transactions
that Mr Abi Ghosn was about to enter into. But given
that there were significant assets, it was necessary that he understood at
time of the execution of the Powers of Attorney that Mr Abi Ghosn would have the
ability to transfer the shareholdings and the
directorship of the trust
companies to others (including himself) and to effect the sale of the properties
which were the subject
of the trust deed at a price determined by Mr Abi
Analysis of the medical evidence
79 The medical evidence of the two
doctors is highly relevant to the determination of Mr Moussi’s capacity.
I do not accept
the submission made by counsel for Ms Moussi and Messrs
Nott and Roache that a doctor should necessarily elicit from the person an
understanding of every aspect of the particular financial transactions which may
be undertaken on his behalf pursuant to the Power
of Attorney. However, the
Court must be affirmatively satisfied, based on the medical and any other
evidence, that the donor had
the requisite capacity to understand the matters
I have set out
80 Essentially, Mr Abi
Ghosn’s case on this issue turned on acceptance of the medical evidence of
the two doctors in preference
to any other contradictory evidence as to
Mr Moussi’s mental state between July and September.
Saliba and Dr Abi Akl were satisfied that Mr Moussi had a full understanding of
what was going on around him and was aware
of the consequences of the documents
signed by him. Unequivocal acceptance of their opinions would mean that Mr
Moussi had the
requisite level of understanding.
82 The question then is the
extent to which I can rely upon these medical witnesses, absent Mr Moussi, as to
the level of Mr Moussi’s
understanding. The reality is that Dr Abi Akl
and Dr Saliba each saw him for a short period of time in his hospital room or at
surrounded by relatives. Neither were responsible for his treatment.
Neither gave me any real insight as to the nature of his condition.
have been of far more assistance to have evidence from a doctor or doctors
treating Mr Moussi at hospital. Such doctors
could have provided information as
to his overall medical condition and their assessment of his mental capacity,
having seen him
over, one assumes, several months, including the times at which
there was apparent confusion and lack of
understanding.
No such evidence was
83 There are other significant qualifications attending their opinions
as to his capacity. First, Dr Saliba had no familiarity whatsoever
Moussi’s past history or condition, other than inspecting the hospital
file on the day he was summonsed to the hospital.
Dr Abi Akl is in the same
position, perhaps less informed, as he did not have the hospital
84 Secondly, neither Dr Saliba or Dr Abi Akl has neurological or
neuropsychological qualifications or any specialty in aged care which
enable one to place greater confidence in their opinions as to the capacity of a
76 year old to exercise proper mental functioning,
particularly if that
functioning related to business matters. Although Mr Houghton placed
considerable significance upon the fact
that Dr Saliba had visited Mr
Moussi’s house subsequently and conversed with him about politics, I am
not sure this takes his
evidence much further. The ability to discuss politics
does not convince me that he was of sound mind.
85 Thirdly, it does not
appear that there was any physical examination carried out by Dr Saliba
and the extent of Dr Abi Akl’s
examination is not clear. More importantly
no neuropsychological or neurological tests were
undertaken.
Both doctors simply asked a
series of questions and obtained responsive answers. Dr Abi Akl’s
examination appears to have
been similar to that of Dr Saliba; no tests, just a
number of questions about dates, places and persons.
86 Fourthly, Dr Saliba
who had access to the hospital file could not remember if there was any evidence
in the hospital file as to
forgetfulness although he thought it would be in his
report; but he had not kept any notes of his examination with Mr Moussi. Indeed
he could not remember what particular medication Mr Moussi was
None of this encourages confidence
in his opinion.
87 Finally and critically, it is impossible to reconcile the
accounts of Dr Saliba as to “infallible memory” and “memory
the far and near past” and that of Dr Abi Akl that “he enjoys all
his mental powers”, with that of Ms Moussi,
Mr Nott and Mr Roache
which demonstrate inconsistent behaviour, confusion and forgetfulness, all
consistent with failing mental
88 In summary, whilst I accept
that there was an ability on the part of Mr Moussi to answer certain questions
posed by the doctors,
I do not think the evidence is any stronger than
Mr Moussi’s “evidence” and his failure to give
evidence on oath
89 Mr Anger, junior counsel for Mr Moussi, travelled and
conferred with Mr Moussi in Lebanon. During the course of the trial, after
ruled that their reports were inadmissible under
Evidence Act
Abi Akl and Saliba gave evidence by video link. Mr Moussi did not. Vickery J,
at the first hearing in the Practice Court,
suggested that the easiest way to
resolve the question of the capacity of Mr Moussi was to arrange a video link.
Nothing was done
by Mr Abi Ghosn to arrange such a link.
90 Mr Moussi was
represented by Senior Counsel and junior counsel. Mr Abi Ghosn was represented
by Senior Counsel. Mr Moussi’s
and Mr Abi Ghosn’s counsel made
common cause in supporting the application. No explanation was proffered for
his absence in
giving evidence by video-link. During the course of the trial
and during closing submissions, I inquired as to the absence of Mr
Moussi could have been called by Mr Abi Ghosn or by his own counsel. His
evidence could, one way or another, have assisted
in resolving his current
mental capacity and by inference his likely capacity in the past three months as
well as addressing a number
of other specific matters which I will refer to in a
moment. I readily conclude that a considered forensic decision was made for
not to give sworn evidence. By comparison, it is worth noting that in Ranclaud,
the donor gave evidence and his Honour’s
impression of her condition and
mental capacity was a significant matter in the consideration of the trial
91 The unchallenged evidence of Ms Moussi was that in July her father
was confused and forgetful. The evidence of Mr Nott, Mr Roache
and Ms Moussi as
to their conversations on 5 September demonstrates a real lack of understanding
on the part of Mr Moussi as to what
had transpired with his affairs and in
particular the sale of the two properties. That evidence is also inconsistent
with the documents
signed by Mr Moussi in the days after 5 September.
Moussi’s evidence could have explained or qualified his telephone
discussions with Ms Moussi between July and October;
and his telephone
discussions with Mr Nott and Mr Roache. Moreover, he could have confirmed
that he understood at the time of executing
the respective Powers of Attorney
what Mr Abi Ghosn was authorised to do, particularly in respect of the transfer
of shares and directorships
in the companies and the sale of the trust
properties. Notwithstanding invitations from the Court to take what seemed to
be an obvious
course to resolve the issue as to his capacity, he chose not to
give evidence and Mr Abi Ghosn chose not to call him as a witness.
view, in a case such as this, a Jones v
inference may readily be drawn on
the basis that Mr Moussi would not have assisted the case for Mr Abi Ghosn
in demonstrating the
adequacy of Mr Moussi’s mental capacity at the time
of the execution of the Powers of Attorney. There was in this case the
evidence of Ms Moussi, Mr Nott and Mr Roache which point to a lack of capacity
on the part of Mr Moussi at the relevant times.
As I have said, I accept their
evidence. The failure to call Mr Moussi to contradict that evidence permits
increased weight to
be given to it and allows inferences to be more confidently
drawn in favour of the case put by Ms Moussi, and Messrs Nott and
94 However, the failure of Mr
Moussi to give evidence, which I have concluded to have been the subject of
a careful and considered
forensic decision, is more significant than just the
drawing of these inferences. Where a person has within his or her knowledge
power to contradict a contrary version and fails to give evidence, then that is
a matter to be taken into account in evaluating
all the evidence. This
proposition was stated more than 200 years ago by Lord Mansfield in Blatch v
and has been reaffirmed by the High
Court recently in Swain v Waverley Municipal
and Russo v
It is of real significance when
the contest involves a determination of the extent of the knowledge or
understanding of the person
95 In this State the principle
was stated by Lush J in the following terms in Earle v Castlemaine District
“The principle discussed
by the majority judges in Jones v Dunkel, supra, goes, however, beyond
acceptance of evidence or of
suggested inferences of evidence and extends to the
resolution of doubts and ambiguities. In Tozer v Kemsley & Millbourn
Ltd. V Collier’s Interstate Transport Service
at p. 282 Fullagar J. said:
“The silence of one party cannot, of course, fill the place of actual
evidence on an issue, but
it may serve to resolve a doubt or an ambiguity,
especially where the facts are peculiarly within the knowledge of the silent
96 The failure of Mr Moussi to give evidence is not of such
little weight that it may be brushed aside, as was faintly suggested by
counsel. Whilst it is true that I have had the benefit of seeing a
taken of him in hospital shortly
after the execution of the Power of Attorney, it does not assist me, as I agree
with the submission
by Mr McNab and Mrs Marks that Mr Moussi appeared
to be reading from a script. I also place little store in the documents
by Mr Moussi evidencing satisfaction with Mr Abi Ghosn’s actions
and endorsing the removal of Mr Nott and
I think it fair to assume
that these documents were not drawn up by Mr Moussi and whilst his signature is
appended to them, I have
little, if any, confidence in whether that these
reflect his true wishes. Indeed, his failure to give evidence highlights the
inadequacies
of documents prepared by others and which he has signed.
two tape recordings of his conversations
with his daughter, Sophie, were relied upon by Mr Houghton. I think that there
is some force in the submission that Mr Moussi, on
both occasions, may have
been simply trying to assuage his daughter, who had understandable concerns
Mr Abi Ghosn. My impression of the second
phone call was that Mr Moussi was endeavouring to convince his daughter to
refrain from
getting involved in this proceeding. On the other hand, the first
phone call is open to two interpretations, namely, a lack of understanding
the part of Mr Moussi as to what was going on or, alternatively, endeavouring to
put his daughter off the scent. Given that the
conversation occurred on the
same day as the conversation with Mr Nott and Mr Roache, I think that there was
real confusion on the
part of Mr Moussi. Again, the true picture may have
emerged if Mr Moussi had given evidence.
98 I reject the suggestion of Mr
Houghton that Mr Moussi’s evidence could not have assisted me materially
in determining his
level of mental capacity. To the contrary I think his
evidence would have been highly relevant. On the basis of a report of a
I accepted that Mr Moussi could not
travel to Australia. However I reject the suggestion that I should infer that
he was incapable
of giving evidence by video-link. Dr Saliba, Dr Abi Akl and Dr
Chami did not suggest that he was so infirm as to be unable to give
evidence. He was able to travel to the Australian Embassy in September. He
conferred with Mr Anger in Lebanon. There is no
acceptable explanation for his
failure to give evidence by video link.
99 In my view, the failure to call Mr
Moussi is significant and is not readily explained by references to bits and
pieces of unsworn
and untested evidence. It is important in assessing the
divergent accounts of Mr Moussi’s mental state at the relevant
100 I am conscious, in determining the issue of the capacity of Mr Moussi, that
I must put to one side the actions of Mr Abi Ghosn
other than those relevant to
his credit which contaminates his evidence relevant to capacity. As Young J
stated in Re C (TH) and
the Protected
“There is no room in the legislation for benign paternalism. A person is
allowed to make whatever decision she likes about
her property, good or bad,
with happy or disastrous effect, so long as she is
101 I need to be satisfied that when Mr Moussi signed the Powers of Attorney he
understood not only the nature of the instrument
but also the practical
consequences in a general sense. He needed to understand that Mr Abi Ghosn had
an enduring power to transfer
the shares and control of the trustee companies to
others, including himself. He had to understand that the assets held by these
companies could be transferred by Mr Abi Ghosn to anyone including Mr Abi Ghosn
himself at any price he saw fit.
102 In my view, the degree of confusion and
lack of understanding as to the sales and Mr Nott’s appointment
deposed to by Ms
Moussi, Mr Nott and Mr Roache points to a clear lack of
relevant understanding and cognitive function. The failure of Mr Abi Ghosn
call Mr Moussi is significant, as I have tried to explain. He of all people
could have spoken as to his understanding of what
was going on in July, August
and September, and particularly what he considered he was authorising. I am
not, as I have said, persuaded
by the evidence of Dr Abi Akl and Dr Saliba.
I cannot reconcile their accounts of his understanding with the evidence of Mr
Mr Roache or Ms Moussi who knew him far better than the doctors. The
lack of any evidence from a treating doctor as to his level
of mental acuity
during this time reinforces my acceptance of the evidence of those who know him
well consistent with the principles
set out in Jones v
103 The burden of proof rests
with Mr Abi Ghosn in establishing that Mr Moussi had the requisite capacity and
in my view it has not
been established.
104 It is not necessary for me to
address the question of proper purpose of the exercise of the powers given my
conclusion. In any
event given the nature of the declaration sought I am not
convinced that such a determination is within the scope of this hearing.
The second issue:
Ratification of the Powers of Attorney
105 Mr Panna argued that, even if Mr Abi Ghosn executed the transfers of the
shares and the directorships and therefore the consequent
sales of the property
without authority, his actions had been ratified by Mr Moussi’s
expressions of approval of his actions.
106 This proposition can, I think, be
rejected at the outset. The authorities are clear that if a donor lacks
capacity at the time
of execution of the Power of Attorney actions taken
pursuant to that power cannot be subsequently ratified by the donor. As McNair
J put it in Kuenigl v
Donnersmarck
“... the short
answer in my judgment is that no one can ratify an agreement or adopt an act
which could not lawfully have been
made or done at the time when the agreement
was purported to be made or the act to be done on behalf of the person
ratifying”.
107 In any event the matters relied upon by Mr Panna do
not, in my view, amount to ratification. He relied upon Mr Abi Ghosn’s
evidence that when he returned to Lebanon, he explained to Mr Moussi his actions
and why he had carried them out, particularly the
Ringwood deal and received his
Absent other reliable evidence
(of which there is none) for the reasons I have set out, I do not accept
Mr Abi Ghosn’s evidence
as to discussions he had with Mr Moussi upon
his return. Not only is his credit in issue but this is not consistent with Mr
statements to his daughter and accountant.
108 Mr Panna also
relied upon subsequent statements by Mr Moussi as constituting ratification. As
I have already said, I regard exhibits
P5, P6, P7 and P8 as being of little
assistance, particularly in the absence of Mr Moussi giving sworn evidence.
I also reject the
proposition that the discussion by Mr Moussi with
his daughter, Sophie, on 15 October 2008
may amount to ratification of Mr Abi Ghosn’s actions. That conversation
needs to be looked at in context, as I have already
indicated. It is
inconsistent with a number of earlier conversations and again, absent Mr Moussi
giving sworn evidence, I do not
think that it amounts to any more than Mr Moussi
telling his daughter to get out of the case.
109 There was no ratification by
Mr Moussi of Mr Abi Ghosn’s actions.
Third issue: Revocation of Mr Nott’s
Power of Attorney
110 Although this issue was not squarely before me, counsel for both Mr Abi
Ghosn and Mr Nott sought that I resolve this issue.
111 On 6 September, Mr
Moussi executed a revocation of James Nott’s Power of Attorney in
On 9 September, Mr Moussi revoked
Mr Nott’s enduring Power of Attorney under
Instruments
Section 125I
Instruments
provides for an approved form by which to revoke an enduring Power of
Attorney. However,
“(1) This division does not limit the events by
which or the circumstances in which an enduring Power of Attorney –
(a) is revoked whether orally or in writing or in another way; or
(b) is terminated by implication or operation of
Sub-section (2) provides that an enduring Power of Attorney may be revoked in
any way that a Power of Attorney may be revoked.
113 In Collier and Lindsay
Powers of Attorney in Australia and New Zealand, the following is said:
“It appears established
that a power given by deed need not be revoked by deed, that may be revoked
informally, even by
114 The deed of revocation witnessed in Lebanon by Elie Sadek and Tony Saliba on
9 September states that the revocation has been
freely and voluntarily
entered into by Mr Moussi in their presence and that at the time of signing it
appears to each of the witnesses
that Mr Moussi had the capacity necessary to
make the revocation.
115 Mr Panna submits that it is clear in the light of
the two revocations executed by Mr Moussi that Mr Nott no longer has a
of Attorney and that Mr Moussi’s intention is apparent. I do not
agree. The two revocations were signed within only a short
time of the two
telephone conversations of 5 September, which demonstrated a totally different
view on the part of Mr Moussi not
only as to the sale of the properties (in the
conversation with his daughter) but also as to the termination of the services
Nott (in the conversation with Mr Nott and Mr Roache). What is clear is
that there was a flurry of activity in Beirut in the next
five days after that
conversation to endeavour to make it apparent to the world that Mr Moussi
intended to revoke Mr Nott’s
Power of Attorney – the execution and
signing of the various documents and the video tape of Mr
I have already indicated my
reservations as to the adequacy of these materials.
116 The question of Mr
Moussi’s intention to revoke Mr Nott’s Power of Attorney was a
matter well within the knowledge
of Mr Moussi if he had chosen to give evidence
himself or had been called by Mr Abi Ghosn. None of the other witnesses to the
or to the various documents have been called to give evidence. The
case on this point rests on the two documents of revocation and
the documents
apparently drawn up by others and signed by Mr Moussi, and what appears to be a
stage managed video. None of this
material, when viewed in the light of all the
evidence, satisfies me that Mr Moussi had the relevant capacity to revoke Mr
Power of Attorney. I think his actions at or around that time are
clouded with confusion and lack of understanding.
117 I propose to make a
declaration that I am not satisfied that the documents executed on 6 September
2008 and 9 September 2008 validly
revoke Mr Nott’s enduring Power of
Attorney executed on 10 January 2008.
118 Mr Abi Ghosn has not persuaded me that Mr Moussi had the capacity to execute
the Powers of Attorney. I decline to make the declaration
sought by Mr Abi
Ghosn, in paragraph 1 of the amended generally endorsed writ and that
application is dismissed.
119 I also reject the claim by Mr Abi Ghosn to have
Principle Focus and Coulter Roache deliver up documents belonging to
That application is dismissed.
120 I will make a declaration
concerning the revocation of the Powers of Attorney as I have set
121 In my view, there is a prima facie case that Mr Abi Ghosn has perjured
himself in relation to the affidavit sworn in this Court.
I direct that these
reasons, the transcript and a copy of his original affidavit be provided to the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
I also think that it is likely that the
documents filed with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission are
false insofar
as they represent that he resided at an address in Mooroolbark. I
direct that these materials also be provided to ASIC for its consideration
relation to infringements of the Corporations Law. The relevant exhibits will
be retained on the court file.
Affidavit of Mr Nott p.1-2 [2] – [5]
Affidavit of Mr
Supplementary affidavit of Mr Roache [2] – [8]
Exhibit JN1 to the affidavit of Mr Nott
Exhibits P9 and P10
Affidavit of Ms Moussi [16]
Exhibits KR14 to KR20 to the supplementary affidavit of Mr Roache; T70 and
The accounts of Mr Ghosn’s behaviour differ markedly but are of no real
relevance. Affidavit of Mr Abi Ghosn [12], Affidavit
of Mr Nott p.2-3
[3] and [4]
Exhibit SM1
Exhibit KR3
to the affidavit of Mr Roache
Affidavit of Mr Roache [15]
Transcript p.9
Exhibit KR12 to the affidavit of Mr Roache
Affidavit of Mr Anger [2]
Exhibit AM3
Collier and Lindsay
Powers of Attorney in Australia and New Zealand
(1992) p. 7 – p. 8
Section 107
Instruments Act
gives effect to a general Power of
Attorney provided it is “in or to the effect of the form set out in
Schedule 12”.
Division 2 of
gives effect to the making of an
enduring Power of Attorney subject to compliance with its provisions.
Exhibits P9 and P10
In the Will of Joseph Vickerman
[1895] VicLawRp 43
(1895) 21 VLR 236
[1918] VicLawRp 40
[1918] VLR 257
Nygh & Davies
Conflict of Laws 7
(2002) 325-327
Corporations Law
Exhibit KR3
to the affidavit of Mr Roache
Affidavit of Ms Moussi [14]
Affidavit of Ms Moussi [18]
Exhibit AM1
Exhibit JN1 to the affidavit of Mr Nott
Affidavit of
Mr Nott p. 2
Exhibits P5, P6 and P7
Exhibits AM2 and AM4
Exhibit AM2
Exhibit AM3
[1954] HCA 17
(1953-1954) 91 CLR 423
at 444 - 445
Exhibits SM4
[1988] 1 Ch 310
ConvR 55-385
[2004] VSCA 235
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 CLR
[2004] VSCA 235
[1999] QSC 182
, [13] and [14]
[1954] HCA 17
(1953-4) 91 CLR 423
[1988] 1 Ch 310
[1988] 1 Ch 310
[1988] 1 Ch 310
NSW Conv R 55 – 385, 57, 548
Conv R 55 – 385, 57, 548
[1954] P 112
Collier, Coyne and Sullivan,
Australian Legal Monographs
, Federation
Press, p.44
Compare the evidence from treating doctors and geriatric specialists available
to Smith J in
Brokenshire (deceased)
[1998] VSC 183
(1998) 8 VR 659
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Industries v Langmuir
(1997) 1 VR 125
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
[2005] HCA 4
[2003] HCA 53
[10] and [11]
[2003] HCA 53
[10] and [11]
[1974] VicRp 86
[1974] VR 722
, 733, cited with approval in
Kidman v Costorplan
[26]. See also [27] – [28]
[1956] HCA 6
(1956), 94 CLR 384
Exhibit P5,
Exhibits SM4 and AM1
Exhibit AM5
[1999] NSWSC 456
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
(1955) 1 QB 515
, 539; see also Collier and Lindsay “
Attorney in Australia and New Zealand
” (1992); p 67 and 68
T95 – 96, 147 - 148
Exhibit AM1
Exhibit KR11 to the affidavit of Mr Roache
Exhibit KR12
to the affidavit of Mr Roache
Collier and
Powers of Attorney in Australia and New Zealand
(1992) p. 220
Exhibits P5, P6, P7 and P8
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (375 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter