URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2020/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
David Jacobs at Ingadwi Pty Ltd premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2020] VCGLR 34 (19 November 2021)
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
In the matter of an application by Ingadwi Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of the decision to
grant a renewable limited licence for the premises trading as Ingadwi Pty Ltd
Flat 2, 15 Field Street, Caulfield South.
Commission:
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell, Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
19 November 2021
Date of Reasons:
19 November 2021
The Commission has determined to vary the decision of the
Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for a renewable limited
licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix One.
Deirdre O’Donnell
Deputy Chair
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Original Application
1. On 8 September 2020, Ingadwi Pty Ltd (the
) applied to the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
for a renewable limited licence under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
in relation to
premises located at Flat 2, 15 Field Street, Caulfield South (the
Original Application
2. The Applicant sought a renewable limited
licence to supply liquor in the form of themed tasting packs for in-person
In-person tasting events)
and online tasting events (
Online tasting
). The Applicant further sought to supply packaged liquor for online
3. The Original Application consisted of:
(a) a ‘Declaration of Associates’ by the Applicant and the director
of the Applicant;
(b) a Liquor Licensing Questionnaire completed by the director of the Applicant;
(c) a ‘Declaration of Right to Occupy’ the Premises by the Applicant
by way of a lease in the name of the Applicant’s
(d) a copy of a certificate evidencing that the director for the Applicant
completed a ‘New Entrant Liquor Licence Training’
course on 1
September 2020;
(e) a copy of a certificate evidencing that the director for the Applicant
completed a responsible service of alcohol (
) course on 2 September
(f) a copy of the Residential Tenancy Agreement for the Premises under the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
, dated 17 December 2019;
(g) a copy of ASIC’s ‘Current and Historical Company Extract’
for the Applicant dated 27 August 2020; and
(h) a copy of ASIC’s ‘Record of Registration of a Company’ for
the Applicant of 12 March 2015.
4. The Applicant also made the following submissions addressing the
‘scale and scope’
requirement in support of the Original Application:
(a) The Applicant intends to provide liquor tasting events to individuals,
businesses, social groups and charities either online
or as In-person tasting
events at customers’ premises.
(b) Tasting events will be limited to no more than thirty (30) individuals at
any one time.
(c) Tasting packs will be limited to five (5) samples with no more than thirty
(30) mls of liquor per sample.
(d) Trading hours for In-person and Online tasting events will be limited from
10.30 am to 10.30 pm, seven (7) days a week, with
online orders available at any
(e) Prices for tasting events and tasting packs will be at the premium end of
the cost spectrum.
(f) The Applicant’s website will require all visitors to confirm that they
are of legal age (at least 18 years old) as a condition
to access the website
and prior to purchasing any tasting events or tasting packs.
5. On 8 September 2020, the Commission wrote to the Applicant seeking the
following information regarding scale and scope of the activities
(a) The website address from which the Applicant
proposes to trade.
(b) The following details in relation to the provision of off-site catering
(i) the types of premises in which the Applicant proposes to supply liquor;
(ii) whether food will be served as part of the services provided;
(iii) how often tasting events will be conducted;
(iv) the intended maximum duration for tasting events;
(v) whether security and staff will be provided for tasting events;
(vi) the location for the proposed tasting events; and
(vii) the manner in which the Applicant will protect the amenity of the area in
which tasting events will be conducted.
(c) The manner in which the Applicant will obtain the liquor prior to it
being served at pre-booked tasting events or delivered as
part of an online
packaged liquor order.
6. On 8 September 2020, the Applicant wrote to the Commission with
submissions addressing the limitations in scale and scope of the
activities of
the business, which can be summarised as follows:
(a) The Applicant proposes to trade mainly under www.thewhiskyparliament.com.au.
However, the Applicant has also registered www.whiskytastingaustralia.com
“feeder" and may register www.thewhiskyrepublic.com.au in the future.
(b) The Applicant intends to supply liquor at In-person tasting events by making
David Jacobs (the sole director and shareholder
of the Applicant) available for
businesses, social groups or charities that wish to engage the Applicant’s
services at a venue
of their choice. The Applicant submitted the following in
answer to the Commission’s specific request for information about
In-person tasting events:
(i) the Applicant expects to conduct tasting events in private or commercial
(ii) the Applicant will encourage a food element to the tasting events;
(iii) the Applicant expects to conduct one tasting event per month, however this
number might increase around holiday periods such
as Christmas;
(iv) tasting events will last between one-and-a-half to two hours;
(v) the Applicant will encourage a security element to the tasting events;
(vi) the Applicant will provide In-person tasting events only in Victoria;
(vii) the Applicant will ensure that the amenity of the area in which tasting
events will be conducted is protected.
(c) The Applicant will order the liquor as required prior to each tasting
event, rather than storing it at the Premises.
7. On 8 September 2020, the Applicant wrote to the Commission with further
submissions regarding scale and scope:
(a) The Applicant will provide tasting events to individuals, businesses, social
groups or charities either online or at venue of
their choice. The Applicant has
no intention to host any tasting events at the Premises.
(b) The Applicant will focus on delivering whisky tasting events, however other
spirits will be offered at a later stage if there
is sufficient demand for it.
(c) The Applicant will deliver Online tasting events via a conferencing platform
such as Zoom or GoToMeeting.
(d) In-person tasting events will be limited to 30 customers at any one session.
Each customer will receive only one tasting pack
per event containing no more
than six (6) samples of spirit, with each sample being of no more than thirty
(30) mls of spirit for
the event. That means that no more than 180 mls of spirit
will be delivered to each customer per
(e) The tasting packs will be themed by either spirit type, country of origin,
style or any other distinguishing aspect of a spirit
that may be of interest to
a customer.
(f) The Applicant’s website will offer tasting packs to those who are not
able to attend an Online tasting event but still
want to enjoy the tasting
experience. Tasting packs will also be limited to no more than six (6) samples
of spirit and no more than
thirty (30) mls of spirit.
(g) The Applicant will refer customers who enquire about purchasing a full
bottle of spirit to a distributor or reseller, and receive
a commission for it.
The Amended Application
8. On 9 September 2020, the Applicant amended the Original Application and
submitted that liquor would be stored, prepared and shipped
from an off-site
location, and that the director of the Applicant would host Online tasting
events from the Premises without any
liquor present (the
Application
9. On 10 September 2020, a copy of the Amended Application was served on the
Chief Commissioner of Victoria Police (
Victoria Police
). On 5 October
2020, Victoria Police advised the Commission that they did not object to the
grant of the Amended Application.
10. On 7 October 2020, an authorised delegate of the Commission (
) determined to grant the Amended Application pursuant to section
26(1) of the LCR Act, subject to the following conditions:
This is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
consumption at pre-booked functions
liquor only when such liquor is ordered by mail, telephone, facsimile
transmission or Internet.
RESTRICTIONS ON SALES
The licensee must not use the above licensed premises to provide
shopping for liquor
liquor stocks or stores
the display
of liquor for sale
collection of liquor by customers
SUPPLY OF LIQUOR AT FUNCTIONS
The function must be held in an area of a premises that is set aside for
the exclusive use of persons who have booked the function
which is attended only
by those persons and their guests. This licence does not allow the supply or
consumption of liquor at public
events which are attended by the general public.
Any premises where the supply and/or consumption of liquor occurs under
this licence is considered to be a licensed premises for the
purposes of the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
. The area set aside for the exclusive use of
persons who have booked the function for the supply and/or consumption of liquor
be clearly delineated from any other area. This condition does not apply to
private residential premises.
This licence does not authorise the supply of liquor for consumption on
the following premises:
already licensed under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
where the current licence has ceased to be in force within the previous 6 months
or has been suspended
where the Commission is currently considering an application for a licence.
RESPONSIBLE SERVICE OF ALCOHOL
All staff involved in the service of liquor must have completed an
approved RSA training program within the previous three years.
Licensees must
ensure evidence of completion of the RSA training program (e.g. certificates) is
available for inspection at the request
of Victoria Police or a gambling and
liquor inspector.
The licensee will not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of
the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises where the
supply and/or consumption of liquor occurs under this licence.
SUPPLY OF PACKAGED LIQUOR FOR ONLINE/ELECTRONIC SALES
The supply of liquor is restricted to tasting packs containing 5 x 30mL
samples of liquor.
A maximum of one tasting pack may be supplied per person, per
DELIVERY OF LIQUOR
Liquor must be delivered to a person aged 18 or over. The licensee must
ensure that delivery arrangements include requiring evidence
of age where
appropriate. Liquor must not be delivered and left at unoccupied premises on the
same day the order is received.
Liquor may only be delivered during the following hours:
a.m. and 11 p.m on any day other than Sunday, Good Friday, ANZAC Day or
Christmas Day.
a.m. and 11 p.m on Sunday.
noon and 11 p.m on ANZAC Day.
No deliveries are permitted
on Christmas Day or Good Friday.
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE DISPLAYED ON WEBSITE/S
The following notice must be prominently displayed on the licensee's
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
To supply alcohol to a person under the age of 18 years (Penalty exceeds
For a person under the age of 18 years to purchase or receive liquor.
(Penalty exceeds $700)
The licensee is required to prominently display the number of this
licence on the website.
ORDERS FOR LIQUOR
Orders for the supply of liquor may be taken at any time on any day.
Internet orders may only be taken through the following website(s):
www.thewhiskyparliament.com.au
www.whiskytastingaustralia.com
www.therumrepublic.com.au
TRADING HOURS
For supply as part of pre-booked functions
ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 10.30pm
On any other day Between 10.00am and 10.30pm
For the supply of packaged liquor for online/electronic sales
At any time.
Original Decision
The Review Application
11. On 9 October 2020, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the
Original Decision (the
Review Application
12. The Applicant made the following submissions in support of the Review
Application:
(a) The supply of liquor will be limited to tasting packs containing five (5)
samples of no more than thirty (30) mls of liquor each.
This amounts to 150 mls
of liquor per tasting pack.
(b) To limit the supply of packaged liquor for online/electronic sales to one
(1) tasting pack per person, per day, is restrictive
to the Applicant’s
business as it will be offering over twenty different themed tasting packs.
(c) The minimum cost for a tasting pack containing 150 mls of whisky will be
$60. This contributes to minimise the potential misuse
or abuse of alcohol,
since it would be significantly cheaper to purchase a standard bottle of alcohol
in the market.
(d) The Applicant proposes to increase the limitation on the supply of packaged
liquor for online/electronic sales from one (1) to
four (4) tasting packs per
person, per day.
13. On 10 November 2020, the Commission wrote to the Applicant to seek
further submissions regarding the Applicant’s business
model and the
number of tasting packs that the Applicant intended to supply at each In-person
and Online tasting event. Particularly,
the Commission sought clarification as
to whether customers attending the Applicant’s tasting events would be
able to attend
back-to-back events on the same day or whether consecutive
tasting events would only be offered to different groups of participants.
14. On 10 November 2020, the Applicant responded to the Commission and
submitted the following information regarding scale and scope:
(a) The Applicant has created over twenty themed tasting packs for customers to
explore and sample.
(b) The price of the tasting packs will range between $68 and $108. This means
that the price for a tasting pack containing 150 mls
of spirit will have the
equivalent market price of a bottle of 700 mls of mid-range spirit.
(c) To limit the supply of packaged liquor for online/electronic sales to one
(1) tasting pack per person, per day, constrains the
Applicant’s business
and adds a penalty to customers who wish to try a variety of tasting packs and
save on postage.
(d) The primary goal of the tasting events is for customers to taste and
discover the whisky, rather than drinking it and becoming
intoxicated.
(e) The Applicant will be unlikely to conduct more than one tasting event per
day with the same group of participants, unless it
involves different
15. On 21 December 2020, the Commission wrote to the Applicant to seek
further submissions regarding the Applicant’s proposed
limitation to the
supply of liquor at off-site events/functions and the procedure by which the
Applicant intends to receive commissions
from vendors.
16. On 21 December 2020, the Applicant responded to the Commission and
submitted the following information:
(a) Limit the supply of liquor at In-person tasting events/functions to one (1)
tasting pack per person, per day.
(b) The Applicant will serve customers by preparing the tasting pack containing
five samples of whisky in advance and placing each
sample on seated tasting
(c) The Applicant will refer customers who enquire about purchasing a full
bottle of whisky to the relevant vendor and potentially
receive a commission for
it, although at this point in time there are no such arrangements in place. The
Applicant stated that this
is because the purpose of its business is to educate
customers and expose them to different varieties of whisky, rather than to sell
them additional whisky.
17. On 10 November 2020, the Applicant advised the Commission that it was
agreeable to have the matter determined on-the-papers without
the need to attend
LEGISLATION AND THE TASK BEFORE THE COMMISSION
The Commission’s internal review power
18. Division 2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
Under section 152, the Original Decision is a reviewable
decision, and the
Applicant is eligible to apply for review of that decision. The Review
Application was made under section 153 of
the LCR Act.
19. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the reviewable decision; or
(b) sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate
20. Under the LCR Act, an application for a renewable limited licence may be
contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an
uncontested application
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections are
received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under
21. The Review Application is uncontested, as was the Original Application,
as no objections were received. The Commission on review
stands in the shoes of
the original decision maker and, in respect of an uncontested application, must
(a) grant the application (and may do so subject to
conditions)
(b) refuse to grant the
application
Exercising the internal review power
22. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
the Commission, in exercising its internal review function, to have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the
Minister under section 5 of the VCGLR
23. The objects of the LCR Act are set out in
section 4(1):
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate
controls over the supply and consumption of liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
24. Section 4(2)
of the LCR Act provides further that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
25. In exercising the internal review power, the
Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker
(b) may consider further information or
(c) may, in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any
matter the Commission considers relevant, make any
enquiries the Commission
considers appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to
be heard concerning the
application
26. The Commission considers that while the
grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2) of the LCR Act are relevant
considerations,
the ultimate determination of an uncontested application is to
be made pursuant to section 44(1) and 157(1) of the LCR Act at the
discretion of
the Commission, and with reference to the objects of the LCR Act at section
27. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
28. Section 44(1) of the LCR Act states that the
Commission must grant or refuse to grant an uncontested application at any time
the expiry of the period for objection under Division 5 (or that period as
extended under section 174 of the LCR Act).
29. Section 44(2)(b) of the LCR Act empowers the Commission to refuse to
grant the Review Application on various grounds, including
granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area in which the premises to which the
application relates are situated;
granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or
abuse of alcohol.
30. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act provides that the
Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is satisfied that the scale
scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
Conduct of an inquiry
31. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate.
32. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply
with the rules of natural justice.
MATERIAL BEFORE THE COMMISSION
33. The Commission on review had before it and considered all materials
received by the Delegate as referred to in paragraphs
to 9 above.
34. The Commission also had before it and considered additional information
and evidence including:
(a) the Original Decision, made on 7 October 2020, with reasons for decision
dated 13 October 2020;
(b) the Review Application, including submissions, received on 9 October 2020;
(c) further submissions made by the Applicant, dated 10 November 2020 and 21
December 2020, as referred to in paragraphs 14 and 16
DETERMINATION OF THE REVIEW APPLICATION
Issues for determination
35. In order for the Commission to make its decision on review, two principal
issues require consideration:
(a) firstly, whether the Commission is satisfied that the scale and scope of the
proposed supply of liquor in the Review Application
is limited in nature,
particularly having regard to the maximum patron capacity at pre-booked
functions and the increase in the number
of tastings packs to be supplied online
from one to four; and
(b) secondly, whether the Commission should exercise its discretion under
section 44(1) of the LCR Act to grant a renewable limited
licence, having regard
to the objects of the LCR Act, in particular harm minimisation, which is the
primary object.
Limited in scale and scope
36. The Commission must be satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in nature,
in accordance with
section 26 of the LCR Act.
37. The Commission has carefully considered the evidence before it in the
Review Application. The Commission notes that the scale
and scope of the
proposed supply of liquor has changed to what was proposed in the Original
Application.
38. The Commission has had regard to the following aspects of the Review
Application in considering whether the scale and scope of
the supply of liquor
the subject of the licence is limited in nature:
(a) the type of liquor product that is to be supplied to customers as a part of
the proposed business. The Commission finds that
the Applicant will only be
supplying tasting packs of whisky and considers this to be a limitation in
relation to the scale and scope
of the supply of liquor in this case, where the
business is that of In-person and Online tasting events focused on offering
a journey of discovery for each whisky;
(b) the supply of liquor at In-person and Online tasting events. The Commission
notes that the supply of liquor at In-person and
Online tasting events will be
limited to one tasting pack containing five samples of no more than thirty (30)
mls of whisky, per
person, per day. The Commission also notes that the Applicant
will only supply liquor to customers who hold a valid ticket and, for
tasting events, will place the five samples of liquor for each person in advance
at seated tasting tables. The Commission
considers that the scale and scope of
the supply of liquor is sufficiently limited for a business conducting In-person
tasting events/functions;
(c) the supply of packaged liquor for online/electronic sales. The Commission
notes that the supply of packaged liquor for online
sales (other than Online
tasting events) will be limited to four tasting packs containing five samples of
no more than thirty (30)
mls of whisky, per person, per day. The Commission
finds that four tasting packs amount to 600 mls of whisky, which is less liquor
than what is contained in the average standard bottle in the market. The
Commission further notes that the Applicant’s websites
will require all
customers to confirm that they are at least 18 years old as a condition to
access the website and prior to purchasing
any tasting events or tasting packs.
The Commission considers that the scale and scope of the supply of liquor is
limited for a business
selling packaged liquor online; and
(d) the proposed customer numbers for off-site
functions. The Commission notes that each In-person or Online tasting
event/function
will be conducted with a maximum of 30 customers per event.
39. The Commission is satisfied, having regard to the combination of matters
above, together with the conditions in Appendix One,
that in all the
circumstances the proposed scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject
of the licence sought in the Review
Application is limited in nature and
therefore meets the requirement in section 26 of the LCR Act.
Grounds of refusal set out in section 44(2) of the LCR Act and general
40. The Commission has considered the objects of the LCR Act, as well as the
grounds for refusal identified in section 44(2) of the
LCR Act, in determining
the Review Application and whether to vary the Original Decision and exercise
its discretion to grant a renewable
limited licence.
41. The Commission does not consider that any particular amenity concerns are
likely to arise from the proposed supply of liquor at
In-person tasting events.
The Commission has considered the limited number of customers permitted in each
session, the educational
nature of the proposed business and the limited
quantity of whisky that will be supplied in each event. Further, the imposition
the standard amenity condition will assist in reducing any potential impact
on the amenity of the relevant area.
42. The restrictions proposed by the Applicant as to hours of operation, the
range of liquor that will be supplied and the maximum
number of customers
permitted in each tasting event are able to be reflected in the conditions on
the licence. Those conditions provide
a measure of protection relevant to the
amenity of the area.
43. The conditions in Appendix One will also constrain the Applicant when
supplying liquor at tasting events. Patrons will need to
hold a valid ticket to
access the premises where the event will be conducted, and will be encouraged to
remain seated during the
event. This will reduce the risk profile of the supply
of liquor that can occur under the limited licence, thereby assisting in the
minimisation of amenity concerns and risk of misuse or abuse with supply of
44. The Commission finds that the price of one tasting pack containing 150
mls of whisky will have the equivalent market price of
a bottle of 700 mls of
spirit, and that the price of four tasting packs containing 600 mls of whisky
will be significantly higher,
thereby assisting in the minimisation of the risk
of misuse or abuse with supply of liquor through online sales.
45. The Commission notes that Victoria Police has not raised any objection to
the licence application, and that the director of the
Applicant has provided
evidence of undertaking and successfully completing the relevant RSA and New
Entrant Training.
46. Having regard to the objects of the LCR Act and the grounds for refusal
identified in section 44(2) of the LCR Act, the Commission
is satisfied that
granting the Review Application would be consistent with those objects and
appropriate in all the circumstances.
47. After considering all the material before it,
and taking into account all necessary considerations under the legislative
the Commission has determined to vary the decision of the Delegate
and grant the renewable limited licence subject to the conditions
Appendix One.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Ms Deirdre
O’Donnell, Deputy Chair, Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Andrew Scott, Commissioner.
Appendix One
This is a renewable limited licence and
authorises the licensee to supply:
consumption at pre-booked functions
packaged liquor
only when such liquor is ordered by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission or
RESTRICTIONS ON SALES
The licensee
must not use the above licensed premises to provide for:
shopping for liquor
browsing liquor
stocks or stores
the display of
liquor for sale
the collection
of liquor by customers
SUPPLY OF LIQUOR AT FUNCTIONS
(CONDUCTED EITHER IN-PERSON OR ONLINE)
The supply of liquor is
restricted to tasting packs containing 5 x 30mL samples of liquor.
of one tasting pack may be supplied per person, per day.
A maximum patron
capacity of 30 patrons at any one function.
The function must be held in
an area of a premises that is set aside for the exclusive use of persons who
have booked the function
which is attended only by those persons and their
guests. This licence does not allow the supply or consumption of liquor at
events which are attended by the general public.
Any premises
where the supply and/or consumption of liquor occurs under this licence is
considered to be a licensed premises for the
purposes of the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
. The area set aside for the exclusive use of persons who have
booked the function for the supply and/or consumption of liquor must
delineated from any other area. This condition does not apply to private
residential premises.
This licence does not authorise the supply of
liquor for consumption on the following premises:
already licensed under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
a premises where
the current licence has ceased to be in force within the previous 6 months or
has been suspended
a premises where
the Commission is currently considering an application for a licence.
RESPONSIBLE SERVICE OF ALCOHOL
All staff involved
in the service of liquor must have completed an approved RSA training program
within the previous three years.
Licensees must ensure evidence of completion of
the RSA training program (e.g. certificates) is available for inspection at the
of Victoria Police or a gambling and liquor
The licensee will not cause or permit
undue detriment to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with
the premises where the supply and/or consumption of liquor occurs
under this licence.
SUPPLY OF PACKAGED LIQUOR FOR ONLINE/ELECTRONIC
SALES (OTHER THAN FOR ONLINE FUNCTIONS)
The supply of liquor is
restricted to tasting packs containing 5 x 30mL samples of liquor.
of four tasting packs may be supplied per person, per day.
DELIVERY OF
Liquor must be delivered to a person aged 18 or over. The
licensee must ensure that delivery arrangements include requiring evidence
age where appropriate. Liquor must not be delivered and left at unoccupied
premises on the same day the order is received.
Liquor may only be
delivered during the following hours:
between 9 a.m.
and 11 p.m on any day other than Sunday, Good Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas
between 10 a.m.
and 11 p.m on Sunday.
between 12 noon
and 11 p.m on ANZAC Day.
No deliveries are permitted on
Christmas Day or Good Friday.
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE DISPLAYED ON
The following notice must be prominently displayed on the
licensee's website/s:
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
To supply alcohol to a person under the age of 18 years (Penalty
exceeds $17,000)
For a person under the age of 18 years to purchase or
receive liquor. (Penalty exceeds $700)
The licensee is required to prominently display the number of this
licence on the website.
ORDERS FOR LIQUOR
Orders for the
supply of liquor may be taken at any time on any day.
Internet orders may
only be taken through the following website(s):
www.thewhiskyparliament.com.au
www.whiskytastingaustralia.com
www.therumrepublic.com.au
TRADING HOURS
For supply as
part of functions
ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 10.30pm
other day Between 10.00am and 10.30pm
For the supply of packaged
liquor for online/electronic sales
At any time.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated
See section 26 of
the LCR Act.
The Applicant
proposed to increase from 5 to 6 the number of samples of whisky contained in
each tasting pack.
Applicant proposed to reduce from 6 to 5 the number of samples of whisky
contained in each tasting pack.
Section 157(2) to (5) of the LCR Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act further
prescribe how the Commission is to undertake internal
Conversely, a
“contested application” is defined in section 3(1) as being
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections are
received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for those
objections (or that period as extended under
sections 44, 49 and 157.
Act, section 44 and 157.
Act, sections 9(3) and (4).
See further
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA
, which confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of
the LCR Act and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing
decisions (although not to the exclusion of the other
LCR Act, section
LCR Act, section
LCR Act, section
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.99 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter