URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1310.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Luxury Developments PL v Banyule CC Luxury Developments PL v Banyule CC [1998] VICCAT 1310 (22 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/82533
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. P337/98
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 11 DECEMBER AND
22 DECEMBER 1998
P.G. O'LEARY MEMBER
Applicant for Review/
Permit Applicant Luxury Developments Pty. Ltd.
Responsible Authority Banyule City Council
Respondents/Objectors B. Fitt and others
Referral Authority Vic Roads
NATURE OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of the failure to grant a permit within the prescribed time.
Three dwellings on a lot
270 Lower Heidelberg Road, Ivanhoe East
Land and Dimensions
Frontage 27.37 metres to Lower Heidelberg Road and 50.6 metres to Hartlands
Road. The site is irregular in shape. Site area is
1032 square metres.
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Banyule Planning Scheme - Residential C (Heidelberg) Zone
APPEARANCES
Mr. J. Cicero, Solicitor, represented the responsible authority.
Ms. G. Natalizio, Town Planner, represented Vic Roads on the first day of the
review hearing.
B. Fitt, J. Morrell, J. Ziogas, A. Natalizio, S. Hamilton-Green and S. McCarthy
(on the first day only), Objectors, represented themselves.
Mr. A. Hooper QC, represented the Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant. Mr.
Hooper called as witnesses M. Ryan, Town Planner, M.
Turnbull, Traffic
Engineer, and A. Clarke, Town Planner.
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
1. Mr. Hooper sought a copy of the Officer's report as his client has
experienced difficulties obtaining information about the reasons
responsible authority's lack of response and the basis for the responsible
authority opposing the application. Mr. Cicero
tabled a copy of the Officer's
2. Mr. Cicero tabled Council's attitude to the application for permit and had
indicated the responsible authority would have refused
the application had it
been in a position to do so. Other letters on file were made available to the
applicant to peruse.
3. Mr. Hooper raised concern about Ms. Moles' hearing the application for
review. Ms. Moles, pursuant to
Section 108(3)
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act
decided that the Tribunal should be
reconstituted. Pursuant to Section 108(3) of the VCAT Act, the President
reconstituted the Tribunal
by appointing full time member Peter O'Leary. At
the reconvening of the hearing no objection was raised to the reconstituted
PLANNING CONTROLS AND POLICY
4. The subject site is zoned Residential C (Heidelberg) of the Banyule Planning
Scheme. A permit is required pursuant to Clause
128-2 of the planning scheme
to use land for more than one dwelling on a lot. The relevant purposes of the
Residential C (Heidelberg)
Zone as it applies to this application are:
"* To provide the opportunity for a variety of residential densities and
dwelling types.
* To encourage higher residential densities in areas near rail transport
stations and stops, near centres of commercial and community
activity and near
areas shown as district centres on the strategic framework plan, having regard
. The nature of the area, including the amenity and residential
. The capacity of surrounding roads to carry any increase in traffic.
. The capacity of existing essential services.
. Whether the development will require improvements to the existing roads or
essential services.
* To ensure that if land is used for a residential building, dual occupancy
or a multi-unit development, adequate provision is made
for daylight, privacy
and landscaping and that the amenity of occupants of adjoining land is not
* To ensure that the amenity of residential areas is maintained or
* To facilitate development which complements or contributes positively to
the enhancement of the existing streetscape, character
and appearance of the
local environment in which it is proposed.
* To encourage high quality urban design architectural practices which are
consistent with the purposes listed above."
5. Lower Heidelberg Road is a Main Road in the planning scheme. A permit is
required pursuant to Clause 17 of the Regional Section
of the Planning Scheme
to obtain access from a new development to a main road. An application must be
referred to Roads Corporation
in accordance with
and Environment Act
6. Clause 21 - The Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing, applies to
this application. The purpose of the go of the Good
Design Guide for
Medium-Density Housing is to ensure that the use or development o land for
medium density housing is in accordance
with this guide and to:
"* promote medium density housing which improves housing choice;
* provide efficient and sustainable medium density housing which
encourages urban consolidation, energy efficiency and makes better
existing infrastructure;
* ensure that new development maintain or enhance existing neighbourhood
character and amenity;
* ensure the provision of adequate daylight, open space, car parking and
neighbouring
* Develop a consistent approach to the assessment of medium-density
housing applications."
7. The relevant statutory policies are found in the following clauses:
* Clause 3.3A Residential Development - Medium Density Housing.
* Clause 14-1 Pattern of Future Metropolitan Development.
* Clause 14-2 Housing and Urban Consolidation.
8. Banyule City Council has prepared a new Banyule Planning Scheme in
accordance with the provisions of the Victoria Planning Provisions.
new planning scheme, it is proposed to rezone the subject site to Residential 1
(Clause 32.02). The major noticeable
change is that a permit would be required
for development of three dwellings on a lot (whereas at present a permit is
required to
use land for three dwellings). The new planning scheme has been
exhibited and submissions have been made to the responsible authority,
to date the planning scheme has not been formally adopted.
9. Banyule City Council has prepared a Municipal Strategic Statement (MSS) in
line with the new Banyule Planning Scheme. The MSS
sets the strategic
direction for land use development in the municipality by identifying nine key
planning elements for consideration
and nominates a series of aims and
strategies for each. These include:
* A high quality living environment, including a high level of amenity
and high quality residential character.
* Additional dwellings to stabilise Banyule's residential
population.
* A greater diversity of affordable housing opportunities in appropriate
locations to address the needs of those seeking to reside
in Banyule.
Strategies:
* Facilitating and encouraging higher density housing closer to public
transport, commercial and community facilities, without impacting
adversely on
the amenity or character of the surrounding areas.
* Encouraging greater diversity of housing in terms of style, size,
affordability and tenure.
* Protecting and enhancing residential streetscapes and the character,
amenity and safety of residential neighbourhoods.
* Encouraging high quality architecture and urban design."
10. Banyule City Council has recently prepared and exhibited its Neighbourhood
Character Study. It has also previously prepared
an Interim Neighbourhood
Policy - July 1998. At the time of consideration of this application for
review, the Neighbourhood Character
Study was still on exhibition and had not
been adopted by the responsible authority.
11. Clause 16-2 of the Planning Scheme provides Guidelines for consideration of
applications for permit. The responsible authority
must consider the following
matters before deciding on an application, the conditions of a permit or
approval of a development plan:
"* If appropriate, the matters set out in
of the Act.
* The State, regional and municipal planning policies.
* The purpose of the zone, reserved land or control.
* Orderly planning of the area.
* Proximity of the land to any reserved land.
* Effect on the amenity of the neighbourhood.
* Any matters required to be considered in the zone, reserve or
12. The site, No. 270 Lower Heidelberg Road, East Ivanhoe, is located on the
north-east corner of Lower Heidelberg Road and Hartland
Road. Title
particulars described the land as Lot 1, Lodge Plan No. 8402, Certificate of
Title Volume 5344, Folio 793. There is
a covenant on the title that restricts
development of the land to no more than one dwelling. The site is an
irregular, almost triangular
block with an area of 1,032 square metres and is
currently occupied by a single storey dwelling with an attached garage, two
and front and rear landscaped areas. The site has a fall of
approximately 5 metres from east (at the rear) to the west (corner of
Heidelberg Road and Hartland Road). The site is elevated above street level
with masonry retaining walls situated along the
entire Lower Heidelberg Road
frontage and partly along the Hartland Road frontage. It is noted that the
property boundary appears
somewhat distorted due to the raised garden bed
locations and the placement of planting in the road reserve along both Lower
Road and Hartlands Road. Vehicular access is provided to the site
via an existing crossover to Lower Heidelberg Road which is a
extending between Rosanna Road to the north and Heidelberg Road to the
south-west. A disused crossover is also located
in the Hartland Road area
abutting an unconstructed right-of-way. The Lower Heidelberg Road, Hartlands
Road and McArthur Road intersection
is controlled by a roundabout.
On the opposite side of Lower Heidelberg Road is the East Ivanhoe Shopping
Centre comprising a variety of convenience and specialty
shops, and a number of
small offices and a supermarket. Residential properties abut the site on the
north and west and east boundaries.
Residential properties in this area
comprise predominantly single and two storey detached houses with generous
gardens and usually
substantial tree cover.
13. Application for Permit No. P337/98 sought approval for three dwellings on a
lot. The plans and elevations show the following:
3 bedrooms, bathroom, ensuite, WIR, living room, dining room, family room and
kitchen. The northern wall of this dwelling will abut
the boundary of 272
Lower Heidelberg Road. A double car garage is provided underneath the dwelling
with access via a new crossing
in Lower Heidelberg Road.
Three bedrooms, bathroom, ensuite, kitchen, family room, dining room, living
and entry. A large balcony would be sited at the south-west
corner of the
house facing the Lower Heidelberg Road/Hartlands Road/McArthur Road
intersection. A two car garage is provided in
a sub-basement and direct access
via a new crossing in Hartlands Road.
Dwellings 1 and 2 will be set back between 4 metres and 6 metres from the Lower
Heidelberg Road property boundary. Dwelling 2 would
be set back 2 metres from
the Hartlands Road property boundary.
Three bedrooms, bathroom, ensuite, WIR, at first floor level. Kitchen, family,
dining, living, entry and study are proposed at ground
level. A two car garage
is provided to the north-west of the house via part of the existing crossover.
This dwelling is set back
between 1.4 and 2.7 metres from the property
THE APPLICATION
14. The application for permit was lodged on 11 June 1998. On 16 June 1998,
the responsible authority requested more information
site analysis and design response. The applicants submitted this information
on 13 July 1998. Subsequently
the responsible authority directed the
notification of the application pursuant to
Section 52(1)
and Environment Act
. Eighteen objections were received from
owners/occupiers of properties adjoining and in the vicinity of the subject
site. The applicant
sought a meeting with Council and objectors in an effort
to resolve the objectors' and Council officer's concerns. This was not
to. The applicant also experienced difficulties obtaining information about
the Council's attitude to the proposal and whether
a meeting could be obtained.
Eventually the applicant lodged an application for review on the basis of the
failure to decide the
application within the prescribed time. Subsequent to
the lodgement of the application for review, the responsible authority advised
that it would refuse the application for permit on the following grounds:
"1. The proposed use and development of the land fails to satisfy key
objectives and criteria of the Good Design Guide for Medium-Density
2. The proposed development fails to provide an adequate response to the
opportunities and constraints of the site.
3. The proposal is not consistent with key aims and strategies of Banyule
City Council's Municipal Strategic Statement.
4. The proposed vehicle access onto Lower Heidelberg Road would result in
the increase likelihood of traffic and pedestrian conflict
adjacent to the
5. The proposed use and development is not consistent with Council's
Neighbourhood Character Strategy Interim Policy.
6. The proposal would be detrimental to the amenity of the area and is an
overdevelopment of the site."
15. At the hearing, most parties tabled and read from their submissions. Mr.
Morrell did not read from a submission. A number of
other objectors, not
present had forwarded their comments and reasons to contest the application for
review. I was provided with
plans, elevations, landscape concept plans, shadow
diagrams, copies of other appeal decisions and many photographs depicting the
area and the neighbourhood in general. All witnesses were available for
cross-examination. I inspected the subject site and the
surrounding
neighbourhood. All of the information supplied has been taken into
consideration. I consider the application for review
should be dismissed and
no permit issue in respect of Application for Permit No. P337/98. My reasons
are as follows:
Policy Context
A great deal of the submissions referred to the character of the area. Mr.
Hooper referred to the Australand Holdings Pty Ltd case.
The Australand case
has been referred to in quite a number of applications for review concerning
medium density housing in recent
times. For the benefit of all parties, the
relevant sections of it will be repeated because it provides a valuable policy
in my consideration of this application for review. The Tribunal
"In Australand Holdings Pty Ltd v City of Boroondara and Crow and Others
(1997/47741), the Tribunal was considering a proposal for
14 two-storey
dwellings in Surrey Hills. The appeal was brought by the applicant as a result
of Council's failure to grant a permit
within the prescribed time. Amended of
the proposal were circulated prior to the appeal hearing which was not
completed in the 3
days set down for the case. The Tribunal however, expressed
a series of preliminary opinions about the proposal and the plans were
modified as a result of these observations before the heating resumed some 2
weeks later. On the issue of neighbourhood character
the Tribunal said:
"In appeals of this type, neighbourhood character is often characterised by
using descriptions of the existing neighbourhood such
Single storey dwellings predominate;
Detached dwellings on their own lots predominate;
Single dwellings on lots of 800 to 1000 square metres predominate;
and then it is argued that a particular medium density housing proposal
fails the neighbourhood character requirements of the. Good
Design Guide
because it is inconsistent with such a characteristic, and that therefore the
proposal should be rejected. This is not
the correct approach. Planning
decisions often involve striking a balance between competing policies. Urban
consolidation is an important
policy of the Planning Scheme and it of necessity
encompasses the idea of change. Neighbourhood character is one of eleven
in the Good Design Guide. The Good Design Guide requires that medium
density proposals be respectful of neighbourhood character,
it does not imply a
slavish repetition of what already exists."
On the question of the benefits to be derived from the process, the Tribunal
"The broader metropolitan benefits of urban consolidation such as, the more
efficient use of existing infrastructure. the increase
in housing choice, and
the reduction in the demand for rural land for urban expansion are often
expressed although not perhaps widely
understood. The benefits of urban
consolidation to a local neighbourhood are often overlooked. Urban
consolidation can assist in
the stabilisation of declining populations in
established suburban areas and the creation of a more heterogeneous population
Benefits of this can include, the revitalisation of local shopping
centres, the establishment of new businesses providing services
to the local
community the creation of local employment, the provision of a more stable
catchment for schools, kindergartens and
the like. Therefore, urban
consolidation is not a trivial policy and Responsible. Authorities and the
Tribunal must give it considerable
In relation to the social cohesion and the social mix, the Tribunal observed
"Another line of argument that is raised against medium density developments
and urban consolidation is that it involves the loss
of family homes or
alternatively it is the policy of the Responsible Authority to encourage the
development of family homes and that
a proposal is inconsistent with the
policy. This Tribunal believes that this argument is misconceived. Accepting
for the moment this
rather narrow conception of what constitutes a family home,
in most neighbourhoods the percentage of family homes given over to medium
density development would be relatively small, although there will be
exceptions to this particularly in the inner city In most neighbourhoods,
particularly in the more established suburbs, the number of family homes would
already exceed the number of families, and they are
not all occupied by
families. Medium density proposals can potentially free up family homes for
family use by providing alternatives
for other household types. It should not
be f assumed that medium density dwellings are not the housing type of choice
for some families.
A working single parent may prefer to devote more time to
work and being a parent than in the maintenance of a large house and
This division of the Tribunal agrees with all the above observations.
It is in the light of those comments that the present application must be
In assessing an application like this, the responsible authority, and therefore
the Tribunal, is empowered to consider those issues
which have been raised in
to 11 of this decision. It is quite often necessary to balance the
various objectives, purposes and provisions of the State, Regional
sections of the Planning Scheme. Compliance with one State objective such as
Urban Consolidation, does not necessarily
guarantee an automatic overriding of
other policy objectives and purposes. In this case the Tribunal is of the view
that the site
is suited to multi unit development because it meets a number of
State Government policies, particularly relating to urban consolidation,
to public transport, shopping and community facilities and its accessibility to
existing infrastructure. However this is
not the only consideration in this
application. It is also important to consider, amongst other things, the
relevant purposes of
the zone, established planning policy, such as the Good
Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing, Council's Municipal Strategic
(MSS) and the Neighbourhood Character Study (which has not been
adopted at this stage).
Restrictive Covenant
A restrictive covenant affects the property. This covenant limits the
development to one dwelling on the site. Mr. Hooper submitted
restrictive covenant has no bearing on the decision to be made on the planning
merits of this proposal. I agree with this
submission. Any action to remove
or vary the covenant will be the subject of a separate application and
procedures by the landowner,
and may or may not be the subject of a separate
application for review, depending on which legal course the applicant chooses
take. Whilst the area is comprised of single and two storey detached
housing, that does not necessarily prohibit the removal of
the covenant nor
does it necessarily prohibit, in a planning sense, the development of the site
for more than one dwelling.
Character of the area
impact of development
The Tribunal finds that the proposal fails to satisfy the objectives of Element
3 of the Good Design Guide as it is not sufficiently
respectful of the
neighbourhood and does not make a sufficiently positive contribution to the
character of the neighbourhood. In
addition, the proposal does not adequately
address two particular purposes of the zone, which are:
"* To ensure that the amenity of residential areas is maintained or
* To facilitate development which complements or contributes positively to
the enhancement of the existing streetscape, character
and appearance of the
local environment in which it is proposed."
The impact of two substantial houses across the frontage of the subject site,
which in itself is quite elevated, would have an overpowering
impact on the
appearance of Lower Heidelberg Road. Also the impact of the elevated two
storey dwelling on Hartlands Road would be
substantial and would detract from
the character and appearance of the area. Mr. Hooper and his planning
witnesses placed a great
weight on the Landscape Concept Plan as a method of
ameliorating the impact of the proposed three houses on the area. However, the
landscape architect was not called to explain or verify certain aspects of the
landscape concept. Whilst the design of each of the
three dwellings could be
considered to be satisfactory in themselves, the combined impact of the three
dwellings relatively close
to each street frontage is considered excessive. It
is acknowledge that land opposite the site in the East Ivanhoe Shopping Centre
has a different urban form, however there is a clear demarcation between
commercial and residential use and built form in this locality.
When visiting
the subject site and the neighbourhood, the Tribunal found the most striking
element of the area was the abundant
vegetation cover; and the subject land
contributes to this feature. On close inspection of vegetation on the subject
site, there
was no individual tree or strand of vegetation that provided good
vegetation cover, rather the mass of vegetation on the site provided
contribution to the character of the area. I was not convinced that the much
narrower front landscape areas or the proposed planting
shown on the landscape
plan would be sufficient in this case to maintain, complement or enhance the
character of the area.
Options to negate the impact of the proposed development
In an effort to resolve the negative impact of the proposed development, I
examined the possibility of setting the two front dwellings
back a further 1.5
metres from the Lower Heidelberg Road frontage (including the elevated entry
features). I also considered setting
the rear dwelling back further from the
Hartlands Road property alignment so that the entry way would be about 3 metres
and the two
storey wall about 4.5 metres (from the property boundary).
However, given the size and positioning of the three dwellings, moving
dwellings back from the street boundaries, would create other difficulties such
as reducing private open space and possibly causing
further internal
overshadowing. This leads me to the conclusion that the application for review
should be rejected. This is not
to say that three dwellings are inappropriate
on the site, it may be possible to have one or two large dwellings on the site
a combination of one or two smaller dwellings. Such matters are for the
owner/designer to resolve.
Shadow diagrams were prepared for the development. I undertook a separate
examination of the shadow diagrams using
"shadow draw".
I concur with
Mr. Clarke's evidence that shadowing is acceptable and meets the objectives and
criteria of the Good Design Guide.
However, I would be most concerned if the
open space areas as shown were reduced in order to address the matters raised
in paragraph
Solar access to rooms
Concern was raised particularly by Mr. Cicero about the adequacy of solar
access to the development and in particular to dwelling
1. I concur with Mr.
Clarke's evidence that solar access is not great but is probably adequate. It
certainly could have been better.
Open space for each dwelling is adequate. Had there been opportunity to revise
the layout of the site without reducing the size
of the private open space for
each unit, I would have done so. I note Mr. Clarke also made reference to the
inefficiency of the front
setback for private open space purposes. This may be
the case, but it needs to be remembered that the front setback provides an
opportunity for landscaping, and this in itself is a valuable aesthetic amenity
feature to the occupiers of the site and the neighbourhood
in general.
Landscaped frontages with shrubs and trees are an important feature in this
neighbourhood. I see no reason to diminish
the opportunity to retain or
enhance these features in this neighbourhood.
Vehicular Access
A new access drive will be created for Unit 1 directly off Lower Heidelberg
Road and it will replace an existing crossover which
is situated closer to
Hartlands Road. Vic Roads had expressed concern about any access from Lower
Heidelberg Road and opposed this
aspect of the development. I consider Mr.
Turnbull's evidence about the suitability of the relocated access to be
acceptable. I
consider that the revised access would be an improvement on the
current access treatment. Similarly I accept Mr. Turnbull's evidence
new garages and crossovers in Hartlands Road are acceptable from a traffic and
safety point of view. However I consider
that access into the sub-basement car
park for Unit 2 to be awkward. I could not tell properly from the drawings and
levels provided
whether the car access was acceptable or not. Had I directed a
permit be issued, I would have imposed a condition requiring more
clarification of the grade and treatment of the access ramp. I consider there
is adequate opportunity for visitor parking
in either Lower Heidelberg Road or
Hartlands Road.
Overlooking
I do not consider that the development would cause unreasonable overlooking to
any adjoining or nearby neighbour. I consider privacy
issues to be in
accordance with the objectives and criteria of the Good Design Guide.
Landscape Plan
The applicant tabled a Landscape Concept Plan which gave an indication of the
likely effect which could be produced if the landscape
plan was adopted. The
landscape architect was not called to give evidence or clarify various aspects
of the proposed landscape treatment.
Given that landscaping is one of the most
significant features in this neighbourhood, I consider the applicant should
much greater emphasis to landscape issues in the design of this
development.
Walls on the boundary
The proposal incorporates some single storey walls on the northern boundary. I
consider these to be acceptable, in fact I consider
greater use could have been
made of the existing boundary wall which abuts 272 Lower Heidelberg Road. I do
not consider that the
placement of walls on the boundary detracts from the
character or amenity of the area.
I do not consider the proposed density per se to be prohibitive in this
application. What I am concerned about is the impact of
three relatively large
houses on a site which has constraints particularly at the rear. The applicant
may find that it can achieve
three dwellings, whether they comprise one large
and two small, or two large and one small dwelling, or alternatively, the site
be suitable for two large houses. These issues are really for the owner
and his designer/architect to resolve.
The order of the Tribunal is that the Application for Review is dismissed.
Pursuant to
Section 85(1)(b)
Planning and Environment Act
the responsible authority is directed not to issue a permit in respect of
Application No. P337/98.
P.G. O'LEARY
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter