URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/272.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McLean v The King [2025] VSCA 272 (12 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0080
NICHOLAS JAY
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
12 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 272
JUDGMENT APPEALED
DPP v McLean
(County Court of
Victoria, Judge Chettle, 27 March 2025)
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
DETERMINED BY A SINGLE JUDGE PURSUANT TO
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ACT
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Application for leave to appeal against sentence – Applicant
pleaded guilty
to disposal of firearms, possession of a traffickable quantity of
firearms, other firearm offences, eight drug trafficking offences,
dealing with proceeds of crime and failure to comply with order to assist
– Total effective sentence of 4 years and
imprisonment – Co-accused sentenced to 10 months’ imprisonment with
2 year CCO – Whether unjustified
disparity in sentences – Applicant
leader in criminal enterprise – Co-accused had intellectual disability
– Disparity
justified by different roles and personal circumstances
– Whether sentence manifestly excessive – Offending objectively
serious – Sentence not manifestly excessive – Leave to appeal
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
Barbaro v The
[2012] VSCA 288
(2012) 226 A Crim R 354
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Chapman v The King
[2024] VSCA 205
Berichon v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 319
, referred to.
Counsel on the papers
Mr C Pearson
Respondent:
Mr J Sutherland (solicitor)
Vassis & Co
Respondent:
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
May 2023 Victoria Police investigated the trafficking of firearms and drugs of
dependence by the applicant and his associates.
A total of six individuals were
charged in relation to this investigation including the applicant, David
Scammell and John West.
12 March 2025 the applicant pleaded guilty to eight charges of trafficking in a
drug of dependence and one charge each of possession
of a drug of dependence,
knowingly dealing with proceeds of crime, failure to comply with order to
provide assistance, and possession
of a traffickable quantity of firearms in
addition to one rolled-up charge of disposing of a traffickable quantity of
firearms. He
also pleaded guilty to two summary charges, possessing a silencer
without a permit and disposing of cartridge ammunition to an unlicensed
On 27 March 2025 the applicant was
on Indictment
Disposing of a
traffickable quantity of
penalty units or 10 years’ imprisonment
years’ imprisonment
Traffick in a
drug of dependence
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment on each charge
Traffick in a
drug of dependence
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Possession of a
drug of dependence
penalty units
Knowingly deal
with proceeds of
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
comply with order to provide
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Possession of a
traffickable quantity of
penalty units or 10 years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Summary Offences
silencer without a
penalty units or 2 years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
cartridge ammunition to unlicensed
penalty units or 12 months’ imprisonment
Effective Sentence:
4 years and 3
months’ imprisonment
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 6 years 6 months
Parole-Period 4 years 6 months
applicant now seeks leave to appeal against sentence on the following proposed
Learned Sentencing Judge erred in the application of the parity principle, and
the principle of equal justice, in relation to
the sentences imposed on charges
1 and 9 and the related summary charge 38.
individual sentences of imprisonment imposed, together with the orders made for
cumulation and the total effective term of imprisonment
so produced, are each
manifestly excessive.
the reasons that follow, leave to appeal should be refused.
Co-accused Scammell
was sentenced by a different judge on 27 February
as follows. His sentence
forms the basis for ground 1 of this application for leave appeal.
on Indictment
Traffick in a
drug of dependence
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment (aggregate)
Disposing of a
traffickable quantity of firearms
penalty units or 10 years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment and 24 month Community Corrections
Possession of a
drug of dependence
penalty units
and discharged
Knowingly deal
with proceeds of crime
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
comply with order to provide assistance
years’ imprisonment
days’ imprisonment
Summary Offences
silencer without a permit
penalty units or 2 years’ imprisonment
days’ imprisonment
cartridge ammunition to unlicensed person
penalty units or 12 months’ imprisonment
Effective Sentence:
10 months and
24 month CCO
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 3 years Non Parole-Period 2 years 2 months
Factual summary
facts underlying the applicant’s offending are as follows.
Charges 2 & 3 —
traffick in a drug of dependence
19 June 2023 covert police operatives attended the applicant’s address and
engaged in conversation with him. During this
conversation the applicant
(a) he sold quarters, half-bags and bags of cannabis for $90, $170 and $300
respectively;
(b) the blue Holden Caprice in the driveway was his vehicle;
(c) he sold ketamine; and
(d) he could supply other drugs of dependence.
applicant also shared his mobile number and stated that the phone was always
manned by himself or his associates.
applicant then sold an ounce of cannabis which had been stored in his pocket to
covert operative (‘CO’) 362 for $200
(charge 2). Shortly
thereafter he agreed to sell CO 368 a gram of ketamine which he retrieved
from inside his address. The substance
purported to be ketamine was subsequently
found to contain 55% ketamine with a weight of 0.8g (charge 3).
Charge 4 — traffick
in a drug of dependence
2 July 2023 the applicant and Scammell met with COs on a street corner near the
applicant’s address. The applicant and Scammell
arrived in the
applicant’s vehicle. They said that they
(a) could sell pounds of cannabis and currently had possession of five pounds of
(b) usually had 10 to 15 pounds of cannabis but were still building up their
supply since being raided by the police four to six
months earlier; and
(c) could sell larger amounts of ketamine.
applicant and Scammell sold CO 368 3.5g of ketamine for $600. Before leaving in
the applicant’s vehicle they said that they
shared the same mobile number.
The substance purported to be ketamine was subsequently found to contain 53%
ketamine with a weight
(rolled-up charge) disposing of a traffickable quantity of
the conversation between the COs and the applicant and Scammell on 2 July 2023,
the applicant and Scammell also said
(a) they could get firearms;
(b) they could get home made pistols for approximately $5,000;
(c) they currently had a .222 calibre rifle for sale
(d) they wanted to get rid of the rifle as soon as possible and would sell it
for $2,500;
(e) the rifle still had the serial numbers;
(f) the rile was stolen; and
(g) they currently also had a 30-06 rifle but were not willing to sell it.
11:25 am and 8:20 pm on 4 July 2023 the applicant and Scammell
negotiated the sale of a firearm with CO 368 via text message.
8:24 pm the applicant and Scammell attended Miller Park, Boronia, with
another associate. CO 368 entered the vehicle the men
arrived in and handed
the applicant $2,500 in exchange for the firearm.
analysis identified the rifle to be a fully operational .222 Remington
manufactured, model 700, bolt action repeating rifle
which had been stolen from
an address in Kew.
2 September 2023 West and another associate of the applicant arranged to procure
more firearms that the applicant could sell to
CO 368. At 9:02 pm on
3 September the applicant sent CO 368 the following text
• Speak to the noys (sic) I can get yous more it’s the same price
and they are very clean this bloke wants 2 gone at
the same time
• Same bloke that sorted the last 1 bruv there both going for 8K tho
• Not such a rush this time lol but I’ll need an answer before
tomorrow lunch time if you want to take them bro as we’re
getting ourself
a new one asap.
11 September 2023 at 11:10 am the applicant sent CO 368 a text in the
following terms ‘Getting shit sorted just may be a
bit late onto it bro
waiting on a call back about them 2 but ayy either way bro still got stuff to be
sold today for you boys’.
At 12:06 pm the applicant sent CO 368
a follow-up text message which stated ‘We’re on bro! Rogue squire no
3 please boys 13K all up for both.’
attended a hotel in Wheeler’s Hill. The COs provided
$13,000 in return for
a 12-gauge shotgun made of timber and a .22 calibre rifle.
analysis identified the firearms to be a fully operational 12 gauge Baikal
shotgun and a Lithgow .22 long rifle. The rifle
was identified as a stolen
firearm and, due to modifications, the rifle met the definition of a
17 and 18 September 2023 the applicant liaised with West to obtains firearms and
ammunition which he then offered to CO 368. Following
this a group of three
men, including the applicant and Scammell, were observed attending a hotel at
Bayswater where they met up with
another associate. The applicant then contacted
CO 368 and organised to meet at the Mount Evelyn Football oval. At around
on 18 September the exchange occurred, wherein CO 368
provided $12,000 to Scammell, the applicant and a third associate in exchange
for a .303 calibre rifle and a .22 calibre long rifle with a shortened barrel.
The four men then had a conversation, during which
the applicant
(a) the previous and current firearms were from the same supplier;
(b) the firearm supplier was taking possession of a fully automatic rifle and a
12-gauge shotgun the following day; and
(c) the fully automatic rifle was a .202 calibre Remington with a 38–39
round capacity in a banana shaped magazine.
subsequent analysis the guns exchanged on September 18 2023 were identified as a
fully operational .22 long rifle of German make
and a Lithgow bolt action rifle,
both of which, due to modifications, met the definition of handguns. The Lithgow
rifle was identified
as a stolen firearm.
19 September the applicant organised the sale of another firearm to CO 368
via text-message. This cumulated in a text from the
applicant sent at
1:13 pm to CO 368 stating ‘Done deal boys see you lads 6pm same
spot’. At 5:47 pm the COs met the applicant,
Scammell and another
associate at the Mount Evelyn Football oval. $30,000 was handed to Scammell
while the applicant negotiated the
sale of a 12-gauge shotgun and .303 rifle to
the COs for $15,000. The COs agreed to purchase the shotgun for $5,000 and to
the automatic rifle when it was available. The applicant counted out
$4,000 of the cash and set aside $1,000 which he described as
cut’. $25,000 was returned to the COs.
firearm purchased on 19 September 2023 was subsequently identified as a fully
operational 12-guage Iver Johnson’s Arms &
Cycle manufactured shotgun
which, due to modifications, was classified as a handgun.
24 September 2023 the applicant sold CO 368 a .22 calibre assault rifle
with suppressor for $25,000 at the Mount Evelyn Football
oval. The applicant
told CO 368 his firearms dealer had wanted $28,000 but he had negotiated
the price back down. An associate of
the applicant and West arrived with the
firearm. The firearm was identified as a fully operational .22 calibre, Stum
Ruger manufactured,
semi-automatic rifle. The suppressor was identified as
meeting the definition of a silencer (summary charge 38 — possess a
silencer without a permit).
13 October 2023 the applicant sold CO 370 a fully operational .303 calibre
Birmingham Small Arms Shireley manufactured rifle for
$6,000. This was exchanged
at the hotel in Wheelers Hill. The applicant, Scammell and a third associate
were present. During the
exchange Scammell stated:
(a) he had an associate that was producing pen pistols whilst working his
legitimate job (the applicant quoted $1500–$2000
per pen pistol);
(b) there was potential for an UZI to be sold for $30,000; and
(c) all the firearms the COs had purchased, apart from two, had come from a
mutual associate of the applicant and West.
6 December 2023 the applicant sent CO 368 a text message offering a
‘mini 12 gauge pistol like’ and a ‘410 sawn
offshotty’. On 8 December 2023 the applicant and Scammell attended Buna
Court, Boronia, where they entered the COs’ vehicle
and directed them to
drive to the applicant’s vehicle, which was parked around the corner on
Bouganville Street. The applicant
then handed CO 368 a bag containing
a single shotgun with a timber handle, a 410-calibre rifle and five .410 calibre
ammunition cartridges
(summary charge 43 — dispose of cartridge ammunition
to unlicensed person). CO 368 provided $10,000 in exchange.
Charges 5–8 —
traffick in a drug of dependence
each of 8 July, 19 July, 3 August and 9 August 2023 CO 368 purchased one
ounce of cannabis from the applicant for $280. These four
transactions form the
basis of charges 5, 6, 7 and 8 respectively. For some transactions the applicant
was joined by Scammell and
another associate. Multiple vehicles were also used
by the applicant across the transactions.
Charge 9 — traffick
in a drug of dependence
29 August 2023 CO 368 communicated with the applicant and Scammell to set
up a purchase of one ounce of ketamine the following
day. At 11:09 am 30
August CO 370 met the applicant, Scammell and a third associate at a
location in Wheelers Hill. CO 370 exchanged
$3,400 for the substance which,
on subsequent analysis, was found to contain 32% ketamine with a weight of
Charge 13 —
possession of a traffickable quantity of firearms
23 January 2024 the applicant discussed a package of slam guns and pen pistols
via telephone with CO 368. The applicant indicated
he would sell the items
for $8,000, before increasing the price to $9,000. It was agreed the sale would
take place on 29 January
2024. The applicant told CO 368 the
items were ready on 27 January and, on 29 January CO 368, said the sale would
need to occur the
following day.
Charges 10, 11,
30 January 2024 Victoria Police executed simultaneous search warrants at the
addresses of the applicant, Scammell, West and three
other associates. At the
applicant’s home in Boronia investigators located and seized:
(1) one black iPhone;
(2) one Samsung phone;
(3) $800 cash (charge 11 — deal with proceeds of crime);
(4) one bag, one glass container and one plastic container containing cannabis
(charge 10 — possess drug of dependence); and
(5) one red Honda dirt bike.
applicant did not comply with the s 465AA
provide the passcodes to his mobile phones (charge 12 — failing to comply
with an order to provide information or
assistance). In his record of interview
(‘ROI’) the applicant provided admissions to the possession of
cannabis and ketamine
and gave no comment answers with respect to the remaining
Sentencing reasons
applicant was sentenced jointly with West.
judge commenced his Reasons by summarising the charges and offending of both the
applicant and West before noting the applicable
judge described the applicant’s personal circumstances as
He was born in 2001 and
was 22 years old at the time of offending. He had an unsettled childhood as he
moved around with his mother
to avoid his father. The applicant had disclosed
recently that he was the victim of sexual abuse at age 11 and had joined the
The applicant
commenced using alcohol and drugs as a 12-year-old and, while a poor student, he
completed Year 12 at TAFE in 2018.
He started a motor mechanics apprenticeship
but did not complete it due to his involvement with drugs. The applicant had
been mainly
unemployed, surviving on Centrelink payments.
the judge summarised the applicant’s history of substance
This began with alcohol,
then cannabis, MDMA, methylamphetamine, ketamine, cocaine, GHB and heroin. The
applicant also abused prescription
drugs. The judge noted that, to his credit,
the applicant has completed a drug program whilst on remand, and observed that
to rid himself of his drug and alcohol abuse if he is to have a
judge referred to the psychological report of Warren Simmons, a consulting
psychologist, tendered on the applicant’s
Mr Simmons was of the
view that the applicant may suffer from a cognitive disability and required
treatment for post-traumatic stress
disorder. The applicant required further
drug and alcohol counselling.
judge then summarised the references tendered at the
These were said to
demonstrate that the applicant enjoyed strong family support and indicate both
his remorse and resolve to be drug
free. The applicant had no prior convictions
and, with his family support, the judge characterised his prospects of
rehabilitation
to be reasonable if the applicant could rid himself of his drug
use. Other exhibits tendered showed the applicant had been drug-free
custody and evidenced an offer of employment upon the applicant’s release
from his aunt in her company.
applicant’s pleas of guilty were taken into account by the
The judge found the
applicant to have accepted responsibility for his actions and demonstrated
remorse. Consequently the judge said
the applicant’s sentence would be
significantly reduced. The applicant’s disrupted and unsettled childhood,
the steps he has taken in custody and his prospects for
rehabilitation, were all expressly taken into account by the judge.
sentence imposed on the co-accused, Scammell, was referred to by the judge.
Scammell’s role in the drug and gun sales was
described as
Scammell himself
claimed his role was to count the money. The judge described the sentence
imposed on Scammell, a 10-month term of
imprisonment and 2-year CCO, as very
lenient. The judge also said that weight was given to Scammell’s mental
health issues
and cognitive impairment.
the applicant the judge said
You were, on the evidence, the leader of this joint criminal enterprise. You
controlled what occurred and organised the sale of
guns and drugs. You sourced
the weapons and you sold from your suppliers and spoke openly about your
trafficking in guns and drug
activities. Your role was, in my view,
substantially more important than that of
judge characterised the applicant’s offending as too serious for the
disposition of a combination of imprisonment and a
CCO based upon the number of
weapons he sold and the ‘not insignificant’ cash
The applicant’s
offending was described as ‘extremely serious’. The principle of
totality was expressly considered
by the judge in his orders for cumulation.
personal circumstances were summarised by the judge sentencing him as
Scammel was born in
2000. He was 23 years of age at the time of offending and 24 years when
sentenced. There was frequent conflict
in his parent’s relationship, which
ended when Scammell was 14 years old, although his parents continued to reside
for the sake of their children. He would ‘at times’ run
away from home.
Scammell had a
positive relationship with his mother and a more distant one with his father.
The judge said that Scammell’s
mother experienced a stroke in 2022 and
required ongoing care. Scammell was diagnosed with a learning disorder at a
young age and
had behavioural issues in secondary school. He was also diagnosed
with ADHD, oppositional defiance disorder and an intellectual disability.
adolescence Scammell was prescribed anti-psychotic and anti-depressant
medication. Scammell attended Swinburne TAFE to complete
his Victorian
Certificate of Applied Learning but was expelled after having a physical
altercation with another student. Thereafter
he had no formal work and received
a Disability Support Pension. Scammell reported a diagnosis of schizophrenia but
the judge noted
that such diagnosis was not confirmed in any of the collateral
material before the court.
began drinking alcohol and using cannabis at the age of 13 years. His alcohol
use escalated during his adolescence. At about
the age of 17 years he began to
use MDMA, cocaine and non-prescribed Xanax which impacted adversely upon his
mental health. He also
experimented with
methylamphetamine.
received a 12 month CCO in 2019 for trafficking cannabis. He successfully
completed the order and abstained from substance
use throughout its duration.
Scammell relapsed into drug use during the COVID-19 pandemic and returned to
selling illicit substances
to fund his own
Scammell also served a term
of imprisonment for offences, including cannabis cultivation, during his remand
for the instant offending.
In custody Scammell had ceased using illicit drugs,
been medication compliant and had also completed numerous courses and
judge had reference to a report of Austin Campbell, psychologist, tendered
on Scammell’s behalf. Mr Campbell diagnosed Scammell
with a substance
use disorder, ADHD and an unspecified intellectual disability. Although Scammell
had minimised his responsibility
for the weapons charges to Mr Campbell,
the psychologist reported Scammell’s prospects of rehabilitation to be
judge recorded that Scammell’s counsel submitted that a sentence combining
a term of imprisonment with a CCO would address
all relevant sentencing purposes
and that the prosecutor conceded that such disposition was within
to Scammell’s role in the criminal enterprise, the judge noted that
Scammell and the applicant ‘spoke without
hesitation’
drugs and guns they could supply. Scammell was present at the point of delivery.
The judge said that Scammell took ‘a
more proactive role’ with
respect to the drug trafficking and was ‘a more silent presence’
when the firearms were
delivered. The judge said that Scammell could not have
doubted that the guns were being sourced for a criminal
The judge then
[y]our role in the offending involved communicating and meeting with the covert
operatives, being present at the various locations
where the illicit goods were
handed over, and receiving and counting the cash payments made. You denied being
the ‘muscle’
for the operation and maintained (in the CCO assessment
report) that your role was merely to count the money. Your precise role remains
undefined, but it is clear that you were a trusted member of a criminal
enterprise trafficking in those drugs of dependence and
Applicant’s
contentions
applicant submits that the issue of parity received ‘scant and inadequate
treatment’ at the hearing of the plea. This
is argued to be demonstrable
from the transcript of the hearing and supports the central proposition that the
judge gave insufficient
regard to the principle in the sentence imposed upon the
application.
support of his argument that there is a marked disparity in the sentences
imposed upon him and Scammell, the applicant relies upon
(a) Both men were involved in the same seven incidents relevant to the disposal
of firearms offence.
(b) The applicant was ‘arguably closer’ to the COs than Scammell and
negotiated the sales of the firearms and drugs with
(c) As to the trafficking of ketamine on 9 August 2023 (charge 9 for
the applicant and charge 3 for Scammell) and the possession
of the silencer on
24 September 2023 (summary charge 38 for the applicant and summary
charge 34 for Scammell), there was nothing
to distinguish their respective
criminality, yet in respect of each charge the applicant received a sentence
that added three months
to his term of imprisonment whereas Scammell received a
wholly concurrent term of imprisonment.
(d) While Scammell had an intellectual disability, Judge Higham did not find
that this contributed to his offending. Scammell was
a year older than the
applicant. Scammell had a criminal record described as ‘relevant’
whereas the applicant did not.
Ground 2 — manifest excess
argue that the total effective sentence imposed of 4 years and 6 months’
imprisonment was manifestly excessive, the applicant
first notes that no
mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment applied to the charges. He further
emphasises four matters upon which
he relied in mitigation of penalty, namely
his age, his difficult and disrupted background, his struggles with drug
addiction and
his early pleas of guilty.
the applicant notes that at the conclusion of the plea hearing the judge
‘was in fact moved to request’ that
he be assessed for suitability
Respondent’s
contentions
respondent first contends that the applicant’s characterisation of the
judge’s treatment of the parity principle during
the course of the plea
hearing as ‘scant’ and ‘inadequate’ is incorrect. It is
put that both the plea transcript
and the Reasons demonstrate that the judge was
cognisant of, and applied, the principle of parity.
to the differences in the sentences imposed on Scammell and the applicant for
the disposal of firearms charge, the respondent accepts
that each man was
involved in the same seven incidents comprising the disposal of ten firearms,
but points to the following differences
in their respective roles.
applicant had a much greater role in the firearms transactions.
(a) On each of the seven occasions it was the applicant who communicated with
the COs to organise the sale of the firearms.
(b) In his text messages the applicant coordinated and set the terms of the
various transactions, stipulating the sale price and
the location at which the
transaction would take place.
(c) The applicant demonstrated his control over the enterprise in his text
messages with CO 368 on 24 September 2023 in which he
said he was
‘pissed off’ with his firearms supplier, whose price had ‘just
gone up through the roof [to $28,000]’,
but that the applicant had managed
to ‘pull it [back] to $25,000’, despite the consequence that he
would be ‘making
sweet fuck all’ from the transaction.
contradistinction Scammell was, as characterised by Judge Higham, ‘a
silent presence’ at the transactions. There was
no evidence that he
communicated with any of the COs as to the sale of the firearms or was involved
with the sourcing or obtaining
respondent also points to the differences in the personal circumstances of each
of the applicant and Scammell, in particular the
latter’s intellectual
disability, as a reason to justify the differences in the sentences imposed. The
respondent submits that
Judge Higham accepted that Scammell’s
intellectual disability enlivened
limbs 3 and 5. Referring
Muldrock v The Queen
the respondent also contends that Scammell’s intellectual disability
reduced his moral culpability somewhat and thereby reduced
the weight to be
given to just punishment and denunciation.
respondent argues that although Scammell had prior convictions for drug offences
and the applicant did not, those convictions
were less relevant to the most
serious charge, being the disposal of firearms charge. Further, both men were on
bail at the time
of the offending.
the respondent submits that the judge was correct to describe the sentence
imposed by Judge Higham on Scammell as ‘very
lenient’. Accordingly,
in the event that ground 1 was to be upheld, it was argued that this Court
should not make more than
a very modest reduction to the applicant’s
sentence so as to avoid the imposition of a manifestly inadequate
Ground 2 — manifest
respondent contends that the judge took into account all matters upon which the
applicant relied in mitigation of penalty, namely
his age, disrupted background,
lack of criminal history and early pleas of guilty. These matters were weighed
against the objective
gravity of the offending. The conduct relevant to charge
1, particularly, is submitted to be very serious offending. General deterrence
and community protection were matters of some weight in the sentencing exercise.
It is contended that the sentence of three years’
imprisonment on charge 1
was well open to the judge.
respondent further contends that the sentences imposed on charges 2
to 9 were modest. Although the offending on each occasion
relatively small quantities of drugs, the applicant’s purpose was to make
a profit. The respondent argues that the
order for three months’
cumulation on the sentence imposed on charge 9 was unremarkable and
appropriately reflected the distinct
offending relevant to that charge.
applicant’s refusal to provide passcodes to his phones is characterised by
the respondent as distinct and serious offending
such that the sentence imposed
and the order for cumulation on that charge were well within range, as were the
sentences and orders
for cumulation imposed on charge 13 and
summary charge 38.
the respondent submits that the fact that the judge had the applicant assessed
for a CCO is irrelevant.
Discussion and analysis
principle of parity in sentencing is founded in the notion that equal justice
requires that like co-offenders should be treated
equally, subject to the
qualification that relevant differences in their culpability and personal
circumstances be accommodated in
the sentencing
discretion.
The relevant
question for this Court when assessing a parity ground is
... whether it is was reasonably open to the sentencing judge to differentiate
— or fail to differentiate — between
the co-offenders in the way
he/she did, if proper weight were given to the similarities and differences
between them as regards culpability,
criminal record and personal circumstances.
The answer to that question determines whether — in the accepted
terminology —
the person making the complaint has a ‘justifiable
sense of grievance’.
is, appellate intervention will only be warranted if an applicant demonstrates
that the disparity between the sentences imposed
is ‘marked’ or
‘manifest’.
my view it is not reasonably arguable to characterise the disparity in the
sentences imposed on the applicant on the one hand and
Scammell on the other
hand in that manner. To the contrary, the differences in the sentences gives
appropriate regard to the differences
between them, both as to their role in the
offending and their personal situations.
applicant argues that the sentences imposed on the disposal of firearms
and the sentences and
orders for cumulation on the possession of silencer without permit
and one of the
trafficking drug of dependence charges relating to
have resulted in marked
disparate overall sentencing outcomes. That is, for the charges in common
between them, the applicant received
an effective term of imprisonment of 3
years and 6 months, whereas Scammell received a term of imprisonment of 10
months with a CCO
of 2 years’ duration.
most serious charge was the disposal of firearms charge. The applicant himself
concedes a difference in his role in this offending
from that of Scammell,
noting he was ‘arguably closer’ to the COs than Scammell and that he
negotiated the sales directly
with them. The applicant advances no argument that
in relation to this offending Scammell was anything other than a ‘silent
presence’. It is clear from the evidence before the judge that the
applicant directed the seven transactions with the COs,
overseeing the
procurement of the weapons and setting the terms of the sales. The judge did not
err in concluding that the applicant
was a leader of the joint criminal
enterprise or that his role was substantially more important than that of
Additionally,
there were marked differences between the applicant and Scammell relevant to all
charges before the judge. Judge Higham
recorded that Scammell had a statement of
intellectual disability.
difficulties were diagnosed from a young age and he had been medicated since his
adolescence. While Judge Higham found that Scammell’s
cognitive and
intellectual challenges did not contribute in any meaningful manner to the
it was accepted that
Scammell’s personal history and his cognitive and intellectual challenges
drove him to substance use in
times of stress and association with criminals in
whose company he found a sense of
The applicant came
before the judge with no such diagnosed issues. Accordingly, the emphasis to be
placed on the sentencing principles
of general deterrence, denunciation and just
punishment differed as between the applicant and Scammell.
Scammell’s prior criminal history fell to be considered against that
background. And, as the respondent argued, it
was less relevant to the disposal
of firearms charge than to the drug charges.
the sake of completeness, a reading of the transcript reveals that the
applicant’s argument that the judge’s consideration
of the principle
of parity at the plea hearing was ‘scant and inadequate’ must be
rejected. In any event, as is evident
from paragraph [
] above, the judge gave express
consideration to parity in his sentencing remarks.
1 must fail.
Ground 2 — manifest
is frequently observed that a ground of appeal alleging manifest excess is
difficult to establish. It must be demonstrated that
the impugned sentence is
wholly beyond the range of sentences reasonably available to the sentencing
judge in the sound exercise
of his or her
discretion.
my view it is not reasonably arguable that the applicant has done so.
applicant relies principally upon his age, lack of criminal history,
‘difficult and disrupted background’ and significant
drug issues to
argue that the individual sentences of imprisonment and orders for cumulation
are manifestly excessive such as to
produce a manifestly excessive total
effective sentence.
judge gave express and appropriate consideration of these matters. In light of
the objective gravity of the offending they are
insufficient to demonstrate that
the sentences and orders imposed were manifestly excessive.
disposal of firearms charge was extremely serious. It was a rolled-up charge
comprising seven different transactions over the
course of five months and the
sale of 10 separate firearms for an amount totalling $73,500. It was obvious to
the applicant that
the firearms were for a criminal
Four of the firearms
were sawn-off weapons. One was a semi-automatic rifle fitted with a silencer
(noting that possession of the
silencer was the subject of summary charge 38).
And, for the reasons discussed under cover of ground 1, the applicant was a
in the criminal enterprise. General deterrence and protection of the
community were significant sentencing considerations. Against
the maximum
penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment, the 3 years imposed was well open to
of the silencer relevant to summary charge 38 was distinct, serious offending.
The imposition of a term of 6 months’
imprisonment with 3 months’
cumulation on the sentence imposed on charge 1 was open to the judge.
2 to 9 involved the applicant trafficking in a drug of dependence on eight
separate occasions. Each charge was subject to
a maximum penalty of 15
years’ imprisonment. On each of charges 2 to 8 he received a term of six
months’ imprisonment
to be served wholly concurrently with the sentence
imposed on charge 1. With respect to charge 9, which involved the sale of 28g
ketamine for $3,400, the applicant was sentenced to 12 months’
imprisonment, 3 months of which were ordered to be served
cumulatively on the
sentence imposed on charge 1. These offences were motivated by profit and
occurred over a period of two months.
On any view, the sentences imposed were
12 was the applicant’s refusal to provide police with the passcodes for
his mobile phones. The seriousness of such conduct
is reflected in the maximum
penalty for failure to comply with an order to provide assistance, being 5
years’ imprisonment.
There is a vital public interest in ensuring that
suspects comply with such orders to facilitate the detection and punishment of
crime. The sentence of 6 months’ imprisonment and the order for 3
months’ cumulation on the sentence imposed on charge
1 is, in all the
circumstances, well within range.
applicant’s conduct relevant to charge 13, namely possession of a
traffickable quantity of firearms, related to four slam
guns and two pen pistols
which he had agreed to sell to a CO for $9,000. A traffickable quantity is two
or more firearms.
The applicable
maximum penalty is 10 years’ imprisonment. The sentence of 12
months’ imprisonment and order for cumulation
of 6 months on the sentence
on charge 1 is unremarkable.
the total effective sentence of 4 years and 3 months’ imprisonment (noting
that the 6 months imprisonment imposed for
knowingly dealing with proceeds of
crime relevant to charge 11 was wholly concurrent with the sentence imposed on
charge 1) and the
non-parole period of 3 years demonstrated the judge’s
consideration of parsimony and totality.
it should be noted that it is irrelevant that the judge had the applicant
assessed for suitability for a CCO prior to passing
sentence. That a sentencing
judge does so in any matter in no way fetters the sentencing discretion of the
2 must fail.
application for leave to appeal will be refused.
DPP v McLean
Court of Victoria, Judge Chettle, 27 March 2025) (‘Reasons’).
Contrary to
Firearms Act 1996
Contrary to
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
Contrary to
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Contrary to 7C(1) of the
Firearms Act
Contrary to
Firearms Act
Contrary to
Firearms Act
DPP v Scammell
[2025] VCC 181
Reasons, [1]–[15].
Reasons, [16].
Reasons, [18].
Reasons, [17].
Reasons, [18].
Reasons, [19].
Reasons, [20].
Reasons, [21].
Reasons, [22].
Reasons, [31].
, [12]–[19].
, [23]–[24].
, [25]–[29].
, [30]–[31].
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Chapman v The King
[2024] VSCA 205
, [47], [64] (Walker and Orr JJA)
Lowe v The Queen
(1984) 154 CLR 606
[1984] HCA 46
Postiglione v The Queen
(1997) 189 CLR
[1997] HCA 26.
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
(2012) 226 A Crim R 354
, 371–2 [63] (Maxwell P, Harper JA and T Forrest
AJA) (citation omitted);
[2012] VSCA 288
[2024] VSCA
Charge 1 for the applicant
and charge 3 for Scammell.
Summary charge 38 for the
applicant and summary charge 34 for Scammell.
Charge 9 for the applicant
and charge 5 for Scammell.
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and
Harper JJA);
[2011] VSCA 157
DPP v Karazisis
[2010] VSCA 350
(2010) 31 VR 634
662–3 [127] (Ashley, Redlich and Weinberg JJA, Warren CJ and Maxwell P
agreeing at [1]);
[2010] VSCA 350
[1999] VSCA126, [42]
(Chernov JA, Winneke P agreeing at [1], Phillips JA agreeing at [54]);
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
, 434 [7] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and
[2017] HCA 41.
Berichon v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 319
(2013) 40 VR 490
; [2013] VSCA.
Firearms Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (550 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter