URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BNW [2024] VMHT 18 (17 September 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan Hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Arna Delle-Vergini (Legal Member)
Peter Millington (Psychiatrist Member)
Paula Davey (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
Treating team member
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Claudia McCall
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal confirmed the
inpatient treatment order expiring on 13/01/2025
This statement of
After the hearing your advocate requested a written
explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of reasons will
be given to your treating team as well as to you, your advocate and your legal
representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your community
treatment order had been changed to an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal
have a hearing to decide whether or not an order should remain in
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – your admission to hospital was very traumatic and undignified.
You remain very upset about this.
restriction – you want to receive treatment on your own terms and do not
believe you needed to come into hospital or require
any more inpatient
treatment. Your preference is to return home to your own bed.
decision making – you prefer to make your own decisions about your mental
health treatment, and it is important to
you that your treating team listen and
take account of your views.
carers – your father is very supportive of you and wants you to remain
Dignity of risk
– you were taking the depot before your admission to hospital, and you
wish to be trusted to continue taking
your medications. You see this as a
reasonable risk to take to achieve psychological wellbeing.
Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your rights under the
of Human Rights and Responsibilities
Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human
rights protected under the Charter including
medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being treated in
hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights
protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable, the
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you and your lawyer, Claudia, told the Tribunal and the materials
you do not agree that you have a mental illness. Rather, you told the Tribunal
you were a passionate and dramatic person.
You do not understand why you have
been on multiple treatment orders but believe it could be because people are
jealous of you and
trying to escape punishment. The police are also conspiring
against you. For example, when they took you to hospital they knew where
personal items were even though you did not tell them. You are disappointed in
your treating team, particularly your case manager,
CM, who you thought you had
a good relationship with before he called the Crisis Assessment Team and police.
You do not believe you
needed to come into hospital when you did. You want to
return home where you have friends and do not agree that your accommodation
at risk. You are not a risk to yourself or anyone else. If anything, it is the
Acuphase that makes you want to kill everyone.
At other times the Acuphase made
you love everyone. You are not sure why it has this effect on you. You are
feeling sound, healthy
of mind, have been eating and hydrating well. You
don’t like taking the depot. You prefer oral medication. It worries you
much money pharmaceutical companies are making. Claudia told the Tribunal
you do not want to be treated as an in-patient. She said
you are not at risk to
yourself or anyone else because the kitchen incident that led to your admission
was the fault of another resident
and other examples where you have harmed
people are outdated. Claudia told the Tribunal you will not receive treatment if
a treatment
order is made because your relationship with the treating team has
been damaged. You are willing to take olanzapine in the community
but ultimately
you want to move out of your current accommodation with friends and start a
building project. You recognise that there
may be some financial constraints
that hinder this plan.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
The treating team prepared a report for you and
the Tribunal. In that report it said you have a diagnosis of schizoaffective
and have experienced over 30 inpatient admissions and long periods of
compulsory care in the community. You have also had electroconvulsive
(ECT) to treat the symptoms of your illness at times. When you are untreated and
experiencing symptoms of your illness
your thinking and mood becomes
significantly disturbed. You start to believe you are being monitored by the
government and police
and you can become aggressive and agitated as a result. At
other times you become upset or suddenly happy. This is referred to as
Prior to your admission you were experiencing increasing
paranoid thoughts about being monitored by the government and police, your
was disturbed, and you were acting out in an aggressive manner. This was
happening for many months according to your case manager.
You were previously
cared for by the mobile support team, but they had to cease their involvement
with you due to rising levels of
aggression. On the day of your admission, you
had an altercation with another resident where you assaulted them. The Tribunal
told this is not typical behaviour for you. When you were brought into
hospital you were significantly agitated and, over time, three
injections of
Acuphase. Whilst in hospital you were cared for in the intensive care unit (ICU)
and then transitioned to the low dependency
unit (LDU). However, shortly after
you assaulted two co-consumers, and you had to be returned to the ICU area. More
recently, the
medication you have been taking in hospital has reduced your
Given your long history of mental illness and consequent
mental health treatment, and given you have been experiencing increasing
paranoid thoughts and aggression for months leading up to your recent admission
to hospital, the Tribunal was satisfied that you
experience a mental illness
characterised by a significant disturbance in your thought and mood.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Your doctor, YK, said you have been responsive
to treatment since you have come to hospital. He told the Tribunal you have only
been able to be treated in LDU. Prior to that you had to have multiple
injections of Acuphase to settle your thoughts, mood and behaviours.
admission to hospital was a traumatic one. Your mental health had been
deteriorating in the community for many months, but you
felt mentally well and
believed strongly that the police, government and other residents in your
accommodation were against you.
You had been taking your depot in the community,
but the treating team believe illicit substance use has caused your mental
to deteriorate. You admitted you enjoy smoking cannabis, but you felt
mentally well and when the police came to take you to hospital
you resisted
them. This led to you being chemically restrained.
The Tribunal accepted
that some of the examples of your aggression are in the past, such as when you
pulled a knife on a member of
your family . However, you have recently assaulted
multiple people, both in your Supported Residential Service (SRS) and at
You have also threatened your support staff and doctors as well. For
these reasons the Tribunal was satisfied that you need to be
treated now in
order to prevent a serious deterioration in your mental health and to prevent
serious harm to someone else.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
The Tribunal did not accept Claudia’s
submission that you would not receive treatment on a compulsory treatment order
the therapeutic relationship between you and CM was damaged and your
treatment would thus be counter therapeutic. Whilst you told
the Tribunal you
did not trust CM anymore you also acknowledged that you get along well with CM
and had some sympathy for him for
having been put in a position where he had to
vary your compulsory treatment order. If you were on an order, you would receive
in the form of multiple antipsychotics, regular reviews by a
psychiatrist and ongoing case management in the community.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
The Tribunal was not satisfied there is a less
restrictive means other than a treatment order to enable you to receive
immediate treatment.
You have a long history of non-adherence to medications.
You do not believe you have a mental illness and the medications you are
to manage mental illness cause a range of side-effects you do not like. Even
though you told the Tribunal you would take medications,
and you were accepting
of your depot before you came to hospital, your history suggests that this is
frequently not the case. Your
doctor, YK also told the Tribunal that in your
current mental state he had concerns you would refuse medications, particularly
additional medications you are being given. The Tribunal accepted this. For
these reasons the Tribunal decided this criterion was
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal confirmed the
treatment order.
Treatment in hospital or in the
An inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on
your rights protected under the Charter. For this reason, the Act says
Tribunal can only make an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a
person cannot be treated in the community.
Your treating team said
community treatment was not possible because your mental health has not quite
stabilised yet and you have
only just had a trial in the low dependency unit. As
of yesterday, you were still exhibiting paranoid thinking and aggression. The
treating team believe if you go back to the community too early it will
backfire, and you will have to be returned to hospital. The
treating team
particularly want to avoid this because of how traumatic and counter-therapeutic
this admission to hospital was.
Your legal representative told the
Tribunal that you could be treated less restrictively in the community. You are
willing to take
your medications, and you have stable long-term accommodation.
You told the Tribunal you wanted to be treated in the community because
not get any sleep in the inpatient setting. You also told the Tribunal you
wanted to remain in hospital to provide support
to the friends you have made in
there. If you remain in hospital you hope to be discharged by the end of the
The Tribunal decided to confirm the inpatient order. You are still
having paranoid thoughts which can lead to outbursts of aggression.
medication you are taking is working but is still being optimised. The Tribunal
agrees that early discharge to the community
could result in you returning to
hospital and this could be very traumatic. The Tribunal also decided you need
the opportunity to
stabilise before you are discharged home.
Length of the Treatment Order
As your hearing was
triggered by your community treatment order being varied to an inpatient
treatment order, the Tribunal did not
have to make a decision about how long
your order should last. The Act sets the duration of your order as the amount
of time remaining
on your order at the time of the hearing. This means the
duration of your order is unchanged and it will expire on 13 January
Date of determination: 14-08-2024
[Signed by the legal member.]
Arna Delle-Vergini
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 17 September 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (504 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter