URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/94.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Anderson [1996] VicRp 94; [1996] 2 VR 663 (14 March 1996)
R v ANDERSON
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, BROOKING JA AND SOUTHWELL AJA
12, 13, 14 March 1996
The applicant, Gary Robert Anderson, was convicted by a jury at the Morwell County Court on 10 August 1995 on one count of attempted
burglary and one count of threatening to kill. He was sentenced to 34 months' imprisonment on the attempted burglary count and 22
months' imprisonment on the count of threat to kill. The sentences were ordered to be served concurrently and a non-parole period
of 22 months was directed.
The applicant was acquitted of the first count on the presentment, which was a count of attempted burglary with aggravating circumstances
charged under s77 of the Crimes Act combined with s321.
Anderson has now applied for leave to appeal against both the convictions and the sentence.
The events out of which the charges arose occurred at about two o'clock in the afternoon of 16 September 1994 at 158 Vary Street,
Morwell, premises occupied by one Cyril Eugene Yates, his wife Robyn and their four children. At the time of the events their next
door neighbour Jennifer Vale, and her two children were also in the house. According to the Yates and Vale, the applicant came to
the front door with a gun in his hand, yelling, "Let me in". They said that he rattled the door, kicked the bottom of the door and
peered through a glass panel which was beside it. It appears that he was calling out, "Where's Chopper?" and, according to Mrs Yates,
he also yelled out, "I'm going to kill you. If you don't let me in I'll blow your head off". According to Mr Yates, he yelled out,
"Let me in, I want to talk to you, I want you to tell me where Chopper and Brownie are. I want you to take your medicine. Don't make
me blow your head off". After a short interval it appears that Vale phoned the police, who arrived a short time after and arrested
the applicant in the vicinity of the premises, although not at the premises.
According to the three Crown witnesses, the applicant was in possession of two firearms, one which he carried in his right hand,
brandishing it about, and the other in a string bag in his left hand. According to Mr Yates, and at his request, the applicant put
these weapons, together with a pair of gloves, in a meter box outside the front door, before fleeing from the premises before the
police arrived. When the police came to interview Yates at the premises, the guns were in fact on the bed in the bedroom. Yates said
that he had retrieved those guns from the meter box.
During the course of the trial a strong attack had been made upon the credit of the witnesses for the Crown, and in particular Yates.
He was cross-examined at length about his prior convictions, which extended over a period of some 20 years and included convictions
for possession of firearms, burglary, theft, perjury, drug dealing and other matters. During the course of that -
cross-examination about the prior convictions of Yates, counsel for the Crown objected and counsel for the defence was prohibited
from putting certain prior convictions to the witness.
It was alleged against Yates that the guns that had been shown by him to the police were in fact not guns that had been in the possession
of the applicant but were guns owned by Yates to enforce his own criminal purposes. I will return to this matter in a moment. As
it turned out, the police in fact confiscated certain drug items and dealer's equipment from the premises and interrogated Yates
whilst he was in custody in respect of them.
In the ultimate event, the jury acquitted the applicant of attempted aggravated burglary and convicted him of the lesser alternative
of attempted burglary simpliciter.
Having regard to the way in which the cross-examination was conducted of Yates and the other witnesses, the way in which the Crown
put its case to the jury and the judge's charge, the verdict of the jury on count 1 must, in my view, mean that it was not satisfied
that the applicant carried weapons at the relevant time. In my view that is the only sensible construction that can be put upon the
jury's verdict in the circumstances, notwithstanding agreement that the judge had made a misdirection in another respect in his directions
to the jury on the question of what constituted aggravated burglary.
I now digress for a moment to consider an aspect of procedure which arose during the trial. At the trial's outset there had been
difficulty in empanelling a jury. On 7 August 1994 the accused had been arraigned in the presence of a panel and a jury of 12 had
been struck from that panel. After they had been sworn one of the jurors said that he knew a principal witness involved in the trial
and his Honour then discharged that jury. The panel had then been reduced to a number of 23 persons, less than sufficient if both
the Crown and the accused were to exhaust their rights of challenge. Counsel suggested that as it was unlikely that the panel would
be exhausted it was worthwhile proceeding with the 23 persons. His Honour said, "I think I should indicate to counsel that if that
isn't successful we would pray tales". The applicant's counsel responded, "Yes, I agree with that". Of course the inevitable happened:
with 11 jurors chosen and sitting safely in the jury box, the panel was exhausted and as a consequence a jury of 12 could not be
struck for want of sufficient jurors.
His Honour, on the application of the Crown, then directed the sheriff "to name so many persons of the jury district duly qualified
and liable to serve as jurors who are present or who can be found to make up the full number of jurors". He also said: "The best
way for that to be done is to obtain jurors summoned to attend one of the other courts." His Honour then adjourned the empanelling
process until the following day.
The direction that his Honour had given obviously had in mind the procedure outlined in s41 of the
Juries Act 1967
. That section reads: In every case where the inquest is likely to remain untaken for default of jurors, the court upon request made
on behalf of the Queen or any party shall command the sheriff to name so many persons of the jury district duly qualified and liable
to serve as jurors then present or who can be found as shall make up the full number of jurors; and the sheriff shall add their names
and additions to the panel, and they shall be deemed to have been included in the panel and shall be subject to challenge for cause
or peremptorily.
It was on this basis that his Honour no doubt informed counsel that he intended to proceed. When the court resumed on the following
morning the applicant's -
counsel submitted that it would be wrong and in breach of the
to strike a jury by intermingling the names from two panels. Notwithstanding, it would seem that the sheriff summoned further persons
from the jury district, presumably from another panel, and the remaining juror was accordingly empanelled. The evidence does not
make it abundantly clear as to precisely what procedure was followed so as this result could be achieved.
Although Mr Priest, who appeared for the applicant on this application, put at the forefront of his argument that there had been
a mistrial for want of a proper jury, I think it is desirable to deal with his merit arguments first, because in my view they are
decisive of this application.
The presentment had alleged three counts, the first two of which were in the alternative. Those counts were: count 1 - the applicant
at Morwell on 16 September 1994 attempted to enter as a trespasser a building at 158 Vary Street, Morwell with intent to commit an
offence involving causing injury to a person therein and at the time had with him firearms, namely a black powder revolver and a
Count 2 alleged against the applicant that at the same place and on the same date he attempted to enter as a trespasser a building
at Vary Street, Morwell with intent to commit an offence involving causing injury to a person therein.
As I have already indicated, that count was a lesser alternative to count 1, which depended for its proof on the fact that at the
time when he attempted to enter the applicant had with him weapons.
Count 3 alleged against the applicant that at the same place and on the same date and without lawful excuse he made to Cyril Eugene
Yates a threat to kill Cyril Eugene Yates intending that Cyril Eugene Yates would fear that the said threat would be carried out
or being reckless as to whether or not Cyril Eugene Yates would fear that the said threat would be carried out.
It will be seen that counts 1 and 2, alleging as they did an attempt to enter the house at Vary Street with the intent to commit
the offence involving the causing of injury to a person in the building, appear to charge an offence which departed from the strict
terms of s76 of the Crimes Act, that section requiring an intent to "commit an offence involving an assault which carries a penalty
of five years or more". It seems tolerably clear, however, that these counts were alleging as the relevant offence the offence of
intending to intentionally cause injury, an offence which is created by s18 of the Crimes Act.
The principal submission which was made on behalf of the applicant on this application was that the learned trial judge directed
the jury in what might be described as a "sterile fashion"; that is, that he told the jury what the elements of each of the offences
were but he did not relate the particular facts of the case to the law which he had given to them. In directing in this way, it was
submitted that he failed to properly put to the jury the essence of the applicant's case.
In my view there is much substance in this submission. The directions as to law given by his Honour appear to have been taken in
large part from the Directions Handbook, which forms a useful part of the trial judge's kit if employed in accordance with the author's
intention. In this trial, however, it seems to me that insufficient effort was made to adapt the model directions to the facts of
the case. The result of the exercise was, in my view, to deprive the jury of any real assistance in the performance of their task.
As the Court of Criminal Appeal in this State has often said, it is ordinarily the duty of the trial judge in a criminal trial not
only to direct the jury on the law applicable but to assist them to apply that law to the facts of the case before them -
by telling them what, in the light of the directions of law, are the real issues raised in the case. I refer to R v Jellard
[1970] VicRp 98
[1970] VR 802
; R v Wilkes and Briant
[1965] VicRp 64
[1965] VR 475
; Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
It is clear from the evidence in this case that the issues, although confined, were not so black and white as to relieve the trial
judge of assuming this important task, and that that is so notwithstanding the fact that the accused himself did not give evidence.
There was, as I have already indicated, a strong attack made by counsel for the applicant against the principal Crown witness, Yates.
The essence of that attack was that the applicant did not carry the guns which the witness said that he did. It was suggested that
the witness had fabricated this allegation to save his own skin, because he was aware that if the police found guns at the house
he (the witness) would be at a distinct disadvantage because of his own record as a known drug dealer and as a person well known
to the police as a violent offender. It was thus suggested that the witness was only too happy to tell the police that the guns found
at his premises belonged to the applicant, when in fact they did not. In contradistinction, it was the Crown case at the trial that
the applicant had been at this house carrying weapons and that he had had those weapons with intent to use them and had been making
threats to use them.
Thus, as it seems to me, a real issue arose at the trial as to whether the applicant had guns. Although, when directing the jury
as to the elements of the offences, his Honour told them that count 1 depended upon proof to their satisfaction that the applicant
had the guns with him, he did not canvass with the jury the options which might be open to them in the event that they were not satisfied
that the applicant was carrying the guns. All that his Honour told them was that count 1 would not be made out and could not be made
out if they were not satisfied of that fact.
In the event that the jury was not so satisfied on count 1, it would have to be satisfied, in order to convict on count 2, that the
applicant still had the relevant intent to commit an assault of the prescribed type, that is, an intent to commit an assault punishable
by imprisonment for five years or more. In my opinion, this would have presented difficulties because the entire Crown case was dependent
upon the evidence that the applicant was carrying the weapons and threatening to do injury with them. Thus it seems to me that his
Honour was obliged to consider and canvass with the jury what the possibilities were in the event that they were not satisfied that
the applicant was carrying those weapons.
His Honour's directions in this respect, in my view, were less than clear. Although he gave the jury a short summary of the evidence,
in order, as he said, to stimulate their memories of it, there was no endeavour to relate the facts to the law as he had given it.
This was a pity, because the only directions as to the relevant intent on the attempted burglary count were the ones which had been
given in relation to aggravated burglary, which had involved the jury's satisfaction as to the carriage of the guns. It was only
in the event that the jury found that there was no gun that they were at all required to consider count 2, but in respect of this
count all his Honour said was: Count 2 is relatively simple in that it is an offence of attempted burglary, and so it contains the
same elements as those of Count 1 with the exception that the aggravation element is not present, and so if you are not satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that at the time the accused had weapons with him, but you are satisfied of the other elements of the charge,
then the proper verdict for you to return on Count 2 would be guilty of attempted burglary rather than aggravated burglary. -
In my opinion that direction was not sufficient because, firstly, the directions in relation to count 1 were inextricably interwoven
with the use of a gun; and, secondly, if the jury were not satisfied that the applicant had a gun, then clearly their approach to
the evidence in support of count 2 would have to be different. They needed assistance, in my view, based on the evidence, as to whether
they could in those circumstances be satisfied of the relevant intent which was implicit in count 2.
His Honour's charge in respect of this intent was to my mind somewhat confusing. His Honour said: And thirdly, in this case the forbidden
intent is that of committing an offence involving an assault to a person in the building, as I have said, being an assault punishable
with imprisonment for five years or more. In that offence, the word "injury" has been further defined. It includes unconsciousness,
hysteria, pain and any substantial impairment of bodily function, but it also includes the things which an ordinary layman would
call an injury. In the long run it is for you, members of the jury, to determine whether the actions of the accused in this particular
case show an intention to commit an offence involving injury to another person in the premises. The expression "unlawful excuse"
in the count refers to self-defence or unlawful chastisement and has no application to the facts of this case.
The jury could not have been aided by that direction, because it was moving from the words of the offence created by s76 of the Crimes
Act to the words of the count on the presentment without specifically defining either. To some extent his Honour's difficulty was
caused by the manner in which the attempted burglary counts were framed. They incorporated a reference to "causing injury", although
the statutory definition of the offence refers to the relevant intent as one involving an assault. It seems clear that the draftsman
was alleging in the counts on the presentment that the relevant intention was, as I have already indicated, an intent to commit the
offence referred to in s18 of the Crimes Act. That section provides: A person who, without lawful excuse, intentionally or recklessly
causes injury to another person is guilty of an indictable offence.
Although the matter was raised in argument on this application, it is unnecessary to consider whether an intention to commit this
offence can provide the intention which is required by s76 of the Crimes Act. Be that as it may, the jury was given a definition
of the word "injury" which was said to be contained in the offence of burglary. It is not. The jury were also told something about
the expression "lawful excuse" said to be contained in the presentment count. It was not.
It is, as I have said, very important for a trial judge to ensure that at all times the real issues in the case for determination
are kept to the forefront of the jury's attention, particularly when the elements of the offence are being discussed. It has often
been said that the purpose of a direction is not best achieved by a ritual incantation of what the law is which generally applies
to the case being tried. As Lord Hailsham said in R v Lawrence
[1982] AC 510
at 519, "[a] direction to a jury should be custom built to make the jury understand their task in relation to a particular case".
Unfortunately, in my view that has not happened here in relation to count 2, simply because the jury was given no assistance upon
what would be sufficient to constitute the intent to satisfy that count, in the event that they were not satisfied, contrary to the
case being made by the Crown, that the applicant was carrying a gun. -
Nor do I think proper directions were given in relation to count 3. His Honour's direction in relation to this latter count again
appears to have been taken out of the textbook but did not have regard to the count that was charged in the presentment. Nor was
any assistance given to the jury on the basis of the evidence. In relation to that count his Honour directed the jury as follows:
Count 3 is the offence of threat to kill. It is perhaps not surprising that it is an offence to threaten to kill another person.
The elements and the things that need to be said about this crime are as follows. Firstly, the threat must be one to kill another
person but not necessarily the person to whom the threat is made. It is an offence as much to say, "I am going to kill your daughter,"
- or your friend or your family, as it is to say, "I am going to kill you". Secondly, the threat must be made in a certain state
of mind. The accused must either intend the person to whom the threat is made to believe that it will be carried out or must make
the threat recklessly. That is to say, knowing that the person to whom it is made would probably fear that it would be carried out
and running the risk that he would so believe. Of course, it is not necessary that the accused should actually intend to carry out
the threat. It is sufficient that he should intend another to believe he so intends or that he should make the threat recklessly
as to whether the other person would fear that the threat would be carried out. Thirdly, the threat must be made without lawful justification,
such as might be provided by self-defence and no such issue has been raised in this trial. So that to prove this offence, this count,
the Crown must establish beyond reasonable doubt each of the following elements: 1, that the accused made a threat to kill that he
communicated his intention to someone, to another person; 2, that at the time of that communication the accused intended that the
other person believe his threat or was reckless in the sense that he foresaw that the other person would so believe and; finally,
that the accused had no lawful justification for making the threat.
That, in my view, is simply a definition of what the law says the offence can be. However, it did not "home in" on the offence which
had been alleged against the applicant and which was a charge of making a threat to Yates to kill Yates. The count required the jury
to focus on the evidence of Yates and, having regard to its verdict on count 1, to do so in the light of the finding that the applicant
was not carrying a weapon. Indeed, although Mr Priest did not press his argument based on inconsistent verdicts, it seems difficult
to see how the jury could have consistently convicted on count 3 when they had acquitted on count 1.
It is my view, therefore, for the reasons stated, that the directions that were given in this case to the jury were so insufficient
as to amount to misdirections.
It was argued by Mr Coghlan, who appears with Mr Gyorffy for the director, that we should not interfere because no exception was
taken to his Honour's charge. It is, of course, true that the failure to take exception is a significant factor that the court will
take into account in determining what course it will take under s568 of the Crimes Act. See R v Clarke and Johnstone
[1986] VicRp 64
[1986] VR 643
, particularly at 661-2. However, it seems to me that the departures from what should be regarded as normal were so fundamental in
this case that it is necessary to quash the verdicts so that a miscarriage of justice is not seen to occur. It is not, of course,
a universal practice to deny the success of an application on a ground in respect of which no exception has been taken at the trial.
It must depend on the circumstances of the individual case. In this case it seems to me that it would have been very difficult to
remedy the deficiencies in the charge, to which I have referred in these reasons, by some form of adequate redirection.
Although what I have said so far is sufficient to dispose of this application, it seems desirable that I should record my view that
the method adopted by his -
Honour to finally empanel a jury to try this case was an appropriate method and one which complied with the procedure laid down in
. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, I am prepared to presume that the steps required by the section to be taken by the relevant
public officer were in fact taken. It would seem from what we have been told that the practice referred to in the section is the
practice which is now customarily followed by judges in circuit districts in this State in cases where it appears, to use the words
of the section, "the inquest is likely to remain untaken for default of jurors". Not only is this a convenient practice, but, since
the abolition of the procedure formerly contemplated by s33 of the
(as to which see s6 of Act 108 of 1993), it is the only practical procedure available in the circumstances confronting the trial
judge in this case. I am not persuaded that the words in s41, "or who can be found", should be given the restricted meaning which
was submitted for by Mr Priest. The procedure followed in this case was very similar to the procedure given approval, albeit obiter,
by the Full Court of this State in the case of R v Abrahams and Bull
[1948] VicLawRp 12
[1948] VLR 51
at 53-4. I would be disposed to think that the current practice to which I have referred has its origins in the practice approved
in that passage of the judgment of the court, and I can see no good reason to resile from it.
The only matter which remains to consider is the appropriate disposition of these applications. For the reasons I have given, it
is my view that the applications and the appeal should be allowed and the verdict of the jury on counts 2 and 3 should be set aside
and the convictions quashed, in which event s568(2) of the Crimes Act requires the court either to enter verdicts of acquittal or
direct a new trial to be had.
In my view, once it is accepted, as I do, that the jury's verdict can only be interpreted on the basis that it was not satisfied
that the applicant was carrying a gun, it is my opinion that, properly instructed, the jury could not reasonably have concluded that
count 3 had been made out. If the jury had had its attention properly confined to the evidence of any threat made to Cyril Yates,
they could not reasonably, in my view, have concluded that the applicant had the intent necessary to sustain the charge of threat
to kill. Accordingly, I would propose that a verdict of acquittal be entered in respect of that count.
In respect of count 2, it is contended by the director that a new trial should be ordered. However, in my opinion, such a trial would
be an unrealistic one. The trial would have to take place dependent upon evidence that is inextricably interwoven with the allegation
that the applicant was carrying a gun and was making statements consistent only with the desire to use that gun. Although it is theoretically
conceivable that the necessary intent could be established on the basis that the jury should put out of its mind the evidence of
the existence of weapons, it is not, in my view, possible to have such a trial consistent with fairness to the applicant. Accordingly,
I would also propose that in respect of count 2 a verdict of acquittal be entered.
Brooking JA
Southwell AJA
I also concur.
The formal order of the court is as follows: The application for leave to appeal against conviction is allowed; the appeal is treated
as having been -
instituted and heard instanter; the appeal is allowed; the convictions and sentences upon counts 2 and 3 are quashed and in lieu
thereof it is ordered that verdicts of acquittal be entered.
Leave to appeal against conviction granted, appeal allowed and verdicts of acquittal entered.
Solicitors for the applicant: O'Halloran Davis and Co.
Solicitor for the respondent: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter