URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1319.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Darmos Pty Ltd v Yarra CC Darmos Pty Ltd v Yarra CC [1998] VICCAT 1319 (24 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/21922
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 97/1557
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 18TH AUGUST 1998
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
Dimensions and Area
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION
APPEARANCES
FURTHER REASONS
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/21922
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 97/1557
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 18TH AUGUST 1998
JENNIFER A. MOLES, MEMBER
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant P.A. Darmos Pty Ltd
Responsible Authority City of Yarra
Respondents/Objectors Robyn & Guy Stansfield & Anor
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
Dual occupancy
154 Cubitt Street,
Dimensions and Area
The subject site has a frontage to the western side of Cubitt Street of
14.945m; a sideage of 25.925m to Bent Street; and an area
of 387sq m.
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Under the Yarra Planning Scheme, the subject site and surrounds are zoned
Residential C.
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The proposal fails to respect the existing neighbourhood character and the
provisions of the City of Yarra Urban Character Study.
2. The proposal does not reasonably comply with the Good Design Guide.
3. The proposal will detrimentally affect the surrounding area.
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION
1. In response to Item 1 in the Notice of Refusal, the City of Yarra Urban
Character Study had not been endorsed by the Council until
the 15th December,
1997, and therefore was not relevant for this particular proposal as the
planning application was made on the
12th November, 1997.
2. The existing neighbourhood character consists of a combination of terrace
houses, 2 storey blocks of flats, factories and the
like. Our proposal is
aimed at fitting in-between the likes of the terrace houses and the higher
density flats which are located
directly across the road on Cubitt Street.
3. In response to Item 2 in the Notice of Refusal, the Responsible Authority do
not indicate any grounds identifying where the application
does not comply with
the Good Design Guide. This leads us to believe that the refusal is made on
"subjective interpretation"
of the Good Design Guide by the Planning
4. In response to Item 3 in the Notice of Refusal, the Responsible Authority
does not give any indication as to how the proposal
will detrimentally affect
the surrounding area.
APPEARANCES
Mr Robin Dunstone, Town Planner, represented the Responsible Authority.
Mr How Ng, Town Planner of H. and G. Town Planning Pty Ltd appeared for the
Mr Andrew Aitken, an objector, appeared in person.
A written submission from Mr Guy M.G. and Mrs Robyn S. Stansfield, objectors
was also received. This together with the oral and
written submissions
presented at the hearing, has been taken into account by the Tribunal. Since
the hearing, the Tribunal has inspected
the subject site and surrounds.
FURTHER REASONS
On the 29th of October 1998, the Tribunal provided written advice that the
proposed form of this dual occupancy was seen as unacceptable.
However, the
applicant was afforded the opportunity to prepare amended plans responding to
the concerns about the architectural
detailing and car parking provision
outlined in the Tribunal's reasons.
Mr Darmos took up that opportunity and amending plans were forwarded to the
Tribunal and the other parties on the 9th of December
Following receipt of those plans, the Registrar (Planning) wrote to the other
parties to the appeal advising that if they wished
to submit comments
concerning the revised proposal they were required to be forwarded to the
Tribunal by no later than Thursday the
24th of December 1998. A copy of their
comments was also to be forwarded to the applicant who had a further period of
ten working
days to respond to those comments. The parties were invited to
request that the proceeding be listed for further hearing if they
In response to that letter, comments were received from the City of Yarra on
the 23rd of December 1998. No other comments have been
forthcoming, including
from the applicant. The specified time periods have now passed.
I have considered the revised plans provided by Mr Darmos. Those plans
increased the pitch of the roof, provided gable ends at the
Cubitt Street end
of the roofs, altered the shape of the windows in the proposed dwelling,
altered the fence details and increased
the size of the garage with access from
Bent Street so as to accommodate two vehicles.
The Responsible Authority, while acknowledging that the amended plans are an
improvement on the original, argue that the design still
needed further work to
ensure the development fits comfortably with the neighbourhood. In particular,
they argued that the curved
balconies are an inappropriate feature of the front
façade and are unnecessary as there is adequate private open space
I agree with their view that curved balconies are an inappropriate
feature of the front façade, but in as much as the ground
space is somewhat restricted I believe the balconies should be retained. Their
curvature could, however, be deleted,
as also is appropriate for the rear
balconies which are visible from Bent Street.
The Responsible Authority remained unsatisfied with the front fence detailing,
and in particular the capping of the pillars. I agree
with this view: the
fence pillars belong to housing of another genre. I have required their design
to be to the satisfaction of
the Responsible Authority.
The Responsible Authority found the form of the glass blocks in the Bent Street
elevation out of character with the design of the
dwelling and believed they
should be made square in shape. I agree that this would be an improvement.
It was said that the garage door panels detract from the clean lines of the
dwelling. I have required that the design of the garage
doors to be to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
The Responsible Authority, submitted that the gable roofs appear to be
rather than a cohesive roof structure to the building. They
indicated that they believed that the false parapet should be removed
should be incorporated into the design. They also commented that gable ends
should be provided both at the Cubitt Street
frontage and at the rear of the
roof as at present it appeared unbalanced due to the hipped roof at the rear.
I agree with both these
concerns. In particular, I feel that the parapetting
and lack of eaves again belong to housing of a different style, and as proposed
sits uncomfortably with the gable ends and strapping to those ends. This is a
design matter which again can be met by a condition
for amended plans.
The order of the Tribunal is that the application for review is allowed and the
Responsible Authority's refusal of the permit is
set aside. A permit is
granted for the development of the land at 154 Cubitt Street, Richmond for the
purpose of a dual occupancy
in accordance with the endorsed plans and subject
to the following conditions
1. Before the development starts, amended plans to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be submitted to the Responsible
Authority for its
approval. When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of
the permit. The plans must be
drawn to scale with dimensions and three copies
must be provided. The plans must be generally in accordance with the plans
by P.A. Darmos Pty Ltd in response to the Tribunal's directions of the
29th of October 1998 but modified to show:
(a) the redesign of the balconies to a rectilinear format;
(b) the redesign of the front fence to the satisfaction of the Responsible
(c) rearrangement and/or reconfiguration of the glass blocks in the Bent Street
elevation to the satisfaction of the Responsible
(d) a simplified design for the garage door panels to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority; and
(e) deletion of the false parapet to the roof, incorporation of a gable at the
western or rear end of the roof and the incorporation
2. The development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without
the further permission of the Responsible Authority
or such approval as may be
granted pursuant to
Sections 62(3)
Planning and Environment
3. Before the development begins, a landscape plan which is to the satisfaction
of the Responsible Authority must be submitted to
that authority for its
approval. When approved, the plans will be endorsed accordingly and will then
form part of the permit. The
landscape plan must show the location, quantity
and size at maturity of all proposed plants, botanical names of the plants, the
of all areas to be covered by lawn or other surface materials and
provide a specification of works to be undertaken prior to planting.
4. Before the development begins, a schedule of all the external materials and
finishes which are to the satisfaction of the Responsible
Authority must be
submitted to the authority for its approval. When approved, the schedule will
be endorsed accordingly and will
then form part of the permit. The schedule
must show the materials, colour and finish of all external walls, roofs,
fascias, window
frames, glazing types, doors, fences and paving (including car
park surfacing), outbuildings and structures.
5. Landscaping of the site must be carried out in accordance with the endorsed
landscaping plan prior to occupancy of the dwellings
and be thereafter
maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
6. Except with the written permission of the Responsible Authority, demolition
or construction works may only be carried out between
7.00 a.m. and 6.00
p.m. Monday to Friday and 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. Saturday. No construction
work is permitted on Sundays, Anzac
Day, Christmas Day or Good Friday.
7. This permit will expire if the development is not commenced within one year
of the date of issue of this permit or the development
is not completed within
a further period of two years. The Responsible Authority may approve extension
to these time limits if requests
are made in writing within three months of the
date of expiry.
Note: All site operations must comply with the relevant Environment Protection
guidelines on construction and demolition noise.
Note: Before construction works begin, a building permit is required.
Note: The development shall be drained to a legal point of discharge to the
satisfaction of the Council.
The Responsible Authority is directed to issue a permit in accordance with this
order pursuant to
Section 85(1)(b)
Planning and Environment Act
JENNIFER A. MOLES
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter