URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2008/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
08-106 [2008] VMHRB 2 (9 January 2008)
In the Appeal of P
An involuntary patient
Clarendon Community Mental Health
[2008] VMHRB 2
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Ms J Slattery
Dr H Chopra
Section 14 –
Mental Health Act 1986
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
– risk to self or others – cruel and degrading
P was a 39 year old man with a mild intellectual disability, a history of
polysubstance abuse and a long-standing diagnosis of schizoaffective
characterised by delusional beliefs, with some paranoia, aggressive, and
aberrant behaviour. He has a long history of relapses
and admissions in the
context of non-compliance with medication, alcohol and drug abuse. P is both HIV
positive and Hepatitis C positive,
and also suffers from other sexually
transmitted diseases. When non compliant and unwell, he has poor impulse control
be very aggressive and sexually disinhibited. Among other things,
this leads to accommodation problems, and P being physically assaulted,
putting others at risk both from P’s aggressive behaviour and from
sexually transmitted diseases.
P’s legal representative Ms Shalit submitted to the Board that her
client did not meet the criterion as set out in
of the Act in relation
to P being a risk to himself or others. She further argued that should the
Board not accept her argument
criterion of risk, and find that P
should not be discharged, then the depot injections should be stopped, as
forcing her client to
have his medication by injection was in breach of
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act
Charter). She argued that, for her client, injections constituted cruel and
degrading treatment. She said that her client was
particularly frightened of
injections and that they were painful for him.
(1) The Board considered the evidence given at the hearing and in the
clinical file in finding that P suffered from a mental illness.
illness was characterised by significant disturbance of thought, perception,
mood and memory.
(2) The Board found that P required immediate treatment that could be
obtained by P being subject to a community treatment order,
and that treatment
was required to lessen the ill effects of his mental illness.
(3) The Board found that due to P’s lack of insight into his mental
illness and the effect of the medication on his mental state,
and his long
history of non-compliance with medication and subsequent relapses, he would be
at grave risk of relapse if not on a
community treatment order. Furthermore, P
put other members of the public at risk by his unsafe sexual practices. His
disinhibited behaviour and poor impulse control when unwell, were also
a risk to minors and adults.
(4) P’s clear lack of insight into his mental illness made him unable
to consent to the necessary treatment. His long history
of relapse due to
non-compliance with medication supported this finding.
(5) The community treatment order was necessary for P to receive adequate
treatment for his illness, and that P could not receive
treatment in a manner
less restrictive of his freedom of decision and action.
(6) Since its early days, the Board has taken the view that the specific type
and mode of treatment provided to an involuntary patient
is a matter of
clinical judgment that should be determined by the treating team, in
consultation with the patient, as part of the
treatment planning process (see
Dr John Grigor and the Chief General Manager of the Dept of Health MHRB and Mr
(1989) 3 VAR 258)
In the Board’s view, the Charter has not altered
that basic position, and the Board has no power to, nor should it, make
treatment decisions in individual cases. However, as a public authority, the
Charter will require individual treating teams in
area mental health services
to take Charter rights into account when making such treatment decisions.
(7) The Board therefore makes no determination in respect of Ms Shalit's
Charter argument, as it is outside the Board’s decision-making
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
P was represented by Ms Barbara Shalit, of the Mental Health Legal
Date of Decision: 9 January 2008
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Clarendon Community Mental Health Clinic
REFERENCE NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
9 January 2008
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms J Slattery
Community Member: Dr J Sparrow
Psychiatrist Member: Dr H Chopra
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 9 January 2008:
Doctor: Dr AB
Case Manager CD
Legal representative: Ms B Shalit, of the Mental Health Legal Centre
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
9 January 2008
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 4 January 2008 prepared by Dr AB and presented to
Plan of P dated 4 January 2008, prepared by CD and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
5. Appeal of P, dated 11 December 2007 and lodged with the Board on that
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board
must discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P is a 39 year old man with a mild intellectual
disability, a history of poly substance abuse and a long standing diagnosis of
schizoaffective
disorder characterised by delusional beliefs, with some
paranoia, aggressive, and aberrant behaviour. He has a long history of relapses
and admissions in the context of non compliance with medication, alcohol and
drug abuse. P is both HIV positive and Hepatitis C
positive, and also suffers
from other sexually transmitted diseases. When non compliant and unwell, he has
poor impulse control and
he can be very aggressive and sexually disinhibited.
Among other things, this leads to accommodation problems, and P being physically
assaulted, and putting others at risk both from P’s aggressive behaviour
and from sexually transmitted diseases.
P has had multiple failed placements at boarding house accommodation largely
due to his behavioural disturbances and deteriorating
mental state when non
compliant with medication. P was in a relationship which has now ended. He now
lives at the Hub in Melbourne,
as a temporary measure, but he still visits his
former partner D, in Mornington for about three or four days per week. D appears
to be P’s only stable social contact. P’s mother and three sisters
appear also to be intellectually disabled. P has not
had any contact with them
for some years. He sees his father regularly. P has been referred to Warringa
for long term placement and
to Fairfield House for regular respite.
P has also been repeatedly assaulted due to his sexually disinhibited conduct
away from his accommodation. When unwell and misusing
alcohol and illicit
substances, he also puts himself and others at risk by having unprotected sex.
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Shalit submitted to the Board that her client did
not meet the criterion as set out in
in relation to P
being a risk to himself or others. She argued that P was now well and free of
symptoms of his mental illness. P
is aware that he needs medication, and he
instructed her that he would take oral medication as prescribed, keeping himself
safe from any ill effects of his mental and physical illnesses. Ms
Shalit argued that in the event that the Board found to the contrary,
her client exhibited behaviours which may endanger himself, he should still be
discharged. She argued that as her client
had an intellectual disability and
that he was a heavy alcohol user, it was not possible for the Board to say that
his aberrant behaviours
were attributable to his mental illness, as they were
attributable to either his intellectual disability or his alcohol consumption,
and therefore the Board must discharge him.
Ms Shalit further argued that should the Board not accept her argument on the
criterion of risk, and find that P should not be discharged, then the
depot injections should be stopped, as forcing her client to
have his medication
by injection was in breach of
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act
(the Charter). She argued that for her client,
injections constituted cruel and degrading treatment. She said that her client
particularly frightened of injections and that they were painful for him. Ms
Shalit then quoted
of the Charter as enabling the Board to take into account
international instruments and decisions. Ms Shalit cited
Ireland v UK.
(18 January 1978) Series A No 25 of the European Court. Ms Shalit was unable to
produce a copy of the decision, or where it may be
found in hard copy. She
referred only to handwritten notes which she said she had made from the
internet. Ms Shalit quoted the
European Court as saying that:
“ Degrading treatment could be constituted by treatment which arouses
in the victim feelings of fear anguish and inferiority,
capable of humiliating
and debasing them.”
Ms Shalit claimed that as P felt debased and humiliated, the injections were
degrading treatment, and consequently the administration
of depot injections
constituted a breach of the Charter. Ms Shalit also said that as the injections
hurt P, the depot injections
were an unacceptably cruel treatment, the ill
effects of which outweighed any beneficial effect they may have for her
Evidence of P
P gave evidence that he was now well, but that he
would take oral medication if told by a doctor to do so. He said that he was
of injections and that they hurt. He gave no indication that he
suffered any other adverse feelings except the fear when he had an
injection. He
said that he had the injections in the arm, and he did not like them.
P said that he was well now, and that even though he had consumed lots of
alcohol and marijuana at Christmas, he had not been aggressive
as he was now
better. He said he has 12 pots of Carlton draft, as he will tonight, but he does
not get drunk or violent now, it just
old “best mate, C.” He shares some bongs of marijuana with him and
lots of “VBs” ( beer).
When asked about his living conditions, P said that he was awaiting
allocation of a flat on his own. He said he wanted privacy. Currently
boarding house accommodation, but visited his ex-partner D in Mornington, and
stayed with him 3 or 4 nights a week. He said
that at D’s place, P also
had a good time with his other “very best friend B, who is 13 years
old.” B comes to
visit P when B’s mother and D (P’s ex
partner) are at work. B’s mother and D are workmates. P describes B as
him very much too and how B says to P “I love you D, I really love
you.” The Board did not question P further about his
relationship with the
two minors.
The Board asked P about the severe injuries he had suffered when he had been
assaulted. He said that he had been bashed once by a
group of what he termed as
“poofter bashers”. On another occasion recently he had looked under
the door of a public toilet
and the occupant had punched him.
When questioned by the Board, P said that he would take pills if he had to,
but would not have injections. He said that he did not
have a mental illness,
but he did have a mood disorder. The Board questioned P about the entries in the
clinical file that he believed
that his mates had killed 380,000 people. He said
that he did not think that now, and that this was a bit silly. He was equivocal
as to whether he still believed that the Navy guys were deliberately infecting
the Army guys with HIV. He said he knew that because
an old boyfriend of his was
an army guy.
When asked why he was having the Zuclopenthixol depot injections, P replied
that his boyfriend wanted him to have them. P said that
his state of mental
health had nothing to do with his prescribed medication.
Evidence of treating team
Dr AB gave evidence to the Board that P has a long
history of Schizoaffective illness, characterised by delusional beliefs,
hallucinations,
disordered thought, aggression and poor impulse control. He has
had multiple admissions in the context of non-compliance with medication
deterioration of his mental state. When unwell, P’s paranoia, aggression,
violence and sexually inappropriate behaviour
worsened. He became loud and
threatening, especially to those at his shared housing. He yelled and broke
windows and became frightening,
responding to the hallucinatory voices he heard.
His insight into the effects of his behaviour decreased and his alcohol and drug
use sometimes increased. There had been times when the deterioration in mental
state was unrelated to drug and alcohol abuse and
solely related to non
compliance with medication. P’s poor impulse control and behaviour had
resulted in him being asked to
leave a succession of rooming house placements.
The service was having difficulty finding suitable places for P to live. Due to
sexually inappropriate behaviour with strangers when unwell, P had been
bashed and put in fear of his life.
The treating team were very specific that when mentally unwell, P engaged in
unprotected sex, as well as other inappropriate sexual
behaviour. Although P
was less sexually inhibited than the norm, due to his intellectual disability,
his risk taking behaviour and
inappropriate behaviour increased when unwell.
This had been observed on the ward following periods of non-compliance and
Given P’s status of being HIV positive, Hepatitis C positive and
also infected with other sexually transmitted diseases, this
was both a risk for
him, and for his sexual partners.
Because of the overall deterioration of P’s mental state and increase
of positive symptoms, P’s medication had been increased
from 50mg of depot
Zuclophenthixol to 250mg each fortnight. There had been an improvement in
P’s mental state without any negative
symptoms from the increased
medication.
The movement of P between Melbourne and D’s home in Mornington at
variable times each week made it difficult for the team to
actually find P when
he failed to present for the depot injections. The existence of the community
treatment order was the only way
the medication could be adequately delivered.
P’s insight into his illness created a situation where he could not
medication, nor could he be relied upon to take oral medication. His
movements were very difficult to track, making daily supervision
medication impossible in practical terms. In any event, the team had now
achieved a medication regimen which was controlling
the symptoms without side
The team acknowledged that P appeared to be afraid of injections and that he
complained that they hurt him. P had refused to have
the injections anywhere but
in his arm. At this site the injection was slightly more painful than injections
into the usual more
muscular area.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board considered the evidence given at the hearing and in the clinical
file in finding that P suffered from a mental illness.
His delusional belief
system had been established by the evidence. His mental illness was
characterised by significant disturbance
of thought, perception, mood and
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board found that P required immediate treatment that could be obtained by
P being subject to a community treatment order, and
that treatment was required
to lessen the ill effects of his mental illness.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of SW subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board found that due to P’s lack of insight into his mental illness
and the effect of the medication on his mental state,
and his long history of
non-compliance with medication and subsequent relapses, he would be at grave
risk of relapse if not on a
community treatment order. On relapse, P was at risk
of being assaulted due to his inappropriate behaviour and at risk of infection
with more sexually transmitted diseases. His risk of losing further housing
because of the behaviour he exhibits when unwell also
puts him at risk of
Furthermore, P put other members of the public, adults and possibly minors,
at risk by his unsafe sexual practices. His generally
disinhibited behaviour and
poor impulse control when unwell, was also a risk to minors and adults.
P’s evidence raised a probable
risk to others, including the minors he
spoke of his best friends whose company he loved. The combination of alcohol,
illicit drugs
and an increase in P’s sexually inappropriate behaviour, if
not compelled by the community treatment order to take his medication
substantial risk to others.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P’s clear lack of insight into his mental illness made him unable to
consent to the necessary treatment. His long history of
relapse due to
non-compliance with medication supported this finding.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
The Board found that the community treatment order was necessary for P to
receive adequate treatment for his illness. As to the issue
pursued by Ms Shalit
that P should have oral medication rather than injections, from P’s
evidence and that of the treating
team, and from the unfortunate history of
rapid relapses due to inadequate medication, it appeared quite clear that P
could not be
appropriately medicated without depot injections, unless he was to
become an inpatient. This was not considered as it was in itself
a much more
restrictive option, to be used only as a last resort when P’s mental state
had so deteriorated that he required
hospitalization.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board found that there had been compliance with the requirements of
in completing the treatment plan.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board found that the plan could be so implemented.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
The Charter and Board Decision Making
The Charter was assented to 25 July 2006 recognising in
legislation key civil and political rights and principles. The Charter became
fully into operation on 1 January 2008. Under the Charter, a "public
authority", which includes the Board when acting in its administrative
and all Victorian area mental health services, is required to act in a way that
is compatible with human rights and, in
making decisions, to give proper
consideration to a relevant human right
In its decision-making role, each division of the Board is a
“tribunal” and, as such, is not a public authority and is
very specific responsibilities under the Charter. First, the Board is required
to interpret the
’s provisions, "so far as it is possible to do so
consistently with their purpose", in a way that is compatible with human rights
In relation to the Board’s decision-making functions under the
, therefore, the Charter is an interpretive tool which does not affect the
validity of the
, or any provision of the
, irrespective of its
incompatibility with a human right. Secondly, in appropriate circumstances and
in accordance with
of the Charter, the Board may refer a question of law
that arises and relates to the application of the Charter or a question arises
with respect to the interpretation of a statutory provision in accordance with
the Charter to the Supreme Court.
It is therefore important for parties to understand that the Board has no
power under the Charter to determine the compatibility of
provisions of the
, with the Charter, nor to declare particular decisions or
actions to be in breach of specific Charter rights. Save for the
requirement in respect of the interpretation of laws, the Charter does not
change the Board’s substantive decision-making role
Dealing with Charter Issues or Arguments
In December 2007, the
Board President issued Practice Direction 2007/1, which is posted on the
Board’s website at
www.mhrb.vic.gov.au
. This practice
direction sets out in detail the Board’s requirements for any party who
wishes to raise a genuine Charter issue
or argument that may affect the
Board’s decision-making. In the interests of fairness to all parties, and
consistency of the
Board’s hearing practices, all parties are required to
comply with the terms of the Practice Direction before the Board will
and determine Charter issues or arguments.
Raising Charter Issues or Arguments in Hearings
In this case, Ms
Shalit purported to raise on P’s behalf a Charter argument relating to the
mode of treatment P is currently
receiving from the area mental health service.
She did this without reference to the Practice Direction, which requires
pre-hearing
notification to the Board and other parties of the issues and/or
arguments, together with details of their basis and supporting material.
Except as indicated above, the Board cannot, and will not, deal with Charter
arguments without due regard to their impact on other
parties involved in the
hearing, and in other cases listed at the same Board sitting. Therefore, strict
compliance with the terms
of the Practice Direction is required.
Consideration of Ms Shalit’s Argument
On behalf of P, Ms Shalit
argued that the use of depot medication given by way of injection is a breach of
one of the Charter rights
established in
, in that P’s acknowledged
fear of injections, which hurt P when given, was evidence of it being a cruel
and degrading treatment
practice. She purported to support this view by
reference to an international decision, a copy of which could not be provided to
the Board at the hearing.
Dr AB gave evidence to the effect that, other than his expressed fear and the
pain on entry of the injection into P’s arm, the
current medication has
provided considerable improvement to P’s mental state and functioning
without any obvious side-effects.
Despite suggestions from the treating team to
reduce the pain by giving the injection in a more muscular site than the arm, P
refused to consider other injection sites.
Since its early days, the Board has taken the view that the specific type and
mode of treatment provided to an involuntary patient
is a matter of clinical
judgment that should be determined by the treating team, in consultation with
the patient, as part of the
treatment planning process (see Dr John Grigor and
the Chief General Manager of the Dept of Health MHRB and Mr DWP
(1989) 3 VAR
In the Board’s view, the Charter has not altered that basic position,
and the Board has no power to, nor should it, make treatment
decisions in
individual cases. However, as a public authority, the Charter will require
individual treating teams in area mental
health services to take Charter rights
into account when making such treatment decisions.
The Board therefore makes no determination in respect of Ms Shalit's Charter
argument, as it is outside the Board’s decision-making
As a result, as all the
criteria were met and the treatment required
for P can be obtained through him being subject to a community treatment order,
Board made the determination set out on page 1.
Dated the 7
day of January 2008.
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (87.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter