URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McDonough (HAR) - App 04 2008 [2008] VRAT 6 (24 June 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 4 of 2008
In the matter of an Appeal
MR ALLAN McDONOUGH
AGAINST THE PENALTY OF A SIX-MONTH DISQUALIFICATION IMPOSED BY THE
HARNESS RACING VICTORIA STEWARDS ON 27 MARCH 2008 FOR BREACHING
HARNESS RACING RULE 190 (1)
JUDGE R. G. WILLIAMS
, His Honour
MR J. Kellett,
MR B. Pearce, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY
24 JUNE 2008 AT 9.41 A.M.
MR T. BURNS appeared on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria
MR C. HAMMOND appeared on behalf of Mr McDonough.
(His Honour Judge Williams)
D E C I S I O N:
HIS HONOUR: At the Stewards' Inquiry on 27 March 2008, Mr Allan
McDonough, the trainer of the horse Captian Cullen, was found guilty
breach of Rule 190(1) and (2), which reads as follows:
"A horse shall be presented for a race free of prohibited substances. If
a horse is presented for a race otherwise then in accordance
with sub-rule (1)
the trainer of the horse is guilty of an offence."
On his being found guilty of that offence, he was disqualified for a
period of six months from training. It is against that decision
of the Stewards
that he has now appealed to the Racing Appeals Tribunal and the appeal is one
against the penalty only.
By way of background, the horse Captian Cullen was sold from New
Zealand to Australia in July 2007 and was at the property of the
owner, Mr Sciberras and until 7 September 07 when it was transferred to the
stables of Mr McDonough for training and it
remained in his care from then on,
for as far as is relevant.
The horse did have two runs before the subject occasion, it was placed
third on 21 December 07 and sixth on 30 December 07, occasions
on which no tests
or swabs were undertaken. It then competed again on 15 January 08 at Bendigo
where it was placed first and was
then subject to a post race urine sample. The
urine sample was tested at RASL and found to be positive for Boldenone, which is
steroid and a prohibited substance.
The test did not set out the quantity of Boldenone detected but the
evidence of Dr Vine at the Stewards' Inquiry and here again
today was that it
was in the low range of quantities and he estimated that it would be somewhere
between 5, 10 or 15 nanograms per
millilitre, but he conceded that this was a
rough estimate only.
The horse was subject to a stable sample on 12 February 08 which
was negative.
Mr McDonough has given sworn evidence today which is consistent with
what he said to the Stewards, that he did not administer Boldenone
to the horse
at any time. He of course had had the horse in his care for approximately 130
days from 7 September 07 to 15 January
08. I repeat he testified that he
never administered or had administered to the horse the substance Boldenone,
indeed he added that
he had no knowledge of Boldenone prior to his involvement
in this matter. He had never used it, he had no knowledge of it, he did
administer it he said and he was not party to its administration by anyone
Indeed he went further in his defence and said that he was a very
careful trainer in relation to his general practices, he kept
scrupulous log
books and it would be contrary to his philosophy and his practices to administer
this substance or to allow it to
be administered. It is a substance which has
to be prescribed by a veterinary surgeon.
The sticking point as far as he is concerned, and the issue which has
been taken up substantially on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria,
is the fact
that he and no one else had possession and control of the horse for those 130
days, from 7 September 07 until 15 January
08 and that such a period renders it
more likely than not that the Boldenone was administered during that 130 days,
rather than that
it was administered some time prior to the commencement of that
It was this issue which has lead to considerable evidence here before
the Tribunal on the hearing of this case. I do not propose
to go through the
witnesses and their views in a piecemeal fashion. I propose to indicate the
Tribunal's conclusion and it is this;
Dr Vine fairly indicated that the
drug Boldenone (a steroid) is designed to stay in the body for a considerable
time. Dr Vine also
very fairly indicated that despite his general evidence that
he would expect any Boldenone administered intramuscularly to be gone
time frame of 40-50 days after administration, that he could not be specific in
any particular case and that there are too
many variables.
Indeed it seems to the Tribunal that this is an area of study which is
subject to a poverty of information and is still in its relatively
early stages
and is still surrounded with a degree of uncertainty. Apparently there are no
documented quantitative studies upon
horses of withdrawal times from Boldenone.
There are no authentic publications on this topic and the witnesses generally
have indicated
that those comments apply across the world to include the United
States, the United Kingdom and indeed Australia.
What does appear to exist are limited studies of single doses of
Boldenone upon a handful of horses under controlled conditions
and it is on
those limited single dose studies which Dr Vine was able to give his general
evidence about a 40-50 day withdrawal period.
Beyond that, there is really
nothing more than anecdotal information, - anecdotal generally from various
veterinary clinics around
the place. One such study, anecdotal, might be
constituted by the matters referred to in the letter to the Tribunal from Dr Van
Veenendaal from the Flemington Equine Clinic, which simply refers to the fact
that a particular thoroughbred trainer, who had a horse
of his test positive to
Boldenone, decided to have elective tests done on a number of his other horses
because he was somewhat surprised
by the finding, and as a result of those tests
Boldenone was apparently detected in small samples for up to a period of 116
and as a result of those findings that particular clinic is advising owners
and trainers to allow for a withholding period of a minimum
As Dr Vine pointed out, with such an anecdotal example it is not
possible to know what all the variables may have been, whether
it was a single
dose or multiple doses, what quantities over what periods and so on, and that is
true. But the information does
not count for nothing and indeed Dr Williamson,
a very experienced vet has indicated that he has given up prescribing Boldenone
of the lack of certainty concerning this very matter, the elimination
rate and withholding period.
Dr Brown indicated that his peers have told him that they are reluctant
to use Boldenone due to the unpredictable results. He was
called also on behalf
of Harness Racing Victoria and indicated that he was told by his peers that the
general withholding period
was somewhere between 6 and 12 weeks, but that he was
also told that he had to be careful because that period is variable.
At one stage there was relied upon apparently, a "white book", which
represented the recommendations of the Australian Equine Veterinary
Association.
And back in the early 90s the period recommended for the withdrawal from
Boldenone was at one stage 26 days, and it
is now out to 40-50 days, according
to Dr Vine.
In all the circumstances the Tribunal is not keen to fix on any
specific period for the withdrawal of a particular animal from the
Boldenone. As was said by more than one witness, there are too many variables
and the area of study seems to be too uncertain.
The Tribunal is not prepared to form the view that with this particular
horse a period of 130 days of possession and control must,
on the necessary
standard, indicate that the trainer was responsible for the administration of
the prohibited substance. Indeed
applying the onus as it should be applied,
i.e. round the other way, the Tribunal is satisfied to the necessary standard on
of Mr McDonough's sworn evidence which it accepts, and on the basis of
the conclusions reached by the Tribunal about the drug and
its withholding time,
the Tribunal is satisfied in this particular case that Mr McDonough was not the
person who administered the
prohibited substance.
In support of that conclusion the Tribunal is fortified by reference to
the subsequent conduct and behaviour or Mr McDonough in
making extensive
enquiries interstate and overseas, as to the qualities of this substance,
Boldenone, and the likelihood of a lengthy
withdrawal period. Indeed he went to
the trouble of having another horse from the same owner tested for either
anabolic steroids
or Boldenone itself, again with a view to better understanding
the case against him and the risks he was likely to be facing in taking
horses from owners in relation to the presence or otherwise of
We, the Tribunal, do not consider that such actions are consistent with
someone who subjectively knows that he has been the guilty
party who has
administered the drug. Accordingly the Tribunal is prepared to conclude that
the appellant, Mr McDonough, has satisfied
us on the Briginshaw standard that he
was not personally responsible for the administration of the drug either by he
himself administering
it or by having someone administer it on his behalf.
Therefore, although he is guilty technically of the offence, he has no true
moral culpability in relation to its perpetration.
I might divert for a short time and make some general observations in
this area of strict liability offences and this is of course
a strict liability
It is an offence which at least in the thoroughbred rules was once the
subject of a "reasonable precautions" defence, the evidentiary
onus being on the
trainer to avail himself of that defence. I do not know if the "reasonable
precautions" defence ever existed in
the Harness Racing Rules but in any event
even in the thoroughbred area the defence was rescinded in the early years of
this century.
And now both the thoroughbred and harness racing provisions
relating to this offence are substantially the same and they are strict
liability offences designed no doubt to preserve the integrity of and public
confidence in the industry.
Accordingly, even in a case where the trainer is able to show that he
did not himself administer the prohibited substance or that
he took reasonable
precautions to prevent it, such material does not provide a defence - there is
still a breach of the strict liability
obligation.
However, from the point of view of penalty the ability of a trainer to
demonstrate to a Tribunal, and the onus is on the trainer,
that he lacks
culpability because he did not administer the substance himself or is not
otherwise responsible in any way, that is
still of course a significant factor
in terms of penalty. But I emphasise the evidentiary onus remains in my view,
on the trainer,
to avail himself of the benefits of proof of reduced or absent
culpability. That conclusion, from a legal point of view, is consistent
the criminal law, in the case of Storey
1998 1 V.R. 359
and it is also referred
to in a thoroughbred case that I was reading of the
New South Wales Authority
v. Graeme Rogerson
which was reported p.5085 of the Racing Appeal Reports
and a case in which His Honour Mr Barry Thorley presided. At p.5087 he
"In the view which this Tribunal takes of the structure of AR178, it is
however for the trainer to carry the evidentiary onus of proving
facts which
serve to reduce the primary inference that would be drawn by the fact of the
finding of a prohibited substance in a horse
within his charge which has been
brought to a race course."
I endorse that statement of the onus in respect of not only the
thoroughbred rules but also the harness racing rules.
With this background these prohibited substance cases
and I emphasise
, fall into one of three categories. First
where through investigation, admission or other direct evidence the Authority,
case Harness Racing Victoria, can establish before the Tribunal a
positive culpability on the part of the person responsible, perhaps
For example, the trainer administered the drug to the horse either
himself or at his direction or had otherwise acted in some way
instrumental in the commission of the offence. Within that category the
culpability may be in the class of deliberate wrongdoing
or it may be through
ignorance or carelessness or something similar.
Secondly, where at the conclusion of any evidence and plea the Tribunal
is left in the position of having no real idea as to how
the prohibited
substance came to get into the horse. This may be with the trainer giving some
explanation which the Tribunal is
not prepared to accept or the trainer may
simple concede that he has no explanation.
I might say that this second category is perhaps the most commonly
experienced scenario. Indeed as again His Honour Mr Barry Thorley
at p.5087 of
that Rogerson case said:
"The common experience is of course that the Stewards have no idea as to
how it is in the case of any racehorse that the prohibited
substance came to be
in it. They immediately, as is required, opened an inquiry. It is very seldom
indeed that that inquiry demonstrates
the actual culprit. Why is that? For the
obvious reason that the sole knowledge of what transpires is within the stable
staff and its professional advisors. No doubt one can speculate that
there are many ways in which a horse may present with a prohibited
One can contemplate the act of some intruder by stealth of night entering the
stable and administering some drug. One
can contemplate the consumption by the
animal accidentally of some substance left lying around negligently or the
ingestion of some
grasses which produce adverse results. One can contemplate
that there was an actual, albeit mistaken administration within the stable
some product which was really intended for the horse in the adjoining stall, but
mistakenly administered to the horse in question.
One can even imagine that the
horse might lick a rail or some place which had previously been contaminated.
The number of examples
one can contemplate is manifold."
As I say, that is perhaps the most common scenario that the Tribunal is
Thirdly, the trainer (or other person being dealt with) may provide an
explanation which the Tribunal accepts and which demonstrates
that the trainer
has no culpability at all. An obvious example would be if the trainer could
satisfy the Tribunal that his horse
had been nobbled, and it had been nobbled
notwithstanding the presence of reasonable measures to prevent same.
And of course there could be various other factual scenarios where the
horse could somehow be the subject of the administration
or ingestion of a
prohibited substance without any culpability either directly or indirectly on
the part of the trainer. This category
represents cases where the trainer does
establish to the Tribunal's satisfaction, the onus being on him, that he is free
that he himself was not instrumental in the administration of the
prohibited substance and that he has done all he could be expected
prevent same.
Generally cases will fall into one of these three categories of case.
Obviously the first category where there is positive evidence
of culpability to
varying degrees, is the worst from the point of view of the trainer or other
person concerned and high penalties
as are appropriate would be likely to flow.
The second category, the lack of evidence category, may or may not end
up being similar to the first category, every case depending
individual facts.
As to the third category where there is little or no culpability, one
would expect any penalty to reflect the absence of culpability
or its low level.
Within this category of cases there may in appropriate situations be instances
where it is deemed not to be appropriate
that the sentence express denunciation
or general deterrence at all and indeed where it is appropriate to impose no
penalty at all.
Turning back to this case then, and I have already indicated the
Tribunal has accepted this case to be in the third category.
Of course a technical breach is proven and the trainer is guilty of the
offence. The Tribunal exercised its mind as to whether
although it has been
found that the trainer, Mr McDonough, did not administer or arrange for the
administration of the prohibited
substance, nevertheless whether he is at least
partly to blame for not having his horse tested before he raced it. Indeed as
goes on this may be a precaution (for the cost of $150) which trainers
generally ought to abide by, out of an abundance of caution
and to avoid what
has occurred in this case.
However, after due consideration and bearing in mind Mr McDonough's
explanation that he received the horse from New Zealand and
then from Mr
Sciberras in all good faith and anticipating the almost certainty that it would
not be negatively affected by any substance,
and the fact that he then raced it
twice, admittedly without any tests being done, but without any indication
anyway of any abnormality;
- it perhaps would be expecting too much caution in
these particular circumstances for a further test to have been done before the
race on 15 January 08.
However I stress that anyone, any trainer reading this decision or any
report of this decision ought consider the prudence in future
of having such a
test undertaken when a horse is obtained from a new owner or when it comes back
to a trainer out of a paddock.
And it seems to this Tribunal that it would be
money well spent.
Finally, turning to what penalty if any should be imposed, the Tribunal
has heard that Mr McDonough is now 31 years old, he has
really done nothing
since he left school other than work in harness racing. He has got
16 horses in work, he trains and drives himself,
it is his only source of
income. He has no other qualifications, he has commitments and he has already
suffered considerably because
of not only the disqualification of the horse from
winning the race, but also the fact of this matter hanging over his head and
the consequent stresses have caused secondary problems to him in his
livelihood.
I want to repeat that this is an unusual case, it is one that probably
would not frequently be encountered in the sense of the Tribunal
positively satisfied of no culpability on the trainers part, and for those
reasons should not be regarded as having a broad
precedent value. Of course if
other cases are the same or similar then the precedent value exists. But it is
probably unlikely
that this sort of situation will be found on the facts in
majority of cases. But in this unusual case the Tribunal considers that
is no justification for any disqualification of the trainer or even for any fine
in view of the findings made. Of course the
horse will be disqualified as it
has to be under the rules, but there will be no other penalty.
The deposit will be returned and I wish to thank my colleagues for
their invaluable assistance, but the decision has been solely
MR BURNS: As the Tribunal pleases.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter