URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
C & I Culinary Pty Ltd at Colombo Brothers [2025] VicLiqComm 2; (12 May 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Santhiyagu Tharinda Chiran Hemadasa as a director
of C & I Culinary Pty Ltd for an internal review of a decision by a delegate
to refuse to grant an application for a renewable limited licence for the
premises trading as Colombo Brothers at 2/156 Torquay Road,
Grovedale 3216
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic,
Commissioner
Date of Decision: 12 May 2025
Date of Reasons: 12 May 2025
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and grant the application subject to the conditions set out
Signed: John Larkins, Chair
Original Application
25 July 2024, C & I Culinary Pty Ltd (
) applied to the
Victorian Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
for a renewable limited
licence for the premises at 2/156 Torquay Road, Grovedale 3216 (
trading as Colombo Brothers (
Original Application
the Original Application, the Applicant sought a renewable limited licence to
provide liquor only with the purchase of take-away
meals from the Premises for
consumption off the Premises.
Applicant proposed to serve 10 lines of liquor comprising beer and pre-mixed
liquor in 330ml cans with a maximum amount of six
cans per transaction.
Applicant proposed to sell only liquor sourced from Sri Lanka or India.
the Original Application, the Applicant sought to trade liquor during the
following hours:
(a) Monday to Saturday between 9am and 11pm;
(b) Sunday between 10am and 11pm; and
(c) ANZAC Day between 12noon and 11pm.
accordance with section 33, a copy of the Original Application was served
on the Chief Commissioner of Police and the Licensing
Inspector1F
) and the City of Greater Geelong (
) on 3 September
. Neither Victoria Police nor the Council
objected to the Original Application. There were no residential objections.
24 January 2024, a delegate of the Commission (
the Delegate
decision to refuse to grant the licence (
Original Decision
Correspondence sent to the Applicant that day indicated that the decision to not
grant the licence was due to the proposal falling
under section 22(1)(c) which
provides that the Commission must not grant a licence in respect of premises
that, in the opinion of
the Commission, are used primarily as a convenience
Application for Internal Review
6 February 2025, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the Original
Review Application
completing the Review Application, the Applicant provided the following reasons
for applying for review of the Original Decision:
(a) “The decision was based on section 22(c) [sic] of the
Liquor Control
, however, [the Delegate] appears to have failed to consider the
extend [sic] of one operation to the other with the bulk of the operation
around the supply of food with a small specialized grocery option in Sri Laken
[sic] cuisine, this is not a convenience store
as defined under the
(b) “This venue is a specialized cultural grocer supplying Sri Laken [sic]
foods as is evidenced by the photos provided in
the application”; and
(c) “The scale of the supply is extremely limited and is restricted to
supply with food service only as is the case with many
venues that supply food
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review
governs internal review applications. Under
section 152
Original Decision is a reviewable decision, and the Applicant is eligible to
apply for a review of that decision. The Review
Application was made pursuant to
section 153.
section 157(1)
, the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision that:
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.3F
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;4F
(b) refuse to grant the Original
Application.5F
Determination of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was uncontested,
as no objections were
received under division 5 of part 2 within the relevant
an application is an uncontested application, section 44(1) provides, subject to
division 3 of part 2, that the Commission must
grant or refuse to grant an
uncontested application at any time after the expiry of the relevant period.
44(2) empowers the Commission to refuse to grant an uncontested application on
various grounds, including that granting of
the application would be conducive
to or encourage harm.7F
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter the Commission
considers relevant and make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit,
and is bound by the rules of natural
Exercising the internal review
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects of the
LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;9F
(b) may consider further information, material or
evidence.10F
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
uncontested application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 44(1)
and 157(1) at the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of
the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant
to this matter
Restrictions on the grant of licences
3 of part 2 sets out the restrictions on the grant of licences, including
section 22(1)(c) which provides that the Commission
must not grant a
licence in respect of premises that, in the opinion of the Commission, are used
primarily as a convenience store.
Renewable limited
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable limited
licence.11F
Pursuant to
section 14(1B), a renewable limited licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor at the times determined by the Commission
and specified in the
licence, and it may be renewed in accordance with the LCR Act. A limited licence
may further be subject to any
conditions determined by the Commission and
specified in the
licence.12F
26(1) provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is
satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the
licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope
Requirement
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate and further material provided by the
Applicant following the Review
Application, being:
(a) Original Application dated 25 July 2024;
(b) completed section 22 questionnaire dated 30 September 2024;
(c) responses received from the Applicant on 1 October 2024;
(d) photographs of the premises, including stock and food offerings;
(e) Original Decision of the Delegate dated 24 January 2025;
(f) Review Application received on 6 February 2025;
(g) responses received from the Applicant on 18 March 2025; and
(h) further responses received from the Applicant on 26 March 2025.
Commission Chair, Mr John Larkins, viewed the Premises on 19 February
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must determine the
following key issues:
(a) whether the premises are used primarily as a convenience
(b) whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is
(c) whether the grant of the Review Application would be conducive to or
encourage harm,15F
contrary to the objects of the LCR Act, in particular the object of harm
minimisation.16F
Whether the premises are used primarily as a convenience store
is made in the Original Decision to the Premises being a convenience store. In
response, the Applicant submitted in their
Review Application that the Delegate
had failed to consider that the Premises was a specialised cultural grocer
supplying Sri Lankan
foods and not a convenience store. The Applicant also
submitted that the bulk of their operation is based around the supply of
food and catering with a small specialised grocery option in Sri
Lankan cuisine.
fundamental question therefore in issue for the Commission to determine is
whether the Premises are used primarily as a convenience
store or something
else, such as a take-away food retailer and specialised grocer.
3 of the LCR Act defines a ‘convenience store’ as being “a
milk bar, mixed business or other premises of
not more than 240 square metres on
which food, drinks and other convenience goods are sold.”
‘mixed business’ nor ‘milk bar’ are defined within the
Macquarie Dictionary
defines ‘mixed business’ as “a
small grocery which also sells a selection of other types of
merchandise”.17F
Macquarie Dictionary
defines ‘milk bar’ generally as “a
shop, often with an open front, where milk drinks, ice cream, sandwiches, etc.,
are sold” and further defines it regionally for Victoria as a
‘corner store’, being “a small local shop selling
goods for domestic
consumption.”18F
of those definitions are inconsistent with the LCR Act.
inclusion of “or other premises” in the LCR Act ‘convenience
store’ definition provides that the Commission
may still consider premises
to be a convenience store despite not fulfilling the criteria for either a mixed
business or a milk bar,
provided the premises does not occupy more than 240
square metres on which food, drinks and other convenience goods are
‘Convenience
goods’ has not been defined within the LCR Act and no definition
correlating to that term appears in the
Macquarie Dictionary
Applicant has provided detailed evidence about their business model in both the
Original Application and Review Application. In
respect of the ‘primary
use’ of the Premises, the Applicant has submitted that their operation
consists of 70% takeaway
food services and 30% supermarket grocery sales, with a
strong emphasis on Sri Lankan cuisine prepared on-site. In the Applicant’s
response dated 18 March 2025, the Applicant indicated that while they do offer
those meals or otherwise provide home delivery of liquor.
18 March 2025, in response to a request for further particulars from the
Commission, the Applicant provided the following business
breakdown of their
operations:
(a) 65% as take-away food;
(b) 5% as party catering;
(c) 9% as ready-made food;
(d) 20% as edible grocery; and
(e) 1% as non-edible grocery.
Applicant also outlined that approximately 80% of the grocery items they stocked
were imported via a wholesale supplier that imported
the goods into Australia,
with the remainder being local product.
Premises occupies an area of approximately 70 square metres. The photographs and
the red line plan provided by the Applicant show:
(a) shelves stocked with packaged food items;
(b) a bain-marie from which hot take-away food is purchased;
(c) a fridge containing ready-made meals prepared on the Premises; and
(d) a commercial kitchen.
Commission notes that the Premises are located at the rear of a shopping plaza
on a busy highway with considerable passing traffic
and ample parking.
Applicant’s answers on the checklist of ‘items sold on the
premises’ on the Section 22-Questionaire relevantly
(a) the Premises does not provide fresh fruit, fresh meat, individual ice
creams, petrol, newsagency, dry cleaning, banking or postal
(b) of the 12 item types listed, the Applicant only answered in the affirmative
for three, being;
vegetables’ – which is qualified as being ‘around 5
items’, including curry leaves, chilli and
snack food’ – a category which on the questionnaire form is further
described with the addition of the words
“for example, pies, hot dogs,
sausage rolls”;
serve drinks’ – a category which on the questionnaire form is
further described with the addition of the words
“for example,
‘slurpies’”;
(c) regarding those questions answered in the affirmative, the Commission notes
availability of fresh vegetables is limited, and based on the information
provided on the questionnaire, comprises of some dried
such as curry
hot snack foods available are specialty Sri Lankan items, and not common snack
items like those listed in the examples on the
questionnaire; and
on the photographs provided, there does not appear to be a soft
dispensing machine on
the premises, although the applicant does stock some packaged soft
Commission considers the Applicant’s submissions are consistent with the
viewing of the premises itself as well as the photographs
1990, the convenience store
was considered by the
Supreme Court of Victoria in
Seldan Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Commission and
Wonga Park Village Supermarket Pty
). In 2009, the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
the Tribunal
) decision in
McGain v Director of Liquor
) found that an organic fruit and vegetable supplier, which
at the time held a convenience store town planning permit, was not a convenience
store for the purposes of the LCR Act. In doing so, the Tribunal relied heavily
on the analysis in
and highlighted the following indicia for
determining what is a ‘convenience store’:
(a) a place from which odd items are purchased as a matter of convenience,
either because it is located near to the consumer, or
is open at times which are
convenient;
(b) a place where a wide range of goods are sold as selected by the proprietor
to suit the convenience of the customers; and
(c) premises from which a particular product, or range of products, are sold may
cease to be convenience stores and become specialty
Relevantly,
, the Tribunal considered items typically sold in convenience
stores and considered it ‘notable’ that McGain did not sell
Further, the Tribunal
observed that the products that McGain did sell which were in common with
ordinary convenience stores were
only available as organic
varieties.27F
notion of speciality, as highlighted in
is relevant to
the current review. In the same way that common products were available only in
‘organic’ varieties in
, the Applicant has demonstrated
that the packaged food products and household products they sell, which may fall
into the same categories
as other common products in convenience stores, are
largely being offered in Sri Lankan variants. For these reasons, the Premises
falls into the category of ‘specialty shop’ as contemplated in
the language of the LCR Act definition of ‘convenience store’, and
the use of ‘and’ between the listed
criteria of products sold
(namely, “food, drinks and other convenience goods”) means that the
failure to satisfy all
of the listed criteria would exclude the Premises from
being considered a convenience store. In the present case, it has been
demonstrated
that the Premises does not sell ‘convenience goods’ as
that term is commonly understood.
purpose of section 22(1)(c) grew out of concerns over the frequency of minors in
milk bars, convenience stores or mixed businesses,
whether as staff or
customers.29F
However, on the
evidence before the Commission, those aspects of a typical convenience store
which usually attract unaccompanied
minors are not present at the Premises.
Therefore, the Commission is satisfied on the current facts and circumstances
that the Premises
are more accurately described as a specialty shop/store, and
not a convenience store. For this reason, the Commission is satisfied
section 22(1) of the LCR Act does not prohibit the grant of a licence.
Commission is mindful of the statutory purpose of section 22(1)(c) and the
object of the LCR Act to facilitate the development
of a diversity of licensed
facilities reflecting community expectations and has accordingly imposed a
special condition.
Whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is
stated above, the Commission may grant a renewable limited licence only if
satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is met
— that is, that the
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission
to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions, the Commission has considered “the nature, location,
duration or frequency
of hours of operation of the licence in question” as
relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.31F
Commission considers that the nature of the licence sought by the Applicant is
limited. The Commission notes that the proposed
supply of liquor is limited only
to sales with meals purchased at the Premises for consumption off the Premises.
The Applicant proposes
to offer a maximum of 10 lines of beer or pre-mixed
liquor sourced from Sri Lanka or India, supplied in 330ml cans with a maximum
amount of six cans per transaction.
the response received from the Applicant on 26 March 2025, the Applicant
indicated that the hours of operation at the Premises
would not extend beyond a
closing time of 9pm on any given day, signalling a reduction in the licence
hours proposed in the Original
Application. Given this, the Commission considers
that the duration of hours of operation now sought by the Applicant is limited,
being shorter than the ordinary trading hours specified in the LCR Act for other
licence types.32F
Consequently,
the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is
Whether granting the application
would be conducive to or encourage harm, or be contrary to the objects of the
application may be refused if granting the application would be conducive to or
encourage harm.33F
In addition,
the Commission must exercise its discretion whether or not to grant a licence
with regard to the objects of the LCR
Act, particularly the primary object of
harm minimisation.34F
Commission notes that Victoria Police did not raise any concerns in relation to
is also noted that the person listed on the Original Application as being in
day-to-day management or control of the Premises has
completed new entrant
training and currently holds a responsible service of alcohol certificate.
stated at paragraph [
reasons, the Premises are not typically the type of premises that would be
frequented by unaccompanied minors. In accordance
with the red line plan, the
only liquor on display at the Premises would be contained within a display
fridge behind the food service
counter and could not be directly accessed by
the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied
that adequate controls exist over the supply and
consumption of liquor at the
Premises and that any harm should be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission
considers that the grant
of a licence in this instance would not be conducive to
or encourage harm and would not be contrary to the LCR Act’s object
concerning harm minimisation.
Decision on review
Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets all legislative
requirements set out above. Accordingly, based on the
reasons set out above, the
Commission is satisfied that granting the licence the subject of the Review
Application is appropriate
in the circumstances.
Commission has therefore determined to set aside the Original Decision and grant
the licence the subject of the Review Application
subject to the conditions set
out in Appendix A.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Chair), Mr James
O’Halloran (Deputy Chair) and Mr
Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner).
General information
Any reference to the Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian
Liquor Commission, or any successor statutory office,
body or officer however
named, under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
(LCR Act) or successor
legislation, that has powers and carries out regulatory functions equivalent to
the Victorian Liquor Commission.
This licence is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
off the licensed premises
during the trading hours specified below.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the
area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the
licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised under
this licence.
Supply of liquor
The supply of liquor shall be limited to no more than 10 lines of beer or
pre-mixed liquor.
The place of origin for all liquor supplied must be either Sri Lanka or
The supply of liquor is only available to patrons purchasing take-away
The quantity of liquor supplied per order for off premises consumption must
not exceed six 330 ml bottles/cans of beer or pre-mixed
liquor and supply is
limited to one order per person per day.
Restrictions on sales and Deliveries
The licensee must not use the above licensed premises to supply liquor to a
person who makes an off-premises request.
Responsible service of alcohol
At least one member of staff, who has been designated as being in day-to-day
management or control of the premises, must have completed
an approved
responsible service of alcohol course within the preceding three years.
All copies of responsible service of alcohol certificates for members of
staff must be at one central place within the licensed area
for inspection if
requested by a member of Victoria Police or the Liquor Regulator.
Special conditions
The licensee may supply liquor from the Premises only while the Premises
operates as a specialty Sri Lankan foods store. Details of
any change in the
Applicant’s operations that tend toward the Premises becoming a
convenience store, or any increase in the
supply of convenience goods at the
Premises, must be reported to the liquor regulator at the time of change.
Trading hours
Good Friday & ANZAC Day Between 12noon and
On any other day Between 10am and 9pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
“licensing inspector”, see section 3.
Review Application.
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Sections 44, 49 and 157.
Sections 44 and 157.
Section 3(1) (definition
of “uncontested application”).
Section 44(2)(b)(ii)
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
Section 157(2).
Section 157(3).
Section 14(1).
Section 14(2)(c).
Section 22(1)(c).
Section 26(1). See [
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Sections 4 and 172D(3).
The Commission notes that, in determining this matter, it has also considered
each of the grounds set out
in section 44(2).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 28 April 2025) ‘mixed business’.
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 28 April 2025) ‘milk bar’.
definition for ‘fresh’ at definition 7 includes
“not canned or frozen; not preserved by pickling, salting, drying,
etc.” (online at 28 April 2025).
defines ‘soft serve’ as “a gelatine confection,
similar to but softer than ice cream, usually served in a cone”
28 April 2025).
In the context of the
forerunner to s 22(1)(c), being the almost identically phrased s 60(1)(c) of the
since repealed
Liquor Control Act 1987
Seldan Pty Ltd v Liquor
Licensing Commission and Wonga Park Village Supermarket Pty Ltd
Court of Victoria, Nathan J, 15 May 1990).
McGain v Director of
Liquor Licencing
[2009] VCAT 1081.
(n 25) [10]–[13].
LexisNexis,
Liquor Laws
(online at 21 March 2025) [LCR 22.5].
Section 26(1).
See decision of
Pty Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-Internal Review)
[2016] VCGLR 19, [61].
See LCR Act,
section 3(1) (definition of ‘ordinary trading hours’), which
specifies the ordinary trading hours for a
general licence, a late night
(general) licence, an on-premises licence, a late night (on‑premises)
licence, a restaurant and
cafe licence, a club licence, a packaged liquor
licence, a late night (packaged liquor) licence, a remote seller's packaged
licence and a producer’s licence.
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Sections 4 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter