URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/260.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lee v Yap [2025] VSCA 260 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2024 0154
IN THE MATTER
applications for leave to intervene by IAN MARTINDALE and CHRISTINE
IN THE MATTER
of applications to restrain IAN
MARTINDALE and CHRISTINE WILLSHIRE from acting for the first to third
respondents
YEW HAN LEE & ANOR (according to the attached
ENG HOCK YAP & ORS (according to the attached
Respondents
EMERTON P, WALKER and RICHARDS JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
29 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 260
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Applications for
leave to intervene in proceeding – Applicants are barristers whose conduct
the proceeding below is impugned – Procedural fairness requires
opportunity to be heard – No objection to intervention
Applications for leave to intervene granted.
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Application to restrain barristers from acting for first to third respondents in
application for leave
to appeal and any appeal – Barristers stated to
Court that they regard themselves as unable to act until application for leave
to appeal and any appeal is decided – Order restraining barristers not
Solicitors for written applications
Applicants:
Self-represented
First, second and third respondents:
Willocks Lawyers
Fourth respondent:
Self-represented
First proposed intervener:
Second proposed intervener:
Lander and Rogers
RICHARDS JA:
2016 the first respondent commenced a proceeding in the Trial Division of this
Court in relation to a trust that had been established
in 1982. As the judge
below observed, the proceeding has been characterised by procedural complexity,
numerous changes in legal representation
and significant developments in the
circumstances of key parties. In June 2024 the judge determined various
applications, including
an application by Yew Han Lee (the first applicant, and
the first defendant below, known as ‘Flora’) to have the
plaintiffs’
fifth amended statement of claim struck out on the basis of an
alleged abuse of process, breaches of ‘
undertakings’
and breaches of
the parties’ and legal practitioners’ overarching obligations. The
judge refused the relief sought in
that summons.
and the third defendant below, Eng Seng Yap (known as ‘Vincent’) now
seek leave to appeal the judge’s ruling.
their application for leave to appeal, Flora and Vincent seek non-party costs
orders against the barristers who acted for the first
to third respondents (who
were the plaintiffs below), Mr Ian Martindale KC and Ms Christine Willshire
(collectively, ‘the barristers’).
Flora and Vincent have also filed
an application seeking to restrain the barristers from acting in the application
for leave to appeal.
Martindale and Ms Willshire each sent email correspondence to this Court stating
that, in light of the application for costs against
them, they are unable to act
for the first to third respondents either on the application for leave to appeal
or below, until the
proceeding in this Court is decided. In light of that, they
stated that they did not contest the application to restrain them from
but submitted that it is not necessary for the Court to do so and asked that the
Court not take that step.
Martindale and Ms Willshire have also filed applications for leave to intervene
in the application for leave to appeal, pursuant
to r 64.10 of the
Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
initially sought to intervene only in relation to grounds 1 to 3 of the
applicants’ application for leave to appeal. They
now also seek leave to
intervene in relation to proposed ground 5, which was added to a proposed
amended application for leave to
appeal filed by the applicants on 18 August
respondents do not contest the applications for leave to intervene.
applicants’ formal position is that they neither oppose nor consent to
leave being granted to Mr Martindale and Ms Willshire
to intervene. They
accept that the barristers ‘must be offered an opportunity to present
arguments in their defence’.
However, they contend that such an
opportunity would also be available at the hearing of their applications for
orders restraining
the barristers from acting. They urge the Court to make
orders that would allow the orderly and fair hearing of the determination
their application for leave to appeal and appeal.
relevant provision of the Rules
person who is not a party to a proceeding has no entitlement to appear and/or
make submissions in relation to that proceeding. However,
such a person may
seek, and may by granted, leave to intervene in an application before this
Court. It is convenient to set out r
64.10, which governs such
applications:
Application for leave to intervene
(1) A person who was not a
or matter in which the
sought to be
was made or a person who does not have an independent
to appear or intervene, may apply to the Court of
for leave to intervene in an application for leave to
(2) An application for leave to intervene is made by filing with the
and serving—
(a) an application in accordance with Form 64B;
(b) an affidavit in support in accordance with any applicable
required by any applicable practice note .
must satisfy the Court of
(a) that the
contribution as an intervener will be useful and different from the contribution
of the parties;
(b) that the intervention would not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of
the application or
matter that the Court of
considers relevant.
(4) When giving leave to intervene, the Court of
may specify—
(a) the form of assistance to be given by the intervener;
(b) the manner of participation of the intervener;
(c) the matters that the intervener may address;
(d) whether the intervener's submissions are to be oral, in
or both; and
(e) whether any undertaking as to
should be given, and if so, in what form.
Bauer v Wilson (No 2)
, this Court summarised the principles relevant to
whether to grant leave to intervene as follows:
(1) A non-party whose interests would be affected directly by a decision in a
proceeding is entitled to intervene to protect the
interest liable to be
(2) Where the legal interests of a person may be affected by the operation of
precedent or by the doctrine of stare decisis, a court
may grant leave to
intervene if the interest is sufficiently substantial.
(3) Where a person having the necessary legal interest to apply for leave to
intervene can show that the parties to the particular
proceeding may not present
fully the submissions on a particular issue, being submissions which the Court
should have to assist it
to reach a correct determination, the Court may
exercise its jurisdiction by granting leave to intervene.
(4) A grant of leave may be limited, and subject to such conditions as to costs
or otherwise as will do justice as between the parties.
(5) A non-party must satisfy the Court that its contribution, as an intervener,
will be useful and different from the contribution
of the parties, and that the
intervention will not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of the
proceeding.
British American Tobacco Services Ltd v Cowell
, this Court granted leave
to intervene to a solicitor whose conduct had been criticised by the judge at
Consideration
reason of r 64.10(3), a person who seeks leave to intervene in a proceeding must
satisfy the Court that:
(a) their contribution as an intervener will be useful and different from the
contribution of the parties; and
(b) their intervention would not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of the
application or
the present case we are satisfied of both propositions in relation to the
barristers’ applications for leave to intervene.
Furthermore,
the application for leave to appeal makes various allegations concerning the
barristers’ conduct, including that
they deceived the court below,
breached the implied obligation, breached
Legal Profession
Uniform Conduct (Barristers) Rules 2015
and breached a duty owed to the
Court by failing to give a full and frank explanation by way of sworn evidence.
These are very serious
allegations and it is plain that the barristers must be
given an opportunity to respond, as a basic application of the principles
natural justice. Permitting intervention in the application for leave to appeal
is the most efficient manner in which that can
occur. Such intervention should,
in our view, occur by way of both written and oral submissions.
applicants’ written submissions suggested that an alternative forum in
which the barristers could be given the opportunity
to respond would be at the
hearing of the application to restrain them from acting. We do not consider that
would be an efficient
manner in which to provide the barristers with the
opportunity that basic fairness requires. Not only would it require two hearings
instead of a single hearing, the content of the two hearings would overlap.
Furthermore, it may later transpire (at the second hearing)
that not all of the
issues concerning the barristers’ conduct were fully ventilated at the
first hearing, which would then
either involve a breach of natural justice or
require a further opportunity for the barristers to be heard, which might delay
conduct of the second hearing. It is plainly preferable that there be a
single hearing, at which the barristers are given the opportunity
to respond to
the allegations against them.
that there was no objection to the barristers’ intervention, and given
that their conduct is impugned and that natural
justice requires them to be
given an opportunity to be heard on the issues raised in the application for
leave to appeal, we will
grant their application to intervene. Their
intervention will be limited to making written and oral submissions in relation
1 to 3 of the applicants’ application for leave to appeal, and
proposed ground 5 of the proposed amended application for leave
do not consider it necessary to make an order restraining the barristers from
acting for the first to third respondents on the
application for leave to
appeal, given the terms of the emails that they have sent to the Court.
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
ESTATE OF CHIN
YAP BROTHERS
HOLDINGS PTY LTD (ACN 006 004 324)
The phrase ‘
undertaking’ is a reference to the implied legal obligation that prevents
parties from using documents obtained through compulsory
court processes for any
collateral or ulterior purpose:
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125.
phrase comes from the case
Harman v Secretary of State for the Home
[1983] 1 AC 280.
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
were remade effective 8 September 2025. Rule
1.05(1) provides that these Rules apply to every civil proceeding commenced in
whether before, on or after the commencement date. Rule 64.10 is in
relevantly the same form in each version.
[2018] VSCA 68
, [7] (citations
(2002) 7 VR 524
[2002] VSCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (331 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter