URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria [2022] VicSAC 2; (4 March 2022)
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
Sentencing Advisory Council, March 2022
Contributors
Chalton, Paul McGorrery, Zsombor Bathy, Dugan Dallimore, Paul Schollum, Octavian
Sentencing Advisory Council
Arie Freiberg AM
Deputy-Chair
Council Directors
Carmel Arthur OAM, Hugh de Kretser, Fiona Dowsley,
Helen Fatouros, David Grace AM QC, Brendan Kissane QC, Dan Nicholson, Susanna
Wendy Steendam
Chief Executive Officer
Cynthia Marwood
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Court Services Victoria and
the Crime Statistics Agency for providing the data used in this report, the
Court for permission to cite unpublished sentencing remarks, and all
those consulted on the findings in this report for their invaluable
insights and
Executive summary
In February 2021, the
government asked the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) to investigate
criminal justice responses to stalking
and breaches of intervention orders,
including how those offences are sentenced in Victorian courts. The Sentencing
Advisory Council
(‘the Council’) agreed to produce three statistical
reports to assist the VLRC in developing its recommendations. This
focuses on the offence of stalking. It presents data on stalking offences
recorded by police and sentenced by courts from
2011 to 2020 (the reference
period), as well as the subsequent offending of people sentenced for stalking
offences in 2015 and 2016.
The offence of stalking
In Victoria, the offence of stalking is defined by
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), which makes it a crime to
engage in one or more of a wide variety of behaviours more than once or for a
protracted period.
The offender must have intended that, or must have been
reckless as to whether, the victim would suffer harm, apprehension or fear.
Because the offence is drafted broadly, behaviour patterns captured by
are not always the same as the behaviour patterns forensic psychologists
might define as stalking.
Based on a review of sentencing remarks in the higher courts, there are a
number of aggravating factors that courts frequently take
into account when
sentencing stalking offences. These tend to align with the features forensic
psychologists and criminologists have
identified as being associated with more
serious harms arising from stalking. They include family violence, stalking over
duration, very intense stalking behaviours, and stalking associated with,
or that appears to be leading up to, physical violence.
Conversely, mental
illness and neurodisability were common mitigating factors.
Stalking offences recorded by police
Police recorded 25,130 stalking offences during the
reference period. The offence occurred in a highly gendered context, with 87%
recorded stalkers being male, and 80% of recorded victims being female. This is
consistent with the extremely high rate of family
violence stalking: 52% of
stalking offences are recorded as occurring in a family violence context, and
over half of all recorded
stalkers are either the current (11%) or the former
(42%) intimate partner of the victim.
The most common stalking behaviour recorded by police was contacting another
person: if sentencing remarks in the higher courts are
an indicator, this often
involves former intimate partners sending hundreds of messages and/or making
hundreds of phone calls over
a brief period at the end of a relationship. And
while half of all recorded stalking offences lasted one week or less (12,446
offences) there were nevertheless 4,881 stalking offences that lasted
longer than 12 weeks.
Stalking offences sentenced by courts
Between 2011 and 2020, Victorian courts sentenced
6,832 stalking charges in 5,444 cases, 95% of which were sentenced in the
Magistrates’
Court. There were comparatively few charges sentenced in the
Children’s Court (186 charges) or the higher courts (183 charges).
6,832 charges – Magistrates’ Court: 6,463
(94.6%), Children’s Court: 186 (2.7%), higher courts: 183 (2.7%)
5,444 cases – Magistrates’ Court: 5,170
(95.0%), Children’s Court: 155 (2.8%), higher courts: 119 (2.2%)
Most stalking is family violence related
Research has shown that people often believe that
stalking predominantly occurs between strangers, and that it is more serious
committed by a stranger than by an ex-partner. Contrary to these
perceptions, 52% of stalking offences recorded by police occurred
in a family
violence context, 68% of stalking offences sentenced in the Magistrates’
Court occurred in a family violence context,
and 39% of stalking cases sentenced
in the Magistrates’ Court involved a breach of a family violence safety
notice (FVSN) or
intervention order (FVIO), making breach of a FVSN or FVIO the
most common offence co-sentenced with stalking offences. Additionally,
has consistently identified family violence as a risk factor for more serious
harm in stalking contexts, and sentencing
remarks in the higher courts indicate
that courts are frequently taking family violence into account as an aggravating
Prison sentences for stalking offences
Imprisonment was the most common sentencing outcome
for stalking charges in the higher courts (82%) and Magistrates’ Court
Offending occurring in a family violence context was correlated with a
higher likelihood of receiving imprisonment for both males
and females, but
gender was even more strongly correlated than a family violence flag with a
higher likelihood of imprisonment. The
most likely cohort to receive
imprisonment was male family violence offenders (46%), followed by male
non-family violence offenders
(29%), then female family violence offenders (17%)
and finally female non-family violence offenders (9%).
Of offenders who received imprisonment in the Magistrates’ Court (since
2017), just 8% did not spend any time on remand prior
to being sentenced. Of the
remaining 92%, 4% received a sentence shorter than the time they spent on
remand, 32% received a
time served
prison sentence, and 56% were required
to spend more time in custody after being sentenced.
Stakeholders raised concerns about the lack of prison-based treatment
programs targeted at reducing the risk of stalking-like behaviours.
are, however, available for offenders serving community correction orders
(CCOs). Of the 1,456 cases in the Magistrates’
Court where imprisonment
was imposed for stalking offences, 43% also included a CCO taking effect upon
the offender’s release
from prison. Almost all offenders (97%) receiving
imprisonment combined with a CCO had a condition attached to their CCO requiring
them to be assessed for, and participate in, some form of treatment and
rehabilitation program.
The effect of COVID-19 on stalking offences
The number of stalking offences recorded by police
increased from 2,394 in 2019 to 2,803 in 2020. Stakeholders we consulted were
surprised at this increase, especially due to the observable shift from
in-person stalking behaviours to online stalking behaviours
during COVID-19. In
contrast, the number of stalking offences sentenced between 2019 and 2020
decreased. This is consistent with
the overall decrease in the number of cases
that courts were able to finalise during the pandemic, prioritising the most
cases; it also largely explains the significant spike in imprisonment
rates in the Magistrates’ Court, from 33% of stalking
charges in 2019 to
59% in 2020.
Half of all stalkers reoffend within four years
The Council analysed the reoffending patterns of all
people sentenced for stalking offences in 2015 and 2016 (1,132 people). Within
four years, more than half (56%) of them had been sentenced again, almost
one-fifth (18%) had been sentenced for a violent offence,
one-quarter (25%) were
sentenced for breach of a FVSN or FVIO, and 8% were sentenced for
stalking offence. It was not possible to track whether these subsequent
offences occurred as part of a stalking episode, nor whether
they were committed
against the victim of the original stalking charge. The reoffending rates were
higher for males than for females,
for family violence offenders than for
non-family violence offenders, for children than for adults, and for offenders
in rural and
regional Victoria than for offenders in the Greater Melbourne area.
Charging decisions can affect treatment options
Forensic psychologists and criminologists usually
ascribe a minimum duration – often two weeks – before describing
intrusions into another person’s life as stalking. This is partly
because their focus is on the causes underlying offenders’
behaviour: the
motivations, pathology and treatment of shorter patterns of behaviour may not be
the same as for longer-term, fixated
stalking. In contrast, the offence under
section 21A
can capture a much wider range of behaviours (including, for
example, workplace bullying) over potentially short periods. While the
requires a course of conduct, the courts have interpreted that requirement
broadly, allowing patterns of behaviour as brief
as a few hours. In this sense,
data about the number of
section 21A
offences recorded and sentenced in Victoria
is likely to
overestimate
the prevalence in the justice system of
behaviour that forensic psychologists would classify as stalking. Conversely,
stalking-like
behaviours are very frequently charged or sentenced as a
combination of incident-based offences (such as property damage, breach
intervention order and making a threat to kill) without a stalking charge. In
this sense, data about the number of
section 21A
offences recorded and sentenced
is likely to
underestimate
the prevalence in the criminal justice system
of what forensic psychologists would classify as stalking.
The decision of which charges to apply to stalking-like behaviour turns on a
combination of prosecutorial discretion and plea negotiations.
Stakeholders
noted that, even if stalking charges are laid by police and prosecutors, those
charges are often the focus for defence
lawyers in plea negotiations, given the
high maximum penalty for the stalking offence (10 years’ imprisonment),
and often are
dropped by prosecutors, given the comparative ease of proving
incident-based offences or breaches of intervention orders.
The absence of a stalking charge to reflect stalking behaviours in a case,
however, affects not only the accuracy of criminal justice
statistics in
presenting a reliable estimate of the prevalence of stalking in Victoria’s
criminal justice system, but also
the offender’s ability to ultimately
receive the treatment most likely to reduce their risk to the community.
Forensicare’s
Problem Behaviour Program specifically addresses the
rehabilitative needs of people who stalk. However, stalkers are only required
be assessed for suitability to participate in the program if it is an express
condition of a CCO, or if a Corrections Victoria
case manager deems it
appropriate that the offender be assessed pursuant to a more generic CCO
condition requiring participation
in treatment and rehabilitation. Pre-sentence
report writers, courts and case managers are often alert for signs that a
for a suitability assessment to participate in the Problem Behaviour
might be appropriate regardless of the charges in a case;
however, the likelihood of an appropriate referral is substantially increased
there is a stalking charge in the case. Stakeholders also raised concerns that
in some cases, the absence of a stalking charge
might lead to the offender
receiving inappropriate and even counterproductive treatment.
Two options for improving access to effective treatment for stalkers could be
to increase awareness among prosecutors of the potential
importance of a
stalking charge in ensuring offenders receive appropriate treatment, and to
better improve identification of cases
a stalking charge that
would nevertheless be appropriate vehicles for referral. Access to programs in
rural and regional Victoria,
and in prisons, could also be useful.
1 Introduction
1.1 This report
is the first detailed examination of how stalking offences are sentenced in
Victoria. Using data provided by Court
Services Victoria and the Crime
Statistics Agency, it presents data on stalking offences recorded by police,
sentencing outcomes
imposed for stalking offences, and the reoffending patterns
of people sentenced for stalking offences.
Context of the report
1.2 On 18 February 2021, the Victorian Law Reform
Commission (VLRC) received terms of reference from the Victorian Government to
investigate
responses to stalking, harassment and similar conduct, and the
related use of personal safety intervention orders
The VLRC was specifically
asked to consider, among other things:
the law on stalking, harassment or similar conduct including:
operation of the
Personal Safety Intervention Orders Act 2010
(Vic), including
consideration of how the legislative framework and operation differs from the
scheme for Family Violence Safety
Notices and Family Violence Intervention
Orders under the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
• sentencing practices and available sentencing
1.3 To assist
the VLRC to understand current sentencing practices relating to these various
offences, the Council agreed to publish
three research reports: one on stalking
contrary to
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), one on breaches of
PSIOs contrary to
section 100
Personal Safety Intervention Orders Act
(Vic), and one on breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs)
and intervention orders (FVIOs) under the
Family Violence Protection Act
Aim and research questions
aim of this report is to examine current sentencing practices for the offence of
stalking contrary to
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
Chapter 2 provides an overview of the legal framework within which stalking
is sentenced, including relevant legislation and
case law, with reference to
criminological research about stalking and what factors may make it more or less
serious. Chapters 3
to 7 analyse police and court data for the 10 years to
31 December 2020 (the reference period) to address the following research
1. Stalking offences recorded by police (Chapter 3): How
many stalking offences were recorded by police during the reference period?
were the characteristics of those offences and offenders? Since 2012, how many
recorded stalking offences occurred in a family
violence context?
2. Stalking offences sentenced by courts (Chapters 4–6): How many
stalking offences were sentenced during the reference period
Children’s Court (Chapter 4), Magistrates’ Court (Chapter 5) and
higher courts (Chapter 6)? What age and gender
were people sentenced for
stalking? What offences were most commonly co-sentenced with stalking? What
sentencing outcomes were imposed
for stalking? Did these outcomes change over
3. Reoffending by stalkers (Chapter 7): How many people sentenced for a
stalking offence in 2015 or 2016 went on, in the next four
years, to be
sentenced for (a) any further offending, (b) violent offending, (c) breach of a
FVSN, FVIO or PSIO, and/or (d) a
stalking offence?
Methodology
methodology used in this report is outlined in Appendix
2 Sentencing stalking offences
2.1 This chapter
provides an overview of the Victorian offence of stalking, a review of
literature about stalkers and the harms they
cause, and relevant case law about
sentencing stalking offences in Victoria.
section 21A
offence of stalking
2.2 In Victoria, the offence of stalking is set out
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). It is a detailed provision.
It is an indictable offence triable summarily, meaning it can be prosecuted in
either the Magistrates’
Court or the higher
Section 21A
came into operation in January
It aimed to ‘offer
protection to people who have been followed, placed under surveillance,
items in circumstances where the offender
intends to cause the person physical or mental harm or apprehension or fear for
her safety, or that of another person’, but where the offender has
not threatened or physically attacked the
There was particular
concern for ‘women [who] have found there has been no appropriate remedy
in circumstances where they have
been harassed or followed over a period of
months or, in some cases,
21A. Stalking
(1) A person must not stalk another person.
Penalty: Level 5 imprisonment (10 years maximum).
(2) A person (the offender) stalks another person (the victim) if the
offender engages in a course of conduct which includes any of
(a) following the victim or any other person;
(b) contacting the victim or any other person by post, telephone, fax, text
message, e-mail or other electronic communication or
by any other means
whatsoever;
(ba) publishing on the Internet or by an e-mail or other electronic
communication to any person a statement or other material—
(i) relating to the victim or any other person; or
(ii) purporting to relate to, or to originate from, the victim or any other
(bb) causing an unauthorised computer function (within the meaning of
Subdivision (6) of Division 3) in a computer owned or used
by the victim or any
other person;
(bc) tracing the victim’s or any other person’s use of the Internet
or of e-mail or other electronic communications;
(c) entering or loitering outside or near the victim’s or any other
person’s place of residence or of business or any
other place frequented
by the victim or the other person;
(d) interfering with property in the victim’s or any other
person’s possession (whether or not the offender has an interest
the property);
(da) making threats to the victim;
(db) using abusive or offensive words to or in the presence of the victim;
(dc) performing abusive or offensive acts in the presence of the victim;
(dd) directing abusive or offensive acts towards the victim;
(e) giving offensive material to the victim or any other person or leaving it
where it will be found by, given to or brought to the
attention of, the victim
or the other person;
(f) keeping the victim or any other person under surveillance;
(g) acting in any other way that could reasonably be expected—
(i) to cause physical or mental harm to the victim, including self-harm; or
(ii) to arouse apprehension or fear in the victim for his or her own safety or
that of any other person—
with the intention of causing physical or mental harm to the victim,
including self-harm, or of arousing apprehension or fear in the
victim for his
or her own safety or that of any other person.
(3) For the purposes of this section an offender also has the intention to
cause physical or mental harm to the victim, including
self-harm, or to arouse
apprehension or fear in the victim for his or her own safety or that of any
other person if—
(a) the offender knows that engaging in a course of conduct of that kind would
be likely to cause such harm or arouse such apprehension
or fear; or
(b) the offender in all the particular circumstances ought to have understood
that engaging in a course of conduct of that kind would
be likely to cause such
harm or arouse such apprehension or fear and it actually did have that result.
(4) This section does not apply to conduct engaged in by a person performing
official duties for the purpose of—
(a) the enforcement of the criminal law; or
(b) the administration of any Act; or
(c) the enforcement of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty; or
(d) the execution of a warrant; or
(e) the protection of the public revenue—
that, but for this subsection, would constitute an offence against subsection
(4A) In a proceeding for an offence against subsection (1) it is a defence to
the charge for the accused to prove that the course
of conduct was engaged in
without malice—
(a) in the normal course of a lawful business, trade, profession or enterprise
(including that of any body or person whose business,
or whose principal
business, is the publication, or arranging for the publication, of news or
current affairs material); or
(b) for the purpose of an industrial dispute; or
(c) for the purpose of engaging in political activities or discussion or
communicating with respect to public affairs.
(6) It is immaterial that some or all of the course of conduct constituting
an offence against subsection (1) occurred outside Victoria,
so long as the
victim was in Victoria at the time at which that conduct occurred.
(7) It is immaterial that the victim was outside Victoria at the time at
which some or all of the course of conduct constituting an
offence against
subsection (1) occurred, so long as that conduct occurred in Victoria.
(8) In this section—
mental harm
(a) psychological harm; and
(b) suicidal thoughts.
2.4 The offence has been amended multiple times since then. In 2003, it was
amended to capture cyberstalking, and the wording was
altered so that the
prosecution was not required to prove that the offender’s behaviour
had a particular effect on the victim so long as a reasonable
person would have
the behaviour to have such an
And in 2011, in response to
the ‘Café Vamp’
incident in which a young woman took
her own life following workplace
the offence was expanded
to cover bullying behaviours such as threats and abusive behaviour, as well as
behaviours designed to cause
psychological harm, suicidal thoughts or
Elements of the offence
are three key elements required to prove a stalking offence:
a course of
the conduct
consists of one or more prohibited behaviours; and
the offender had
a requisite state of mind.
2.6 To prove that the offender
engaged in a course of conduct, the prosecution must establish that there were
either multiple incidents
or a single protracted episode of stalking
behaviours.
The conduct must
have a ‘continuity of purpose’ in targeting the
And while the notion of
a course of conduct is not without
boundaries,
it has been
interpreted broadly. For example, it has included:
• on a single occasion, the offender sending nine
• over a brief period, a man inhaling paint fumes and exposing his
genitals to a woman at a train station, behaving erratically,
inhaling more
fumes and then approaching the same woman, causing her to be afraid and jump
over a nearby fence to run
• in a single night, the offender leaving a series of threatening
voicemails and sending a number of threatening messages to
a male who he
believed was romantically involved with his
ex-girlfriend;
• in a single but protracted incident, the offender breaking into the
victim’s apartment with tools and restraints while
she was not home, doing
extensive damage including leaving various threats using a black marker and
tarot cards, and then sending
a threatening text message the following
• over two days, the offender persistently calling and sending text
messages to the offender’s former partner and then
driving to her house
and looking into her bedroom;
• over two days, the offender tracking and surveilling the
offender’s wife (who had recently left him) using an iPhone
placed in the
boot of her car, sending her abusive and threatening messages, making 93 phone
calls and smashing her car
2.7 There are many types of prohibited behaviour that can constitute stalking
in Victoria. These include contacting the victim, following
them, publishing
material about them online (see, for example, Case Study 1), causing
unauthorised computer functions on their devices,
tracking their use of the
internet or social media, loitering outside their home, making threats, keeping
them under surveillance,
or using offensive words in their
In addition to these
and other specific behaviours, there is also a catch-all of acting in
that could reasonably be expected to cause physical or mental
harm, including self-harm, to the victim or to arouse apprehension
the victim for their own safety or that of any other
Case Study 1: Stalking by publishing material relating to a
The offender in this case was sentenced for three
charges of stalking. He had accessed photographs of two of his three victims
from various social networking websites. He then posted those photographs
on pornographic websites in close proximity to photographs
of other women who
were nude or participating in sexual activity and who resembled the two victims,
making it seem as though the
victims were featured on those websites. He also
commented anonymously on the websites, referring to all three victims’
and descriptions such that anyone Googling their names would be directed
to those websites. He had a prior conviction for stalking
one of those victims a
few years earlier.
Total effective sentence:
15 months’ imprisonment
Wilson v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 40
2.8 Finally,
there are three ways to satisfy the mental element of a stalking offence. An
offender engaging in a course of conduct
involving one or more prohibited
behaviours is guilty of stalking if they:
to cause the victim physical harm, mental harm, self-harm, or apprehension or
fear for the safety of themselves or someone else (intention,
their behaviour would be likely to cause such harm, apprehension or fear
(subjective recklessness, no harm required);
ought to have known
circumstances
that their behaviour would be likely to cause such harm,
apprehension or fear
their behaviour actually did cause such harm,
apprehension or fear (objective recklessness or quasi-objective test, actual
harm required).
Maximum penalty
2.9 The maximum penalty for stalking in Victoria is
10 years’ imprisonment.
The maximum penalties for stalking offences vary across Australia: 5
years’ imprisonment in the Northern Territory, South Australia,
Wales and the Australian Capital Territory; up to 8 years’ imprisonment in
Western Australia; and up to 10 years’
imprisonment in Queensland (Figure
2.10 Most jurisdictions’ maximum penalties only apply if there are
aggravating circumstances present, such as if the offending
occurred in breach
of a court order or while the offender was in possession of a
The 10-year maximum
penalty in Queensland only applies in the very narrow circumstance of the
offending being directed at a law enforcement
officer (otherwise the maximum is
5 or 7 years). When those aggravating circumstances are not present, the maximum
penalties are
lower. In Victoria, however, the 10-year maximum penalty applies
in all circumstances, making it effectively the highest maximum
penalty for
stalking in Australia.
Figure 1: Maximum penalties for stalking in Australian
Maximum penalty
Australian Capital Territory
2 or 5 years
New South Wales
Northern Territory
2 or 5 years
5, 7 or 10 years
South Australia
3 or 5 years
Western Australia
3 or 8 years
2.11 Indeed, the maximum penalty for stalking is higher in Victoria than in
most common law countries. The maximum penalty in New
Zealand is 2 years; in
Scotland and England and Wales, 5 years; and in Ireland and Northern Ireland, 7
Canada, however, also has
a comparable 10-year maximum penalty for
Motivations and behaviour patterns associated with
2.12 Understanding a stalker’s motivation can
be a useful way for sentencing courts to analyse culpability and assess any
appropriate
interventions, such as whether imprisonment or a community
correction order (CCO) with a treatment program would better protect the
community. To that end, forensic psychologists and criminologists who research
stalking sometimes categorise stalkers into five groups
according to their
motivations.
The category names,
which were developed by stalking researchers, refer to ‘stalkers’,
but the typology describes behaviour
and relationships as well as more stable
underlying personality traits and pathologies. It is therefore possible that one
might, at different times or in relation to different victims, fall into
more than one category.
stalking typologies also exist; however, they tend to be closely focused on
either risk assessment or treatment and less demonstrative
of characteristics
that could be relevant to
sentencing.
2.13 The five
groups are as follows:
people who begin
to stalk following the breakdown of an important relationship, usually a
sexually intimate one. They may be motivated
by reconciliation, revenge, or both
at different times. They are often jealous or possessive, and they may suffer
from personality
disorders. Almost all former partner stalkers fall into this
Intimacy seeking
people who stalk
in order to become intimate with someone they are (wrongly) convinced will or
already does return their affection.
A high proportion of this group suffers
from delusional or psychotic mental
They may stalk the same
victim for a long time.
Incompetent
people who stalk in
order to get a date or sexual encounter or to establish a new friendship, often
because they lack the social
skills to initiate social contact
appropriately.
They may realise
that their victim does not currently reciprocate their feelings, but they hope
that this will change. They may be
more likely than intimacy seeking stalkers to
target multiple victims (intimacy seeking stalkers are more fixed on their
may suffer from cognitive and/or social
impairments.
those who set out
to frighten or distress the victim because they believe they have been wronged.
This may be related to the victim’s
real or perceived characteristics or
actions, or it may be an outlet for a more general sense of
Resentful stalkers
may have paranoid personality traits and/or psychotic
those who stalk in
order to obtain sexual gratification (for example, through voyeurism) or in
preparation to sexually assault or
attack the victim. These stalkers may have
previous convictions for sexual
The harms of stalking
2.14 The harms arising from stalking can be serious
and long-lasting. Experiencing stalking is associated with
and lower overall mental
it is also associated
with diagnosable psychological disorders such as depression, anxiety and
post-traumatic stress disorder,
and sleep disorders.
Australians who experienced stalking or harassment in 2012, more than half of
females and around one-third of males experienced
fear or anxiety in the year
after it began.
Victims may also
change their behaviour in response to stalking and may experience significant
personal inconvenience, financial
cost, and social, reputational and
professional harm.
has described:
[s]talking has been shown to have psychological, emotional and social
repercussions for victims ... Victims report heightened levels
of anxiety and
chronic sleep deprivation, manifested through panic attacks, hypervigilance and
hyperarousal ... weight fluctuation,
fatigue, increased alcohol and nicotine
consumption, headaches, and nausea ... post-traumatic stress disorder ... [and]
than 31% of victims surveyed repeatedly contemplated committing
2.15 Although psychosocial harm is often stalking’s most serious
consequence,
stalking can also
progress to or involve physical
It is estimated that
between 10% and 48% of stalkers engage in physical violence against their
factors that may (individually or together) increase the likelihood or
seriousness of harms arising from stalking include:
relationship between the stalker and the victim – former partners tend to
be more threatening and engage in a broader
variety of stalking behaviours, and
they are more likely to engage in physical violence, especially if they were
abusive during the
relationship;
• the duration of the stalking – persistent or recurring stalking
tends to cause more severe harm, but this is not always
the case; stalkers who
commit serious physical violence tend to stalk for shorter durations, perhaps
because they are apprehended
• whether the offender has engaged in actual or threatened
– in the context
of ongoing, unwanted intrusions, threats can cause more serious harm than actual
violence does;
• whether the offender has substance abuse
• whether the offender has a history of property damage (especially so
for former partners);
• whether the offender has physically approached the
• the gender of the offender and the
Guidance on sentencing stalking offences
2.17 There is a great variety of stalking that
courts in Victoria might be called on to sentence. This can significantly
which purposes of sentencing courts prioritise. The stalking may last
many years,
involve explicit,
credible threats,
serious harm to the victim
be committed by an offender with a history of related
In these cases,
sentencing courts often prioritise protection of the community in crafting an
appropriate sentence.
stalking might be as brief as less than a
and result in relatively
inconsequential harms for the victim. In these cases, it might be that courts
prioritise rehabilitation
and craft a sentence that acts as an appropriate
intervention to help the offender change their behaviour. This is especially the
case for offenders with neurodisabilities or mental
As Professor Ian
Freckelton has observed:
[s]ome stalkers, to be sure, commit their offences in a seriously morally
reprehensible fashion with an intention to inflict maximal
amounts of trauma and
distress upon their victims. Others, though, have little by way of such an
intention ... On some occasions,
the offender may bear relatively little
responsibility for his or her own behaviour by reason of suffering from a
serious psychiatric
illness which has influenced his or her conduct ... [F]or
some offenders, apprehension has aroused in them insight into the harm
have engendered by their harassment of a victim and a determination not to
repeat the conduct. For both of these categories
of offender, rehabilitation is
realisable and a more benign sentencing disposition is
appropriate.
2.18 Because of
the diversity of circumstances in which stalking occurs, it can be difficult to
ascertain the sentencing range for
stalking. However, some factors do stand out,
and they are largely consistent with those associated with a higher risk of harm
victims. Stalking has been considered more serious where:
• it was associated with family
particularly where
there had been violence within the
relationship
or where an
intervention order had been
• the behaviour lasted a long
or continued or recurred
despite the offender having a previous conviction for
or an intervention
order having been obtained by the
• the stalking was particularly intense in terms of the
of interferences in the
victim’s life;
• the behaviour was particularly
calculated;
• the offender did not take
responsibility;
• the context suggested the stalking might have been a prelude to
further offending;
• the effect on the victim was particularly
2.19 On the other hand, courts have mitigated sentences for stalkers if
delusion or psychosis diminished the offender’s
culpability,
the stalking was
comparatively minor and ‘out of
character’,
offender had a history of trauma, suffered from a
neurodisability,
or had a mental
illness such as schizophrenia that enlivened
considerations.
2.20 As no sentencing remarks were available in the Magistrates’
it is difficult to
ascertain the bottom of the range. However, three examples of some of the more
severe sentences imposed for stalking
charges include:
DPP v Bouras
36 months’ imprisonment for one stalking charge (base sentence). The
course of conduct was short (seven days), but the stalking,
which included
specific threats about the victim and her son and references to weapons, was
very intense and was intended to instil
fear. Frequent contact continued despite
the victim applying for a personal safety intervention order (PSIO). The effect
on the victim
was severe; the offender had a significant criminal history and
had previously stalked a different victim.
imprisonment for one stalking charge (1 year cumulative). Over 10 months, the
offender had made five voyeuristic
videos of a woman undressed. They were taken
at close range (from her property), and they were discovered during a rape
investigation,
contextualising his likely motivation for stalking. He did not
take responsibility for his actions and blamed the victim. Due to
seriousness of the other charges (serious sexual offending against other
victims), the stalking charge made up only a small portion
of the 14-year total
effective sentence.
imprisonment (one year cumulative) as part of a 54-month total effective
sentence for a closely related course of
The offender and victim
had been in a relationship for 19 years, during which he had repeatedly
committed family violence and breached
multiple intervention orders. After the
relationship ended, immediately upon his release from prison and in breach of an
intervention
order, he repeatedly texted explicit threats, published obscene
material on Facebook about the victim and her new partner, and called
repeatedly throughout the night. The offending continued for 10 weeks despite
police intervention and the offender being remanded
in custody, where he used
calls to their son to continue contacting the victim. He also pressured their
son to have the victim withdraw
her complaints, leading to a charge against the
offender of attempt to pervert the course of justice.
Charge selection and sentencing
a stalking offence includes actions that themselves amount to criminal offences,
such as threatening to kill or harm another
person, damaging property, or making
additional charges;
in others, it is treated as context for the stalking
offence. The selection of charges depends on a combination of prosecutorial
discretion and plea negotiations; it may involve considerations such as whether
a particular incident is substantially removed from
the rest of the course of
conduct in seriousness or time. One stakeholder described factors that might
influence this decision:
It can depend on the context and the facts of each case that you’re
presented with. So if you’ve got a particular course
of conduct and then
perhaps one outlying, particularly serious act, you might take that serious act
outside of the stalking charge
and charge the more persistent acts as a
stalking. It’s going to be, personally for me, a case-by-case
consideration: what’s
most appropriate when you look at the particular
factual scenario you’re faced with? ... It may also be the time period ...
if the more serious offending falls a few days after or a few days before,
whether it can properly be said to fit within a course
of conduct. There are a
lot of different variables that might play into that
2.22 From a sentencing perspective, both approaches (additional
charges and providing context to stalking) are workable and are unlikely
change the overall sentence. If a person is sentenced for both stalking and an
additional offence that also forms part of the
courts tend to
cumulate less of the sentence for the other offence to avoid punishing an
offender twice for the same
Where the other
offence is an uncharged act, it may be considered an aggravating feature of the
2.23 For instance, in
Atkinson v The
the offender
had been convicted of stalking as well as related offences including discharging
a firearm and criminal damage. He argued
on appeal that he had been doubly
punished because the trial judge cumulated the sentences imposed on some of
those other offences
even though they constituted some of the behaviour captured
by the stalking charge. The Court of Appeal disagreed and upheld the
sentence, partly because the cumulation for those other offences was ‘very
Similarly, in
Maher v The Queen,
offender was sentenced for stalking as well as numerous other offences,
including burglary, aggravated animal cruelty and breaches
of an intervention
order, all of which were part of the stalking. The court held that while some
concurrency between the sentences
imposed was required, there also needed to be
‘an extent of cumulation’ between
principle holds that ‘a judge, in imposing
sentence ... cannot take into account circumstances of aggravation which would
warranted a conviction for a more serious
The offences
most often co-sentenced with stalking tend to have lower maximum penalties, such
that the principle is not often infringed
when the offences are treated as
aggravating features of the stalking
For example, in
the offender
breached an intervention order while committing the stalking offence, but there
was no separate charge for a breach
offence. Nevertheless, the sentencing court
(and the Court of Appeal) implicitly treated the breach of intervention order as
an aggravating
feature of the stalking
This is consistent
with the approach the Court of Appeal took in
Maher v The
where the breach
of intervention order was charged separately. The court held that the breach
represented ‘distinct criminality’
because breaching an intervention
order constitutes ‘disobedience of a court order’, such that the
breach offending must
have a ‘real impact’ on the sentence imposed,
ameliorated for totality
2.25 During
consultation with stakeholders, it was noted that defence lawyers often focus on
stalking charges during plea negotiations,
aiming instead to reflect the same
behaviour in guilty pleas to incident-based offences or breaches of intervention
It’s twofold: they’re not being charged in the first instance, but
even if they are charged, they get withdrawn as alternatives.
And of course, any
defence counsel will say ‘get rid of the stalking’, because
it’s higher penalty, and ‘we’ll
go with the family violence
As defence counsel, it is our role to ensure that the prosecution can prove
every element of each offence. And in the case of stalking,
the mental element
can be hard to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. So we often seek for these
charges to be withdrawn in favour of
other charges, such as a contravention of a
PSIO or FVIO.
2.26 While the
presence or absence of a stalking charge in the case does not appear to have a
significant effect on the sentence type
imposed, it can significantly affect the
availability of targeted rehabilitation initiatives. Stakeholders we consulted
advised that
if there is no stalking charge in the case at sentencing, offenders
are less likely to be referred to Forensicare’s Problem
Behaviour Program,
the only specialist stalking-specific treatment program in Australia
[5.24]–[5.25]). They may instead be directed into treatment programs that
might be ineffective or even counterproductive
in preventing stalking:
Sometimes, if they don’t have the stalking charge, they can end up in the
totally wrong intervention environment. They might
end up in one that’s
all about relationship-building, which equips them beautifully with knowledge
and techniques to be an
even better stalker. It turns them into love-bombing
stalkers, which is not great.
You can’t underestimate how much decisions in court on the day affect
stalking – I don’t want to exaggerate, but
I think almost more so
than any other offence, because it’s such a nebulous concept, and so many
people have views on whether
stalking is the right thing or the wrong thing to
charge, or whether other charges are more appropriate. That has real impacts on
the flow-through in the criminal justice system that really can’t be
underestimated.
3 Stalking offences recorded by police
3.1 This chapter
presents police data on stalking offences in the 10 years from 2011 to 2020.
This includes the number of stalking
offences recorded by police each year, the
stalking offences,
the age and gender of recorded stalkers and victims, and the
relationships between them.
How many stalking offences were recorded by police?
3.2 Between 2011 and 2020, police recorded 25,130
stalking offences contrary to
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Figure 2). The number of stalking offences recorded each year initially
increased, but it remained relatively stable for most
of the reference period.
This follows almost two decades of consistent yearly increases, from about 400
stalking offences in 1995–96
to just under 2,000 in
Figure 2: Number of stalking offences recorded by police, by year, 2011 to
2020 (25,130 offences)
Number of offences recorded
Total offences recorded
3.3 These figures should be viewed as both an underestimation and an
overestimation of stalking in Victoria. Criminal justice statistics
behaviours that have been reported. There is also a unique issue with
stalking-like behaviours such as patterns of property
damage, threats and
frequent contact in breach of an intervention order. These behaviours are often
recorded or prosecuted as incident-based
offences instead of
Conversely, the
figures are also an overestimation because the broad definition of stalking in
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) means that many behaviours
recorded and prosecuted under that section would not amount to what forensic
psychologists, and most
of the community, would classify as stalking.
Stalking behaviours recorded by police
3.4 When police record a stalking offence, it is
attached to an offence description. Most often, that description is simply
contrary to
section 21A
; however, 10,930 (43%) of the
25,130 recorded offences were described by reference to either a mental or a
behavioural element of
the stalking offence. Each offence has only one
description, presented in Figure 3. Victoria Police advise that officers record
based on the victim’s narrative, but it is common for multiple
behaviours to be present. In such cases, the brief of evidence
additional details of behaviour that may be relevant in
prosecution.
Figure 3: Mental and behavioural elements of stalking recorded by police,
2011 to 2020 (10,930 offences)
Mental element (5,570 offences)
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) arouse apprehension or
fear for safety
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) cause mental harm
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) cause physical
Behavioural element (4,968 offences)
Follow another person
Keep another person under surveillance
Loiter outside residence, business or place frequented
Publish material relating to another person
Make threats
3.5 Among the 5,570 stalking offences recorded by reference to a mental
element, the most common (70%) related to causing the victim
to fear for their
own or someone else’s safety. Among the 4,968 offences recorded by
reference to a behavioural element, the
most common was contacting another
person (62%).
Stakeholders
commented that the behaviour recorded may also be influenced by police
officers’ desire to particularise a charge
with behavioural elements that
are easily provable by objective evidence, such as phone records or message
Duration of recorded stalking offences
3.6 For most offence types, police record a single
date on which the alleged offence occurred. However, a course of conduct offence
such as stalking rarely occurs on a single
so police often record
both a start and an end date for the alleged offence. The time between the start
and the end dates recorded
for all 25,130 stalking offences is presented in
Figure 4: Duration of stalking offences recorded by police, 2011 to 2020
(25,130 offences)
Duration of stalking
Number of offences recorded by police
More than 1 to 7 days
More than 7 to 14 days
More than 2 to 4 weeks
More than 4 to 8 weeks
More than 8 to 12 weeks
More than 12 weeks
Total offences recorded
3.7 A significant proportion (33%) had one-day durations, where the start
date and the end date were the same. Stakeholders suggested
a number of reasons
why so many stalking offences seemed to occur on a single
Some may be genuine
instances of stalking behaviours that ended after less than 24 hours or when
police were able to intervene early;
others may be products of inaccurate data
entry representing, for example, the date the offence was reported, the date of
hearing when the charge was laid, the start date of the offending or a
single memorable or verifiable stalking-related
3.8 The average (86 days) and median (one to two weeks) recorded durations
are somewhat shorter than average and median durations
identified in stalking
Even if one-day
durations are excluded from calculations, the average recorded duration was 128
days per offence, and the median
recorded duration was around four weeks. This
may be partly because recorded durations are, by their nature, an undercount:
represent the durations at the time police record the offence, but the
stalking may continue beyond
Age and gender of recorded stalkers and victims
3.9 There were 14,453 unique
recorded as having
committed the 25,130 stalking offences. Data on age and gender was available for
over 99% of them (Figure 5).
Males accounted for 87% of all recorded stalkers,
and this did not vary significantly during the reference period. Males accounted
for between 85% and 90% of almost every age category. There was one exception:
males accounted for just 72% of recorded stalkers
aged 10 to 19. This is
probably partially explained by lower rates of intimate partner violence, which
is strongly gendered, among
87% of recorded stalkers are male
Figure 5: Age and gender of stalkers recorded by police, 2011 to 2020
(14,331 offenders)
Age group of offender
10-19 years
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55 years and over
Total offenders
3.10 In the same
timeframe, 19,492 people were recorded as victims of stalking offences (Figure
6). Data on age and gender were available
for 98% of them. Females accounted for
80% of all victims of stalking; this was relatively stable each year of the
reference period,
ranging from 77% to 83%. Females were most likely to be
victims while aged 20 to 34, and males were most likely to be victims while
80% of recorded victims of stalking are
Figure 6: Age and gender of victims of stalking recorded by police, 2011
to 2020 (19,044 victims)
Age group of victim
15-19 years
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55-59 years
60-64 years
65 years and over
Total victims
Relationship between recorded offenders and victims
3.11 When recording an offence, police in Victoria
indicate whether it is a ‘family
In the nine
years to 2020, police recorded 23,370 stalking
Just over half
(52%) were recorded as family incidents. In the 10 years to 2020, the
relationship between offender and victim was
recorded for 13,322 of the 19,492
victims of stalking.
from most to least common, the relationships between recorded stalkers and
victims were:
former intimate
partners (5,657 or 42% of known relationships);
members but related or associated (3,183 or 24%);
not related or
associated (2,222 or 17%);
current intimate
partners (1,493 or 11%); and
family members
other than current or former intimate partners (767 or 6%).
52% of stalking offences were recorded as family
3.12 Just over half (53%) of all recorded stalkers were current or former
intimate partners of the victim, which is consistent with,
or slightly higher
than, the findings of past
The rate of
stalkers who were former intimate partners has increased significantly since
2011, from 27% to 50% of recorded stalking
offences (Figure 7). Stakeholders
suggested this could be due to a number of factors. Those included the evolution
of technology,
which had changed both the types of stalking behaviours and the
evidence available to prove them, and the ‘Royal Commission
(as one contributor termed it): an increasing social intolerance of family
violence, especially non-physical abuse,
a greater willingness of victims to
report it, and improved policing
Figure 7: Relationship types between stalkers and victims of stalking
offences recorded by police, by year, 2011 to 2020
offender–victim relationships)
Relationship type
Current Partner
Former Partner
Non Family Member
Not Related/ Associated
Total known relationships
Total unknown relationships
3.13 In contrast, the number and proportion of other relationship types
remained relatively stable, albeit with a slight increase
in stranger stalking
in 2020. Stakeholders suggested this was due to COVID-19 driving many
undesirable behaviours
Additionally, a
reduction in current intimate partner stalkers was also said to be attributable
to COVID-19, which made it difficult
to report stalking behaviours if the victim
lived with the stalker.
instances of stalking recorded as occurring between current intimate partners
may relate to tumultuous relationships that end
and recommence, sometimes
cyclically (see, for example, Case Study 2).
Case Study 2: Stalking a current intimate
The offender and the victim had been in a
relationship. The offender’s treating psychiatrist and the sentencing
judge shared
the view that the relationship oscillated between ‘passionate
sexual encounters and episodes of vehement arguments of almost
equal intensity
which in turn would be followed by further bouts of intense reconnection and
passion’. Over an 18-month period,
the offender and the victim were in
what the court described as a ‘volatile’ relationship that the
victim had tried to
leave ‘a number of times’. During this period,
he assaulted her on at least two occasions, sent her hundreds of abusive
and attended uninvited at the victim’s place of work and her home.
Total effective sentence:
$2,000 fine with conviction
DPP v Skews
[2012] VCC 361
4 Stalking offences sentenced in the
Children’s Court
4.1 This chapter
describes the number of stalking offences sentenced in the Children’s
Court during the reference period. It
examines the demographics of children
sentenced for stalking, the other offences children were co-sentenced for
alongside stalking,
and the sentencing outcomes imposed on children who were
found guilty of, or who accepted responsibility for, stalking.
Number of sentenced charges and cases
4.2 In the 10 years to 2020, 186 stalking charges
were sentenced in 155 cases in the Children’s Court. The number of
charges and cases each year declined from 2013 to 2020 (Figure 8),
consistent with the overall decline in the number of cases in
Children’s Court in that
Figure 8: Number of stalking charges and cases sentenced in the
Children’s Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (186 charges, 155 cases)
Number of charges
Number of cases
Age and gender of children sentenced for stalking
9 shows the age and gender of the children sentenced in the 155 stalking cases.
Almost one-third (31%) were female, while
69% were male. The most common ages
for girls (14, 15 and 16) were younger than they were for boys (16, 17 and 18).
Figure 9: Age and gender of offenders sentenced in the
Children’s Court for stalking, 2011 to 2020 (155 cases)
Age of offender
Total cases
4.4 The youngest
children sentenced for stalking were:
an 11-year-old
boy who received diversion for stalking and using a carriage service to
a 13-year-old
girl who received probation for 11 charges, including 2 stalking charges and
charges of using insulting words in public,
criminal damage and breaching a
family violence intervention order; and
13-year-old girl who received an accountable undertaking for stalking, using
threatening words in a public place and handling
stolen goods.
Stalking behaviours sentenced in the Children’s
4.5 There has been very little research on children
who stalk. However, in the late 2000s, Purcell et al. undertook a review of 299
restraining order applications filed in the Melbourne Children’s Court in
response to stalking
The review found
that most applications involved female victims (69%) and male offenders
Almost all victims
(98%) knew their stalker, often as a school peer (24%), family or peer
acquaintance (23%), ex-partner (21%), estranged
Three-quarters of
victims were threatened, 54% of victims were assaulted, and the most common
stalking behaviours were unwanted approaches,
phone calls and text
4.6 The findings in Purcell et al. are consistent with the findings of the
current report in relation to the gender of children sentenced
Children’s Court for stalking, the rates of family violence, and
co-sentenced offences. For instance, in addition to
69% of cases having a male
offender, 30% of cases had a family violence flag (17 of 57 cases since
disproportionately represented in those cases involving family violence (14 boys
compared to 3 girls). The review by Purcell
et al. would suggest that many of
these cases most likely involved boys stalking a female peer-aged victim
following the end of an
intimate or dating relationship, often in circumstances
where they attended the same
These cases also
often involved co-sentenced offences of assault and injury offences, threat
offences and using a carriage service
to menace, harass or offend, which suggest
a serious and ongoing pattern, though it cannot be known whether these charges
the same victims.
Offences co-sentenced with stalking
4.7 Stalking cases in the Children’s Court
involved an average of 1.2 stalking offences and 6.9 total offences per case.
is broadly consistent with the average number of charges per case in the
Children’s Court in 2015
though that rate may
have increased since then.
Most cases (87%) involved a single stalking charge, but there was 1 case with 6
stalking charges.
4.8 As shown in Table 1, the most common offences co-sentenced in the
Children’s Court with stalking were threat offences (33%),
assault and
injury offences (32%) and using a carriage service to menace, harass or offend
(28%). The three most common offences
were the same for both boys and girls, but
girls were more likely than boys to have a co-sentenced threat offence or
assault and
injury offence. Stakeholders commented that girls might be less
likely than boys to be charged where overt acts of violence were
Table 1: Offences most commonly co-sentenced with stalking offences in the
Children’s Court, by gender, 2011 to 2020 (155 cases)
Co-sentenced offence type
Number and proportion of all cases (155 cases)
Number and proportion of cases involving male offenders (107
Number and proportion of cases involving female offenders (48
1. Threat offences
2. Assault and injury offences
3. Using a carriage service to menace, harass or offend
4. Breaches of intervention orders
5. Property damage offences
6. Theft offences
7. Bail-related offences
8. Additional stalking offences
9. Non-contact sex offences
10. Burglary offences
Sentencing outcomes in the Children’s Court
4.9 The most common outcomes in the Children’s
Court for stalking (Figure 10) were good behaviour bonds, probation and
which together accounted for almost three-quarters of all outcomes
(74%). There has been an overall change in sentencing practices
Children’s Court in recent years: since diversion was introduced statewide
it has become the
most common disposition in cases in the Children’s
In stalking cases,
diversion made up 68% of Children’s Court sentencing outcomes in
2018–19 and 38% in 2019–20.
Boys were much more likely than girls to
receive youth supervision orders, while girls were more likely than boys to
receive undertakings
and diversion. During the reference period, 4 stalking
charges in 4 separate cases (2 cases involved male offenders and 2 cases
female offenders) resulted in a youth justice centre order.
Figure 10: Percentage of stalking charges sentenced in the
Children’s Court, by gender and sentencing outcome (186 charges)
Youth justice centre order
Youth supervision order
Good behaviour bond
Youth diversion
Accountable undertaking
Total cases
5 Stalking offences sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court
5.1 This chapter
describes the number of stalking charges and cases sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court during the reference
period. It considers the
demographics of people sentenced for stalking, the other offences they were
co-sentenced for in the same
case, and the sentencing outcomes they received.
Number of sentenced charges and cases
the reference period, the overwhelming majority of stalking offences were
sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court (95%),
with 6,463 stalking charges
sentenced in 5,170 cases. The numbers of stalking charges and cases sentenced
each year (Figure 11) increased
between 2011 and 2016, before declining between
2017 and 2020.
6,463 charges, 5,170 cases, 4,735
Figure 11: Stalking charges and cases sentenced in the Magistrates’
Court, by year, 2011 to 2020
Number of charges
Number of cases
5.3 The decrease in stalking charges and cases in 2020 could be partly
attributable to COVID-19, particularly in the context of a
steep decline in the
total number of cases sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court in
The decrease
in 2020 also appears to be a continuation of a pre-existing trend. It is
possible that this reflects a change in how
these behaviours are prosecuted. If
more people have family violence and non-family violence intervention orders in
place, which
they seem to,
then behaviours that were once prosecuted as stalking may now instead be
prosecuted and sentenced as breaches of intervention
As one stakeholder
I think there is a preference to go with the family violence-related charges
because they’re easier to prove ... any defence
counsel will say
‘get rid of the stalking because it’s a higher penalty’, and
‘we’ll go with the family
Stalking in a family violence context
5.4 Reliable data about Magistrates’ Court
cases involving family violence has been available since April
A family violence flag
denotes whether at least one offence in a case occurred in a family violence
context. In the five years to
2020, more than two-thirds (68%) of all stalking
cases (1,909 of 2,826 cases) had a family violence flag. That rate was steady
2016 to 2019 and increased to 73% in 2020.
68% of stalking cases were flagged as involving family
Age and gender of sentenced stalkers
the 5,170 stalking cases sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court during the
reference period, 88% of offenders were male
(4,553) and 12% were female (617).
88% of offenders sentenced for stalking were
5.6 The average age of offenders in stalking cases was 37 years. These
findings are consistent with recent Queensland research on
stalking offences,
which found that 86% of offenders were male and they had an average age of 37
However, the
proportion of stalkers who were female was higher in the 18 to 24 age group than
in other age groups (Figure 12).
Figure 12: Age and gender of offenders in stalking cases,
Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to
Age group of offender
Total cases where age was known
Stalking behaviours sentenced in the Magistrates’
stalking charges (79%) sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court were simply
recorded as stalking contrary to the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), without
specifying the type or types of behaviour involved. However, the other 21%
(1,379 charges) referred to a specific mental
or behavioural element of the
section 21A
5.8 The types of stalking sentenced by courts
largely resemble the types of stalking recorded by police (see [3.4]). An
to cause the victim apprehension or fear for safety was the most
common mental element, and contacting another person was the most
behavioural element. Having an intention to cause
harm constituted
one-quarter of all stalking offences that police recorded by reference to an
offender’s mental state; however,
that dropped to 10% for sentenced
stalking offences recorded by reference to an offender’s mental state.
This could be partly
due to stalking being perceived as less serious and/or more
difficult to prove (and therefore charges being more likely to be dropped
plea negotiations) in the absence of physical harm or verbal
Figure 13: Mental and behavioural elements of sentenced stalking charges,
2011 to 2020 (1,379 offences)
Mental element
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) arouse apprehension or
fear for safety
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) cause mental harm
Intent to (or act in a way reasonably expected to) cause physical
Behavioural element
Follow another person
Keep another person under surveillance
Loiter outside residence, business or place frequented
Publish material relating to another person
Make threats
Offences co-sentenced with stalking
were 31,674 total charges sentenced in the 5,170 stalking cases: 6,463 stalking
offences and 25,211 other offence types.
As Figure 14 shows, it was far more
common for stalking cases to include multiple charges (80%) than to include a
single charge (20%).
Over one-third (36%) of all stalking cases involved 6 or
more charges, with 1 case involving 34 stalking charges but no other offences
(these were the most stalking charges in a single case).
14: Total charges in stalking cases sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court,
2011 to 2020 (5,170 cases)
Number of charges per case
Number of cases
Total cases sentenced
5.10 The offence type most commonly co-sentenced with stalking was breaches
of intervention orders, in 44% of cases (Table 2). Most
of these (39% of all
cases) involved breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs) or
intervention orders (FVIOs), while 6%
of cases involved one or more breaches of
personal safety intervention orders (PSIOs); 1% of cases involved both. The
Sentencing Advisory Council also found breaches of domestic violence
orders to be the offence type most commonly co-sentenced with
stalking, but
stalking cases involving breaches of domestic violence orders were more than
twice as prevalent in Victoria (39%) as
in Queensland
Bail-related
offences, assault and injury offences, and threat offences were also common. In
13% of cases, the offender was sentenced
for more than one stalking charge, with
5 cases involving more than 20 stalking charges. Males were more likely than
females to be
co-sentenced for each offence type, with the exception of using a
carriage service to menace, harass or offend.
Table 2: Offence types most commonly co-sentenced with stalking offences
in the Magistrates’ Court, by gender, 2011 to 2020
Co-sentenced offence type
Number and proportion of all cases (5,170 cases)
Number and proportion of cases involving male offenders (4,554
Number and proportion of cases involving female offenders (616
1. Breaches of intervention orders
2,274 (44%)
2,056 (45%)
2. Bail-related offences
1,254 (24%)
1,127 (25%)
3. Assault and injury offences
1,126 (22%)
1,042 (23%)
4. Threat offences
1,088 (21%)
5. Property damage offences
6. Using a carriage service to menace, harass or offend
7. Additional stalking offences
8. Theft offences
9. Drug-related offences
10. Driver licence offences
Sentencing outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court for
5.11 Figure 15 shows the proportion of stalking
charges that received various sentence types in the Magistrates’ Court.
one-third (32%) of charges received an immediate custodial
and almost another
one-third (31%) received a community
as the most serious
penalty. Of the 1,888 prison sentences imposed since 2012, when community
correction orders (CCOs) became available,
40% (759) were combined with a
Figure 15: Sentence types imposed on stalking charges in the
Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020 (6,463
Sentence type
Number of charges
Percentage of charges
Immediate custodial sentence
Community order
Adjourned undertaking
Total charges sentenced
Trends in sentencing outcomes: 2011 to 2020
5.12 The sentence types imposed on stalking charges
varied during the reference period (Figure 16). Notably, the rate of immediate
custodial sentences increased steadily from 24% in 2011 to 33% in 2019 –
imprisonment rates for
charges in the Magistrates’ Court also
increased during that period, from under 5% to over
Then in 2020, the
imprisonment rate for stalking charges almost doubled to 59%, largely due to
COVID-19 requiring courts to prioritise
cases where a defendant was either on
remand or likely to receive
imprisonment.
Figure 16: Percentage of sentence types imposed on stalking charges in the
Magistrates’ Court, by year, 2011 to 2020 (6,463
Sentence type
Immediate custodial sentence
Community order
Adjourned undertaking
Total charges sentenced
5.13 Community orders increased in prevalence between 2011 and 2015,
coinciding with the introduction of CCOs in 2012 and the Court
of Appeal’s
December 2014 guideline judgment in
Between 2015
and 2019, the rate of stalking charges receiving CCOs declined from 42% to 32%;
the rate then fell to 20% in 2020, but
again this appears to have been primarily
related to COVID-19. The proportion of stalking charges that received
imprisonment combined
with a CCO (on the stalking charge and/or other charges in
the case) remained relatively stable from 2015 to 2019 (the proportion
was affected by COVID-19), suggesting that there was a genuine decline in CCOs
between 2015 and 2019. A full breakdown of
yearly sentencing outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court is available in Appendix 3.
Sentence types by gender and family violence flag: 2016 to
5.14 Figure 17 shows sentencing outcomes for
stalking cases from 2016 to 2020, according to the offender’s gender and
the case had a family violence
Cases involving male
offenders and cases with family violence flags resulted in the most severe
sentences. Almost half of all family
violence offenders sentenced for stalking
received an immediate custodial sentence (44% of cases compared with 25% of
cases without
a family violence flag). This is consistent with case law and
research on the seriousness of intimate partner stalking (see
[2.15]–[2.17]).
Figure 17: Sentence types imposed in stalking cases, by gender and family
violence flag, Magistrates’ Court, 2016 to 2020 (2,826
Sentence types
Male (family violence indicator)
Male (no family violence indicator)
Female (family violence indicator)
Female (no family violence indicator)
Immediate custodial sentence
Community order
Adjourned undertaking
Total cases
5.15 Although both males and females were more likely to receive an immediate
custodial sentence when their case involved family violence
offending, gender
was even more strongly correlated with an increased likelihood of an immediate
custodial sentence. In total, 35%
of males sentenced for stalking received an
immediate custodial sentence (46% in cases involving family violence), whereas
was just 9% for females (17% in cases involving family violence). In
contrast, females were far more likely than males to receive
an adjourned
undertaking (29%) or diversion (18%). This variation between sentence types for
males and females, which is common across
is most likely due to
a number of factors, including stalking by males typically being more harmful
and posing a greater risk of
serious or repeated physical
the increased
seriousness of co-sentenced offences in cases involving male offenders (see
Table 2), the longer criminal histories
of male offenders, and females being
more likely to have a ‘blurred’ status as both victim and
Sentence types by court location
5.16 Figure 18 shows the number of stalking charges
and cases sentenced in each of Victoria’s justice regions over the 10-year
reference period. There was an overrepresentation of stalking charges sentenced
in rural and regional Victoria, but this was almost
exclusively in Gippsland,
which has 4% of Victoria’s adult population but dealt with 12% of
sentenced stalking charges. Stakeholders
noted that Gippsland suffers from
higher-than-average levels of economic disadvantage, unemployment, mental
illness, family violence,
methylamphetamine use and intergenerational trauma,
and that accessing support services there can be
These factors most
likely combine to increase the seriousness of stalking behaviours in many cases,
as well as the culpability and
risk level of the offender, which would explain
why Gippsland also has the highest imprisonment rate for stalking charges (40%).
As one stakeholder explained:
[y]ou may be more likely to get imprisoned as a result of family violence
because of your history, there’s more severe offending,
it’s higher
risk offending, there’s more history of crime. So you might be more likely
to get charged, because you’ve
got a history, and then you’re more
likely to get imprisoned, because you’ve got a history, and the severity
of the offending
is likely to be greater because of the population that’s
Figure 18: Proportion of stalking charges sentenced in Victoria’s
justice regions, and the imprisonment rate for those stalking
charges, 2011 to
Justice Region
Proportion of Victorian population
Number of charges
Proportion of charges
Imprisonment rate
Barwon South West
Loddon Mallee
Prison sentences imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for
5.17 There were 1,988 stalking charges that
received imprisonment in the Magistrates’ Court during the reference
period. They
were sentenced in 1,456 cases, with the offender receiving
imprisonment combined with a CCO in 43% of those cases
Factors associated
with an increased likelihood of a prison sentence were gender (see [5.15]),
family violence (see [5.14]), and
offences; just 5% of the 1,020
stalking cases comprising a single charge received imprisonment. Specifically,
prison sentences were
more common where a stalking charge was co-sentenced with
an assault offence (47% or 524 of 1,122 cases), a bail-related offence
583 of 1,256 cases) or a breach of an intervention order (41% or 940 of 2,274
5.18 Since 2017, when pre-sentence detention data became more reliable,
almost all people (92%) sentenced to imprisonment for stalking
had spent at
least one day on remand (Figure 19). More than half (56%) had spent some time on
remand but received a prison sentence
longer than the time they had already
spent in custody.
remaining 36% received a prison sentence either
than (4%) or
identical to (32%) the amount of time they had spent on remand. The latter is
known as a time served prison
People who receive
time served prison sentences are released from prison immediately or within days
of being sentenced. Relatively
few of these offenders who received sentences
resulting in their immediate release also received a CCO that would take effect
their release from prison (15% or 45 of 302 cases).
Figure 19: Proportion of prison sentences imposed in stalking cases in the
Magistrates’ Court that were shorter than, identical
to, or longer than
the amount of time declared as pre-sentence detention, 2017 to 2020
Imprisonment sentence type
Number of cases
Percentage of cases
Less than time served
Time served
More time to serve
Imprisonment sentence without remand
Total imprisonment sentences
increase in prison sentences in 2020 did not appear to result from changes in
the rate of time served prison sentences, accounting
for 36% of cases receiving
imprisonment in 2019 and 38% in 2020, or the rate of remand, accounting for 95%
of prison sentences in
2019 and 94% in 2020.
Community correction orders imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court for stalking
5.20 CCOs are non-custodial sentences requiring an
offender to comply with a number of conditions over the length of the
There were 2,651
stalking offences that received a CCO in 2,031 cases during the reference
In 23% of those (605
cases), the offender also received imprisonment either on the stalking charge or
on another charge in the case,
and in the other 77% of cases the CCO was the
most severe penalty. CCOs ranged in length from 3 months (12 cases) to 3 years
with 54% of CCOs ranging in length from 12 months to less than 18
months (Figure 20).
Figure 20: Lengths of CCOs imposed on stalking charges, 2012 to 2020
(2,031 cases)
CCO duration
Number of cases
less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
18 to less than 24 months
24 months or longer
5.21 The most common conditions attached to those 2,031 CCOs were assessment
and treatment (93%), supervision by corrections officers
(72%) and unpaid
community work (57%).
rates are mainly consistent with the most common conditions attached to all CCOs
in the Magistrates’ Court (Figure 21),
although people sentenced for
stalking were more likely than offenders generally to have assessment and
or supervision and
judicial monitoring conditions attached to their CCOs. They were also
likely to be required to undertake unpaid community work. This focus
on measures to improve victim safety, such as rehabilitation
and supervision,
over more punitive conditions
is consistent with research suggesting that stalkers – particularly
acquaintance and stranger stalkers – often suffer
from psychological
issues that may contribute to their
Figure 21: Comparison of rates at which different groups of offenders had
certain conditions attached to
Assessment and treatment
Community work
Supervision
Judicial monitoring
CCO first monitoring report (2014)
CCO second monitoring report (2015)
CCO third monitoring report (2016)
Animal cruelty offenders (2019)
Stalkers (2022)
5.22 The CCO conditions imposed on stalkers varied somewhat by both gender
and whether the offender received imprisonment in the same
case (Table 3). Males
were more likely than females to be subject to almost all of the optional
conditions except justice plan conditions,
which are only available for
offenders with an intellectual
disability.
When a CCO was
combined with imprisonment, there were higher rates of assessment and treatment,
supervision by corrections officers
and judicial monitoring, and much lower
rates of unpaid community work. Stakeholders agreed that this is most likely
because CCOs
combined with imprisonment are often used as partially or primarily
therapeutic supplements to time served prison sentences and short
imprisonment:
The imprisonment is the real punishment part ... and then the corrections order
is the therapeutic part. That’s why there’s
no community work.
It’s like double punishment; why would you put unpaid community work on an
order when someone’s already
served a term of
imprisonment?
Table 3: Percentage of all CCOs imposed on stalking charges that had
certain conditions attached, by whether the CCO was combined
with imprisonment
and by gender, 2012 to 2020
All CCOs (2,031 CCOs)
CCOs only (1,414 CCOs)
CCOs combined with imprisonment (617 CCOs)
CCOs imposed on males (1,363 CCOs)
CCOs imposed on females (151 CCOs)
Assessment and treatment
Supervision by corrections officers
Unpaid community work
Judicial monitoring
Justice plan condition
Forensicare’s Problem Behaviour Program
5.23 In Victoria, when someone is sentenced to a
CCO for stalking behaviours, they can be required to participate in
Forensicare’s
Problem Behaviour Program, a specialist community-based
program – it is not currently available in prison – run by
Forensicare
that assesses and treats adults exhibiting problem behaviours,
including stalking.
program takes referrals from a range of sources, but most are from Corrections
Victoria, which can make compulsory referrals
in one of two ways:
the sentencing
court requests a pre-sentence report assessing the offender’s suitability
for a CCO, the report writer specifically
recommends that the offender be
referred to the Problem Behaviour Program, and the sentencing judicial officer
makes it an express
condition that the offender be assessed for treatment within
that program; or
• the sentencing court imposes a general requirement to participate in
assessment and treatment programs directed by Corrections
Victoria, and the
relevant case manager requires the offender to be assessed for suitability in
the Problem Behaviour
5.24 In both instances, the presence of a stalking charge in the case
significantly improves the prospect of stalkers being referred
to the Problem
Behaviour Program.
is no stalking charge in the case, the report writer, judicial officer and/or
case manager needs to be alert for the presence
of stalking behaviour in the
offending, such as a constellation of certain offence types, in order to
identify the Problem Behaviour
as an appropriate avenue for
An evaluation of
the program showed a significant reduction in reoffending rates for those who
successfully completed
5.25 Practitioners
and courts should be mindful that dropping stalking charges during plea
negotiations can inhibit the offender’s
prospects of receiving targeted
and effective treatment. Similarly, sentences of imprisonment without a CCO
component do not facilitate
access to the Problem Behaviour Program.
Fines imposed in the Magistrates’ Court for stalking
5.26 During the reference period, 760 stalking
charges received a fine. Of those, 312 were non-aggregate fines, such that the
fine amount attributable to the stalking charge could be discerned
(Figure 22). Fine amounts ranged from $200 (in a case involving
a 27-year-old
male sentenced for a single stalking charge) to $10,000 (in a case involving an
82-year-old male sentenced for a single
The most common fine
imposed for a stalking charge was between $501 and $1,000, with 72 fines being
precisely $1,000.
Figure 22: Non-aggregate fine amounts imposed in the Magistrates’
Court for stalking charges, 2011 to 2020 (312 charges)
Fine amount
Number of charges
$500 or less
$501 to $1,000
$1,001 to $1,500
$1,501 to $2,000
$2,500 or more
Total fines
6 Stalking offences sentenced in the higher
6.1 This chapter
describes stalking offences sentenced in the higher courts (the County and
Supreme Courts) during the reference period.
It examines the number of stalking
charges and cases, the other offences co-sentenced with stalking offences, and
the sentencing
outcomes imposed for stalking.
Number of sentenced charges and cases
6.2 There were 119 cases and 183 charges of
stalking sentenced in the higher courts: 115 cases had male offenders (their
average age
at sentence was 39) and 4 had female offenders (their average age at
sentence was 36). During the reference period, 3 offenders –
– were sentenced twice in the higher courts for
Stalking was the
principal proven offence in 48 of the 119 cases.
183 charges, 119 cases, 116 people
6.3 There were
41 additional stalking charges in 14 cases that received an order under the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to Be Tried) Act 1997
including 9 custodial supervision orders, 31 non-custodial supervision orders
and 1 unconditional release order. These outcomes
are not included in the
analyses below.
Co-sentenced offences
6.4 Stalking
cases sentenced in the higher courts involved an average of 1.5 stalking charges
and 7.7 total charges. As shown in Figure
23, 9% of the 119 cases involved a
single stalking charge. The other 91% of cases had two or more charges, with
almost one-quarter
(22%) involving 10 or more charges.
23: Total number of charges per case in stalking cases sentenced in the higher
courts, 2011 to 2020 (119 cases)
Charges per case
6–9 charges
10–19 charges
20+ charges
Total charges
6.5 The most stalking charges in any one case was 18, and the offender in
that case was also sentenced for 73 charges of using a carriage
menace, harass or offend.
was a 34-year-old male with a drug addiction who over a number of years had sent
thousands of sexually explicit messages, images,
videos and audio recordings via
social media to 91 women. He received a total effective sentence of imprisonment
of 2 years and 7
months, with an 18-month non-parole period.
6.6 The most common offences co-sentenced with stalking (Table 4) were
assault and injury offences (in 34% of cases), burglary offences
(25%), property
damage offences (24%) and breaches of intervention
Further stalking
charges were also common. These co-sentenced offences are broadly consistent
with the offence profiles of males
sentenced for breaches of family violence
safety notices (FVSNs) or intervention orders
which in turn is
consistent with former intimate partners representing the majority of stalkers
sentenced in the higher courts. In
some cases, co-sentenced offences have formed
part of the stalking course of conduct, while in others they have been separate
distinct, perhaps even committed against different victims. Threats, for
example, are often captured by the section 21A offence and
are not charged and
sentenced separately.
Table 4: Offences most commonly co-sentenced with stalking offences in the
higher courts, 2011 to 2020 (119 cases)
Co-sentenced offence type
Number and proportion of all cases (119 cases)
1. Assault and injury offences
2. Burglary offences
3. Property damage offences
4. Breaches of intervention orders
5. Additional stalking offences
6. Sexual assault offences
7. Threat offences
8. Bail-related offences
9. Non-contact sex offences
10. Drug-related offences
Sentencing outcomes in the higher courts
24 shows that 82% of stalking charges sentenced in the higher courts received an
immediate custodial sentence (150 of 183
charges). Of these, 18 were
imprisonment combined with a community correction order (CCO) and 2 were
partially suspended sentences
of imprisonment. The 33 stalking charges that did
not result in an immediate custodial sentence received a community order (23),
wholly suspended sentence (3), a fine (3), an adjourned undertaking (2) or
discharge with conviction (2).
Figure 24: Sentence types imposed
on stalking offences in the higher courts, 2011 to 2020 (183 charges)
Sentence type
Percentage of charges
Immediate custodial sentence
Total charges
6.8 Prison sentences were often at least partly due to more serious offences
being co-sentenced with stalking: in the 48 cases where
stalking was the
principal proven offence, an immediate custodial sentence was less common (65%
of cases). Stalking was the principal
proven offence in all 3 cases where an
offender received a fine.
Imprisonment lengths in the higher courts
6.9 Of the 148 stalking charges that received
imprisonment,
131 received
non-aggregate prison sentences, meaning it was possible to analyse the lengths
of those sentences. Eight charges received
imprisonment combined with a CCO,
which limits the maximum possible term of
imprisonment.
Imprisonment
lengths imposed in the higher courts for stalking charges ranged from 1 month to
4 years and 6 months.
average term was 14 months’ imprisonment, and half (51%) were between 6
months and less than 18 months (Figure 25).
Figure 25: Lengths of non-aggregate prison sentences imposed in the higher
courts for stalking charges, 2011 to 2020 (131 charges)
Imprisonment length
Number of charges
Less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
18 to less than 24 months
24 to less than 30 months
30 to less than 36 months
36 months or longer
Total charges
Time spent on remand
6.10 The 148 charges resulting in imprisonment were
in 93 cases.
Just as in cases
sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court (see [5.18]–[5.19]), in almost
all cases (92% or 86 of 93), the
offender spent at least some time on remand
prior to being sentenced. Their time on remand ranged from 2 days (in 1
to 45 months (in a case
involving multiple rape offences), with 32 offenders spending a year or longer
on remand before being sentenced
(Figure 26). The average time on remand was 341
days. Time served prison sentences were fairly rare (just 6 cases). In total, 9
resulted in an offender’s immediate release after
sentencing.
The remainder
were sentenced to spend longer in custody than they had spent on remand.
Figure 26: Time declared as pre-sentence detention in cases where
offenders were sentenced to imprisonment in the higher courts for
stalking, 2011
to 2020 (86 cases)
Duration of pre-sentence detention
Number of cases
Less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
18 months or more
Total charges
Community correction orders imposed in the higher
6.11 Stalking
charges received CCOs in 31 cases in the higher courts. In 16 of those cases,
the stalking charges received a CCO only,
while in the other 15 the stalking
charges received imprisonment combined with a CCO. The CCO lengths ranged from 6
months (1 case)
to 3 years (8 cases), with almost half (14 of 31) being
precisely 2 years in length (Figure 27).
Figure 27: Length of
CCOs imposed in the higher courts for stalking, 2011 to 2020 (31 cases)
CCO duration
Number of cases
less than 12 months
12 months to less than 18 months
Total cases
6.12 Optional conditions were recorded for 24 of the
These included
supervision by corrections officers (in 23 cases), unpaid community work (13),
assessment and treatment (6), judicial
monitoring (5), a justice plan condition
(2) and contact restrictions (1). These conditions seem to suggest somewhat less
of an emphasis
on treatment and rehabilitation than was the case in the
Magistrates’ Court (see [5.21]), though that is affected by cases
higher courts typically being more serious than cases in the Magistrates’
Cases highlighting the range of sentences in the County
Court for stalking
2-year community correction order
The offender was aged 75,
was physically frail and malnourished, had a hearing disability, lived a
‘hermit-like existence’
camping in the Great Otway National Park,
had experienced periods of psychiatric illness since the 1950s, had spent time
in psychiatric
hospitals since the 1970s, and at the time of sentencing met the
diagnostic criteria for a paranoid delusional disorder and a mixed
personality
disorder with paranoid, schizoid and narcissistic traits.
In 2015, he sent 199 emails to the Premier of Victoria, many copied to other
people. The emails included bomb threats, threats to
release dangerous
biological substances, and demands for millions of dollars. He was sentenced for
making a bomb hoax and stalking.
He received a 2-year CCO with a requirement to undergo medical and mental
health assessment and treatment as directed.
[2016] VCC 1487
9 months’ imprisonment
The offender (aged 33) and victim had been married,
but the victim separated from the offender upon finding out he had had an
Shortly after she ended the relationship, he placed an iPhone in the boot of
her car and used it to track the car, sent her a threatening
message, and
attempted to call her 93 times. He was seen near where the victim was staying,
and he damaged her car window and windscreen
wiper, leading to a charge of
criminal damage. The following day, he sent a threatening email and made 25 more
He pleaded guilty to 1 charge of stalking and received a 9-month prison
sentence. His total effective sentence, including cumulation
for charges of
criminal damage, theft and attempt to pervert the course of justice, was 11
months and 14 days.
DPP v Wasif
[2019] VCC 1775
3.5 years’ imprisonment
Over the course of four years, the male offender
(aged 43) repeatedly sent the female victim (aged 23), whom he had met at
university,
unwanted messages, including ‘extreme’ threats, some
from fake accounts. His messages and threats escalated despite a
personal safety
intervention order being issued and stalking charges being laid.
He was ultimately sentenced for 3 charges of stalking in relation to this
course of conduct.
The final series of messages – sent over the course of a week,
threatening to kill the victim and ‘slice [her] face off’
was given a base sentence of 3 years and 6 months’ imprisonment. His total
effective sentence was 4 years and 4 months’
imprisonment.
DPP v Stephens
[2018] VCC 1246
Characteristics of stalking offences sentenced in the higher
6.13 We had access to sentencing remarks for 73
cases involving stalking charges sentenced in the higher courts from 2011 to
Those 73 cases were coded for five criteria: the relationship between the
offender and the victim at the time of the stalking offence,
whether the
offender had previously been violent or abusive towards the victim, the most
likely stalking typology that the offender
would be classified into, the
duration of the stalking behaviour, and the non-aggregate sentence length for
stalking charges receiving
imprisonment.
The findings of
the analysis include that:
• the most common relationship was former intimate partners (in 52% of
the 69 cases where the relationship was
discernible),
followed by
people known to the offender with whom they had not had a prior intimate
relationship (25%)
strangers (13%);
• the most common behaviours were making excessive phone calls and
sending excessive text
creating or
threatening to distribute intimate
threatening to harm
or kill the victim,
following the victim or loitering outside or near their
• while some stalking charges covered many months of stalking
behaviours,
almost half (45%)
covered periods of less than two
In many of these
cases, the behaviours prosecuted as stalking represented an intense period of
unwanted intrusion immediately after
the end of a relationship, which is known
to be a high-risk period for escalating violence and abuse (see, for example,
Case Study 3: Intense stalking at the end of a
relationship
The offender and the victim had been in a
relationship for a year. Over the course of the relationship, he had assaulted
her on numerous
occasions. She ended the relationship in response to his
controlling and jealous behaviour. Shortly after the end of the relationship,
she organised to attend his house one night and pick up some of her belongings.
He accused her of seeing someone new and punched
her in the head, pinned her to
the floor, continued to hit her and placed his hands on her throat. Over the
next six hours, he blocked
any attempt she made to use her phone or leave the
house. He eventually let her leave the next morning.
Over the next week, he attempted to contact her ‘hundreds of times, via
calls, missed calls, text and face messages ... Many
of the messages were
derogatory. Some threatened to release intimate photos ... and others threatened
to damage her property’.
These behaviours constituted the stalking charge.
He was then arrested.
Total effective sentence of imprisonment:
4 years and 6 months
Non-parole period:
2 years and 10 months
Stalking charge:
6 months (3 months cumulative)
DPP v Fallon
[2018] VCC 2094
Cases highlighting the range of charges in the County
6.14 The analysis of sentencing remarks
demonstrated the range of charge combinations employed to deal with stalking
behaviour. The
examples below illustrate how stalking can also represent
incident-based offences, and how the courts use aggregate and concurrent
sentences to ensure consistency in sentencing despite that variation. In other
cases, courts took similar approaches to stalking
charges where the facts
substantially overlapped with charges of persistent breaches of intervention
and where there were
multiple stalking charges in relation to the same
There would also have
been numerous cases that did
include a stalking charge (and so would
not have been included in the analysis in this chapter) but did demonstrate a
pattern of behaviour
that could fairly be called
Multiple offences (including stalking)
The offender’s partner ended their
relationship. Over the course of 10 days, the offender threatened to kill her
while holding
a knife, texted and called her hundreds of times after she changed
her locks, threatened to shoot her, broke into her house and damaged
property, and stole her jewellery, a car key and her university ID.
The stalking offence in this case covered the whole period. The offender was
also charged with threats to kill, theft, burglary and
2 counts of criminal
He received an aggregate prison sentence of 3 years with a 2-year non-parole
DPP v Fuiava
[2018] VCC 76
Single stalking offence
In late November 2015, the offender’s partner
ended their relationship, during which the offender had been abusive. In the
from 6 to 12 December, the offender sent her hundreds of abusive text
Among other things, he threatened to seriously injure a man he thought she
was seeing, threatened to distribute intimate images of
her, and actually
distributed such images. These actions could constitute offences under
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) and sections 41DA and 41DB of the
Summary Offences Act 1966
This behaviour was captured by a single stalking charge.
The offender received a 3-year CCO.
DPP v Taylor
[2019] VCC 2063
7 Subsequent offending by stalkers
7.1 This chapter analyses the rates at which offenders sentenced for one or
more stalking offences in 2015 or 2016 were sentenced
again for further
offending within four years of their index sentence. It analyses the types of
subsequent offences that were sentenced,
and the differing rates at which
various groups of offenders were subsequently sentenced. As the Productivity
Commission recently
observed, there are multiple ways to measure
recidivism;
in this report,
it is measured by the offender being
for other offending after
their index sentence.
Sentenced stalkers with subsequent offending
7.2 There were 1,132 people sentenced for stalking
in 2015 or 2016. Of those, 29% were sentenced again within 12 months, 45% within
2 years, 52% within 3 years, and 56% within 4 years (Figure 28). This rate is
significantly higher than Victoria’s general
reoffending rate (10% within
12 months).
However, the high
number of low-risk offenders sentenced for traffic offences in the
Magistrates’ Court
depresses the general
reoffending rate.
Figure 28: Proportion of offenders sentenced for stalking in 2015 or 2016
who were sentenced again within four years (1,132 offenders)
Reoffending period
Number of offenders
Percentage of offenders
Within 1 year
Within 2 years
Within 3 years
Within 4 years
Total offenders
7.3 Figure 29 shows the number of times each of those 1,132 people were
sentenced within four years of their index sentence for stalking.
While 44% of
stalkers were not sentenced again, the remaining offenders were more likely to
be sentenced two or more times (33%)
than they were to be sentenced on just one
further occasion (23%). Indeed, almost one-fifth (19%) were sentenced four or
more times.
This suggests a significant cohort of stalkers who have not been
deterred by criminal justice interventions. It is also consistent
with recent
research finding that people who are identified by police as stalkers most often
target multiple victims and engage in
a range of unlawful behaviours, rather
than committing only stalking offences or targeting only one
Figure 29: Number of times offenders were sentenced within four years of
their index sentence for stalking (1,132 offenders)
Number of subsequent cases
Percentage of offenders
Total offenders
Subsequent offending rates by gender, age, family violence flag
and justice region
7.4 Table 5 shows how many stalkers were sentenced
again in the four years after their index sentence by the characteristics of
the offender and the subsequent
It shows how many
offenders were sentenced for at least one further offence of the following
section 21A offence,
breach of a family violence safety notice (FVSN) or intervention order (FVIO),
and breach of a personal safety
intervention order (PSIO).
Table 5: Proportion of stalkers sentenced at least once within four years
after their index sentence in 2015 or 2016, by category
of offender and offence
Category of offender
Number of offenders
Any offence
Violent offence
Section 21A offence
Breach of a FVSN or FVIO
Breach of a PSIO
Family violence flag
No family violence flag
Magistrates’ Court
Children’s Court
Higher courts
55 and over
Greater Melbourne area
Rural and regional Victoria
7.5 Key findings
of the data include that:
• the small number of children aged
under 18 had the highest rates of any offences and violent offences, but very
few breaches
of intervention
• offenders aged 35 to 39 had distinctly high rates of overall
offending, subsequent stalking offences and breaches of FVSNs
or FVIOs, which
stakeholders attributed to the nature of family violence offending for people in
this age bracket;
male offenders
had higher subsequent offending rates than did female offenders, both overall
and for each offence type analysed except
for breach of a PSIO;
family violence
offenders had higher subsequent offending rates than did non-family violence
offenders, both overall and for each
offence type analysed, except for breach of
a PSIO; and
• there were higher rates of subsequent offending in rural and regional
Victoria, particularly in Hume and Gippsland, than in
the Greater Melbourne
area, which stakeholders said was most likely due to more limited access to
services, treatment and support
7.6 While very few people were sentenced for stalking again within four years
of their index sentence, this could be due to how criminal
proceedings are
originally charged and subsequently negotiated. One stakeholder commented that
the 8% recidivism rate ‘vastly
underestimated’ the true prevalence
of subsequent stalking.
7.7 Finally, we investigated how many homicide offences were preceded by
sentenced stalking offences. This involved searching the
Australasian Legal
Information Institute’s database of publicly available judgments for
homicide cases where the offender had
been sentenced between 2011 and 2020 for a
stalking offence. That search revealed 5 cases (3 murders and 2
manslaughters).
In all 5, the
stalking appears to have been committed against a former
but the homicide was
committed against a different victim who was not the offender’s partner.
There were other instances where
an offender had engaged in stalking behaviours
against the murder victim prior to the homicide, but that conduct had not led to
There were also
cases where a history of stalking was not
There were too few
cases to identify a discernible
8 Summary and implications
8.1 This report
has examined recorded and sentenced stalking offences in Victoria during the
10-year reference period from 2011 to
2020. Key findings include:
reference period, 25,130 stalking offences were recorded by police and 6,825
stalking charges in 5,438 cases were sentenced
by the courts;
the number of
stalking charges sentenced each year increased, reaching 807 in 2017, but then
declined to 595 in 2020, perhaps because
stalking behaviours are instead being
recorded, prosecuted and sentenced as breaches of intervention
• more than two-thirds of cases in the
Magistrates’ Court (68%) were linked to family violence, with the
proportion increasing
over time, from 66% in 2016 to 73% in 2020, whereas
research suggests that the community believes that stalking primarily occurs
between strangers. In the higher courts, in sentencing remarks available for
stalking cases involving family violence, there was
a reassuring recognition of
the seriousness of stalking in a family violence context, especially in the
immediate period after the
relationship;
Magistrates’ Court, stalking was very frequently co-sentenced with
breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs)
and intervention orders
(FVIOs) (38% of all cases);
most stalkers
were male (88%);
custodial sentences were the most common outcomes for stalking charges in the
Magistrates’ Court (32%) and in the
higher courts (82%);
correction orders (CCOs) were the next most common outcomes in both the
Magistrates’ Court (31%) and the higher courts
(13%), with most CCOs
having an assessment and treatment condition (91%), especially when the CCOs
were combined with imprisonment
children were sentenced for stalking (155 cases in 10 years). The most common
sentencing outcomes overall were good behaviour
bonds (26%) and probation (26%),
although diversion, which was rolled out statewide in 2017, is now the most
common disposition each
year, consistent with trends in the Children’s
Court generally;
more than half
of all people sentenced for stalking were sentenced again within three years
(52%), with breaches of FVSNs or FVIOs
being fairly common (19% of all
offenders); and
Gippsland had
disproportionate numbers of sentenced stalking charges, rates of imprisonment
for those charges and rates of reoffending.
Stakeholders attributed this to a
constellation of factors related to socioeconomic disadvantage.
The section 21A offence is broad
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), which criminalises stalking in
Victoria, is drafted to capture a wide range of intrusive, threatening or
harassing behaviour.
Stalking is charged and sentenced in an equally wide
variety of contexts, ranging from a brief interaction of aggressively
approaching
a stranger at a train station to thousands of abusive text messages
and phone calls to a former partner over many months. In some
cases, these
behaviours accord with how forensic psychologists and criminologists define
stalking (for risk assessment and treatment
purposes), while in other
circumstances they do not.
8.3 Further,
many offenders’ stalking includes actions that are
criminal in
their own right, such as property damage, threats, and distribution of intimate
images. In some cases, these behaviours
are prosecuted as a single stalking
charge, while in others those offences are prosecuted and sentenced separately
alongside the
stalking charge. From our review of sentencing remarks, courts
appear to be capably ensuring consistency between cases involving
configurations of charges by ordering a measure of concurrency among the
sentences imposed on incident-based offences and
treating uncharged stalking
behaviours as relevant aggravating contextual factors. This leads to quite
similar total effective sentences
regardless of whether the behaviours are
prosecuted as a single stalking offence or a collection of other
The importance of rehabilitation
selection and plea negotiations can significantly affect whether stalkers
receive appropriate treatment. Forensicare’s
Problem Behaviour Program is
a unique program available in Victoria that can specifically address the
rehabilitative needs of stalkers
and has been proven to reduce reoffending. But
it is not currently available in prison, and offenders receiving CCOs are
only referred to be assessed for suitability to participate in the
program if the pre-sentence report writer, judicial officer and/or
corrections
case manager makes the referral. That referral depends on those people not only
being aware of the program itself but
also recognising the behaviour as
stalking. The problem is that, too often, stalking behaviour does not result in
a sentenced stalking
which would improve the odds of
recognition. As one stakeholder commented:
[i]t’s twofold: they’re not being charged in the first instance, but
even if they are charged, they get withdrawn as
alternatives. And of course, any
defence counsel will say ‘get rid of the stalking’, because
it’s higher penalty,
and ‘we’ll go with the family violence
[intervention order]
8.5 This is a
significant issue. The most effective way to protect the community from many
stalkers is to prioritise their treatment
in order to reduce their risk of
further offending. This is perhaps especially so for the unusually high
proportion of stalkers whose
behaviour is associated with psychological or
neurological difficulties. In that context, it is encouraging to see that
are much more likely than other offenders to have a treatment and
rehabilitation condition attached to their CCO, especially when
they receive
imprisonment combined with a CCO. But those are only cases that include a
stalking charge, and some of those treatment
and rehabilitation programs may not
be tailored to the stalking behaviour.
8.6 Improving
access to targeted treatment programs for stalkers who commit offences in family
violence and non-family violence contexts
should be a key priority. This could
include extending access to community programs to rural and regional Victoria,
especially Gippsland,
improving awareness of the consequences of negotiating
away stalking charges, improving awareness of such programs among pre-sentence
report writers, judicial officers and corrections case managers, and,
importantly, establishing specialised programs in prisons.
This would represent
a significant expansion of the type of treatment that Forensicare currently
provides via the Problem Behaviour
Program and would require additional
resourcing.
Appendix 1: Methodology
This report utilises
data provided by the Crime Statistics Agency and Court Services Victoria. Unless
otherwise specified, the reference
period for the data examined in this report
is the 10 years from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2020.
Data on stalking offences recorded by police
In response to our request, the Crime Statistics
Agency provided the following data in relation to the offence of stalking
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
the number of
stalking offences recorded by police during the reference period;
the duration of
alleged stalking behaviour, with the caveat that the behaviour may have
continued even after police recorded the offence
such that the recorded
durations of some stalking offences will be an underestimation;
the age and
gender of the alleged offender;
the age and
gender of the recorded victim;
the relationship
between the recorded offender and victim;
where recorded,
the primary type of behaviour upon which the stalking offence was recorded, with
the caveats that most stalking offences
are not recorded by reference to a
specific behaviour and that multiple types of behaviour are often involved;
for stalking
offences recorded since 1 January 2012, an indication of whether the recorded
stalking offence occurred in a family violence
Some of this
data is exhaustive for all recorded offences, while other data includes
‘not known’ categories or blank entries.
For example, relationship
data was not available for all recorded offences. Where a significant amount of
data was not available,
this is noted in the discussion.
Data on stalking offences sentenced by courts
Data on sentencing outcomes is routinely provided
to us by Court Services Victoria. We undertake cleaning and checking of data
it is received. This report incorporates data from all Victorian courts:
the Children’s Court, the Magistrates’ Court,
the County Court and
the Supreme Court.
Throughout this report, reference is made to sentencing remarks from cases
sentenced in the higher courts. Most references are based
on sentencing remarks
publicly available via the Australasian Legal Information Institute (AustLII).
Others are non-public remarks
provided to us by the courts. Where factual
details of non-public sentencing remarks have been included in this report,
express permission
was sought and received from the relevant court.
Unless otherwise specified,
sentence types
presented in this report
represent the most serious penalty imposed for a charge or case. For example, if
an offender received imprisonment
combined with a community correction order
(CCO) pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), this would
be counted as a sentence of imprisonment rather than as a community order.
Due to data availability and reliability, this report does not provide
sentence lengths for prison sentences imposed in the Magistrates’
for breaches of family violence safety notices (FVSNs) and intervention orders
(FVIOs). This is because sentence lengths for
charges can only be discerned if
the court has imposed a non-aggregate (discrete) sentence on the particular
offence. There is an
extremely high rate of aggregate sentencing in the
Magistrates’ Court, both generally and for stalking, and many of the
offences appear to be parts of aggregate prison sentences despite not
being recorded as such.
Family violence flags
In the Magistrates’ Court and the
Children’s Court, cases associated with family violence are designated
using a family
violence flag. This data has been available in the
Children’s Court since mid-2016. Therefore, analyses of family violence
offences sentenced in the Children’s Court run from 2017 to 2020. In the
Magistrates’ Court, family violence flags have
been reliable since April
2015, when the Magistrates’ Court’s systems began to automatically
include family violence
flags applied in the LEAP system by Victoria Police.
Therefore, analyses of family violence offences sentenced in the
Magistrates’
Court run from 2016 to 2020. The family violence flag applies
to the case. When multiple cases are consolidated, the family violence
applies to the whole consolidated case, even if some of the offending is
non-family violence related.
Remand and time served prison sentences
Remand data in this report is based on pre-sentence
detention as reckoned by the courts. In some instances, the time reckoned as
is different from the time actually served. For instance, the offender
may have already had their time in custody reckoned as served
proceedings.
The higher courts record total effective sentences in months and pre-sentence
detention in days. The Magistrates’ Court records
sentence lengths in
months and days and records pre-sentence detention in days. We equated these
values by using the approximation
of 30.4 days per month (365 days across 12
months). To account for differences in measurement, data entry errors and any
administrative processing, a total effective sentence was considered
equal to the time spent on remand (a time served prison sentence)
if they were
within five days (inclusive) of each other.
Classifying co-sentenced offences
The offences recorded in each court’s
Classification
(ANZSOC) codes, which are defined by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics.
We undertake some
quality assurance regarding the ANZSOC codes associated with each offence
recorded in the sentencing data. Throughout
this report, our discussion of
‘offence types’ refers to ANZSOC subdivisions, which are the
second-broadest category
of offence classification. There are occasions where
customised offence groupings are used to ensure that the data is as meaningful
as possible. For instance, most breaches of community orders are bail-related
offences, so that category of co-sentenced offences
has been split into
bail-related offences and other offences relating to community orders.
Similarly, most offences involving threatening
or harassing behaviour are
threats, so we grouped threat offences separately from other offences in that
grouping, and also included
threats to distribute intimate images, which are
otherwise classified in ANZSOC as non-contact sex offences.
Reoffending rates
Our reoffending database links different sentencing
events using unique person identifiers. This allows us to track
individuals’
prior and subsequent offences. This database was used to
identify each offender who was sentenced for a stalking offence on at least
occasion during 2015 and 2016. Each offender was counted once, at the earliest
sentence (the index sentence). In this report,
subsequent offences are offences
sentenced within four years after the offender’s index sentence. This
ensures an identical
follow-up time for all offenders. In some cases, a
subsequent sentence may relate to offending that actually occurred before the
index sentence, or even before the offence leading to the index sentence was
committed. In other cases, offending may have occurred
offence but
the index sentence, and this may not appear in the
reoffending analysis.
Appendix 2: Consultation
Meetings and
Stakeholder Roundtable
Assoc. Prof. Troy McEwan (Swinburne
University)
Centres Against Sexual Assault
Corrections Victoria
Court of Victoria
Department of Justice and Community
Domestic Violence Victoria
Federation of Community Legal
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Office of Public
Prosecutions
Office of the eSafety Commissioner
Victims of Crime
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Victoria Legal Aid
Women’s Legal Service Victoria
19 October 2021 (via Zoom)
Meeting with Assoc. Prof. Lorraine Sheridan, Curtin University
21 October 2021 (via Zoom)
Appendix 3: Yearly sentencing outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court
Table A1: Number and
percentage of outcomes imposed on stalking charges in the Magistrates’
Court, by sentence type and year
Imprisonment
1,988 (31%)
Partially suspended sentence
Wholly suspended sentence
Youth justice centre order
Community correction order
1,892 (29%)
Community-based order
Intensive correction order
Drug treatment order
Adjourned undertaking
Discharge with conviction
Dismissal without conviction
One or more
charges against a person that are prosecuted, sentenced or diverted at one
A single count of an offence.
Higher courts:
In this report, the County Court of Victoria and the
Supreme Court of Victoria.
Immediate custodial sentence:
A sentencing outcome that results in an
offender serving at least part of their sentence in custody. This includes adult
imprisonment
and partially suspended sentences of imprisonment.
Index sentence:
A sentence for a stalking offence during 2015 and
2016, counting each offender once and using the earliest sentencing date.
Principal proven offence:
The most serious offence in a case. For
offences in the higher courts, the principal proven offence is specified by the
offences in the Magistrates’ Court, we determine the principal
proven offence based on the severity of the sentence and the
seriousness of the
offence (see Appendix 1: Methodology).
Pre-sentence detention:
A period of custody reckoned by a court
imposing a prison sentence as already served under the sentence:
Recorded offence:
As defined by the Crime Statistics Agency,
‘any criminal act or omission by a person or organisation for which a
penalty could
be imposed by the Victorian legal system ... An offence is counted
and included in the data where it: was reported to, or detected
by, Victoria
Police; and was first recorded within the reference period’.
Reference period:
In this report, the 10-year period from 1 January
2011 to 31 December 2020.
The holding of an offender in custody before they are
Section 21A offence:
A stalking offence against
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
In this report, either an offence against
section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) or more generally a pattern of unwanted intrusions
into another person’s life.
Subsequent offence:
In this report, an offence sentenced in the four
years after an index sentence for a stalking offence.
Time served prison sentence:
A total effective sentence of
imprisonment imposed in a case equal to the time the offender spent on remand
prior to the sentence
(plus or minus three days).
Total effective sentence:
The total term of imprisonment that an
offender receives after a sentencing judicial officer has combined all
individual terms of
imprisonment imposed on charges within the case.
Violent offence:
In this report, any offence except threat offences,
under ANZSOC subdivision code 021.
Bibliography
Bureau of Statistics (2011),
1234.0 – Australian and New Zealand
Standard Offence Classification (ANZSOC)
(abs.gov.au, 2011)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1234.0>.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2017),
Stalking – In Focus: Crime
and Justice Statistics
(abs.gov.au, 2017)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/focus-crime-and-justice-statistics/june-2017>.
Basile, Kathleen C., Ileana Arias, Sujata Desai and Martie P. Thompson,
‘The Differential Association of Intimate Partner Physical,
Psychological and Stalking Violence and Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms in a
Nationally Representative Sample of Women’
(2004) 17(5)
Traumatic Stress
Baum, Katrina, Shannan Catalano, Michael Rand and Kristina Rose,
Victimization in the United States,
NCJ no. 224527 (Bureau of Justice
Statistics, 2009)
<https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/ovw/legacy/2012/08/15/bjs-stalking-rpt.pdf>.
Bendlin, Martyna and Lorraine Sheridan, ‘Risk Factors for Severe
Violence in Intimate Partner Stalking Situations: An Analysis
Records’ (2021) 36(17–18)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Björklund, Katja, Helinä Häkkänen-Nyholm, Lorraine
Sheridan, Karl Roberts and Asko Tolvanen, ‘Latent Profile
Approach to
Duration of Stalking’ (2010) 55(4)
Journal of Forensic Sciences
Bracewell, Kelly, Paul Hargreaves and Nicky Stanley, ‘The Consequences
of the COVID-19 Lockdown on Stalking Victimisation’
Family Violence
(DOI 10.1007/s10896-020-00201-0)
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10896-020-00201-0>.
Children’s Court of Victoria, ‘Youth Diversion Service’
(childrenscourt.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://childrenscourt.vic.gov.au/criminal-division/youth-diversion-service>.
Churcher, Frances P. and Marc Nesca, ‘Risk Factors for Violence in
Stalking Perpetration: A Meta-Analysis’ (2013) 7(2)
FWU Journal of
Social Sciences
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Explanatory Notes’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/about-the-data/explanatory-notes>.
Diette, Timothy M., Arthur H. Godsmith, Darrick Hamilton, William Darity Jr.
and Katherine McFarland, ‘Stalking: Does it Leave
a Psychological
Footprint?’ (2014) 95(2)
Social Science Quarterly
Dressing, Harald, Peter Gass, Katharina Schultz and Christine Kuehner,
‘The Prevalence and Effects of Stalking’ (2020)
Ärzteblatt International
Dussuyer, Inez, ‘Is Stalking Legislation Effective in Protecting
Victims?’ (Paper presented at Stalking: Criminal Justice
Conference, Australian Institute of Criminology, Sydney, 7–8 December
Ferreira, Célia and Marlene Matos, ‘Post-Relationship Stalking:
The Experience of Victims With and Without History of
Partner Abuse’
(2013) 28(4)
Journal of Family Violence
Flowers, Caroline, Belinda Winder and Karen Slade, ‘Identifying the
Characteristics Associated with Intimate Partner Stalking:
A Mixed Methods
Structured Review and Narrative Synthesis’ (2020) 31(6)
The Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
Forensicare, ‘An Evaluation of the Problem Behaviour Program: A
Community Based Model for the Assessment and Treatment of Problem
Behaviours’ (forensicare.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.forensicare.vic.gov.au/centreforforensicbehaviouralscience/forensic-mental-health-research/problem-behaviour-program-evaluation/?w3tc_note=flush_all>.
Forensicare, ‘Problem Behaviour Program’ (forensicare.vic.gov.au,
<https://www.forensicare.vic.gov.au/our-services/community-forensic-mental-health-services/problem-behaviour-program/>.
Freckelton, Ian, ‘Editorial: Stalker Sentencing and Protection of the
(2001) 8(1)
Journal of Law and Medicine
James, David V., Troy E. McEwan, Rachel D. MacKenzie, J. Reid Meloy, Paul E.
Mullen, Michele T. Pathe, Frank R. Farnham, Lulu F. Preston
and Brian J.
Darnley, ‘Persistence in Stalking: A Comparison of Associations in General
Forensic and Public Figure Samples’
(2010) 21(2)
The Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
James, David V. and Rachel D. MacKenzie, ‘Stalking and
Harassment’, in Jane L. Ireland, Philip Birch and Carol A. Ireland
The Routledge International Handbook of Human Aggression
(Routledge,
2018) 170–182.
Kropp, P. Randall, Stephen D. Hart, David R. Lyon and Jennifer E. Storey,
‘The Development and Validation of the Guidelines
for Stalking Assessment
and Management’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The Law
Logan, T. K., ‘Examining Stalking Experiences and Outcomes for Men and
Women Stalked by (Ex)partners and Non-partners (2020)
Journal of Family
MacKenzie, R. D., D. V. James, T. E. McEwan, P. E. Mullen and J. R. P.
Ogloff, ‘Stalkers and Intelligence: Implications for
(2010) 21(6)
The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
McCarthy, Jennifer, James Ogloff and Troy McEwan,
An Evaluation of the
Problem Behaviour Program: A Community Based Model for the Assessment and
Treatment of Problem Behaviours
(Forensicare, 2015).
McEwan, Troy E., Daniel E. Shea, Michael Daffern, Rachel D. MacKenzie, James
R. P. Ogloff and Paul E. Mullen, ‘The Reliability
and Predictive Validity
of the Stalking Risk Profile’ (2018) 25(2)
McEwan, Troy E., Lianne Harder, Cleo Brandt and Vivienne de Vogel,
‘Risk Factors for Stalking Recidivism in a Dutch Community
Forensic Mental
Health Sample’ (2020) 19(2)
International Journal of Forensic Mental
McEwan, Troy E., Michael Daffern, Rachel D MacKenzie and James R. P. Ogloff,
‘Risk Factors for Stalking Violence, Persistence,
and Recurrence’
(2017) 28(1)
The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
McEwan, Troy E., Michele Pathé and James R. P. Ogloff, ‘Advances
in Stalking Risk Assessment’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The
McEwan, Troy E., Rachel D. MacKenzie, Paul E. Mullen and David V. James,
‘Approach and Escalation in Stalking’ (2012)
The Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
McGorrery, Paul, ‘Causing Psychological Harm: A Criminal
(PhD Thesis, Deakin University, 2021).
Meloy, J. Reid, Kris Mohandie and Mila Green, ‘The Female
Stalker’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The Law
Mohandie, Kris, J. Reid Meloy, Mila Green McGowan and Jenn Williams,
‘The RECON Typology of Stalking: Reliability and Validity
Based Upon a
Large Sample of North American Stalkers’ (2006) 51(1)
Forensic Science
Mullen, Paul E., Michele Pathé, Rosemary Purcell and Geoffrey W.
Stuart, ‘Study of Stalkers’ (1999) 156(8)
American Journal of
Pinals, Debra A., ‘Stalking: Classification and Typology’ in
Debra A. Pinals (ed.),
Stalking: Psychiatric Perspectives and Practical
(Oxford University Press, 2007) 27–60.
Podaná, Zuzana and Romana Imríšková,
‘Victims’ Responses to Stalking: An Examination of Fear
Coping Strategies’ (2016) 31(5)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Paper
(Productivity Commission, 2021)
<https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/prison-dilemma/prison-dilemma.pdf>.
Purcell, Rosemary, Michele Pathé, Gennady N. Baksheev, Andrew
MacKinnon and Paul Mullen, ‘What Mediates Psychopathology
in Stalking
Victims? The Role of Individual-Vulnerability and Stalking-Related
Factors’ (2012) 23(3)
The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry &
Purcell, Rosemary, Bridget Moller, Teresa Flower and Paul E. Mullen,
‘Stalking Among Juveniles’ (2009) 194(5)
British Journal of
Queensland Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Spotlight on Stalking
(Queensland Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.qld.gov.au/research/reports/sentencing-spotlight/stalking>.
Safe Lives UK,
SafeLives Dash Risk Checklist: Frequently Asked
(SafeLives UK, 2015)
<https://safelives.org.uk/sites/default/files/resources/FAQs%20about%20Dash%20FINAL.pdf>.
Scott, Adrian J., Nikki Rajakaruna, Lorraine Sheridan and Emma Sleath,
‘International Perceptions of Stalking and Responsibility:
The Influence
of Prior Relationship and Severity of Behavior’ (2014) 41(2)
Justice and Behavior
Scott, Adrian J., Simon C. Duff, Lorraine Sheridan and Nikki Rajakaruna,
‘The Influence of Contextual Information Regarding
the Breakdown of
Relationships and Perpetrator-Target Sex Composition on Perceptions of
Relational Stalking’ (2019) 25(4)
Psychology, Crime & Law
Senkans, Svenja, Troy E. McEwan and James R. P. Ogloff, ‘Assessing the
Link Between Intimate Partner Violence and Postrelationship
Stalking: A
Gender-Inclusive Study’ (2021) 36(1–2)
Journal of Interpersonal
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Animal Cruelty Offences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/animal-cruelty-offences-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety
Intervention Orders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-breaches-of-personal-safety-intervention-orders-in-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Children’s
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-childrens-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Children Held on Remand in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/children-held-on-remand-in-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2014)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-monitoring-report>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders:
Monitoring Report (Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-second-monitoring-report-pre-guideline-judgment>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/community-correction-orders-third-monitoring-report-post-guideline-judgment>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Community Correction Orders
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2017)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/contravention-community-correction-orders>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention
Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2016)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/contravention-family-violence-intervention-orders-and-safety-notices-prior-offences>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2010)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/gender-differences-sentencing-outcomes>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reoffending Following Sentence in Victoria: A
Statistical Overview
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/reoffending-following-sentence-victoria-statistical-overview>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/rethinking-sentencing-for-young-adult-offenders>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Children in Victoria: Data Update
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/sentencing-children-victoria-data-update-report>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Children’s Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-childrens-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Swift, Certain and Fair Approaches to
Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Discussion Paper
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2017)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/swift-certain-and-fair-approaches-sentencing-family-violence-offenders-discussion>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-02/Time_Served_Prison_Sentences_in_Victoria.pdf>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Threat Offences in Victoria: Sentencing
Outcomes and Reoffending
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/threat-offences-in-victoria-sentencing-outcomes-and-reoffending>.
Sheridan, Lorraine and Adrian J. Scott, ‘Perceptions of Harm: Verbal
Versus Physical Abuse in Stalking Scenarios’ (2010)
Justice and Behavior
Sheridan, Lorraine and Karl Roberts, ‘Key Questions to Consider in
Stalking Cases’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The Law
Sheridan, Lorraine, Martyna Bendlin and Paul House, ‘Stalkers:
Specialists Versus Generalists’ (2021)
Journal of Interpersonal
(DOI 10.1177/0886260521102350).
Sibenik, Michelle, ‘A Critical Analysis of the Applications of
Anti-Stalking Legislation in Victoria, Australia’
(PhD Thesis,
Monash University, 2018).
Spitzberg, Brian H., William R. Cupach and Lea DL Ciceraro, ‘Sex
Differences in Stalking and Obsessive Relational Intrusion:
Meta-Analyses’ (2010) 1(3)
Partner Abuse
Victorian Government,
Family Violence Multi-Agency Risk Assessment and
Management Framework
<https://www.vic.gov.au/maram-practice-guides-and-resources>.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Consultation Paper
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021)
<https://www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/VLRC_stalking-consultation-paper-forweb_1.pdf>.
Weller, Michelle, Lorraine Hope and Lorraine Sheridan, ‘Police and
Public Perceptions of Stalking: The Role of Prior Victim–Offender
Relationship’ (2013) 28(2)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Atkinson v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 127
Berlyn v Brouskos
[2002] VSC 377
Boulton v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 150
Cooper v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 153
DPP v Ahern
[2014] VCC 849
DPP v Aleluia
[2017] VSC 204
DPP v Alexander (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 124
DPP v Amato
[2017] VCC 145
DPP v Ashton
[2012] VCC 911
DPP v Baker (A Pseudonym)
[2019] VCC 2096
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075
DPP v Bouras
[2018] VCC 1651
DPP v Brien
[2017] VCC 89
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
DPP v Erradi
[2015] VCC 1672
DPP v Erradi
[2016] VCC 1902
DPP v Fallon
[2018] VCC 2094
DPP v Fernandez
[2013] VCC 2027
DPP v Fitzgerald
[2019] VCC 352
DPP v Fuiava
[2018] VCC 76
DPP v Garner
[2017] VSC 685
DPP v Hamilton
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Henderson
[2015] VCC 1333
[2016] VCC 1487
DPP v Hoblos
[2020] VCC 720
DPP v Letizia
[2014] VCC 957
[2017] VCC 1911
DPP v Lorenzana
[2016] VCC 236
DPP v McDonnell (A Pseudonym)
[2018] VCC 1782
DPP v McLachlan
[2015] VCC 1164
DPP v Morrison
[2020] VCC 492
DPP v Morton (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1850
DPP v Murphy
[2013] VCC 615
DPP v Riley
[2019] VCC 36
DPP v Salvaggio
[2018] VCC 1313
DPP v Sanchez
[2015] VCC 907
DPP v Skews
[2012] VCC 361
DPP v Skravanj
[2018] VCC 135
DPP v Stephens
[2018] VCC 1246
DPP v Stewart
[2019] VCC 2086
DPP v Taupau
[2015] VCC 239
DPP v Taylor
[2019] VCC 2063
[2016] VCC 1011
DPP v Wasif
[2019] VCC 1775
DPP v Willats
[2018] VCC 1030
Duncan v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 351
Fernandez v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 169
Finding into Death without Inquest of Brittany Harvie
[2020] VicCorC
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136
Nadarajamoorthy v Moreton
[2003] VSC 283
Pilgrim v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 191
Police v Nunn
[2021] TASMC 3
[2009] VSCA 7
[2019] VSC 90
[2012] VSC 77
[2016] VSC 485
R v Carolus
[2011] VSC 583
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
[2007] VSCA 117
[2015] VSC 790
[2005] VSCA 20
R v McMillan
[2018] VSC 819
[2019] VSC 30
[2007] VSCA 236
[2016] VSC 685
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
[2013] VSCA 147
Sawyer v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 282
Slaveski v Victoria & Ors
[2010] VSC 441
Smith v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 219
Thomas v Campbell
[2003] VSC 460
Tran v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 252
Victoria Police v JV
[2013] VMC 26
Wilson v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 40
Younger v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 199
Legislation
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to Be Tried) Act 1997
Crimes (Stalking) Act 2003
Crimes (Amendment) Act 1994
Crimes Amendment (Bullying) Act 2011
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Justice Legislation Amendment (Family Violence and Other Matters) Act
Personal Safety Intervention Orders Act 2010
Sentencing Act 1991
Summary Offences Act 1966
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
Wage Theft Act 2020
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 1899
Criminal Code Act 1924
Criminal Code Compilation Act 1913
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Criminal Code Act 1983
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code,
RSC 1985, c C-46
Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
Harassment Act 1997
Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997
Protection of Freedoms Act 2012
The Protection from Harassment (Northern Ireland) Order
Quasi-legislative materials
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Direction No. 3 of 2020 – Criminal Proceedings in the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria
(24 March 2020).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No. 5 of 2020
– COVID-19 Pandemic Response: Criminal Proceedings in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
(8 April 2020).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No. 20 of 2020
– 6 August to 24 October 2020
(24 September 2020).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 31 May 2011
(Martin Pakula, Member for Western Metropolitan)
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 20 October 1994
(Geoff Coleman, Minister for Natural Resources)
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1994
(Jan Wade, Attorney-General)
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-65-8 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
Publications of the Sentencing Advisory Council follow the Melbourne
Law Review Association Inc
Australian Guide to Legal Citation
(3rd ed., 2010).
This report reflects the law as at 1 January 2022.
. Pursuant to
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
. Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Consultation Paper
(2021) viii–ix.
Criminal Procedure Act
. The offence of stalking was
first introduced by
Crimes (Amendment) Act 1994
. Victoria, ‘Crimes
(Amendment) Bill Second Reading’,
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 20 October 1994, 1384 (Geoff Coleman, Minister for
Natural Resources).
. Victoria, ‘Crimes
(Amendment) Bill First Reading’
, Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 19 October 1994, 1267 (Jan Wade, Attorney-General).
Crimes (Stalking) Act 2003
(Vic) ss 3–4. For example, this might occur if the victim was not
aware they were being stalked.
. Victoria, ‘
Amendment (Bullying) Bill 2011
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative
Council, 31 May 2011, 1542 (Martin Pakula, Member for Western Metropolitan).
Crimes Amendment (Bullying)
Berlyn v Brouskos
[2002] VSC 377
, [12]–[25]. While
course of conduct
is defined in
clause 4A(1) of Schedule 1 of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic), that
definition does not apply to the offence of stalking because the stalking
offence is in Division 1 of
Crimes Act 1958
definition only applies to sex offences, certain offences under the
Theft Act 2020
(Vic), and offences in Divisions 2, 2AA, 2A, 2B and some of
Division 3 of the
Crimes Act 1958
Berlyn v Brouskos
[2002] VSC 377
Nadarajamoorthy v Moreton
[2003] VSC 283
[2009] VSCA 7
, [26]–[27].
. For instance, in the
Tasmanian case of
Police v Nunn
[2021] TASMC 3
, a court held that the
accused could not be held to have engaged in a course of conduct for having
spent less than 10 seconds pouring
petrol over a car with a child in it in
circumstances where he knew, or ought to have known, that the behaviour would
unreasonably
control or cause mental harm, apprehension or fear in his
, [86] (though the issue was not decisive, the court saw ‘no
reason why the jury was not entitled to treat each act of posting,
different addressee, as a separate piece of conduct’).
DPP v Taupau
DPP v Fitzgerald
[2019] VCC 352.
This was followed by an aggravated burglary of the male
victim’s home while he was not present.
Smith v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 219.
The Court of Appeal upheld the 18-month prison sentence
imposed for the stalking offence despite ‘the stalking last[ing] for
relatively short period’:
Smith v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 219
DPP v Morrison
[2020] VCC 492.
Other stalking behaviour led to additional charges.
DPP v Wasif
Crimes Act 1958
ss 21A(2)(a)
–(f). On what constitutes ‘following’ a
victim, see
Slaveski v Victoria & Ors
[2010] VSC 441
[1853]–[1857] (concluding that it requires ‘some motion’). On
what constitutes ‘loitering’, see
Nadarajamoorthy v Moreton
[2003] VSC 283
, [31]–[33]. On what constitutes
‘surveillance’, see
[2009] VSCA 7
Crimes Act 1958
s 21A(2)(g).
Crimes Act 1958
–(3). See further
[2007] VSCA 117
[99]–[105] (‘the required state of mind is not the actual state of
mind of the offender, but what “that offender”
circumstances “ought to have understood”’).
Crimes Act 1958
When the offence is tried summarily (in the
Magistrates’ Court), it is subject to the standard restrictions for
offences tried
summarily. That is, the maximum penalty for a single charge is 2
years’ imprisonment, and the maximum cumulation or aggregate
where there are multiple charges in a case is 5 years’ imprisonment:
Sentencing Act 1991
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189(2)(b);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Compilation Act
(WA) s 338E(1)(a);
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) s 359E(4).
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189(2)(b);
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
Compilation Act
1913 (WA) ss 338D, 338E(1)(a).
. Maximum penalties inform
how sentencing courts exercise their discretion; for instance, in
[2014] VSCA 191
, the Court of Appeal indicated that a
‘sentence of 2½ years’ imprisonment in the context of a 10 year
not excessive’:
Pilgrim v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 191
. The penalty for Tasmania is
not included in Figure 1 because the maximum penalty for all offences other than
murder and treason
in Tasmania is 21 years’ imprisonment:
Criminal Code
(Tas) sch 1 cl 389(3).
Harassment Act 1997
Protection of Freedoms Act 2012
(E&W) s 111;
Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010
(Scot) s 39;
The Protection
from Harassment (Northern Ireland) Order 1997
(NI) s 6 (for a course of
conduct that causes the victim to fear violence on at least two occasions);
Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997
(IR) s 10(6).
Criminal Code,
1985, c C-46, s 264(3).
. Paul E. Mullen et al.,
‘Study of Stalkers’ (1999) 156(8)
American Journal of Psychiatry
1244; see also Troy E. McEwan et al., ‘Approach and Escalation in
Stalking’ (2012) 23(3)
The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry &
. There is debate as to how
stalkers who appear to fit into, or progress through, multiple categories should
be categorised, and whether
they might nonetheless have a single underlying
Debra A. Pinals (ed.),
Stalking: Psychiatric Perspectives and Practical
(2007) 45, 54–55; McEwan et al. (2012), above n 29,
396–397; Troy E. McEwan et al., ‘Advances in Stalking Risk
Assessment’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The Law
. See, for example, Kris
Mohandie et al., ‘The RECON Typology of Stalking: Reliability and Validity
Based Upon a Large Sample
of North American Stalkers’ (2006) 51(1)
Journal of Forensic Science
147; Safe Lives UK,
SafeLives Dash Risk
Checklist: Frequently Asked Questions
(2015); P. Randall Kropp et al.,
‘The Development and Validation of the Guidelines for Stalking Assessment
and Management’
(2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Baker (A Pseudonym)
[2019] VCC 2096
DPP v McLachlan
[2015] VCC 1164
DPP v Ahern
[2014] VCC 849.
. Mullen et al. (1999), above
n 29, 1246; Troy E. McEwan et al., ‘The Reliability and Predictive
Validity of the Stalking Risk
Profile’ (2018) 25(2)
261–262; Pinals (2007), above n 30, 46–47; Caroline Flowers et al.,
‘Identifying the Characteristics Associated
with Intimate Partner
Stalking: A Mixed Methods Structured Review and Narrative Synthesis’
(2020) 31(6)
The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
. See, for example,
v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 351
DPP v Willats
[2018] VCC 1030.
. McEwan et al. (2018), above
n 33, 261–262; R. D. MacKenzie et al., ‘Stalkers and Intelligence:
Implications for Treatment’
(2010) 21(6)
The Journal of Forensic
Psychiatry & Psychology
852, 859–860; Pinals (2007), above n 30,
. David V. James et al.,
‘Persistence in Stalking: A Comparison of Associations in General Forensic
and Public Figure Samples’
(2010) 21(2)
The Journal of Forensic
Psychiatry & Psychology
283, 295, 299–301.
. See, for example,
[2019] VCC 36.
. McEwan et al. (2012), above
n 29, 396; McEwan et al. (2018), above n 33, 262; Pinals (2007), above n 30,
. Mullen et al. (1999), above
n 29, 1246.
. Ibid; McEwan et al. (2018),
above n 33, 262; Pinals (2007), above n 30, 49.
. See, for example, two cases
involving the same offender, but offences four years apart:
Cooper v The
[2013] VSCA 153
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
[2016] VCC 1902.
. Mullen et al. (1999), above
n 29, 1247; McEwan et al. (2018), above n 33, 262; McEwan et al. (2012), above n
29, 396. Stalking could
also be a way to regain control or power: Pinals (2007),
above n 30, 50.
. McEwan et al. (2018), above
n 33, 262; Mullen et al. (1999), above n 29, 1249.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1313
DPP v Murphy
[2013] VCC 615.
. Mullen et al. (1999), above
n 29, 1247; McEwan et al. (2012), above n 29, 396, 405–406; McEwan et al.
(2018), above n 33,
. T. K. Logan,
‘Examining Stalking Experiences and Outcomes for Men and Women Stalked by
(Ex)partners and Non-partners (2020)
Journal of Family Violence
729, 733–734.
. See, for example, Harald
Dressing et al., ‘The Prevalence and Effects of Stalking’ (2020)
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International
347, 349–350.
. See, for example, ibid
349–350; Timothy M. Diette et al., ‘Stalking: Does It Leave a
Psychological Footprint?’
(2014) 95(2)
Social Science Quarterly
563, 574–575; Kathleen C. Basile et al., ‘The Differential
Association of Intimate Partner Physical, Sexual, Psychological
and Stalking
Violence and Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms in a Nationally Representative Sample
of Women’ (2004) 17(5)
Journal of Traumatic Stress
. Dressing et al. (2020),
above n 47, 350.
. Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2017), ‘Whether Experienced Anxiety or Fear in the 12 Months
After the Most Recent Episode
of Stalking Started’,
Stalking – In
Focus: Crime and Justice Statistics
(abs.gov.au, 2017)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/focus-crime-and-justice-statistics/june-2017>
at 20 December 2021.
. Examples include taking
time off work or school, avoiding family or friends, moving house and changing
Baum et al.,
Stalking Victimization in the
United States,
NCJ no. 224527 (2009) 6–7.
. Michelle Sibenik, ‘A
Critical Analysis of the Applications of Anti-Stalking Legislation in Victoria,
Australia’ (PhD
Thesis, Monash University, 2018) 39. See also Paul
McGorrery, ‘Causing Psychological Harm: A Criminal Offence?’ (PhD
Thesis, Deakin University, 2021) 59 (on the rate of victims of stalking
suffering post-traumatic stress disorder).
. McEwan et al. (2011), above
. One survey of 1,766 victims
of stalking in the United Kingdom found that almost one-third had suffered
violence, and 8% had required
hospital or injury room treatment for injuries
ranging from cuts to disfigurement, permanent disability, and sterility as a
of rape: Lorraine Sheridan and Karl Roberts, ‘Key Questions to
Consider in Stalking Cases’ (2011) 29(2)
Behavioral Sciences & The
. Flowers et al. (2020),
above n 33, 915–916; Victorian Government,
Family Violence Multi-Agency
Risk Assessment and Management Framework
(2018) 28–29.
. Frances P. Churcher and
Mark Nesca, ‘Risk Factors for Violence in Stalking Perpetration: A
Meta-Analysis’ (2013) 7(2)
FWU Journal of Social Sciences
. Flowers et al. (2020),
above n 33, 915–916; McEwan et al. (2012), above n 29, 401–402;
Logan (2020), above n 46, 735;
Troy E. McEwan et al., ‘Risk Factors for
Stalking Violence, Persistence, and Recurrence’ (2017) 28(1)
Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
38, 46; Churcher and Nesca
(2013), above n 56, 106–107; Célia Ferreira and Marlene Matos,
‘Post-Relationship Stalking:
The Experience of Victims With and Without
History of Partner Abuse’ (2013) 28(4)
Journal of Family Violence
393, 397–398; Svenja Senkans et al., ‘Assessing the Link Between
Intimate Partner Violence and Postrelationship Stalking:
A Gender-Inclusive
Study’ (2021) 36(1–2)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
NP772, NP787–NP789.
. Rosemary Purcell et al.,
‘What Mediates Psychopathology in Stalking Victims? The Role of
Individual-Vulnerability and Stalking-Related
Factors’ (2012) 23(3)
Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology
361, 366–368; McEwan
et al. (2017), above n 57, 47.
. Flowers et al. (2020),
above n 33, 910–911, 913–916; McEwan et al. (2017), above n 57,
49–51; Churcher and Nesca
(2013), above n 56, 107–108; Martyna
Bendlin and Lorraine Sheridan, ‘Risk Factors for Severe Violence in
Intimate Partner
Stalking Situations: An Analysis of Police Records’
(2021) 36(17–18)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
. Purcell et al. (2012),
above n 58, 366–368.
. Flowers et al. (2020),
above n 33, 913; Churcher and Nesca (2013), above n 56, 106.
. McEwan et al. (2017), above
n 57, 39, 46–48, 50.
. Churcher and Nesca (2013),
above n 56, 106–107; Flowers et al. (2020), above n 33, 915; McEwan et al.
(2012), above n 29,
. Male stalkers are more
common than female stalkers, female victims are more common than male victims,
and female victims of male
stalkers experience more fear: Dressing et al.
(2020), above n 47, 348, 350; Logan (2020), above n 46, 734–736; J. Reid
et al., ‘The Female Stalker’ (2011) 29(2)
Sciences & The Law
240; Zuzana Podaná and Romana
Imríšková, ‘Victims’ Responses to Stalking: An
Examination of
Fear Levels and Coping Strategies’ (2016) 31(5)
of Interpersonal Violence
. See, for example,
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 150.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1313.
. See, for example,
[2016] VCC 1902
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
[2020] VCC 428.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1313
, [65]–[66];
DPP v Sanchez
, [33], [39].
. See, for example,
[2019] VCC 352.
. For example, in
[2019] VSC 30
, [35]–[44], a prison sentence would have been
more onerous for the offender. Mental illness may also affect culpability, as
[2017] VCC 1911
, where the offender had a delusion that the
victim returned his affections. See also
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA
. Ian Freckelton,
‘Editorial: Stalker Sentencing and Protection of the Public’
Journal of Law and Medicine
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075
[2020] VCC 492
DPP v Alexander (A Pseudonym)
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 2075.
. See, for example,
[2013] VCC 2027
DPP v Hamilton
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246
DPP v Sanchez
[2015] VCC 907
. See, for example,
[2016] VCC 821
(multiple episodes over 10 years or more involving the
same group of victims);
DPP v Alexander (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 124
DPP v Alexander (A
[2020] VCC 124
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1651
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1651
DPP v Stephens
[2018] VCC 1246
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 2075
, [20], [24];
DPP v Salvaggio
, [32]: when interviewed, the offender ‘stated that the stalking was a
“silly decision”, but that it “became
somewhat encouraging
when the person makes it very easy”. [He] believed if the victim was a
true exhibitionist, she would not
mind [his] behaviour’.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1313
, [28], [35]: the offender made five voyeuristic
videos of a woman, and they were discovered during an investigation into
allegations
he had raped another woman, contextualising his likely motivation
for stalking.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246
, [26], [31].
, [8]–[9], [14].
DPP v Skews
DPP v McDonnell (A
[2018] VCC 1782
, [44] (intellectual disability).
DPP v Taupau
, [47] (the stalking in this case was also exceptionally brief, though
threatening, and was not the principal offence in the case).
[2007] VSCA 102.
. There was only one publicly
available Magistrates’ Court decision, a successful appeal against
conviction, relating to a stalking
charge during the reference period:
Victoria Police v JV
[2013] VMC 26.
DPP v Bouras
Additionally, the offender received 8 months’ imprisonment (2
months cumulative) for threatening to injure a police officer
working on the
DPP v Salvaggio
[2018] VCC 1313.
DPP v Bambalis
[2018] VCC 2075.
He also received 30 months’ imprisonment (6 months
cumulative) for a charge of persistently breaching an intervention order,
consisted of ‘essentially the same’ behaviour.
. Attempt to pervert the
course of justice was the base sentence (36 months’ imprisonment). In
addition to the stalking and
persistent breach charges, he was also sentenced
for an unrelated charge of cultivating a narcotic plant, which attracted 2
imprisonment (wholly concurrent).
. Stakeholder Roundtable (19
October 2021).
Thomas v Campbell
[2003] VSC 460
, [37]–[41];
[2007] VSCA 236.
. See, for example,
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 282
[52]–[59], where the Court of Appeal noted
with approval at [59] that ‘where there was ”a factual
between a substantive charge and a ”particular” of
the stalking charge, the judge reduced the sentence on the substantive
accommodate the overlap’;
Thomas v Campbell
[2003] VSC 460
‘It would no doubt be wrong to punish an offender twice for the commission
of elements which are common to unlawful
assault and stalking. But that is a
different matter to the question of whether the offender may be convicted of
both offences’.
Atkinson v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 127.
Atkinson v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 127
, [32]–[34].
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136.
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136
, [11]–[16].
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
. The Court of Appeal also
confirmed that a sentencing court may take stalking-like behaviours into account
despite there not being
a stalking charge on the indictment or charge sheet, so
long as a stalking charge would have been a ‘lesser offence’:
Tran v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 252
DPP v Fernandez
[2013] VCC 2027.
Fernandez v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 169
, [25], on appeal from
DPP v Fernandez
For example, at first instance the court said, at [9]–[10] and [21]:
‘I am not, of course, here to punish you for an
offence of breaching the
intervention order ... I regard this as a serious example of stalking. It was
committed in circumstances
where you knew perfectly well that there was an
intervention order ... the sentence I imposed must be designed in part at least
deter you from committing further offences of that kind, and indeed any
further offences involving breaches of intervention orders’.
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136.
Maher v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 136
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Meeting with Assoc.
Prof. Lorraine Sheridan, Curtin University (21 October 2021).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Sibenik (2018), above n
52, 88. Sibenik collated statistics from Inez Dussuyer, ‘Is Stalking
Legislation Effective in Protecting
Victims?’ (Paper presented at
Stalking: Criminal Justice Responses Conference, Australian Institute of
Criminology, Sydney,
7–8 December 2000) and multiple statistical reports
published by Victoria Police and the Crime Statistics Agency.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021). See also McEwan et al. (2018), above n 33, 264; Sheridan and
Roberts (2011), above n 54,
. Email from Victoria
Police to Sentencing Advisory Council, 18 October 2021.
. This included contacting
a person by phone (905), email or other electronic communication (888), text
message (473), post (284),
fax (2) or unspecified means (538).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. In fact, forensic
psychologists sometimes exclude stalking that occurs over a very short duration,
usually under two weeks, from
their research because those cases involve a
distinct, sometimes even a relatively normative, underlying psychology. See, for
McEwan et al. (2012), above n 29, 395; Senkans et al. (2021), above n
57, NP774; McEwan et al. (2017), above n 57, 42.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Email from Victoria
Police to Sentencing Advisory Council, 18 October 2021; Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Findings vary, but some
studies have found median durations of around three to four months and averages
of up to two years. See
James et al. (2010), above n 36, 289; McEwan et al.
(2017), above n 57, 48; Katja Björklund et al., ‘Latent Profile
to Duration of Stalking’ (2010) 55(4)
Journal of Forensic
1008, 1010. Average durations can be skewed by exceptionally long
stalking episodes, perhaps more so than recorded offences where
there might be
multiple behaviours recorded.
. Email from Victoria
Police to Sentencing Advisory Council, 18 October 2021. See also Troy E. McEwan
et al., ‘Risk Factors
for Stalking Recidivism in a Dutch Community
Forensic Mental Health Sample’ (2020) 19(2)
International Journal of
Forensic Mental Health
127, 137–138: the study compared recidivism
rates following various interventions and according to different definitions of
recidivism and found up to half of stalkers targeted the same victim again. In
some stalking studies, recorded durations are also
influenced by the exclusion
of people who stalk for less than two weeks. It was not possible to calculate an
average duration for
recorded offences over two weeks, but the median for such
offences was between eight and 12 weeks.
. Recorded offenders are
unique within each calendar year, but there may be some duplication if someone
was recorded as a stalker
in two separate years.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. A family incident
‘is an incident attended by Victoria Police where a Victoria Police Risk
Assessment and Risk Management
Report (also known as an L17 form) was completed.
Victoria Police are required to complete an L17 report when they attend an
and identify that there [is a] familiar relationship between the
individuals involved’: Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Explanatory
Notes’ (crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/about-the-data/explanatory-notes>
24 November 2021.
. Since 2011, initiatives
such as the Family Violence Code of Practice have been put in place by Victoria
Police to improve the recording
of family incidents, such that
‘comparisons to data prior to 2012 are not advised’: Ibid.
. For the others, the
relationship either was not specified (3,398) or could not be determined
. Brian H. Spitzberg et
al., ‘Sex Differences in Stalking and Obsessive Relational Intrusion: Two
Meta-Analyses’ (2010)
Partner Abuse
259, 260; Dressing et al.
(2020), above n 47, 350; Churcher and Nesca (2013), above n 56, 106.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. This is consistent with
early research on the effect of COVID-19 on stalking types and rates in the UK:
Kelly Bracewell et al.,
‘The Consequences of the COVID-19 Lockdown on
Stalking Victimisation’ (2020)
Journal of Family Violence
10.1007/s10896-020-00201-0) 3–4
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10896-020-00201-0> at 23
November 2021.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. In 2012–13, there
were 4,356 cases sentenced in the Children’s Court, and by 2019–20
that had declined to 2,769:
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced
in the Children’s Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-childrens-court>
at 24 November 2021.
. Rosemary Purcell et al.,
‘Stalking Among Juveniles’ (2009) 194(5)
British Journal of
. Ibid 452.
. The family violence flag
has been available in the Children’s Court since the 2016–17
financial year, meaning that 2017
is the first full calendar year for which data
is available.
. Purcell et al. (2009),
above n 132, 453.
. Sentencing Advisory
Sentencing Children in Victoria: Data Update Report
. The rate of 6.9 offences
per case is lower than the rate of charges (11.3) in recent cases involving
threat offences sentenced in
the Children’s Court: Sentencing Advisory
Threat Offences in Victoria: Sentencing Outcomes and Reoffending
(2021) 37. The number of charges per case had also been increasingly
steadily in the years leading up to 2015, most likely due to
case consolidation
practices in the Children’s Court: Sentencing Advisory Council (2016),
above n 138, 12; Sentencing Advisory
Children Held on Remand in
(2019) 39–41.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Children’s Court
of Victoria, ‘Youth Diversion Service’ (childrenscourt.vic.gov.au,
<https://childrenscourt.vic.gov.au/criminal-division/youth-diversion-service>
at 24 November 2021.
. Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Children’s Court’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-childrens-court>
at 24 November 2021.
. Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-magistrates-court>
at 24 November 2021.
. This is suggested in the
Council’s forthcoming third monitoring report on breaches of family
violence safety notices and intervention
orders; see also
Sentencing Advisory
Council, Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety Intervention Orders in
. This is perhaps
especially so for the offence of persistent contravention of family violence
safety notices and intervention orders,
which came into effect in 2012 and can
operate as a course of conduct offence similar to stalking:
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
, inserted by
Justice Legislation
Amendment (Family Violence and Other Matters) Act
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Since this date, the
Magistrates’ Court system has been updated automatically using Victoria
Police data. See Sentencing Advisory
Swift, Certain and Fair
Approaches to Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Discussion Paper
. Queensland Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Spotlight on Stalking
(2020) 6–7.
. The age of the offender
in 10 cases was not available.
. Lorraine Sheridan and
Adrian J. Scott, ‘Perceptions of Harm: Verbal Versus Physical Abuse in
Stalking Scenarios’ (2010)
Criminal Justice and Behavior
407, 412–415.
. Queensland Sentencing
Advisory Council (2020), above n 148, 10.
. The assault and injury
offences included common assault, unlawful assault, assaulting a police officer
or emergency worker, causing
injury intentionally, causing injury recklessly and
causing serious injury recklessly. Theft offences primarily consisted of thefts
from a person, thefts from a shop, bicycle thefts and thefts of or from a motor
vehicle. The drug-related offences included possessing
a drug of dependence
(commonly amphetamine and methylamphetamine), using a drug of dependence,
trafficking a drug of dependence and
cultivating cannabis. The regulatory
driving offences included driving without a licence (usually while suspended or
disqualified
from driving) and driving in breach of a licence condition, but
excluded careless driving, exceeding the speed limit and driving
influence of alcohol or drugs. And threat offences included threats to destroy
or damage property, threats to assault emergency
workers, threats to commit a
sexual offence, extortion with threats to kill, inflict injury or destroy
property, using threatening
words in a public place, and threats to distribute
intimate images. The vast majority of threat offences were threats to kill or
inflict serious injury (86%).
Immediate custodial
comprises imprisonment and partially suspended sentences of
imprisonment.
Community order
comprises community-based orders (109 in 2011 and one in 2012), intensive
correction orders (25 in 2011) and community correction
orders (1,892 since
Sentencing Act 1991
At various points in the reference period, the maximum term of
imprisonment that could be combined with a CCO was 3 months, 2 years,
recently 1 year:
Sentencing Act 1991
; see also Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Contravention of Community Correction Orders
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring
(2014) 4. In this context, imprisonment with a CCO was the outcome
specific to 759 stalking charges.
sentence types were wholly suspended sentences (299 charges), a youth
justice centre order (1 charge), drug treatment orders (4 charges),
with conviction (3 charges) and dismissals without conviction (7 charges).
. Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>
at 24 November 2021.
. Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria,
Practice Direction No. 3 of 2020 – Criminal Proceedings in
the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
(24 March 2020) 1–2;
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No. 5 of 2020
– COVID-19 Pandemic Response: Criminal Proceedings in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
(8 April 2020) 1–2;
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No. 20 of 2020
– 6 August to 24 October 2020
(24 September 2020) 2.
Boulton v The
[2014] VSCA 342.
. Changes to procedures in
the Magistrates’ Court in 2015 mean that data on family violence flags
from cases sentenced after
16 April 2015 is more reliable than data from cases
sentenced before that date.
. See Sentencing Advisory
Council (2021), above n 139, 27.
. Meloy et al. (2011),
above n 64, 247–251; Logan (2020), above n 46, 734–736; Churcher and
Nesca (2013), above n 56,
. Sentencing Advisory
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(2010) 63. There is
also a ‘considerable overlap’ between intimate partner violence and
stalking perpetration and victimisation:
Senkans et al. (2021), above n 57,
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. CCOs combined with
imprisonment were not necessarily imposed in relation to the stalking charge.
All combined orders were imposed
between 2012 (when the CCO was introduced as a
sentencing option) and 2020.
. This is as calculated by
the court, including any adjustments.
. Sentencing Advisory
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
Sentencing Act
. This adds 759 stalking
charges to the charges that received a community order in Figure 15, due to the
inclusion of charges that
received imprisonment combined with a CCO.
. Of the 2,031 CCOs
imposed on stalkers in the Magistrates’ Court, 1,879 required
rehabilitation and treatment, 1,471 required
supervision by corrections
officers, 1,150 required unpaid community work, 364 required judicial
monitoring, 49 had a justice plan
condition, 43 had association restrictions, 36
had place restrictions, 12 had an alcohol exclusion, 8 had residence
restrictions,
and 3 had curfew conditions.
. The specific nature of
treatment and rehabilitation can vary depending on the case. It can include
assessment and/or treatment for
drug abuse or dependency, alcohol abuse or
dependency, medical assessments and treatments, mental health assessments and
treatments,
programs designed to reduce offending behaviour, or any other
treatment or rehabilitation the court considers necessary, such as
employment,
educational, cultural and personal development programs:
Sentencing Act 1991
. Unpaid community work,
for example, is a punitive condition:
Boulton v The Queen
[2014] VSCA
, [60], [148]–[151];
[2016] VCC 1011
. McEwan et al. (2018),
above n 33, 262; McEwan et al. (2017), above n 57, 51; David V. James and Rachel
D. MacKenzie, ‘Stalking
and Harassment’, in Jane L. Ireland et al.
The Routledge International Handbook of Human Aggression
. Sentencing Advisory
Council (2014), above n 155, 17; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Correction Orders: Second Monitoring Report
(Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(2015) 16; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third
Monitoring Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(2016) 17; Sentencing Advisory
Animal Cruelty Offences in Victoria
(2019) 36–37.
Sentencing Act
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Forensicare,
‘Problem Behaviour Program’ (forensicare.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.forensicare.vic.gov.au/our-services/community-forensic-mental-health-services/problem-behaviour-program/>
at 23 November 2021.
. Email from Assoc. Prof.
Troy McEwan to Sentencing Advisory Council, 29 October 2021.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021); Email from Assoc. Prof. Troy McEwan to Sentencing Advisory
Council, 29 October 2021.
. Email from Assoc. Prof.
Troy McEwan to Sentencing Advisory Council, 29 October 2021.
. Jennifer McCarthy et
An Evaluation of the Problem Behaviour Program: A Community Based Model
for the Assessment and Treatment of Problem Behaviours
(2015), cited in
Forensicare, ‘An Evaluation of the Problem Behaviour Program: A Community
Based Model for the Assessment and
Treatment of Problem Behaviours’
(forensicare.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.forensicare.vic.gov.au/centreforforensicbehaviouralscience/forensic-mental-health-research/problem-behaviour-program-evaluation>
at 22 November 2021.
. The next highest fines
were $8,000 (1 charge), $7,000 (1 charge) and $5,000 (5 charges).
. Sentencing remarks are
available for the repeat stalkers:
DPP v Erradi
[2016] VCC 1902
[2015] VCC 1672
[2012] VSC 77
DPP v Bouras
[2018] VCC 1651
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
Cooper v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 153
(appeal against the first stalking conviction).
. Unpublished sentencing
remarks provided to the Council. He was charged with stalking for the 18 victims
who could be contacted,
and with using a carriage service to menace, harass or
offend for the 73 victims who could not be contacted.
. The most common assault
offences were common law assault (15 cases) and intentionally causing injury (14
cases). The most common
burglary offences were actual or attempted aggravated
burglary (21 cases), burglary (8 cases) and home invasion (1 case). Almost
of the intervention order breaches were breaches of FVIOs (25 of 27 cases), and
most of those were aggravated contravention offences
involving higher maximum
penalties: persistent contravention offences (12 cases) and contraventions in
circumstances where the offender
intended to cause harm or fear (7 cases). The
most common threat offences were threats to kill (12 cases).
. Sentencing Advisory
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety
Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(2016) 19, 22, 42.
. See, for example,
[2019] VCC 2063
. The fines included
$2,000 for stalking and common law assault, $2,500 for stalking and using a
carriage service to menace, harass
or offend, and $8,000 for stalking and
criminal damage. As an example of a case where a fine was imposed, see
[2012] VCC 361.
. This does not include
the two partially suspended sentences, as the data does not specify the active
component for individual charges.
. The maximum term of
imprisonment that could be combined with a CCO varied over time, and for some of
the offences in the study group,
it was three months or two years: see
Sentencing Advisory Council
(2017), above n 155, 4; Sentencing Advisory
Council (2014), above n 155, 4. It is currently one year:
Sentencing Act
However, pre-sentence detention does not count towards
this maximum:
Younger v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 199
Boulton v The
[2014] VSCA 342
. See also the earlier
[2005] VSCA 20
, in which the Court of Appeal upheld a
6-year prison sentence for a single charge for ‘one of the worst examples
of stalking’:
[2005] VSCA 20
. One case of the 93
received a Commonwealth partially suspended sentence and is not included in the
analysis of time served prison
DPP v Letizia
[2014] VCC 957
. Three cases recorded a
period of remand longer than the total effective sentence, with differences of
65 days, 59 days and 13 days.
. Optional conditions were
recorded for 24 of the 31 CCOs imposed. According to sentencing remarks that
were reviewed, judges sometimes
imposed further custom conditions, for example,
internet restrictions, on the offender depending on their offending behaviour.
unique conditions are not counted or examined here.
. An interrater
reliability check was conducted as part of this analysis to measure the extent
to which multiple observers agree with
interpreting subjective information.
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Stewart
[2019] VCC 2086
[2019] VCC 2063
DPP v Wasif
[2019] VCC 1775
[2018] VCC 2075
DPP v Fallon
[2018] VCC 2094
[2018] VCC 135
DPP v Fuiava
[2018] VCC 76
DPP v Brien
[2017] VCC 89
DPP v Lorenzana
[2016] VCC 236
DPP v Henderson
[2015] VCC 1333
DPP v McLachlan
[2015] VCC 1164
DPP v Sanchez
[2015] VCC 907
DPP v Ahern
[2014] VCC 849
DPP v Fernandez
[2013] VCC 2027
DPP v Ashton
[2012] VCC 911
[2012] VSC 77.
Further, in 23 cases the offender had been violent or abusive
to a victim who was their intimate partner prior to the stalking behaviour.
. See, for example,
[2019] VSC 30
DPP v Riley
[2019] VCC 36
DPP v Bouras
[2018] VCC 1651
DPP v Stephens
[2018] VCC 1246
[2018] VCC 1030
DPP v Cooper
[2016] VCC 821
[2014] VCC 957
, [6]. This category includes a few cases where the
offender and victim had met for one or two dates, but nothing further had
eventuated.
. See, for example,
v Salvaggio
[2018] VCC 1313
DPP v Erradi
[2016] VCC 1902
DPP v Erradi
[2015] VCC 1672
DPP v Taupau
[2015] VCC 239.
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1651
, [9]–[16];
DPP v Amato
[2017] VCC 145
DPP v Erradi
[2016] VCC 1902
DPP v Erradi
[2015] VCC 1672
[2014] VCC 849
. See, for example,
[2019] VCC 2063
, [38]–[48];
DPP v Fallon
DPP v Letizia
[2014] VCC 957
, [11], [13].
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 720
, [55]–[58].
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 428
DPP v Lorenzana
[2016] VCC 236
. See, for example,
[2020] VCC 428
(the stalking behaviours lasted at least 3
DPP v Salvaggio
[2018] VCC 1313
(10 months);
DPP v Willats
[2018] VCC 1030
(10 months);
DPP v Skravanj
[2018] VCC 135
DPP v Erradi
[2016] VCC 1902
(6 months).
. Forensic psychologists
and criminologists usually apply a minimum duration, often two weeks, before
classifying a pattern of behaviour
as stalking: see, for example, McEwan et al.
(2012), above n 29, 395; Senkans et al. (2021), above n 57, NP774; McEwan et al.
above n 57, 42.
[2019] VCC 2063
DPP v Brien
[2017] VCC 89.
. See, for example,
v Baker (A Pseudonym)
[2019] VCC 2096
, [24]–[25], [59].
. See, for example,
[2018] VCC 1246.
. See, for example,
(A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1850
, [11]–[15].
. Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Paper
. Sentencing Advisory
Reoffending Following Sentence in Victoria: A Statistical
. Lorraine Sheridan et
al., ‘Stalkers: Specialists Versus Generalists’ (2021)
Interpersonal Violence
(DOI 10.1177/0886260521102350) 8–9.
. As cases sentenced in
the higher courts do not have family violence flags, 20 offenders with an index
sentence in the higher courts
are excluded from the family violence flag
groupings. Four offenders whose ages were unknown were excluded from the age
. A violent offence is
defined as an offence in ANZSOC Category 021 (assault), excluding a threat.
. This is consistent with
the large volume of research showing that offending behaviour tends to peak in
adolescence and young adulthood:
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing for Young Adult Offenders
(2019) 11–14.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021); Meeting with Assoc. Prof. Lorraine Sheridan, Curtin
University (21 October 2021): ‘When
you’re older, you’re more
level... if you’re younger – you’re really angry, you’re
raging, but
you’ll get over it eventually. But the 35–40s, they
stick – “it’s all over, I can’t be young
can’t start again ... I thought we had our whole life, I’m not going
to give it up, so you will pay”.
They tend to be the longer duration
stalkers, as well’.
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021). Gippsland also had a disproportionate number of stalking
charges and the highest imprisonment
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021); see McEwan et al. (2020), above n 121, 137–138. McEwan
et al. discuss the effect
of criteria for defining recidivism, with subsequent
conviction (the most restrictive) substantially reducing the rate compared to
more inclusive definitions, some of which suggested that half or more of
stalkers continued or recommenced stalking.
R v McMillan
[2018] VSC 819
[2016] VSC 685
[2017] VSC 685
[2019] VSC 90
(manslaughter);
[2016] VSC 485
(manslaughter).
. Or the stalking appears
to be at least co-sentenced with a breach of a FVSN or FVIO.
. See, for example,
[2015] VSC 790
(murder – the victim was the estranged wife of the
. Finding into Death
without Inquest of Brittany Harvie
[2020] VicCorC 26675
, [62], [70]; see also
DPP v Aleluia
[2017] VSC 204.
. This is demonstrated by
R v Carolus
[2011] VSC 583
, where the offender had stalked and later
murdered his former partner, but the stalking offence was committed outside the
covered in this analysis.
. This stands in stark
contrast to the prevailing perception in the community that stalking by
strangers and acquaintances is more
serious, threatening and deserving of
criminal justice intervention than the same stalking behaviour by an ex-partner,
at least when
the relationship did not involve physical violence: Adrian J.
Scott et al., ‘International Perceptions of Stalking and Responsibility:
The Influence of Prior Relationship and Severity of Behavior’ (2014) 41(2)
Criminal Justice and Behavior
220, 221–222, 231–232; Michelle
Weller et al., ‘Police and Public Perceptions of Stalking: The Role of
Prior Victim–Offender
Relationship’ (2013) 28(2)
Interpersonal Violence
320, 327–328; Adrian J. Scott et al.,
‘The Influence of Contextual Information Regarding the Breakdown of
Relationships
and Perpetrator-Target Sex Composition on Perceptions of
Relational Stalking’ (2019) 25(4)
Psychology, Crime & Law
. Stakeholder Roundtable
(19 October 2021).
. Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2011),
1234.0 – Australian and New Zealand Standard Offence
Classification (ANZSOC)
(abs.gov.au, 2011)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1234.0> at 24 November
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.47 MB)
PDF format (1.93 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter