URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-057 [2006] VMHRB 9 (30 October 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
East AMHS – Koonung Clinic
[2006] VMHRB 9
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Ms G Nihill
Mr G Matthews
Involuntary status –
Mental Health Act 1986
consent – insight -
– application for
non-disclosure
P was living with his family. He was employed, and had worked on a regular
full-time or part-time basis for two years. A diagnosis
had been made that P had
the illness, schizophrenia. He had been an involuntary patient since 2002. His
most recent admission to
hospital in 2003 took place in the context of marijuana
use and P’s unwillingness to accept medication.
An application for non-disclosure was made with respect to documents pursuant
Ms Mutha, P’s legal representative, accepted that the
material met the requirements of
, in that inspection or access by the
patient would breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who
supplied information
contained in the documents or document. She submitted that
the material was unable to be tested, and could not be challenged by
would be likely to have wished to do so if he had that opportunity. She
submitted therefore that the Board should exercise
its discretion to decide to
not examine and take into account the documents, and referred to the Guidelines
of the Office of the
Chief Psychiatrist titled “Patient Access to Files
for Mental Health Review Board Hearings” in this respect.
Ms Mutha made submissions in relation to
, (d) and (e) of the Act.
She submitted that the primary issue was that of consent. She submitted that P
was able to consent to
treatment and had consistently done so. Ms Mutha said
that P had recognised that he had become unwell in the past and would continue
with treatment if a voluntary patient. She submitted that it ought not be
required that P have a full clinical understanding of
the causes of his illness;
it was enough that he understood his illness and how medication had assisted
him. Ms Mutha submitted that
P had remained compliant since 2003.
Dr SK agreed that P had been compliant with medication since 2003 and that
P’s insight had improved.
P said that he had not heard voices for at least nine months because of the
medication. He said he was eating and sleeping better.
He said he was willing
to continue the treatment because he was scared that if he did not do so he
might become unwell again. When
asked if he considered whether he had an
underlying mental illness P said yes, that he had psychosis which caused him to
hear voices
and have dreams about God when he was not receiving treatment.
(1) The Board carefully considered the matter of viewing documents subject to
an application of non-disclosure, having regard to the
principles of natural
justice and procedural fairness, and in particular those principles in the
context of decision-making about
a person’s freedom of action and
decision. It took into account the fact that
gives primacy to other
considerations over procedural fairness in certain limited circumstances, one
being the circumstance before
the Board, namely an undertaking of
confidentiality having been given. The Board allowed the application for
non-disclosure, and
ordered that the material not be provided to P. It decided
to proceed with the hearing without at that stage examining and having
the material that was the subject of the application. However the Board did
reserve the right to inspect the documents
later in the hearing.
(2) The Board carefully considered all the medical information, from Dr SK at
the hearing and from the clinical file, and also the
information from P himself,
and accepted that P had a mental illness. The Board accepted that P appeared to
be mentally ill, and
that his mental illness was characterised by a significant
disturbance of thought and perception.
(3) The Board accepted evidence that the provision of consistent treatment
since 2003, in particular anti-psychotic medication, had
ameliorated the
symptoms of P’s illness such that he was free of auditory and visual
hallucinations, able to maintain employment
and was eating and sleeping well.
The Board considered that the evidence that P required immediate and consistent
treatment was
compelling, and that the provision of treatment together with
P’s apparent abstinence from cannabis use appeared to have lessened
ill-effects of his illness. The Board found that P did require immediate and
ongoing treatment.
(4) As to the question of P’s capacity to consent, the Board considered
a test set out in
Re the Review of CC
(1994) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 182 at
“To provide informed consent to treatment, a person should be aware of
the nature and existence of their illness and understand
the purpose and effect
of the treatment prescribed for it. To say this is not to demand that a person's
insight into their condition
and their understanding of the means for its
amelioration needs to be complete. What is required, however, is that the person
a sufficient appreciation of both their illness and its treatment for their
decision making with respect to their condition to be
regarded as being founded
in reality and in reason.”
(5) P’s evidence was that he knew he suffered from a psychotic
illness, he understood that symptoms of this illness included
auditory and
visual hallucinations, and he could identify the nature of these hallucinations
and reflect upon them. He was able
to reflect upon his attempt to commit
suicide, and to understand it in the context of his mental illness. He was able
to articulate
that, while he did not like the fact that, as he saw it, the
medication caused a blunting of his emotional responses, he needed the
medication to maintain amelioration of the symptoms of his illness. P gave
evidence, which he repeated in several contexts, that
he would continue to
attend at the general practice to receive treatment, and would see a
psychiatrist regularly, either privately
or through the service. P was also
able to articulate that his use of cannabis had contributed to the severity of
his mental illness,
and he gave evidence that he had stopped using cannabis six
months earlier.
(6) The Board acknowledged the genuine concerns of the service for P’s
ongoing well being, and the concerns of Dr SK and SL
that P may become unwell in
the future. However applying the test referred to above, the Board was unable
to be satisfied that P
was currently unable to consent to treatment. The Board
was not satisfied that this criterion was met.
(7) Having not been satisfied that this criterion was met, the Board did not
consider the remaining criteria.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was not necessary.
P was represented by Ms Mutha, of Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision:
30 October 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Central East AMHS - Koonung Clinic
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
30 October 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
An application for non disclosure was made under
Health Act 1986
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms G Nihill
Community Member: Mr G Matthews
Psychiatrist Member: Dr M Lush
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 30 October 2006:
Legal Representative Ms P Mutha, Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Doctor: Dr SK
Case Manager: SL
Observer: MS
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was not satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order was
The Board therefore discharged P from the community treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore allowed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
30 October 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P is discharged from the community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 12 October 2006 prepared by Dr SK and presented to
Plan of P dated 20 October 2006, prepared by SL, case manager, and presented to
from P’s general practitioner dated 5 August 2006 and 17 August 2006,
respectively.
from urine tests for cannabis and other illegal substances dated 6 September
6. Oral evidence at the hearing.
a) Application for non-disclosure
the Board may order that a patient not be entitled personally
to inspect or otherwise have access to documents to be given to the
connection with a hearing, if the Board is satisfied that such inspection or
access by the patient would breach a confidentiality
provision imposed by a
person who supplied information that is contained in the documents or
The Board considered this matter in the absence of P.
The consideration of an application under
section 26(8)(c)
gives rise to some
difficult issues. It is a fundamental principle of natural justice or
procedural fairness that a person affected
by a decision be given the
opportunity to answer the case against them. This would ordinarily involve
having full access to all material
on which the decision relies. The legislation
however, sets out certain circumstances in which it is recognised that other
considerations should be given priority over this rule of procedural
fairness. However, this also means that the power given to the
Board should be
exercised with caution and in limited circumstances.
In the absence of P, Dr SK and SL were asked whether or not the material was
relevant to the hearing, and after some consideration
submitted that in their
view it was. Ms Mutha requested that she be allowed to examine the material on
behalf of her client, in
order to be able to make submissions in relation to it.
Dr SK sought an undertaking from Ms Mutha that she would not disclose the
content of the documents to her client, and Ms Mutha made this undertaking. On
this basis Dr SK did not object to Ms Mutha examining
the material and Ms Mutha
Ms Mutha accepted that the material met the requirements of
that inspection or access by the patient would breach a confidentiality
provision imposed by a person who supplied information
contained in the
documents or document. She submitted that the material was unable to be tested,
and could not be challenged by
P, who would be likely to have wished to do so if
he had that opportunity. She submitted therefore that the Board should exercise
its discretion to decide to not examine and take into account the documents, and
referred to the Guidelines of the Office of the
Chief Psychiatrist titled
“Patient Access to Files for Mental Health Review Board Hearings” in
this respect.
The Board carefully considered this matter, having regard to the principles
of natural justice and procedural fairness, and in particular
those principles
in the context of decision-making about a person’s freedom of action and
decision. It took into account the
gives primacy to other
considerations over procedural fairness in certain limited circumstances, the
circumstance before the Board
of an undertaking of confidentiality having been
given being one. The Board allowed the application for non-disclosure, and
that the material not be provided to P. It decided to proceed with the
hearing without at that stage examining and having regard
to the material that
was the subject of the application however the Board did reserve the right to
inspect the documents later in
the hearing.
b) Community Treatment Order
Under s36C(2), if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified
in s8(1), the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
Under s35A, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with s19A in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
A diagnosis had been made that P had the illness,
schizophrenia. He had been an involuntary patient since 2002. His most recent
to hospital was in 2003. This admission took place in the context of
marijuana use and P’s unwillingness to accept medication.
P was living with his family. He was employed as a house painter, and had
worked on a regular full-time or part-time basis for two
Submissions by P’s legal representative
Ms Mutha made submissions in relation to
(d) and (e) of the
Ms Mutha submitted that the primary issue was that of consent. She submitted
that P was able to consent to treatment and had consistently
done so. Ms Mutha
said that P had recognised that he had become unwell in the past, that he
realised that he previously heard voices,
and had jumped from a balcony in 2001.
She submitted that P considers that the medication he currently receives helped
him, and that
he no longer heard voices or saw visions. Ms Mutha said that P
would continue with treatment if a voluntary patient. She submitted
ought not be required that P have a full clinical understanding of the causes of
his illness; it was enough that he understood
his illness and how medication had
assisted him. Ms Mutha noted P’s view that his understanding of his
illness and his willingness
to accept treatment had not been accurately
reflected in the clinical notes. Ms Mutha submitted that P had remained
compliant since
2003, and she provided to the Board letters from P’s
general practitioner, which confirmed his regular attendance for depot
medication.
In relation to whether there was a less restrictive means by which treatment
could be provided, Ms Mutha submitted that P was willing
to continue to see his
general practitioner, willing to continue to engage with the service and the
treating team until the services
of a private psychiatrist could be engaged, and
willing to continue to accept treatment with the support of his family. Ms
noted that P no longer used cannabis at all, and provided to the Board
results of urine tests indicating that there were no illegal
substances detected
in P’s urine.
In relation to the issue of risk, Ms Mutha submitted that the risk of
deterioration in P’s mental state was minimal. He had,
she said, been
stable for three years and was willing to continue with treatment and be
monitored by mental health services. He
had not used cannabis for six months,
and was working and more socially connected than in the past.
In relation to the treatment plan, Ms Mutha noted that the treatment plan did
not reflect P’s continuing wish that his care
be transferred to a private
psychiatrist. She noted that in June 2005, at a previous hearing before the
Board, the treatment team
had said to P that they would work with him towards
the transfer of his care to a private psychiatrist. However this had not
nor was it reflected in the treatment plan.
Evidence from Dr SK
Dr SK agreed that P had been compliant with
medication since 2003 but said that he did so reluctantly. She said that the
case manager
needed to keep in contact with the general practitioner to ensure
that P attended for his injection. She agreed that P’s insight
improved, but she was concerned that he did not realise that each time he became
unwell his prognosis would be worse. Dr SK
said that P had had a second opinion
from another consultant psychiatrist. Initially he had said that P did not need
to be on the
community treatment order, as P presented very well at the
assessment. He changed his mind on reviewing the file and on seeing how
became when untreated, and advised P that he considered that the order should
continue. Dr SK said she had investigated
the possibility of transfer of care
to a private psychiatrist, but that there were great difficulties in finding
someone who was
prepared to provide treatment to a patient under a community
treatment order, and would bulk bill.
Dr SK said that P’s family was involved in discussions with the
treating team and aware of the hearing. They were very supportive
of P, but the
responsibility for monitoring for deterioration in P’s mental health was
too great a burden to place on them.
Dr SK was concerned that earlier in her time at the service P did not attend
for appointments. She was concerned that without a community
treatment order
there would not be the same capacity for follow up if he did not attend.
Dr SK spoke of the concerns of Dr G, the consultant psychiatrist, that P
expressed a level of anger when people explained his illness
to him, and that he
was not yet capable of what she described as second step reasoning, continuing
to blame the psychiatrists and
the service and continuing to feel that he was
being persecuted and labelled by the service.
Dr SK said that P had expressed his concern to her that as a result of taking
the medication he did not feel anything, that he did
not feel love. Two months
ago he had said that he did not want to be on it. There had been some
discussions about reviewing the
medication, but that was on hold pending the
In response to questions from Ms Mutha, Dr SK said that if a person did not
attend for treatment that the steps taken would be phone
calls, letters and
visits, and that this would be the same whether or not a person was on a
community treatment order. She agreed
that P’s community treatment order
had not been revoked for three years.
Evidence of SL
SL said that P was accepting treatment and regularly seeing his doctor. She
said that her concern was that he might not continue
to do so in the future, and
that he would become very unwell as in the past.
Evidence of P
P told the Board that he had given up cannabis six months ago, and that he
felt much better for it. He said that he gave it up because
he hoped that to do
so would improve his mental illness and this had turned out to be the case. He
said that he no longer heard
voices and no longer believed in God. He said that
mentally he was feeling much better and he had a few projects he was now able
work on. He described one as being a generator that does not use fuel, but is
powered by water pressure. He said that he had
not relied upon any particular
expertise in developing the idea, but that anyone who had completed year 12
physics could have done
P told the Board that he had made a move from his parent’s home in the
middle of the year, but that he was only gone for a short
time and then
returned. He moved because he felt that his mother was always on his back, but
returned because his car tyres were
punctured twice in one week when it was
parked outside his boarding house. He decided to return because he did not want
at the boarding house, had nowhere else to go, and his parents were very
happy to have him back.
P described his work as a house painter. He said he was asked to do more or
less work depending on how much work his boss had. He
supplemented this income
with Centrelink benefits, and advised Centrelink each fortnight of his income
P said that he had not heard voices for at least nine months. He said that
this was because of the medication. He said he was eating
and sleeping better.
He said he was willing to continue the treatment because he was scared that if
he did not do so he might become
unwell again. When asked how he would know if
he were becoming unwell again, P said that he would hear the voices. He was not
to identify any other possible indicators of impending illness. When asked
if he considered whether he had an underlying mental
illness P said yes, that he
had psychosis which caused him to hear voices and have dreams about God when he
was not receiving treatment.
When asked why he had tried to commit suicide by
jumping from the balcony, P said that he had thought that by doing so he could
save the world from global warming. He said that he did not think this anymore.
He was still concerned about global warming but
was seeking practical solutions,
such as his generator. He said that the voices told him to jump, and that this
was a symptom of
his illness. He noted that he told his aunties and uncles the
day before but they did not do anything. He said that he was seeing
psychiatrist at the time, but that he didn’t have an appointment before he
jumped. P said that the voices were not like
human voices, that he had thought
it was a higher than human voice that told him to jump. He noted that his
family was of the Bahá’i
faith. During the time when he was unwell
he was attending many Protestant churches.
When asked why he wanted to come off the community treatment order, P
reiterated that he would continue to see his GP and would see
a psychiatrist.
He wanted to be able to see a psychiatrist after hours, as he does the GP,
because of his work commitments. He
did not like it that he always saw
different psychiatrists at the mental health service. He would see the treating
team at the service
until something else could be arranged. He posed the
question: “Would you rather go to work with a rope over your head or
work because of your own judgement?”
P acknowledged that he had told Dr SK that he did not feel anything because
of the medication, did not feel love, or pleasure in things.
He said that this
was a definite drawback of the medication, but that he hoped the medication
would be adjusted in time to assist
with this. When asked why one of the drug
screen reports indicated that the urine was very dilute, and that the results
were inconclusive,
he was unable to explain, except to say that the doctor had
watched him provide the urine sample.
P said that he intended to continue his work as a painter, intended to
continue to live with his parents and brother at this stage,
and intended to
continue to take medication. Other than that, he said, he could not predict the
The material from the clinical file which was not disclosed to P under
The Board stood down the hearing for a short period to examine the documents
withheld pursuant to
Of the material that was current, relating to
the previous twelve-month period, there was no material that had not been
at the hearing that was of relevance to the criteria to be considered
by the Board.
The hearing then resumed for this to be explained, and was again stood down
for the Board to consider its decision.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board carefully considered all the medical information, from Dr SK at the
hearing and from the clinical file, and also the information
from P himself, and
accepted that P had a mental illness. The Board accepted that P appeared to be
mentally ill, and that his mental
illness was characterised by a significant
disturbance of thought and perception.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
As discussed above, the Board accepted evidence that the provision of
consistent treatment since 2003, in particular anti-psychotic
medication, had
ameliorated the symptoms of P’s illness such that he was free of auditory
and visual hallucinations, able to
maintain employment and eating and sleeping
well. The Board considered that the evidence that P required immediate and
treatment was compelling, and that the provision of treatment
together with P’s apparent abstinence from cannabis use appeared
lessened the ill-effects of his illness.
The Board found that P did require immediate and ongoing treatment.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
The Board considered this criterion very carefully.
The evidence given by P and not contradicted by Dr SK, SL or any of the
material in the clinical file, whether withheld under
or not, was that P
was not refusing treatment and had not refused treatment for some time. There
was evidence that he had expressed
dissatisfaction with some of the side-effects
of treatment two months prior to the hearing, but no evidence that he had
accept treatment or failed to attend to receive treatment.
As to the question of P’s capacity to consent, the Board considered a
test set out in
Re the Review of CC
(1994) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 182 at 186:
“To provide informed consent to treatment, a person should be aware of
the nature and existence of their illness and understand
the purpose and effect
of the treatment prescribed for it. To say this is not to demand that a person's
insight into their condition
and their understanding of the means for its
amelioration needs to be complete. What is required, however, is that the person
a sufficient appreciation of both their illness and its treatment for their
decision making with respect to their condition to be
regarded as being founded
in reality and in reason.”
P’s evidence, outlined above, was that he knew he suffered from a
psychotic illness, he understood that symptoms of this illness
included auditory
and visual hallucinations, and he could identify the nature of these
hallucinations and reflect upon them. He
was able to reflect upon his attempt
to commit suicide, and to understand it in the context of his mental illness.
He was able to
articulate that, while he did not like the fact that, as he saw
it, the medication caused a blunting of his emotional responses,
he needed the
medication to maintain amelioration of the symptoms of his illness. P gave
evidence, which he repeated in several
contexts, that he would continue to
attend at the general practice to receive treatment, and would see a
psychiatrist regularly,
either privately or through the service. P was also
able to articulate that his use of cannabis had contributed to the severity
his mental illness, and he gave evidence that he had stopped using cannabis six
months earlier. Despite the somewhat inconclusive
test results, P’s
evidence in regard to his cessation of cannabis use was not contradicted by Dr
SK or SL or by any material
in the clinical file whether or not it was material
that had been withheld subject to
The Board acknowledged the genuine
concerns of the service for P’s ongoing well being, and the concerns of Dr
SK and SL that
P may become unwell in the future. However applying the test
referred to above, the Board was unable to be satisfied that P was
unable to consent to treatment.
The Board was not satisfied that this criterion was met.
Having not been satisfied that this criterion was met, the Board did not
consider the remaining criteria.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The treatment plan, prepared by SL, case manager, on 6 October 2006, and
authorised by Dr MG on 20 October 2006 set out the components
of treatment.
That is, it indicated that P should attend the clinic regularly, attend meetings
with his case manager and treating
doctor and that family meetings and
psychoeducation be offered by the treatment team. It also addressed P’s
employment situation,
providing strategies to maintain his employment as a
painter. It stated that his current medication is Flupenthixol Decanoate IMI
The Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist had complied with
in making the treatment plan.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board was satisfied that the plan was capable of being implemented by the
mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
Accordingly, the Board made the determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (85.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter