URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1586.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corporation PS418693K v Contract Control Services & Ors (Ruling) [2025] VCC 1586 (31 October 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
BUILDING CASES LIST
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-24-06968
OWNERS CORPORATION PLAN NO.
CONTRACT CONTROL SERVICES PTY LTD (ACN 007 453
First defendant
WEKAN CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD (ACN 094 687 939)
WILLIAMSBOAG PTY LTD (ACN 005 670 217)
BUILDING CONSULTANTS PTY LTD (ACN 118 532 755)
Second defendant
Fourth defendant
Fifth defendant
Her Honour Judge Kirton
DATE OF HEARING
23 May 2025
DATE OF RULING
21 August 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Owners Corporation PS418693K v Contract Control
Services & Ors (Ruling)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1586
REASONS FOR RULING
Subject: Security For Costs
Catchwords: Practice and Procedure – Security for costs against an
owners corporation – the threshold to order security
– the nature of
an owners corporation – the rights of creditors – discretionary
factors – public interest
in allowing owners corporations to make claims
for building defects in common property on behalf of lot owners – public
in the rectification of combustible cladding – merits –
admissible evidence
Legislation Cited:
Corporations Act 2001
County Court Civil
Procedure Rules 2018
Building Act 1993
Building Contracts Act 1995
Evidence Act
Owners Corporations Act 2006
Subdivision Act 1988
Cases Cited:
Livingspring Pty Ltd v Kliger Partners
[2008] VSCA 93
(2008) 20 VR 377
Colmax Glass Pty Ltd v Polytrade Pty Ltd
[2013] VSC 311
Trility Pty
Ltd v Ancon Drilling Pty Ltd
[2013] VSC 577
US Realty Investments LLC #1
[2013] VSC 590
Great Barrier Reef Yacht Club Villas Pty Ltd v
Insurance Australia Ltd
[2024] QSC 320
The Owners - Strata Plan No 87639
v Karimbla Properties Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 107
Australian Cement Holding
Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 645
Ballymoss Pty Ltd v
Kollaras & Co Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2023] VCC 1268
Body Corporate St James
Apartments v Renaissance Assets Pty Ltd
[2004] VSC 438
(2004) 11 VR 41
In the matter of
Eastmark Holdings Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 2071
Owners-Strata Plan No 50530
v Walter Construction Group Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 820
Scotia Property
Maintenance Pty Ltd v Owners Corporation Plan No. PS316440K
Corporations)
[2021] VCAT 123
May v Owners Corporation PS519798G
Corporations)
[2017] VCAT 1759
Webb v Owners Corporation PS621796Q
(Owners Corporations)
[2016] VCAT 268
Owners Corporation 1 Plan No.
PS440878V & Ors v Dual Homes Victoria Pty Ltd
(Owners Corporation)
[2011] VCAT 211
The Owners - Strata Plan 64415 v Serman
[2017] NSWSC
Timbercorp Finance Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Tomes
[2015] VSCA 332
Façade Treatment Engineering Pty Ltd (in liq) v Brookfield Multiplex
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 169
Owners Corporation v
Seascape Construction Pty Ltd
[2016] VCAT 1870
VM Romano Construction
Group Pty Ltd v BCG (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2023] VSCA 312
Body Corporate
St James Apartments v Renaissance Assets Pty Ltd
[2004] VSC 438
(2004) 11 VR 41
Brookfield Multiplex Ltd v Owners Corporation Strata Plan 61288
[2014] HCA 36
313 ALR 408
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
Szwarcbord v Charbord
Investments Pty Ltd
[2024] VSCA 92
Interwest Ltd v Tricontinental Corp
(1991) 9 ACLA 1218;
Impex Pty Ltd v Crowner Products Ltd
13 ACSR 440
Ariss v Express Interiors Pty Ltd (in liq)
[1996] 2 VR
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Tisher Liner FC Law
For the First Defendant
D Williams KC with
Findlay Arthur Phillips
For the Second Defendant
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
For the Third Defendant
For the Fourth Defendant
Fifth Defendant
Colin Biggers & Paisley
DLA Piper Australia
HER HONOUR:
Introduction
first defendant (
) applied for orders that the plaintiff (the
) provide security for costs up to and including the trial in the sum
of $219,000, or such other sum as the Court deems fit, and that
the proceeding
be stayed until the security is provided.
submits that there is good reason to believe that the OC does not have
sufficient assets in Victoria to pay their costs if ordered
to do so. In
summary, they rely on the facts that the plaintiff is an owners corporation, it
owns no real property, and such an entity
only retains sufficient funds to meet
basic expenditure. They contend there is no evidence the plaintiff has any
assets to satisfy
an adverse costs order.
OC opposes the application, submitting that they do not satisfy the threshold
issue of impecuniosity, the discretionary factors
weigh against an order, and in
any event, the amount sought is grossly excessive.
determined the application and made orders on 21 August 2025 dismissing the
application for security. CCS requested detailed reasons,
which I now provide.
Relevant Background
plaintiff is the OC for the land and buildings at 232-234 Brunswick Street,
Fitzroy, otherwise known as ‘The Max’.
This proceeding arises out of
building works carried out by CCS at the Max apartment buildings in 2015. The OC
says that those building
works included the installation of combustible cladding
and combustible insulation. The OC has received a Building Notice issued
Municipal Building Surveyor under the
Building Act 1993
(Vic) requiring
it to show cause why it should not rectify those defects.
OC commenced this proceeding in November 2024, against CCS as the builder, and
others allegedly involved in the works. As against
CCS, the OC alleges breaches
of the warranties contained in the building contract and also implied by
Domestic Building Contracts Act 1995
(Vic), a breach of a
duty of care, and breach of guarantees imposed by the Australian Consumer Law
(ACL). At the time of the hearing
of this application none of the defendants had
filed a defence. It appears that CCS will deny liability. Based on the affidavit
its director Mr Seketa, CCS’ foreshadowed defence appears to turn on an
apportionment of liability, rather than that the defects
is no dispute between the parties as to the relevant principles to be applied in
an application for security for costs. The
application is made under r 62.02 of
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
alternatively
Corporations Act 2001
The general principles are well
and I will not repeat
particular relevance to the present matter are cases which have considered
applications for security against owners corporations
(or their equivalents in
interstate jurisdictions). Some decisions have ordered security and some have
not. A helpful summary of
many of the decisions was set out by Wilson J in
Great Barrier Reef Yacht Club Villas Pty Ltd v Insurance Australia
Since then, and most
recently, was the decision of Stevenson J of the NSW Supreme Court in
Owners - Strata Plan No 87639 v Karimbla Properties Pty
). An examination of the decisions indicates that each agree
there are a number of uncontroversial propositions, the answer to the
question (of whether there is reason to believe that an owners corporation will
be able to meet a costs order) requires
a factually intensive enquiry, and the
differences in outcomes are explained by differing facts and differing levels of
given to the facts. I will discuss these decisions further below.
The evidence and objections
this application, CCS relied on evidence contained in the following
affidavits:
(a) affidavit of Michael Geoffrey Witt dated 2 April 2025 (
(b) the affidavit of Stefan Seketa dated 24 March 2025 (
(c) the affidavit of Paul Gronsbell-Luntz dated 24 March 2025 (
Gronsbell-Luntz Affidavit
(d) the affidavit of Paul Gronsbell-Luntz dated 16 May 2025 (
Gronsbell-Luntz Affidavit
OC relied on:
(a) the affidavit of Phillip Leaman dated 15 May 2025 (
the First Leaman
(b) the affidavit of Vi Luc dated 16 May 2025 (
the First Luc Affidavit
(c) the affidavit of Phillip Leaman dated 21 May 2025 (
the Second Leaman
(d) the affidavit of Vi Luc dated 23 May 2025 (
the Second Luc Affidavit
OC submitted that the First Gronsbell-Lunz Affidavit and paragraph 9 of the
Second Gronsbell-Luntz Affidavit are inadmissible
and should not be read in the
application. The basis of the objection is that Mr Gronsbell-Luntz, a chartered
accountant, purports
to express his opinion as to the financial resources of
owners corporations generally.
opinion rule in
Evidence Act
(Vic) make such opinion
evidence inadmissible, unless the deponent satisfies the requirements of
In the present matter, Mr Gronsbell-Luntz has provided no evidence of any
specialised knowledge based on his training, study or experience.
The OC submits
the evidence is analogous to that considered by Barrett J in
Cement Holding Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton
where his Honour was
unable to identify a relevant body of specialised knowledge, based on training,
study or experience, which enabled
the deponent to speak about the conduct of
experienced and competent company directors.
response, CCS submitted that Mr Gronsbell-Luntz was not purporting to give
opinion evidence as an independent expert. Instead,
his affidavit is exhibiting
documents, and as this is an interlocutory application, it should be allowed.
my reading of his affidavits, Mr Gronsbell-Luntz is providing his opinion as to
the general financial capability of owners corporations
and lot members. He has
provided some detail of his experience to make such generalised comments. I will
allow the disputed paragraphs
of the two affidavits into evidence, but having
said that, I find the probative weight of this evidence to be of very little
The capacity and capability of owners corporations generally, and a
presumption that lot owners are usually reluctant to fund extra
costs, has no
weight when compared to the direct evidence of the OC in the present
proceeding.
Has the jurisdictional threshold to order security
been enlivened?
is necessary, as a threshold question, for CCS to establish that the
believe, based on credible testimony, that the OC will be unable to pay their
costs? The threshold is low. The task requires
making a practical risk
assessment – adopting a practical, common-sense approach to the
corporation’s financial
is no dispute that CCS bears the onus of satisfying the Court that the threshold
is reached. Further, it is necessary to assess
the likely financial position of
the OC at the end of the litigation, not just at the date of the application for
was also no dispute that this is a complex building dispute, and the OC has sued
five defendants. CCS estimated its costs of
a five-day trial are conservatively
$219,000. If the OC loses, they will be facing costs orders of a similar amount
from each defendant,
plus their own costs, plus the cost to rectify the building
to comply with any Building Order issued following the Building Notice.
costs may easily exceed $1 million.
OC has set out its financial position in the form of audited financial
statements for the years ending 30 April 2022, 30 April
2023 and 30 April 2024.
The OC has also adduced evidence of its internal financial statements for the
year ending 30 April 2025.
These financial statements show that the OC’s
net asset position for these four years was positive. For privacy reasons I will
not provide the actual figures in these Reasons but suffice to say the balance
appears adequate to meet its usual administrative
and maintenance obligations.
each of the years ending 30 April 2022 to 30 April 2025, the OC’s assets
were primarily made up of liquid cash, held in two
term deposits.
OC is not an ordinary corporation registered under the
Corporations Act
(Cth). Instead, it is an owners corporation which was created on
registration of the plan of subdivision and is governed by the
Corporations Act 2006
Subdivision Act
). The specific features of an owners corporation
relevant to this application, which make it different from an ordinary company,
were identified by the OC in its submissions. The following features are
prescribed by either the OCA or the SA:
(a) the OC has perpetual succession and is capable of suing or being sued in its
(b) the OC is excluded from the
Corporations Act 2001
(otherwise than to
the extent it carries out activities which are not authorised by the SA or the
OCA) (s 29 SA);
(c) the OC ‘is the registered proprietor of a fee simple in the common
property [at the Max apartment buildings] and it is
the equitable or beneficial
ownership but not the legal ownership of the common property which is vested in
the lot owners...’;
(d) the OC must not carry on a business (s 13 OCA);
(e) the OC must not mortgage or charge common property (s 17 OCA);
(f) the OC must ordinarily set annual fees for lot owners on the basis of lot
liability (s 23(1)-(3) OCA), but where particular costs
are incurred for the
benefit of a lot owner, must set any additional fees on the basis that the lot
that benefits pay more (s 23(3A)-(3B)
(g) the OC must ordinarily set fees for extraordinary items of expenditure
relating to repairs, maintenance or other works, on the
basis of lot liability
(s 24(1)-(2) OCA), but where particular costs are incurred for the benefit of a
lot owner, must set any additional
fees on the basis that the lot that benefits
pays more (s 24(2A)-(2B) OCA);
(h) the OC requires a special resolution if exercising the power to levy special
fees and charges to cover extraordinary items of
expenditure if the amount
involved is more than twice the total amount of the current annual fees set by
it (s 24(4) OCA);
(i) the OC has the power to borrow money (s 25 OCA);
(j) all fees levied by the OC must be paid into a bank account of itself or of
its manager (s 27(3) OCA);
(k) any lot owner for the time being and any purchaser in possession of a lot is
liable to pay any outstanding fees, charges or contributions
or amounts owing to
the OC in respect of that lot (s 28(1) OCA);
(l) the OC is entitled to recover any money owed to it in any court of competent
(m) a creditor of the OC may apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
) for the appointment of an administrator for the OC (s 173
(n) if an administrator is appointed for the OC, that administrator may do
anything that the OC or its committee can do (s 176(c)
(o) it is possible for VCAT to wind up the OC on the ground that it is just and
equitable but on any such application a creditor
has a right to be heard (s 34G
Discussion and analysis
submitted that the evidence of the OC’s finances is sufficient to
establish that the OC will be unable to pay an adverse
costs order if one is
made at the conclusion of the litigation. It says that it is obvious that the OC
will have insufficient funds
to meet costs of $1 million. Further, the
OC’s funds are needed to maintain and insure the building and are not all
to meet any costs orders. The OC has no real estate or other fixed
assets and no automatic right of indemnity from the lot owners.
noted above, there have been a number of decisions in similar applications, with
a variety of outcomes. The most recent was
OC v Karimbla,
Stevenson J drew together and discussed a number of the earlier authorities. His
Honour set out the following uncontroversial
propositions in relation to an
application for security made against an owners corporation:
(a) about half of the cases in the Technology and Construction List (in the NSW
Supreme Court) are commenced by owners corporations
against the builder and/or
the developer of the relevant development alleging the existence of defects in
the common property of
the building;
(b) applications for security are regularly made;
(c) the threshold question is whether there is reason to believe that the owners
corporation will not be able to pay the builder’s
costs if ordered to do
(d) the threshold question requires consideration of whether there is a rational
basis for the requisite belief that the owners corporation
will be unable to pay
any future costs of the defendant; and
(e) the threshold question is a ‘low threshold’ and ‘an
undemanding test’
Honour then examined a number of earlier decisions and concluded those cases
show that the threshold question of whether there
is reason to believe that an
owners corporation will be able to meet a costs order gives rise to a factually
intensive enquiry. The
cases show differing levels of emphasis, but the
following factors emerge:
(a) An applicant for security must show that the levies it seeks to raise, in
order to meet an order for costs, would not be paid.
(b) The burden of an applicant for security is not satisfied if there is no
evidence of any recalcitrance on the part of unit owners
to pay a levy.
(c) A relevant factor is whether the costs are likely to be paid within a
reasonable time.
(d) Because of the nature of owners corporations, some delay in the payment of
an adverse costs order is likely, if not inevitable
and to be expected, but can
be compensated for with interest.
(e) A factor weighing against ordering security is a demonstrated ability on the
part of the owners Corporation to raise funds by
way of a special levy from the
unit owners.
(f) A factor weighing in favour of ordering security costs is an absence of an
undertaking from lot owners to pay any levies when
imposed on them and to do so
within a reasonable time.
J noted, but did not agree with, comments in other decisions that a relevant
factor may be that a party in the position
of the builder, seeking to enforce a
costs order ‘could not enforce any right and duty of the [Owners
Corporation] to raise
an additional levy from unit [owners] unless the Owners
Corporation cooperated or was wound up.’ Instead, his Honour noted
judgment creditor of an owners corporation is in a better position referred than
a creditor of an ordinary corporation, as
the powers under the relevant acts
give a judgment creditor the right to approach a tribunal for the appointment of
an independent
manager, who could themselves raise a levy without the lot
owners’ consent.
Honour then considered the evidence in the matter before him and concluded that
he was not satisfied that there was reason to
believe that the Owners
Corporation could not, within a reasonable time of being visited with a costs
order by the builder, pay those
the present matter, I will follow the approach taken by Stevenson J in
, and I take the following matters into
consideration.
Financial position
accept that the OC may not have sufficient assets to meet a costs order made at
the conclusion of the trial in favour of CCS. Its
average cash assets for the
last four years are greater than CCS’s estimate of its costs at the
conclusion of the trial ($219,000).
However, I accept that these assets must be
used to fund the OC’s ongoing obligations, including administration and
maintenance,
and it cannot be presumed they will be available to pay CCS’
said that, I do not accept that this is a sufficient basis to conclude that the
OC is impecunious. Its bank accounts show a
positive balance. There is no
evidence that it is unable to meet its own usual outgoings. The evidence of its
manager, Vi Luc, demonstrates
that it has met its obligations for the last four
years. Vi Luc also deposes that at each annual general meeting they have
an annual budget, which has been approved by the lot members. This is
not a case where the owners corporation’s liabilities
may exceed its
assets ‘by a very substantial margin’, unlike
In the matter of
Eastmark Holdings Pty Ltd
Eastmark Holdings
– discussed below.
special levy
the present matter there is no dispute that the OC is able to raise funds by way
of a special levy from the lot owners. CCS submitted
that in order to strike a
special levy, this will require the consent of the lot owners and the outcome of
such a vote is uncertain.
CCS relied on the decision of
Eastmark Holdings
where Brereton J referred to the principle that the ability of a plaintiff to
have recourse by way of indemnity to a trust fund or
similar is not an answer to
an application for security in this type of situation. His Honour
The same applies in this case [where the plaintiff is an
owners corporation]: it seems to me that, unless the plaintiff itself cooperates
or unless it were wound up, the defendants could not enforce any right and duty
of the plaintiff to raise an additional levy from
the unit holders. The
defendants would have no direct process of execution against the unit holders
for the purposes of doing so.
The extent to which the levy would be productive
in any event would depend upon the terms of the resolution determined at a
meeting of the Owners Corporation by the people liable to pay and it
cannot be excluded that they, or some of them, might have some
defence to a levy
being struck.
note that in
Eastmark Holdings
, Brereton J discussed the decision of
Bergin J (as her Honour the Chief Judge in Equity then was) in the case of
Owners-Strata Plan No 50530 v Walter Construction Group
Construction
In that case, her Honour concluded that for the
defendant to have discharged its burden, it needed to call evidence upon which,
objectively, the Court could be satisfied that the plaintiff was not
entitled to raise a special levy to pay the costs or, if able
to do so, that
such levies would not be paid, and in the absence of evidence of recalcitrance
on the part of the unit holders to
pay the special levies, the Court was not so
J distinguished the facts in
from those in
Walter Construction
on the basis that the evidence in his case
demonstrated that the owners corporation’s ‘liabilities exceeded its
by a very substantial margin’, whereas in the latter case,
‘there does not appear to have been evidence of the impecuniosity
plaintiff itself in the way in which there is in this
the present matter, as noted above, there is no evidence before me that the OC
is impecunious. The facts are more on all fours
with those in
Construction.
In my view, the appropriate enquiry therefore is that made by
Bergin J, namely whether the defendant has provided evidence that a
not be raised or paid. There is no evidence before me that any levy the OC may
seek to raise would not be paid, nor is
there any evidence of any recalcitrance
on the part of unit owners to pay a levy. On the contrary, the evidence of the
OC manager,
Vi Luc, is that every proposed budget has been approved by the lot
members at the annual general meeting.
Costs to be paid in a
reasonable time
is no evidence before me that the costs are not likely to be paid within a
reasonable time. To adopt the words used in
OC v Karimbla,
there is no
evidence of any recalcitrance on the part of unit owners to pay a levy. I accept
that because of the nature of owners
corporations, some delay in the payment of
an adverse costs order is likely, if not inevitable and to be expected. However,
accept that this delay can be compensated by interest.
Power to have an administrator appointed
there are any difficulties with raising a levy, CCS, as a judgment creditor, has
the right to approach VCAT for the appointment
of an independent manager or
administrator to the OC, who could themselves raise a levy (ss 173- 174 OCA).
submitted that this right should not weigh against an order for security, as it
would be ‘quite remarkable’ to have
a successful defendant wait, and
then potentially have to apply to another jurisdiction for an administrator, the
outcome of which
may or may not be successful, as an answer to whether its costs
can be paid in a reasonable time.
contention by CCS was rejected by Stevenson J in
OC v Karimbla,
That observation appears to overlook s 237 of the
[Strata Schemes Management Act 2015], which ... gives a judgment creditor of an
owners corporation the right to approach NCAT [the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal] for the appointment of an independent strata
manager, who could
themself raise a levy...
his Honour accepted that a creditor of an owners corporation is in a more
advantageous position than a creditor of an ordinary
corporation. The creditor
is able to enforce a judgment debt by appointing a managing agent, who can then
raise levies against the
lot owners to meet that judgment debt, without seeking
their approval. Importantly, a judgment creditor against an ordinary corporation
does not have an equivalent power. While a judgment creditor can commence
proceedings to have a company wound up, that liquidator
cannot then turn to
shareholders to raise funds to meet the judgment debt.
agree with Stevenson J. There are numerous examples where VCAT has appointed an
administrator under s 174 of the OC Act, and set
down the terms and conditions
of their appointment, for example in applications by a creditor seeking
against owners refusing
to pay a special levy to fund
litigation,
and where an owners
corporation was unable to raise funds to prosecute a building defects
I do not accept
CCS’ contention that the availability of this method of enforcing any
costs order is a reason in favour of
making an order for security. On the
contrary, in my view, this is a factor weighing against an order for security.
Undertaking
also submitted that the absence of an undertaking from lot owners to pay any
levies when imposed on them, and to do so within
a reasonable time, is a factor
weighing in favour or ordering security costs.
J agreed that this is a factor, based on the decision of
The Owners - Strata
Plan 64415 v Serman.
case involved a claim for professional negligence brought by an owners
corporation against its former lawyers. Walton J found
plaintiff’s accounts revealed a current substantial net negative asset
position, and a substantial levy would be required
to meet the estimated cost
order alone, in addition to the levies designed to deal with the negative net
asset position. Further,
there was a history of an unwillingness to pay, not
merely because levies charged were unduly delayed in payment but because the
levies charged were set, for financial or other reasons, in the form of
instalments over a period of time. In those circumstances,
his Honour considered
that the absence of an undertaking was a relevant factor in the exercise of his
discretion.
the present matter, I accept that the members of the owners corporation have not
given an undertaking, and that this is a relevant
factor weighing against an
order for security. However, I also take into consideration that there is no
evidence that the lot owners
have previously been reluctant to approve any
levies or failed to pay any levies. In those circumstances I do not consider the
of an undertaking is a major factor in the exercise of my
discretion.
those reasons, I am not satisfied that the threshold has been reached, and I am
not satisfied that my discretion under r 62.02
of the Rules,
alternatively
Corporations Act 2001
make an order for the provision of security has been enlivened.
Discretionary factors
power to order security not having been enlivened, there is no need to consider
the discretionary factors. However, if I were
to do so, I consider that there
are three relevant factors which weigh against an order for security. These
(a) first, the public interest,
(b) second, the unique nature of the OC, and
(c) third, that it is no more than a matter of speculation that CCS will in fact
obtain an order that the OC pay its costs.
Public interest
first factor was raised by Deputy President Aird in
Owners Corporation v
Seascape Construction Pty
), in which she found that whilst there may be circumstances
where an order that an owners corporation provide security for a
respondent’s
costs is appropriate, the public interest militates against
generally ordering owners corporations to provide security. She
Whilst there may be circumstances where an order that an
owners corporation provide security for a respondent’s costs is
appropriate,
in my view the public interest militates against generally ordering
owners corporations to provide security. The legislature has
seen fit to provide
owners corporations with certain powers so that they can fulfil their statutory
obligations. Under
Subdivision Act 1988
, except for some limited
rights of a lot owner to deal with their share of the common property as part of
dealing with their lot,
only an owners corporation has the power to deal with
the common property. The relevant owners corporation is the legal entity with
power to make an application ... in respect of defects in the common
response, CCS disputed that there were public interest concerns at play. It
submitted that the rights in dispute are private interests,
and just because the
owners corporation was created by legislation on the subdivision of the land, it
does not make its actions in
the public interest. Further, the fact that a
Building Notice or Order to address combustible cladding has been issued does
the OC’s obligation anything other than a private
obligation.
do not accept CCS’ submission, for the following reasons.
is no prescriptive legal definition of the phrase ‘in the public
interest’, yet ‘this is a phrase commonly
used in legislation and
one with which courts are familiar. “Public interest” is a broad
concept that is flexible enough
to respond to the facts and circumstances of any
particular case.’
dictionary definition is ‘a benefit or advantage to a whole community, as
opposed to the
individual’.
VM Romano Construction Group Pty Ltd v BCG (Aust) Pty
Burchell J of this Court considered an application for
security for costs in a building case similar to the present matter. A Building
Notice had been issued to two owners corporations requiring the replacement of
combustible cladding on the common property. They
sued the builder in VCAT. The
builder then commenced a related proceeding in the County Court, against various
consultants and subcontractors
on the project, for the purpose of ‘passing
through’ liability to the parties responsible for the loss and damage for
the benefit of the owners corporations and ultimately for the benefit of the
owners of the apartments. Those consultants and subcontractors
sought security
for their costs from the builder, which admitted it was not trading and had no
J delivered an ex-tempore ruling, making an order for security up to mediation.
Her Honour held:
In my view, (a) although there is a public interest
element in relation to cladding where [the owners corporations] do not have
of contract with these subcontractors in the County Court and (b) where
there are health and safety issues arising from the combustible
cladding on the
building, (c) although it is a finely balanced case, (d) there is no evidence
before the court that satisfies the
requirements as satisfied in
as to those who stand behind the company in circumstances
where the company does not have assets in Victoria and it has not been
since 2016 (e) where there are arguable defences (f) there is not an
inevitability in relation to success for the plaintiff
(g) where the balancing
exercise is that if security is not awarded, the court would be requiring the
defendants, who are before
the court, to bear all the risk in relation to the
costs moving forward there ought be security for costs awarded up to mediation
for each of the defendants and I will hear the parties in relation to the
quantum and terms.
respondents applied for leave to appeal (which was refused) but did not
challenge her Honour’s comments that there is a
public interest element in
relation to cladding where an owners corporation does not have privity of
contract with the subcontractors
and where there are health and safety issues
arising from the combustible cladding on the building. The Court of Appeal did
not disagree
with those comments either.
agree with the decisions of DP Aird in
OC v Seascape
and Burchell J in
. In Victoria, the system of creating subdivisions and common
property, and regulating the management of and dealings with that common
property, is regulated by the parliament, via the SA and the OCA. The effect of
the legislated regime is that an owners corporation
‘is the registered
proprietor of a fee simple in the common property and it is the equitable or
beneficial ownership but not
the legal ownership of the common property which is
vested in the lot owners’.
is the owners corporation which must sue for building defects in common
property, rather than the private lot owners. Owners corporations
do not usually
own property or other assets above what they need to fulfil their obligations to
administer and maintain the common
property. There would be very few owners
corporations which had sufficient assets to resist an application for security,
were assessed solely on current assets. However, they are in a special
position compared with general corporations, in that the legislation
the powers to levy their members. Moreover, the parliament has chosen expressly
to give protection to creditors, by naming
them in s 173 of the OCA.
DP Aird said in
OC v Seascape:
‘[n]ot only it is
inconceivable that an OC would cease to exist, unlike a company which is a party
to litigation, s173 of the
OC Act enables a judgement
creditor to seek an order from the Tribunal appointing an administrator should
the OC fail to strike a
levy to meet any adverse costs orders.’
as identified by Burchell J in
there are special
considerations of public interest in relation to building defects in residential
The failure of building regulators and the
danger to building occupants and the general public are well known; for example,
in the Lacrosse apartment building, the Neo22 apartment building, the
Grenfell Tower.
owners and the committee managing an owners corporation are usually
unsophisticated in building regulations, building defects,
engineering issues, and appropriate methods of rectification. An owners
corporation has no privity of contract with subcontractors
or consultants
involved in the original building works. Its rights to claim in negligence for
pure economic loss are extremely
The presumption of
equal bargaining power to allocate risk which is common in commercial building
projects does not usually apply
to the owners corporation of a residential
building. An owners corporation is dependent on the warranties in the DBCA. The
government acknowledged that ‘often owners corporations are not
adequately governed and resourced to deal with complex, large-scale
matters like cladding
rectification.’
response to the combustible cladding crisis in Victoria, the state government
established the Cladding Rectification Program as
a public safety
It put in place a
process to identify non-compliant cladding, to issue Building Notices and
Building Orders, and to assist owners
corporations to rectify, so that
‘importantly all Victorians will benefit from a safer built environment,
coupled with the
confidence that the Government is also overhauling
Victoria’s building legislative framework to ensure this never happens
government established Cladding Safety Victoria to (among other things)
administer the cladding rectification program, to provide
financial assistance
for cladding rectification work and register owners and owners corporations of
those buildings, and to provide
guidance to owners and owners corporations of
buildings in relation to cladding rectification work in order to mitigate risk.
Crown retains the right to subrogate claims from owners corporations and lot
owners to recover from builders and others where it
has provided financial
assistance to an owner.
the present matter, the Building Notice was issued by the Municipal Building
Surveyor of the City of Yarra. The OC is in discussions
with Cladding Safety
Victoria in relation to the rectification work necessary to comply with the
Building Notice.
The Minister
for Planning’s Guideline 15 in essence requires all building surveyors in
Victoria to have regard to Cladding
Safety Victoria’s
consider the following comment of French CJ in
apposite: when
‘used in a statute, the term [public interest] derives its content from
“the subject matter and the scope
and purpose” of the enactment in
which it appears’. Although he made this statement in the context of
statutory interpretation,
it is equally relevant when considering the statutory
scheme established by the state of Victoria in relation to cladding
rectification.
my view, these factors indicate that the issues in dispute in this proceeding go
beyond the private interest of a lot owner. Their
resolution is in the public
interest. Accordingly, this would be a significant factor in favour of not
ordering security for costs,
if it appeared that ordering security would cause
the claim not to proceed.
The unique nature of the OC
or alternatively, if the OC’s proceeding is merely an exercise of private
rights, and there is no public interest involved,
I consider that the matters
described above are nevertheless relevant to the exercise of my discretion. That
is, the matters set
out at paragraphs
above, being the financial position
of the OC, the characteristics of the OC which distinguish it from a regular
corporation, the
improbability that it will cease to exist, its role and
responsibility in administering the common property for the benefit of current
and future lot owners, the rights given to creditors under the OCA to provide
them with a mechanism for recovering any debts, and
the state’s role in
ensuring the health and safety of the building for current and future lot owners
and the general public.
factors combined would lead me to refuse the application for security on
discretionary grounds. In an application for security,
the Court is required
carry out a balancing exercise. It must weigh the injustice to
the plaintiff if it is prevented from pursuing a proper claim by an
security, against the injustice to the defendant if no security is ordered and
at trial the plaintiff’s claim fails
and the defendant is unable to
recover costs...
injustice to the OC if it is prevented from pursuing the claim significantly
outweighs the risk to CCS that it may not recover
its costs (minimal), or there
may be some delay in recovering its costs (which can be compensated with
third discretionary factor arises because I consider it unlikely that the OC
will altogether fail in the proceeding. While the
court is not obliged to
consider at length the merits of the claim, and to do so would ordinarily be a
waste of resources, in the
present case I consider that the merits of the claim
is a relevant factor.
are unarguably building issues with the Max apartment building. A Building
Notice has been issued. CCS’ foreshadowed defence
appears to turn on an
apportionment of liability, rather than that the defects do not exist. As
Stevenson J held in
OC v Karimbla:
... it can be said, even
at this remove, that it is unlikely that the Owners Corporation will altogether
fail and no more than a matter
of speculation that the Builder will in fact
obtain an order that the Owners Corporation pay all of its costs; this being the
on which the Builder’s application for security is
same applies in the present matter. Whatever orders may be made at the
conclusion of the proceeding, there is no certainty that
the OC would be ordered
to pay CCS’ costs. In circumstances where the DBCA s 8 warranties impose a
strict liability, the grounds
on which CCS may succeed in defending the
OC’s claims are limited. It could be that CCS is found to have a strict
to the OC under the s 8 warranties, but is able to succeed in
recovering contribution or indemnity from third parties. Another outcome
CCS could succeed in a defence that the claims are apportionable and it is the
other concurrent wrongdoers which are completely
liable for the OC’s loss
and damage. In either of those scenarios, any costs orders in favour of CCS
would be likely to involve
the other parties, not just the OC. I consider this
is a relevant factor against ordering the OC to pay security at this
the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the material before the Court
is sufficiently persuasive to permit a rational
belief to be formed that, if
ordered to do so, the OC would be unable to pay CCS’ costs, if it were to
be unsuccessful in its
claim. The ‘threshold question’ is therefore
not satisfied in favour of CCS.
it were, I would exercise my discretion to refuse the application. In balancing
factors of the nature of the proceeding, public
interest and merits, I conclude
that the OC would suffer a greater injustice if it is prevented from pursuing
its claim, than CCs’
risk of being unable to recover its costs.
order that the application is dismissed.
Certificate
I certify that these 22 pages are a true copy of the reasons for ruling of
her Honour Judge Kirton delivered on 31 October 2025.
Dated: 31 October 2025
Associate to Her Honour Judge Kirton
Affidavit of Stefan Seketa
dated 24 March 2025, [8] – [13].
Livingspring Pty Ltd v
Kliger Partners
[2008] VSCA 93
(2008) 20 VR 377
Colmax Glass Pty Ltd v Polytrade Pty
[2013] VSC 311
Trility Pty Ltd v Ancon
Drilling Pty Ltd
[2013] VSC 577
US Realty Investments LLC #1 v Need
[2013] VSC 590.
Great Barrier Reef Yacht
Club Villas Pty Ltd v Insurance Australia Ltd
[2024] QSC 320
[69]-[110].
The Owners - Strata Plan No
87639 v Karimbla Properties Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 107
[1], [9] – [11]
OC v Karimbla’
Australian Cement Holding
Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 645
See above n 2;
Pty Ltd v Kollaras & Co Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2023] VCC 1268
Body Corporate St James
Apartments v Renaissance Assets Pty Ltd
[2004] VSC 438
(2004) 11 VR 41
, at [30] (Mandie J),
interpreting then
Subdivision Act 1988
(Vic). See now,
Subdivision Act 1988
OC v Karimbla
OC v Karimbla
[28] – [30], citations omitted.
OC v Karimbla
Ibid [31] – [32], citations omitted.
In the matter of
Eastmark Holdings Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 2071
Owners-Strata Plan No
50530 v Walter Construction Group Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 820
Construction’)
Eastmark Holdings
12) [1], [7].
Eastmark Holdings
Scotia Property
Maintenance Pty Ltd v Owners Corporation Plan No. PS316440K
Corporations)
[2021] VCAT 123.
May v Owners Corporation
(Owners Corporations)
[2017] VCAT 1759.
Webb v Owners
Corporation PS621796Q
(Owners Corporations)
[2016] VCAT 268
Corporation 1 Plan No. PS440878V & Ors v Dual Homes Victoria Pty Ltd
(Owners Corporation)
[2011] VCAT 211.
The Owners - Strata Plan
64415 v Serman
[2017] NSWSC 806
Timbercorp Finance Pty
Ltd (in liquidation) v Tomes
[2015] VSCA 332 (McLeish
Façade Treatment Engineering Pty Ltd (in liq) v Brookfield Multiplex
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 169
[11], [14].
Owners Corporation v
Seascape Construction Pty Ltd
[2016] VCAT 1870
Seascape’).
Law Institute of Victoria
submission to the
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
Report 123), tabled on 3 September 2014,
Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era (ALRC Report 123) | ALRC
Macquarie Dictionary
, 2025, Macquarie Dictionary Publishers, an imprint of Pan Macmillan
Australia Pty Ltd,
macquariedictionary
VM Romano Construction
Group Pty Ltd v BCG (Aust) Pty Ltd
(County Court of Victoria,
Judge Burchell, 3 March 2023) cited in
VM Romano Construction Group Pty
Ltd v BCG (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2023] VSCA 312.
Body Corporate St James
Apartments v Renaissance Assets Pty Ltd
[2004] VSC 438
(2004) 11 VR 41
, at [30] (Mandie J),
interpreting then
Subdivision Act 1988
Subdivision Act 1988
For a detailed examination
see the excellent book by P Britton and M Bell,
Residential Construction
ed., 2025, Hart Publishing.
Brookfield Multiplex Ltd
v Owners Corporation Strata Plan 61288
[2014] HCA 36
(2014) 313 ALR 408.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 4 September 2020, 2124 (Lily
D’Ambrosio, Minister for Energy, Environment and Climate Change, Minister
for Solar Homes)
State of Victoria
(Department of Transport and Planning) v L.U. Simon Builders Pty Ltd
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 4 September 2020, 2125 (Lily
D’Ambrosio, Minister for Energy, Environment and Climate Change, Minister
for Solar Homes); cited in
State of Victoria (Department of Transport and
Planning) v L.U. Simon Builders Pty Ltd,
Cladding Safety Victoria
The Second Leaman Affidavit
dated 21 May 2025.
Parliament of Victoria,
Cladding Safety Victoria
Annual Report
(Report, 12
September 2024) 4 <
cladding-safety-victoria-annual-report-2023-24.pdf
Hogan v Hinch
243 CLR 506
Szwarcbord v Charbord
Investments Pty Ltd
[2024] VSCA 92
(n 2) [19].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter