URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/269.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lindner v The King [2025] VSCA 269 (10 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0134
McLEISH and KAYE JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
30 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
10 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 269
JUDGMENT APPEALED
DPP v Lindner
[2024] VCC 1580
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Application for extension of time to file notice of appeal against
Applicant pleaded guilty to nine charges of handling stolen
goods, one charge of possession of a drug of dependence, and four related
summary charges – Applicant sentenced to total effective sentence of 3
years and 4 months’ imprisonment with a non-parole
period of 2 years and 1
month – Applicant involved in enterprise of receiving, altering and
rebirthing stolen vehicles for
profit – Value of stolen goods in excess of
$280,000 – Where applicant re-offended following arrest – Limited
in mitigation – Whether sentence manifestly excessive –
Proposed ground of appeal not sufficiently arguable to warrant
extension of time
– Application refused.
Crimes Act 1958
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, referred to.
Ms C Jackson
Respondent:
Ms J Warren
Stephen Peterson Lawyers
Respondent:
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
applicant pleaded guilty in the County Court Koori Court to ten indictable
charges relating to handling stolen goods and possession
of a drug of
dependence, and four related summary charges relating to dealing with property
suspected of being the proceeds of crime,
failing to comply with a direction to
assist and committing an indictable offence while on bail.
a plea presented on his behalf, the applicant, on 10 October 2024, was sentenced
to a total effective sentence of 3 years
and 4 months’ imprisonment with a
non-parole period of 2 years and 1 month. That sentence was constituted as
Indictment P10284033
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
years imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
years imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Handle stolen
goods (contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Possess drug of
dependence (contrary to
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled
Substances Act 1981
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Summary Offences
property suspected of being proceeds of crime (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months imprisonment
indictable offence on bail (contrary to
months’ imprisonment
month imprisonment
comply with direction to assist (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
comply with direction to assist (contrary to
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Effective Sentence:
3 years and 4
months’ imprisonment
2 years and 1
Pre-sentence
Detention declaration pursuant to
Sentencing Act
Section 6AAA
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 3 years and 2 months’
imprisonment
Relevant Orders:
Forfeiture and Disposal orders
applicant seeks leave to appeal against sentence on one ground, namely, that the
total effective sentence and the non-parole period
are manifestly
application for leave to appeal was filed on 27 June 2025, 232 days out of time.
The reason for delay is explained in an affidavit
deposed by the
applicant’s instructing solicitor. The respondent acknowledges that it
appears the delay was not occasioned
by any fault of the applicant, and was due
substantially to delays in securing legal aid funding for the appeal, and a
counsel briefed to draft the written case. Accordingly, it is
acknowledged by the respondent that the outcome of the application
extension of time should depend substantially on an assessment of the merits of
the application for leave to appeal against
Circumstances of
offences, that were the subject of the first seven charges, and related summary
offences numbered 20 and 30, were each committed
on 1 February 2023.
Charges 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 were each rolled-up charges. The offences, that
were the subject of charges 8 to 10,
and related summary offences 29 and
31, were each committed on 1 March 2023.
the time of the offending, the applicant, who was then 28 years of age, was
residing in premises in Newborough with his partner,
Chelsea Laidlaw. During an
investigation by Victoria Police Vehicle Crime Squad into a series of thefts of
Holden motor vehicles,
the police identified the applicant as a person of
interest, as someone acting as a disposal point for the stolen vehicles and
them for profit.
Accordingly,
on 1 February 2023, police executed search warrants at the applicant’s
premises in Newborough. The applicant was
present during the search. Several
stolen motor vehicles and other vehicle parts were identified at the
the front yard of the property, police located a white Holden Commodore station
wagon which had been stolen from Frankston Nissan
dealership between 13 December
and 21 December 2022. That vehicle was the subject of charge 1 (handling stolen
goods). The station
wagon displayed registration plates and bore a Vehicle
Identification Number (VIN) that belonged to a white 2008 Holden Commodore
station wagon registered in Ms Laidlaw’s name.
the rear yard of the property, police located three further stolen vehicles. The
first was a silver Holden Commodore sedan which
had been stolen from the Crown
Casino car park between 17 December and 18 December 2022. The vehicle had been
stripped of many of
its parts and components, including its engine, gearbox and
interior. That vehicle was the subject of charge 2, which is a rolled-up
second vehicle located in the rear yard was a black Holden VF utility, which had
been stolen from Traralgon Car City on 12 January
2023. The vehicle had also
been stripped of parts and components which included its engine, gearbox and
interior. The applicant’s
possession of that vehicle constituted charge 3
on the indictment (a rolled‑up charge). The vehicle was displaying a
registration plate which had been registered to an unrecovered stolen
1998 Mercedes-Benz vehicle. That item is the subject of charge
7 (a rolled-up
third vehicle located in the rear yard of the property was a silver Holden sedan
which had been stolen from the Crown Casino car
park between 17 December and
18 December 2022. That vehicle also had been stripped of its engine,
gearbox and interior. The applicant’s
possession of the vehicle
constituted charge 4 on the indictment (a rolled-up charge).
the garage to the premises, police located the engine that belonged to the
silver Holden Commodore sedan that was the subject of
charge 2. The engine had
been installed into the applicant’s own Holden ClubSport sedan. The
applicant’s possession of
the engine constituted part of charge 2.
the driveway to the premises, police located a grey Holden sedan which had been
stolen from the Park Royal Hotel in Clayton between
17 January and 18 January
2023. The vehicle displayed registration plates that were registered in
Ms Laidlaw’s name. On examination,
the vehicle’s VIN had been
altered. The applicant’s possession of the vehicle constituted charge 6 on
the indictment.
In the rear console of the vehicle police located $25,050 in
cash and an Autel Diagnostic Tool, which were the subject of related
offence 20 (dealing with suspected proceeds of crime), and which is a
rolled‑up charge.
the shed of the premises police found various motor vehicle parts as
(a) An engine from a stolen 2016 Holden VF SSV Redline station wagon. The
vehicle had been stolen between 20 November and 21 November
2022, and had not
been recovered (charge 7).
(b) A build plate and two registration plates belonging to a 2008 black Holden
ClubSport sedan (charge 5).
(c) Two Victorian registration plates which belonged to an unrecovered 2017
Holden Commodore sedan that had been stolen on 24 January
2023 (charge 7).
(d) Two Victorian registration plates which belonged to a 2007 black
Mercedes‑Benz vehicle that had been stolen between 22
January and
28 January 2023 (charge 7).
(e) One registration plate that belonged to a 2015 Holden VF utility that itself
was located in the rear yard (charge 3).
(f) One registration plate that belonged to a 2011 Holden Commodore sedan that
itself had been stolen on 30 October 2021. The Holden
sedan had not been
recovered (charge 7).
(g) The second registration plate of an unrecovered stolen 1998 Mercedes-Benz
vehicle (charge 7).
to the garage at the premises, police located the gearboxes from three stolen
vehicles, those vehicles themselves being the subject
of charges 2, 4 and
police searched the applicant’s house, they located $13,900 cash in his
bedroom, which constituted part of the cash that
was the subject of related
summary offence 20 (dealing with property the suspected proceeds of crime).
on the same day (1 February 2023), police also searched two sheds at ‘All
in Storage’ in Yarragon which were rented
by the applicant and
Ms Laidlaw. Police located, in one of the sheds, a black Holden ClubSport
sedan which bore registration plates
that belonged to an unrecovered stolen 2017
Holden Commodore sedan which had been stolen between 27 January and 28 January
the driveway of the home of its owner in Box Hill North (charge 5).
The vehicle bore registration plates which had belonged to an
unrecovered stolen
2017 Holden Commodore sedan (charge 7).
the search, the applicant was arrested and charged on 1 February 2023. When
interviewed, the applicant stated that he owned
all the vehicles, having
purchased them off an online classified website for $2,000 to $3,000 each. He
said that he knew that the
vehicles were cheap and something was not right. He
believed that the vehicles were each worth between $5,000 and $10,000. He said
that he sold the parts of the vehicles and hoped to profit in the sum of $10,000
from each vehicle. The applicant accepted that he
owned all the property seized
from the garage and storage sheds. The applicant failed to provide an accurate
PIN to unlock his mobile
phone on request. His failure to do so constituted
related summary offence charge 30.
the interview, the applicant was charged and released on bail to appear at
La Trobe Valley Magistrates’ Court.
1 March 2023, police reattended the applicant’s home address in Newborough
to execute further search warrants.
located in the front yard a 2004 Holden Commodore sedan which had been stolen on
the previous day, on 28 February 2023, from
Berwick railway station. The vehicle
was bearing false registration plates and efforts had been made to conceal its
true VIN. The
applicant’s possession of the vehicle constituted charge 8
on the indictment.
seized from the garage in the premises a 2015 black Holden Sandman station wagon
which had been stolen from Jeff Wignall Ford
in Frankston on 14 February 2023.
The vehicle’s registration and VIN plates had each been altered. The
applicant’s possession
of the vehicle was the subject of charge 9.
the lounge room in the premises, the police located the following three
(a) a wallet belonging to the applicant that contained $1,200 cash, which was
suspected of being the proceeds of crime (related summary
offence charge 20);
(b) an iPhone belonging to the applicant, to which the applicant refused to
provide the passcode (related summary offence charge
(c) a combined total of 14 grams of methylamphetamine (charge 10 –
possession of a drug of dependence).
the same day, 1 March 2023, the police searched a shed at Maverick Storage in
Yarragon. The following three items were located
and seized:
(a) a service book from an unrecovered 2013 Holden Maloo utility vehicle that
was stolen on 4 January 2023 (charge 7);
(b) a service book from an unrecovered 2014 black Holden ClubSport sedan that
was stolen on 11 January 2023 in Hoppers Crossing (charge
(c) a service book from the stolen 2008 Holden ClubSport sedan that was the
subject of charge 5. The applicant’s possession
of this service book also
constituted part of charge 5.
the time of the further offending, the applicant was on bail (related summary
offence charge 29). On his arrest, he was interviewed.
In the course of the
interview, the applicant stated that he owned the vehicles that were the subject
of charges 8 and 9. He was
unable to recall when he purchased the vehicle that
was the subject of charge 8. He said that he had recently purchased the vehicle
that was the subject of charge 9. He said that the $1,200 cash, that was located
in his wallet, constituted earnings from mowing
lawns. He again refused to
provide the passcodes to his phones. He said that the storage shed at Maverick
Storage had been rented
by him ‘just after’ the execution of the
first search warrant on 1 February 2023.
total value of the insurance monies paid in respect of eight of the nine stolen
vehicles amounted to $217,997.48.
vehicle that was the subject of charge 4 was a collector’s item. The owner
of the vehicle provided a victim impact statement.
He had purchased the vehicle
in 2018 for $69,990, and had hoped to be able to sell it for $120,000, which
would have assisted him
to support his eldest son who has severe autism. When
the vehicle was recovered by police it was a mere ‘shell’. The
vehicle was not insured.
his arrest on 1 March 2023, the applicant was remanded in custody. A bail
application made on his behalf on 29 March 2023 was
refused. Following two
committal mention hearings, he was released on bail on 27 July 2023. On his
release, he attended a thirty
day residential rehabilitation program with Arrow
Health in Woodend.
5 June 2024, the applicant was arrested in respect of further alleged offending.
As a consequence, his bail was revoked on 17 July
2024, following which he
remained in custody until sentence in the present matter.
Applicant’s previous
convictions
applicant has two relevant previous convictions.
20 January 2014, the applicant was before the Shepparton Magistrates’
Court on two charges of burglary, five charges of theft
and one charge of
criminal damage. He was convicted and sentenced to a community correction order
for 12 months on conditions that
included that he perform 75 hours of community
work, and that he undergo assessment, treatment and rehabilitation in respect of
Subsequently,
on 3 May 2019, the applicant was convicted and fined $750 in the La Trobe
Valley Magistrates’ Court on one charge
of recklessly causing
The applicant’s personal
circumstances and background
applicant was born on 28 June 1994. His father was a member of the Palawa people
of Tasmania. The applicant’s parents separated
when he was two years of
age. He attended the Mooroopna and Tatura Primary Schools, and then attended
Mooroopna Secondary College
until partway through Year 8. The applicant left
school at the age of 14 years and nine months.
leaving school, the applicant worked in a number of different capacities. He
commenced by working at the Tatura abattoirs for
a couple of years. Following a
short period as a chef’s apprentice, he worked in plastering for
18 months, before returning
to work at the abattoirs. Subsequently, he
worked successively at SPC, on a poultry farm, and in abattoirs in Warrugal.
Since leaving
school, he had been in gainful employment for about 80 per cent of
his time. At the time of his arrest, he was working as a plasterer
on a casual
applicant is the father of three children. He has two young sons (who were aged
five years and three years respectively at the
time of sentence) by a
previous partner, and a further daughter (who is aged one year) with his current
partner, Ms Laidlaw. At the
time of the sentencing, the applicant’s
partner was pregnant. Ms Laidlaw provided a reference on the plea.
applicant has used cannabis, cocaine and MDMA. At the age of 18 years, he
commenced to use methylamphetamine, but he subsequently
remained free of that
substance for some time. Following the breakdown of his first relationship, he
relapsed into using it, and
he continued to do so until his arrest in March
2023. Following his period on remand, the applicant attended Arrow Health
rehabilitation
program for one month.
applicant was assessed by Ms Carla Lechner, a clinical psychologist, on 15
May 2024. Ms Lechner’s report was tendered on
Ms Lechner concluded that the applicant presented with symptoms of
Stimulant Use Disorder that was in early remission,
Major Depressive Disorder
and a provisional diagnosis of adult ADHD. She noted that the applicant was then
abstinent from drug use
and was keen to stay out of further trouble.
Ms Lechner considered that the applicant would benefit from involvement
with treatment
services. She was also of the view that a period of immediate
incarceration would be likely to lead to a further deterioration in
applicant’s mood state, and might potentially undermine the gains that he
had so far achieved.
Kurylowicz, a Koori AOD worker, with Ramahyuck District Aboriginal Corporation,
provided a ‘case summary’ dated
16 September 2024.
Mr Kurylowicz attended the hearing of the plea. In the case summary,
Mr Kurylowicz stated that the applicant had
commenced using
methylamphetamine at the age of 17 years and that he had continued to use it
since then. The applicant had presented
with a methylamphetamine abuse problem,
and his then goal was to attend a long-term treatment facility. For that
purpose, Mr Kurylowicz
had referred the applicant to attend Odyssey House,
Hope Centre, so that he could learn relapse prevention, understand his triggers
and learn how to regulate in a supportive therapeutic community.
written submissions in support of the applicant on the plea, counsel for the
applicant submitted that the Court should have the
applicant assessed for a
combination sentence, in particular to ascertain whether he would be assessed as
suitable for participation
in the Wulgunggo Ngalu Learning Place in Macks Creek,
Gippsland. In the course of oral submissions, counsel for the applicant
acknowledged
that such a disposition would involve the exercise by the judge of
a ‘degree of mercy’.
Reasons for sentence
his reasons for sentence,
summarised the circumstances of the offending and the matters personal to the
applicant relied on on the plea. The judge
noted that counsel for the applicant
did not contend that the principles in
applied to reduce his
moral culpability, but rather, he had submitted that the applicant’s Major
Depressive Disorder and other
matters, and his separation from his wife and
children, would render his time in custody more
Counsel accepted that
the report of Ms Lechner did not provide a basis for concluding that the
applicant’s mental health would
be at risk of serious deterioration during
his time in custody.
judge accepted that various certificates of achievement, tendered on the plea,
demonstrated that during the applicant’s
period of incarceration, he had
engaged in rehabilitative programs, which supported the proposition that he had
reasonable prospects
rehabilitation.
The judge was
persuaded that the applicant was remorseful and that he was concerned to
rehabilitate himself when given the opportunity
judge considered that while there might have been significant benefit in a
disposition that involved the applicant being released
on a community correction
order, the offending by the applicant, in pursuing a professional and
well-ordered illicit business in
car rebirthing for profit, was too serious for
such a disposition.
Summary of submissions
support of the proposed ground of appeal, counsel for the applicant acknowledged
that the offending in the case was serious and
that it called for the imposition
of a term of imprisonment. However, counsel submitted that in the circumstances
of the case, it
was open to the judge to impose a combination sentence involving
a term of imprisonment of 12 months and a community correction order.
Alternatively, it was submitted that the length of the sentence imposed by the
judge was itself manifestly excessive.
support of those submissions, counsel contended that the judge placed excessive
weight on the aggravating features of the offending,
and failed to give due
weight to the mitigating circumstances, which included:
applicant’s early and unqualified pleas of guilty and his remorse.
The applicant
had not previously served a custodial sentence.
The applicant
did not have any previous convictions for similar commercial‑level
property offending.
The application
of the principle discussed in
Akoka v The
to make allowance for
time spent by the applicant in a rehabilitation facility.
applicant’s age and his employment history.
applicant’s sustained efforts at rehabilitation, including his attendance
at a 30-day residential drug treatment program,
maintaining ongoing support with
Arrow Health and demonstrating insight into the connection between his drug
addiction and his criminal
conduct. In that respect, counsel relied on the
judge’s assessment that the applicant has reasonable prospects of
rehabilitation.
applicant’s personal vulnerabilities, including his childhood deprivation,
diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder, his long-standing
methylamphetamine
addiction, family trauma, the stress of separation from his pregnant wife and
child, which would render a term
of imprisonment more burdensome.
applicant’s Aboriginal heritage, and his desire to connect with
submitted that the sentence imposed on the applicant does not sufficiently
reflect the utilitarian value of the plea, and
the fact that the applicant by
the plea accepted responsibility and cooperated with authorities.
further submitted that the periods of cumulation imposed by the judge are
excessive. Although the offending engaged in by
the applicant was serious and
repeated, he was not involved in a large-scale criminal syndicate. Rather, his
conduct stemmed from
an entrenched substance addiction and financial
instability. The conduct by the applicant spanned two distinct, but closely
events that were less than one month apart.
written submissions, counsel noted that in sentencing the applicant in respect
of summary charge 20 (dealing with property suspected
of being the proceeds
of crime), the judge incorrectly described the offence as one of handling stolen
property, which carries a
maximum sentence of 15 years’
imprisonment.
submissions, counsel, correctly, accepted that that misdescription by the judge
did not have a material effect on the sentence
imposed on that charge.
response, counsel for the respondent noted that the sentencing judge expressly
had regard to the relatively limited matters that
were put on behalf of the
applicant in mitigation of sentence, including his remorse, his steps towards
rehabilitation, his diagnosis
of Major Depressive Disorder, his background, the
30 days spent in a residential rehabilitation program, and his pleas of guilty.
However, counsel submitted the offending by the applicant was serious. It
involved a degree of planning and was a serious example
of handling stolen
goods. Further, it was submitted, the offending was brazen. The applicant
received, dismantled, and reconfigured,
the vehicles in his own home premises.
The offending was also quite sophisticated, with the applicant acting as a
receipt and disposal
point for stolen vehicles and for rebirthing them for
profit. The offences that were the subject of charges 8 to 10 were
while the applicant was on bail. Counsel noted that after being
charged on 1 February 2023, the applicant almost immediately continued
offending. Further, the applicant’s statements to police, and to
Ms Lechner, that he had purchased the vehicles in question
on Gumtree, were
not borne out by the evidence. The applicant had claimed that the offending was
spurred by financial pressures associated
with a workplace injury and supporting
his young family. However, his central motivating factor was to support his
methylamphetamine
further noted that the applicant was 28 years of age at the time of the
offending, and, as such, youth was not a significant
mitigating factor. Further,
the applicant’s Aboriginality was not identified on the plea as a
particular vulnerability. The
applicant had found out about his Aboriginal
heritage 12 months previously, and during that time he had not engaged to any
significant
degree with his culture.
for the respondent noted that the individual sentences imposed on the handling
stolen goods charges ranged between 6.67 per
cent and 10 per cent of the
available maximum sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment. The orders for
cumulation on the charges
were modest. Counsel submitted that in the
circumstances of the case the sentencing purposes of general deterrence and
denunciation
were of particular importance.
respect of related summary offence charge 20, counsel noted that the charge is a
rolled‑up charge, comprising three amounts
of cash totalling $40,150 that
were found in locations on the applicant’s premises over the two charged
dates. Counsel acknowledged
that the judge did incorrectly describe the charge
as ‘handling stolen cash’. However, in imposing a sentence of 9
imprisonment for the charge, there was no indication that the
judge was affected by his incorrect description of the maximum sentence
available for the offence. It was submitted that the individual sentence, and
the modest cumulation imposed on related summary offence
20, do not invite
Analysis and conclusion
order to sustain the proposed ground of appeal, that the total effective
sentence and the non-parole period, are manifestly excessive,
the applicant must
demonstrate that those sentences were wholly outside the range of sentencing
options available to the judge. By
its nature, such a test is, necessarily, a
stringent requirement. It is not sufficient for the applicant to demonstrate
sentences, either individually or the total sentence, were longer than
this Court might have imposed in the circumstances of the
case. Rather, the
applicant must establish that the sentences were so excessive as to bespeak
error by the judge in the exercise
of his sentencing
discretion.
starting point, for a consideration of the proposed ground of appeal, is that,
by their nature, each of the offences, that were
the subject of charges 1 to 9
(inclusive), are serious criminal offences. By definition, the offence of
handling stolen goods is
committed where a person, knowing or believing the
goods to be stolen, dishonestly receives them, or dishonestly undertake or
in their retention, removal, disposal or realisation for the benefit of
another person.
The prescribed
maximum sentence for the offence is 15 years’ imprisonment.
the present case, the circumstances in which the applicant committed the
offences were quite serious. In essence, he pleaded guilty
on the basis that,
knowing that the vehicles were stolen, he had acted as a disposal point for the
vehicles and rebirthing them for
a profit. The offending, that was the subject
of charges 1 to 7, concerned six Holden motor vehicles, five of which were
at the home of the applicant, and the sixth was at the storage facility
in Yarragon rented by the applicant and his partner. Each
of those six vehicles
had been stolen recently, between 13 December 2022 and 28 January
2023. In addition, the applicant had in his
possession a number of motor vehicle
parts which had been taken both from those vehicles and other stolen
vehicles, that were the subject of charges 8 and 9, of the indictment comprised
two Holden motor vehicles, one of which had been
stolen on 14 February 2023, and
the second of which had been stolen on 28 February 2023.
total value of the stolen vehicles was in excess of $280,000. As counsel for the
respondent pointed out, the offending by the
applicant was particularly brazen,
being committed by the applicant in his own home. After the premises were
1 February, the applicant proceeded to commit the two
further offences that were the subject of charges 8 and 9 on the
indictment.
was in that context that the applicant was to be sentenced on the basis that he
was involved in an enterprise involving the theft
of vehicles, with the
applicant himself acting as a disposal point for the stolen vehicles and for
altering and rebirthing them for
the purposes of a profit.
the circumstances, the sentencing purposes of denunciation, general deterrence,
and specific deterrence were of particular significance.
It was necessary that
the sentences imposed on the applicant be sufficient to reflect the gravity of
his offending, and to express
the community’s opprobrium for the degree of
dishonesty involved. Further, it was necessary that the sentences be
sufficiently
severe to deter any other person who might be minded to engage in
the kind of conduct committed by the applicant. In other words,
it was important
that the sentences be such as to convey a clear and unequivocal message that any
person, who might be minded to
engage in such conduct, would, on apprehension,
suffer a loss of their right to remain at liberty in society for a significant
the case of the applicant, it was also necessary that the sentences be
sufficient to deter him from further criminal conduct of
the kind that he
engaged in. The fact that the applicant continued to offend, after he was
arrested and charged on 1 February 2023,
highlighted the need for a sentence to
be imposed on him that would be sufficient to deter him from participating in
any further
such conduct.
as recognised by the sentencing judge, the applicant had available and relied on
relevant mitigating circumstances. His
plea of guilty of the charges had
significant utilitarian value, and, as accepted by the judge, was accompanied by
appropriate remorse.
The applicant had limited previous convictions, and he had
a good employment history, notwithstanding his problems with drug addiction.
Further, the applicant had made positive steps towards his rehabilitation,
including his attendance at the 30-day residential drug
treatment program while
he was on bail. In addition, as accepted by the judge, a term of imprisonment
would bear more onerously on
the applicant, due to his personal vulnerabilities,
and his separation from his pregnant wife and child. It was also relevant that,
following his arrest, the applicant had taken some steps to connect with his
Aboriginal heritage and culture, which of itself constitutes
a positive step on
the pathway to rehabilitation.
of those mitigating circumstances, individually and collectively, were relevant
to the determination of the applicant’s
sentence in this case, and were
acknowledged as such by the sentencing judge.
Nevertheless,
the conclusion is inevitable that, in view of the serious nature of the
offending in the case, which we have discussed,
it was not only appropriate, but
indeed necessary, that the judge impose a term of imprisonment which would be
sufficient to reflect
the gravity of the offending and vindicate the sentencing
purposes to which we have referred.
those matters into account, we are not persuaded that the sentences were wholly
outside the range of sentencing options available
to the judge. Rather, and to
the contrary, in the circumstances of the case, we consider that the sentences
were appropriate and
reasonable.
would add that, in view of the gravity of the offending, and in particular the
circumstance that the applicant continued to offend
after his arrest on 1
February 2023, it would not have been appropriate in this case for the judge to
have imposed a sentence comprising
a combination of a term of imprisonment and a
community correction order. Such a sentence would not have been sufficient to
the seriousness of the offending, or to serve the relevant sentencing
purposes which we have outlined.
those circumstances, we do not consider that the proposed ground of appeal is
sufficiently arguable to justify the grant of leave
to appeal to the applicant.
For that reason, the application for an extension of time must be
Rolled-up charge.
Rolled-up charge.
Rolled-up charge.
Rolled-up charge.
Rolled-up charge.
Rolled-up charge.
DPP v Lindner
(‘Reasons’).
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
(Maxwell P, Buchanan and Vincent JJA);
[2007] VSCA 102.
Ibid [33]–[34].
Ibid [36]–[37].
[2017] VSCA 214
[109]–[112] (Warren CJ, Kyrou and Redlich JJA).
Reasons [2], [16], [51].
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and
Harper JJA);
Leimonitis v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 198
[32] (Priest
Crimes Act 1958
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (405 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter