URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1625.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Safari v Victorian WorkCover Authority [2025] VCC 1625 (13 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
SERIOUS INJURY LIST
No. CI-24-07041
FAIZ MOHAMMAD SAFARI
VICTORIAN WORKCOVER AUTHORITY
HER HONOUR JUDGE HINCHEY
DATE OF HEARING
21 July 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
13 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Safari v Victorian WorkCover Authority
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1625
REASONS FOR
Subject: ACCIDENT COMPENSATION
Catchwords: Serious injury – injury to the function of the spine
– long-term severe mental or behavioural disturbance
or disorder –
paragraphs (a) and (c) of the definition of “serious injury” –
loss of earnings – relevant
Legislation Cited:
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
Cases Cited:
Kelso v Tatiara Meat Co Pty Ltd
[2007] VSCA 267
(2007) 17 VR 592
v George Weston Foods
[2009] VSCA 242
Hunter v Transport Accident
[2005] VSCA 1
Petkovski v Galletti
[1994] VicRp 32
[1994] 1 VR 436
Barwon Spinners Pty Ltd & Ors v Podolak
[2005] VSCA 33
(2005) 14 VR 622
Orica Australia Pty Ltd & Anor
(2006) 14 VR 602
Judgment: Application granted.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr J J Mighell KC with
Mr D D Nguyen
Zaparas Lawyers
For the Defendant
Mr E Makowski
Russell Kennedy Lawyers
HER HONOUR:
is an application for leave to bring proceedings for damages pursuant to s335(2)
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(“the Act”) for injuries suffered by the plaintiff in the course of
his employment between 2021 and 2023, and more particularly
on 31 January 2023
(“the incident”) while he was employed with Hol Special Parts Pty
Ltd (“the employer”).
plaintiff seeks leave to bring proceedings for damages in relation to both pain
and suffering and economic loss.
Relevant legal
application for leave to bring proceedings for damages is brought pursuant to
subparagraph (a) of the definition of “
serious injury
that term is defined in s325(1) of the Act, namely:
serious injury
(a) permanent serious impairment or loss of a body function;
physical impairment relied upon is the function of the spine.
order to establish an entitlement to recover damages under the Act, apart from
satisfying the definition of the phrase “
serious injury
s5 of the Act, the relevant injury must have arisen out of or due to the nature
of the plaintiff’s employment with
the employer, on or after 1 July 2014.
plaintiff has the burden of proof on the application. The standard of proof is
on the balance of probabilities.
relation to the physical impairment, by s325(2)(c) of the Act, it is the
consequences
of the physical impairment which
produce the “
pain and suffering
loss of earning
”, which must be “
” – that is,
if the plaintiff is to succeed in his claim relating to impairment or loss of a
body function, the plaintiff
must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that
such impairment or loss results in relevant “
consequences
when judged by comparison with other cases in the range
of possible impairments fairly described as being more than significant or
marked, and as being at least very considerable
been referred to as the “
narrative test
”. It has been held
that this task is largely a question of impression or value
325(e) and (f) set out the statutory formula by which, in usual circumstances,
the Court must measure the plaintiff’s
loss of earning capacity prior to
any grant of leave. This formula provides that the plaintiff must establish a
loss of earning
capacity of 40 per cent or more, as measured in accordance with
s325(f) of the Act.
determining the application, the Court:
(a) must assess whether the injury is a “
serious injury
at the time the application is
(b) must give reasons that disclose the pathway of reasoning in dealing with the
evidence and issues raised by the
application.
is well understood that a person who is injured is to be compensated only for
such injuries as are proven to have resulted from
the relevant
To undertake this task,
the plaintiff must establish what physical injury was caused by the incident.
The Court must then determine
the consequences of that injury to the plaintiff,
disregarding any consequences which the Court finds arise from circumstances
than the physical injury.
If the Court is satisfied that the consequences of the physical injury alone are
” and long term, then the plaintiff will have
demonstrated that he is suffering from a “
serious injury
under the Act.
325(2)(h) of the Act requires me to disregard all psychological or psychiatric
consequences in determining an application
which relates to a physical
impairment.
s325(2)(b) of the Act, in determining the seriousness of the
consequences
” of the injury, the Court is required to assess
the matter by reference to this particular plaintiff, viewed objectively,
from the injury. Comparison must also be made between the
consequences
” of the physical impairment arising from the
injury the subject of this application, and the range of possible physical
impairments.
reaching my conclusions in relation to the application for leave to bring
proceedings for damages, I have applied the principles
identified by the Court
of Appeal in
Barwon Spinners Pty Ltd & Ors v
Grech v Orica
Australia Pty Ltd &
plaintiff relied upon two affidavits, gave
evidence and was
cross-examined.
addition, both parties relied upon medical reports and other materials which
were contained in the Court Books,
or were otherwise tendered. I have read all of the tendered material. In this
judgment, I will refer only to the relevant parts
of the tendered
The Plaintiff’s background
plaintiff was born in Afghanistan in December 1978. He is presently aged
forty-six years. He is married and has six children.
All of the children live
at home with him and his
completed school until Year 10 level. When he finished school, he worked as a
mechanic in his father’s business. He then
worked as a security
moved to Australia with his family in 2021. He started working with the
employer as a mechanic about nine months after he arrived
in Australia. He was
employed on a full-time basis. His work duties included bending, twisting and
crouching in order to work on
vehicles. There was a lot of heavy lifting of car
parts. There were forklifts to remove large items, but no other lifting
experienced pain in his lower back when lifting at work and, in particular, on
31 January 2023. He was removing a rolltop cover
to install it. He did that
task many times in the course of his employment. After the installation, he
felt pain in his lower back.
He struggled to move because of the severe pain.
He was assisted by another worker, who directed him to go home. He went home
and hoped the pain would go
following day, he consulted with his general practitioner, who gave him pain
medication. He went to work for a further two weeks
but could not cope with the
back pain and stopped working. He started physiotherapy and continued to take
Nurofen and Panadeine
2 February 2023, he had a CT scan of his lower back that showed:
(a) L2-3: minor annular disc bulge and ligamentum flavum thickening;
(b) L3-4: mild annular disc bulge and ligamentum flavum hypertrophy; moderate
right and mild left subarticular recess narrowing with
potential impingement of
the descending right L4 nerve root;
(c) L4-5: mild annular disc bulge that is more prominent left paracentral,
ligamentum flavum hypertrophy and likely impingement of
the descending left L5
nerve root; and
(d) L5-S1: minor annular posterior disc bulge with ligamentum flavum
hypertrophy.
2 June 2023, he had an MRI scan of his lumbar spine which showed reduced disc
heights at L4-5 and L5-S1 and posterior disc bulge
18 July 2023, the plaintiff consulted with Dr David Edis, orthopaedic and spine
surgeon. Dr Edis suggested that the plaintiff
consider having an injection and
also suggested another procedure involving
radiofrequency.
4 October 2023, he had a CT-guided epidural injection. He thought that this
procedure made his pain
continued having physiotherapy in 2024. He experienced pain in his back, and
into his leg and groin. He consulted Dr Ali Kian
Mehr, pain physician, about
his back pain in mid
Pre-existing
has been diagnosed with tuberculosis. He consults with doctors at Monash Health
in relation to this condition. He has been advised
that this condition is a
dormant type
” of tuberculosis. Since the incident, he has
not received any treatment for his
tuberculosis.
concerning the consequences of the Plaintiff’s injury
plaintiff swore two affidavits, the first dated 30 July 2024 and the second
dated 14 March 2025.
summary, the plaintiff’s evidence as to the pain and suffering and
economic loss consequences which he presently experiences
(a) he has constant pain in his lower back. He has a “
sensation there. His lower back feels stiff. The pain and stiffness is mainly
in the middle of his lower back. The pain
changes in intensity, depending on
how much activity he does. It is not just one level. It changes and is at
times very intense;
(b) he has flare-ups of lower back pain a few times a week. When he experiences
a flare-up, the pain “
” at him and really affects him
and what he is able to do;
(c) his back pain gets worse when he does things such as stooping, bending,
crouching, squatting and lifting anything heavy. It
gets worse if he walks or
stands for long. He often changes his posture to try and ensure that he does
not aggravate the pain;
(d) the pain in his lower back sometimes travels down to his left leg. He finds
that after driving for a period, his left leg feels
numb. After a time, this
Treatment and medication
(e) he consults with his physiotherapist twice a week. He consults with his
general practitioner monthly, for certificates and pain
medication;
(f) since the epidural injection he underwent on 4 October 2023, he has not had
any further injections;
(g) he has not had any further recommendations for specific treatment or
(h) he continues to see Dr Mehr, pain physician, for ongoing
(i) he currently takes the following medications:
(i) Targin, 10 milligrams and 5 milligrams, depending on the pain level, once
(ii) Oxazepam, 15 milligrams per
(j) he takes the medication for the pain in his lower back. When the medication
wears off, the pain gets worse;
(k) he struggles to get comfortable enough to sleep at night. His sleep is
affected by the pain he experiences in his lower back.
The pain in his lower
back causes him to wake up and it is also difficult for him to fall asleep due
to that pain;
(l) at times, it is both lower back and left leg pain that affects his sleep.
He experiences pain when he sleeps on his left side;
(m) he has been prescribed medication which helps him to stay asleep. Prior to
taking this medication, he was waking up several
(n) the medication he takes for sleeping helps, but he still has problems going
to sleep or waking up due to pain. He has tried
to take the sleeping medication
less. There have been nights when he has stayed up until the sun rises due to
his lower back pain;
(o) sometimes he is awake due to the lower back pain and at other times it is
due to how he has been affected mentally by his work
Activities of daily living
(p) before his back injury, he used to be social and enjoy visiting friends. He
tends to avoid going out these days, because he
cannot cope with long periods of
standing and sitting. He prefers to be on his own, to avoid getting attention
He misses being with his friends and being with people,
but it is not worth the worsened back pain. Sometimes he goes out to visit
friends, but less than before he suffered the injury to his lower back. He is
not who he used to be before he suffered that
(q) prior to his back injury, he enjoyed playing soccer. He had played while he
lived in Afghanistan and had hoped to resume playing
once he and his family were
settled in Australia. He would struggle to play soccer now, because the kicking
and running would worsen
(r) he clarified in his second affidavit, that when he referred to enjoying
playing soccer, he has not played soccer since arriving
(s) if he sits in one position or drives for long periods, the pain in his lower
back gets very strong and he has to rest or stretch
his back to ease the
Psychological injury
(t) his greatest struggle is not being able to work and contribute to his family
in the way that he used to. As his English is not
good and due to his physical
limitations, he worries a lot about whether he will be able to work
(u) he feels down on himself a lot with the pain and missing out on the things
that he used to enjoy. He also experiences a lot
of guilt and shame that he
cannot work and contribute to his family financially. He has always wanted a
good future for his children.
He finds it sad that he is not sure that he can
provide for that now;
Loss of earning capacity
(v) the biggest consequence of his back injury is his inability to return to
full-time work. He loved his job. He was proud of
his ability to earn money
and to provide for his family. It was a big life event to move to Australia
with his family, and he had
overcome a lot of hardship to get to Australia and
obtain a good job with a good wage. He had planned to work as hard as he could
to set up his family and provide a good future for his
(w) he has only ever done physical-type work. He does not have English-language
skills. He cannot write or read English. He would
struggle to lift heavy car
parts and repetitively bend and crouch for long periods of time. He has tried
to do small pieces of work
on his car at home, but the pain is very bad
afterwards;
(x) he worries about what sort of work he could do now that he has a back
cross-examination, the plaintiff gave the following relevant evidence:
(a) he sometimes talked in English and sometimes in Farsi when he worked with
the employer;
(b) he cannot speak English and he does not understand
(c) he does not presently walk with a limp. He has previously walked with a
(d) he denied ever limping on his right side. He said “
there’s no problem with my right
(e) he does not presently use a walking stick. He has not ever used a walking
stick since he suffered the
(f) he was asked why, even though he had an interpreter available to him, he
answered one of the questions in English. He replied
I understand
sometimes, yes
(g) it was suggested to him that he has “
reasonable communication
skills in English
”. He denied that this was
(h) his back pain is worsened by stooping, bending, crouching and squatting. He
said that he can only lift light
(i) the pain gets worse if he stands for more than about 10 minutes. When this
happens he has to walk around to reduce the pain.
He can sit for about one hour
before the pain gets “
(j) he always has pain, but if he does heavy lifting, that makes it
(k) he used to be social and enjoyed visiting friends. He now tends to avoid
going out because he cannot cope with long periods
of sitting and standing. He
prefers to be on his own to avoid getting attention about his back injury. He
misses being with his
friends and seeing people, but it is not worth it because
of the worsened back pain that he experiences. He still
” socialises with his friends. He does not do
activities with his friends, he just visits them, sometimes at their houses.
has been on outings with friends since he suffered the injury. He could not
initially recall when the last outing was. Subsequently
he recalled that it may
have been the day of “Eid”. He could not remember the date of this
religious occasion;
(l) he sees a psychologist at the present time, usually once a week. The reason
he sees this practitioner is because of the pain
that he is having and the fact
that consultations with the psychologist make his mood feel
(m) he is mentally affected by the injuries he has suffered, and experiences
some depression;
(n) he changed general practitioners recently. He said that this is because his
former general practitioner, Dr Hosseini, was “
not treating me very
well and he was forcing me to go to work while I couldn’t work so that was
the reason I changed
(o) he denied that he moved to his new general practitioner, Dr Khan, because he
believes he cannot work ever again. He said “
No, I went to Dr Khan if
I can get proper treatment and then after that I can return back to
(p) it was put to him that Dr Hosseini had arranged a variety of treatments for
him, and had therefore treated him properly. In
response, he replied
At the moment I’m not sure because I’m in severe pain and
I don’t think I received proper
(q) he was pressed on why he said that Dr Hosseini did not give him proper
treatment. In response to this, he replied “
I couldn’t get rid
of the pain
(r) it was put to him that in fact the treatment which had been given to him by
Dr Hosseini had helped him and that he had improved.
It was suggested to him
that he dies not want to go back to work. He denied
(s) when asked to clarify why he left Dr Hosseini, he replied “
at that time I didn’t complete my treatment and I was doing the pain
management program and he gave me the certificate
that you can work with Julie
but I couldn’t work. ... After that I didn’t see him,
(t) he agreed that he chose to be discharged early from the pain management
program. This was because the severity of his pain had
remained unchanged. He
explained, “
... I went there for a very long time and their exercises
didn’t help me. Didn’t reduce my pain. But physio was helpful
that’s why I was asking to do
(u) he was asked how he knew that the pain management program was not going to
(v) it was suggested to him that during the program, he was able to reduce his
opioid use and his pain did not increase at that time.
In response, he replied
I don’t remember. What time are you talking about? I’m
(w) he agreed that Dr Hosseini had arranged for him to have an epidural
injection into his back. He said this did not help him,
and in fact made his
pain worse. He explained further, “
It didn’t help me [and] apart
from that the injection site was really painful and was burning. For a very
long time I was feeling
pain there in the injection site. ... For three or
four months
(x) he denied having neck pain at the present
(y) he was asked whether or not he has shoulder pain. In response, he replied
Only when I’m trying to lift my arm it hurts
clarified with him that this issue impacts upon his lifting ability. He agreed
that this was true;
(z) he confirmed that he experiences numbness in his fingers. He was asked
whether or not this affects him on a day-to-day basis.
In response, he replied
As I’m not working it’s
(aa) he confirmed that he takes painkillers for these issues, but clarified
It doesn’t help, but it’s just reducing the pain. ... I
mean that it’s not a proper treatment for
(bb) he told Dr Khan about his left arm problem. He said that Dr Khan
advised him to get
physiotherapy;
(cc) he confirmed that the pain-relieving medications he takes have a good
effect on his back pain;
(dd) he was asked whether or not the physiotherapy treatment for his back pain
actually helps him. He replied “
So when I’m doing physio is
actually reducing the pain, but if I don’t do the physio pain is getting
(ee) it was put to him that the medication he takes only gives him very mild
pain relief. He agreed that this was true, but clarified
medication’s helping me for four or five hours. When the effect of the
medication wear[s] off I’m still having the
(ff) it was clarified with him that Dr Khan had written “
He feels that
the medicines give him very mild temporary relief
”. In response, he
Yes, I told that if I don’t take medication then the
pain is getting
(gg) he was taken to a consultation he had with Dr Hosseini on 26 April
The note recorded that
the plaintiff was “
Walking with a walking stick. He says he has
decided to use a walking stick and it has not been recommendation of the
”, and he confirmed that this was true. It was put to him that
despite what he had said earlier about not using a walking stick,
on at least
this occasion, he had used one. In response, he replied, “
At that time
I bought that one and I was going to consult with him should I use the stick or
not, and he recommended not, then after
that I didn’t use it. ... No-one
told me, I bought it myself. I thought it will help me with the pain ... Then
gave it back to the shop and I told them I’m not allowed to use
(hh) he denied that he presently has a walking stick at
(ii) it was put to him that when he attended Dr Khoury in August 2023, his
symptoms included severe low back pain with pins and needles
down the leg, and
an inability to sleep at night. He confirmed that this was true. He was asked
whether or not this was still the
case at the present time. In response, he
I don’t have the needling sensation in my leg
(jj) he confirmed that in August 2023, his back pain affected his ability to
camp, walk and have barbecues with his
(kk) by reason of his back pain, he is slow with walking and slow with dressing
and undressing. He is also hesitant with bending
and going back to the upright
He said that he still
has difficulties bending and going back to the upright position due to his
(ll) he was shown a portion of surveillance material from July 2023. He
confirmed that this video surveillance showed him climbing
into the back of his
Tarago vehicle. He said that he was cleaning the car. He agreed that he was
bending over at the waist. He
agreed that he was in a very deep squat inside
the vehicle. He agreed that he was twisting while in that position. It was put
him that there were no observable signs of pain demonstrated on the video
surveillance footage. In response, he replied “
Even though when
I was cleaning I had pain but it was very less pain but after when I
finished cleaning I went home the pain got worse
”. He said he had not
watched this portion of video before the
(mm) he was asked whether or not he still cleans his car at this time. In
response, he replied
(nn) he was asked whether or not he can still do the movements that were shown
in the video surveillance. In response, he replied
At that time I
could do those movements. ... I can do it but I will have severe pain. ...
Sometimes I’m having severe pain
but sometimes the pain ... decreases,
sometimes less pain. Probably when I was doing the cleaning maybe I had less
pain at that
Even though I could do those movements right now
but later on I will have severe
(oo) he was pressed about whether or not he still does these types of movements
and still cleans his car at the present time. In
response, he replied
No, because I’m having severe pain that’s why I’m
not touching anything anymore. If I knew this activity will increase
then I’m not doing the activity. At that time I didn’t know. ... I
wasn’t sure that I have that problem
or if I was sick. I thought I could
do a lot of things, I couldn’t do that one so that’s why I was
cleaning my car.
But now if I think the activity will increase my pain then
I’m not doing it
(pp) it was put to him that at the point in time where the video surveillance
was taken, he had in fact had pain for many months.
He agreed that this was
true. It was put to him that at that time, he knew he had pain and he also knew
how restricted he was.
He agreed that this was true. It was put to him that
the explanation he gave for his ability to perform those tasks on the video
not make sense, taking into account what he had just confirmed about the
existence of his pain and his knowledge of restrictions
at that time. In
response, he replied “
What do you want?
” He was pressed
again about whether or not he agreed that his explanation did not make sense.
In response, he replied “
Just maybe it’s not great for you but
for me to make sure that I’m able to do something, convince myself that
able to do something makes sense. But maybe not making sense for
(qq) he was pressed on this issue, and it was suggested to him that the video
surveillance he had been shown demonstrated a person
back injury if any injury at all
”. In response, he replied
Yes, I agree. In the video it’s looking someone who is very
healthy is working
.” He agreed that this is different to how he was
presenting to his general practitioner in the months before the video was
(rr) it was suggested to him that what was shown in the video surveillance is an
example of a “
big difference between someone who needs a walking stick
compared to what we see on the video
”. In response, he replied
Yes, at that time when I was looking for walking stick I was in severe
pain, I thought that would help me. And I also wanted to return
but they changed my work from being a mechanic to cleaning, I didn’t like
it and I wanted to be a mechanic.
But when I was cleaning my car in that video
and after the cleaning I was having severe pain, I realised I’m not able
(ss) it was suggested to him that in the two months before the video
surveillance was taken, he presented to his doctors in a very
disabled way with
back pain. It was suggested to him that the video shows no disability. He
That’s correct
”. It was suggested to him
that his explanation that he did not know how bad his back pain was until
undertaking the activities
in the video was incorrect. He replied, “
”. It was put to him that the video shows him having
no pain while bending down. In response, he replied “
having pain. ... What I’m saying is that my pain is fluctuating,
sometime it’s getting very severe.
When I’m in severe pain
I’m not able to do anything. But if I have less pain I’m able to do
something. Well,
if I have less pain I’m a human being, I have to go
outside, I have to do something to keep myself busy. So but if I’m
severe pain I’m not able to do anything. But I have always
(tt) he was asked once again about why he would have presented to doctors very
differently to what was shown in the video surveillance.
In response, he
Maybe because sometimes I’m in a severe pain, sometime
not, sometime I’m good, sometime in a very bad situation, so I
know why it’s happening to
(uu) he was asked whether or not he had seen a second piece of surveillance
footage. He said he had seen one where he went to a
picnic with his family and
was sitting on a chair. He could not recall when he had seen it. He was asked
whether or not he thought
that video showed him as somebody without much of an
injury. In response, he replied “
That’s what you think of me,
but I’m in pain, I have
(vv) he was shown the portion of video footage taken in October 2024. He agreed
that he was the person depicted in the video. He
did not remember the day, but
did remember one day going to such an
(ww) he could not recall how long the drive to the park was, saying only
It was further away, it was too far. ... Maybe an hour or more than
an hour but I don’t remember
(xx) he agreed that in this portion of video surveillance, he was seen to sit on
a rug on the ground with friends at a social outing.
He was asked whether or
not he agreed that the video showed him to be enjoying himself. In response, he
No. Was not good for me.
” He agreed that the video
demonstrated him walking at a normal pace with no limping, and talking on his
(yy) he was asked how many hours he thought he was at the park. In response,
he replied “
I don’t remember, but we were there for a long time
and I was sitting on the chair and after that I ate. After that I had pain,
got pain in my back, then I went to my car and lie down in my car
When asked how long he lay down for, he could not recall, saying “
two hours, two and a half or three hours ... Maybe one hour
(zz) it was put to him that the chair he was sitting in, which was a fold-out
chair, did not have much back support. He disagreed
with this, and said
Yeah, had support but it was soft. ... Had back support but it was
(aaa) he agreed
the video depicted him leaning forward in his chair and using his arms to pick
up a drink from the ground;
(bbb) when asked
why his wife did not drive to and from the park, he replied “
wife recently start learning driving and that was far away and my children was
in car, was not safe, that’s why I
(ccc) he was asked if he agreed that an observer of the video would not be able
to tell that he was in pain. In response, he replied
you’re right, when you see the video ... it seemed like the person has no
pain whatsoever, but I was in pain and the pain
got worse later on, and I went
to my car, I lay down there ... I didn’t play, I didn’t play
football, there was no game,
it was very boring for
(ddd) it was put
to him that this is an example of him going out and seeing his friends and
enjoying his time. He did not agree with
proposition;
content of Professor Bittar’s report was put to him, where Professor
Bittar listed all the issues which the plaintiff
has difficulty with. It was
suggested to him that that list of difficulties was quite different to what
could be seen on the video
in terms of socialising and sitting for prolonged
periods. The plaintiff enquired what was the time difference between the video
surveillance and the medical report. He was informed that the medical report
was dated May 2025 and the video surveillance was October
2024. In response, he
So the situation is changing. At that time, maybe I had less
pain, but now the pain is getting worse, especially when the weather
cold. So yes, from time-to-time, it’s
(fff) he was
asked whether or not he had been exaggerating the extent of his pain to his
general practitioner, Dr Hosseini. In response,
he replied “
telling the
(ggg) he was
asked whether or not he has any plans to return to work for the rest of his
life. In response, he replied “
Yes. ... I will return back to my
mechanic job
(hhh) when asked
whether he would consider doing alternative jobs that were lighter than his
mechanic job, he replied “
... I don’t know how to do the other
(iii) it was suggested to him that he has formed the view that he will not even
think about working until he finishes with this WorkCover
case. In response, he
No. Always in my mind to get rid of this pain and to get
healthier and return back to
confirmed that when he takes his medication, his pain decreases from 10 out of
10, to 5 out of 10;
confirmed that his pain has been worsening since he first suffered the injury in
early 2023;
(lll) it was put to him that the only way the doctor can assess what pain he is
in, is by what he tells them. In response, he replied
truth to the doctor and he had all the tests in front of him, so I don’t
(mmm) it was put
to him that his sleep is affected by his psychological condition; namely, that
he is depressed, sad and worried.
In response, he replied “
sometimes the pain does not allow me to sleep - my lower back
(nnn) he agreed
that he had told his general practitioner that TAFE would be too difficult for
him because he needs to sit for 60
or 90 minutes at a time at that course, but
he needs to stand up frequently due to back pain. It was suggested to him that
sit for longer than 60 to 90 minutes, based upon what is depicted in the
video surveillance taken in October 2024. In response to
that, he replied
For one day I can do it, not
(ooo) he was
asked whether he knew why he could engage in that amount of sitting on the day
of the video but now says that he cannot
do it. In response, he replied
Well I don’t know the day of the video but some time if I have
to do it then I have to bear the pain and I have to do it, I
(ppp) it was put
to him that Dr Hosseini had written a certificate of capacity which allowed him
to engage in English-language training.
He agreed that he remembered this, and
added that “
I requested that
”. It was clarified with him
that he was suggesting that he was the one that had requested English-language
training. He agreed
that this was true. He was asked whether or not he had
gone and done such training. He said that he had not. When asked why he
not undergone that training, he replied “
I was waiting for them to find
someone, to get approved, and I was in touch with Ms Julie but I don’t
know what happened, they
couldn’t find someone
”. He denied that
he told his new general practitioner, Dr Khan, that he did not want to undertake
English-language
(qqq) he was
aware that Dr Hosseini had recommended that he undergo one-on-one English
tutoring in a community setting. He has not
undertaken this
(rrr) He agreed
that Dr Hosseini had proposed that he return to work on three to four-hour
shifts, four days per week, with certain
other restrictions. He added to this,
At that time I told them I am in severe pain, I’m not ready to
return back to work, but he was insistent. He was asking me
to go to work. ...
Then I said okay, if that’s the case, then I have to learn English first,
then I will find another
(sss) it was
suggested to him that immediately after this exchange, he changed general
practitioners. He disagreed that this was
the case. He said that the reason he
changed general practitioners was “
Because from the start when I was
with this doctor, I didn’t see any benefits. I thought it’s better
to try another
(ttt) it was put
to him that he had changed general practitioners because Dr Hosseini
believed that he could work. In response, the
plaintiff replied
I’m not sure about him believing me or not, only the result. ...
I think when I changed my doctor, it took me a month or
details of doing a car park attendant’s job were put to him, including
assisting customers and receiving and processing
payments. He was asked whether
or not he thought he could undertake this role. In response, he replied
No, because I cannot speak English. ... I understand everyday things
(vvv) he was taken to the requirements of being a service adviser. He was taken
to the fact that it involved manual and computerised
data entry and
word-processing tasks and general office duties. In response, he replied
No, I cannot do that ... Because I don’t know how to use a
computer now, I don’t know how to speak English. ... My memory
bad but I will do my best but I don’t think
(www) he was
taken to the tasks involved in being a ticket collector or usher. He was taken
to the fact that this required constant
sitting or standing at a sales counter,
and walking around assisting customers and collecting tickets. In response, he
No, I cannot do it because you need English. ... Since my
injuries ... I forgot a lot of English words because ... [I’m] not
well ... I’m not happy and I’m taking the medication making my
(xxx) it was put to him that Dr Slesenger had observed him demonstrating a
right-sided limp when he went to see that doctor on 14
May 2025. In response,
he replied “
I don’t have any problem on the right side. ...
I’m always walking straight on my right side. I don’t feel anything
wrong on my right
observations made by Mr Dooley in his report dated 3 September 2024 were put to
him. In particular, he was taken to Mr
Dooley’s opinion that the video
surveillance overall showed the plaintiff being active in general and having a
physical capacity
to do light physical work and clerical-type work. In
response, he replied “
If I’m in less pain or if I don’t
have pain then, yes, I could do that one. But I told him my pain is
fluctuating. If
I’m in severe pain, no, I cannot do
(zzz) he was
asked whether or not his neck pain or left shoulder pain is as bad as his back
pain. In response, he replied “
No. The pain in my shoulder and my arm
is less than my lower back. My lower back is worse. And now it got worse
because of the
(aaaa) he was
asked what sort of pain he experiences when he bends and squats. In response,
he replied “
... when I’m bending myself I’m feeling severe
pain in my lower
(bbbb) when
asked to explain this point further, he replied “
It’s not the
severe, severe pain, but it’s very kind of annoying pain
was pointed out to him that he had used the word “
his earlier answer. In response, he replied “
Yes, it is severe but not
the way you telling me it’s very, very severe, it’s not that severe.
But when I’m bending,
yeah, it is severe
(cccc) it was put to him that nothing in the video surveillance which showed him
bending forward, reflected that he was in pain.
In response, he replied
No, but that’s what you think, that if I bend myself I’m
not feeling pain, I can bend myself, but no, actually I’m
feeling pain.
... Yes, I’m always having pain since my injuries, my pain is consistent,
and sometime[s] it’s getting
less, sometimes getting
(dddd) it was
put to him that despite the fact that he has told a number of doctors that
prolonged sitting or standing aggravates
his pain, the video surveillance showed
him engaging in prolonged sitting in the park. In response, he replied
Yes, I have to because ... I was sitting with my own people and
I have to bear the pain. When the pain got worse I changed my location.
A few time[s] I wanted to lie down on the floor, but I couldn’t do it
because of the cultural issue ... I didn’t want
to ... in front of those
30 Under re-examination the plaintiff gave the following relevant
(a) the reason that he underwent an epidural injection a few months after the
first video surveillance was taken in July 2023 was
because of the pain that he
was experiencing;
(b) he does not own a computer and has not ever worked on a computer. He cannot
use a computer;
(c) since coming to Australia, he did study English. He thinks that was for a
period of more than two or three months. It was at
the same time that he was
working, doing full-time work. After hours he was going to TAFE to learn
(d) he was asked why, in the second tranche of video surveillance, after he had
been sitting on the ground eating, he then moved
to a chair. In response, he
Because I cannot sit on the floor for a very long time. I can
sit to just finish my food, then I’m sitting on a chair because
comfortable on a
(e) he said that when he gave evidence that he was lying down in his car, that
was after he had finished his food, and was sitting
on a chair. He said that
Everyone was busy and I was by myself, got bored, and I got pain, then
I went to the car and I lie down in the
(f) when he was asked whether or not that was shown on the video surveillance,
he replied, “
I think they shown it ... that I was going to the car, lie
down, but ... the time I was lying down in the car. They didn’t
on the video
The medical evidence
were numerous medical reports contained in the tendered material. Both parties
relied upon reports from medico-legal experts.
relevant medical material is set out below.
The Plaintiff’s
medical evidence
plaintiff relied upon three reports from his general practitioner, Dr Ebrahim
Hosseini: the first dated 3 July 2023, the second
dated 5 March 2024, and the
third dated 23 July 2024. In the first
Dr Hosseini described
the plaintiff as suffering from “
[severe] lower back pain
which at that time had been affecting him for three months.
the third report, Dr Hosseini diagnosed the plaintiff as suffering from severe
depression secondary to chronic pain affecting sleep
“His issues include :
- Chronic pain
- Concentration, attention, and memory are affected.
- Problem-solving, planning, decision-making, and organisation are
severely impaired.
- Communication, listening, and administrative duties are impacted,
partly due to poor English proficiency.
Physical Function:
- Able to walk 200 metres on a level surface.
- Can lift up to 5kg from ground to waist or waist to shoulder.
- Able to stand and walk for up to 30 minutes a day, with breaks as
- Capable of repetitive hand and finger movements.
- Not fit for employment due to ongoing pain but might manage a
sedentary role involving office desk work or attending meetings.
Management:
1. Pain Management:
Medications:
- Targin 5-10mg twice daily
- Mobic 15mg once daily with a meal
- Paracetamol 1g at night as required
Physiotherapy:
- Exercises, gym membership, hydrotherapy, and hands-on massage to
restore joint movement and reduce pain, swelling, and muscle
- Home exercise programme.
2. Severe Depression:
- Medications:
- Sertraline 50mg (SSR)
- Psychology counselling and coping
mechanisms.”
plaintiff relied upon one report from his treating general practitioner,
Dr Shahroze Khan, dated 18 February 2025. In that report,
Dr Khan said
that the plaintiff had been diagnosed with severe lower back disc disease, most
marked at L4-L5. Dr Khan noted that
the plaintiff had been working as a
mechanic, and his work involved a lot of heavy and repetitive lifting and
bending. He sometimes
had to lift over 60-70 kilograms, and his back pain
started when he lifted a heavy object at work. Dr Khan noted that the plaintiff
had been on multiple painkillers over the last two years, including Targin,
Palexia, Mobic and Gabapentin. The plaintiff felt that
these medications gave
him very mild temporary relief. Dr Khan also diagnosed the plaintiff as
suffering from an Adjustment Disorder
for which he has been seeing a
psychologist and taking Sertraline.
Khan expressed the opinion that the plaintiff’s occupation as a mechanic
was the main contributor towards his back injury.
He noted that the plaintiff
has severe back pain radiating down his legs. He is unable to bend/squat/kneel,
unable to lift more
than 2 kilograms, unable to sit/stand/walk/drive for more
than 10 to 15 minutes. Dr Khan said that the plaintiff is at risk of developing
degenerative changes, and that from the last MRI, he could see that the
plaintiff has already developed significant degenerative
changes. He thought
that the restrictions that he had outlined were “
He thought that the plaintiff was unfit for his pre-injury duties, and did not
think that this situation would change in
the future. He also expressed the
opinion that the plaintiff was unfit for modified duties and thought it was very
difficult to
say whether or not the plaintiff would be able to return to the
workforce in the future in any capacity. He noted that the plaintiff’s
lower back injury restricts not only his work life but also his day-to-day and
personal life. In particular, he noted that the plaintiff’s
restricts him from participating in leisure and social activities, and that this
is likely to continue into the foreseeable
plaintiff relied upon one report from Dr David Edis, orthopaedic and spine
surgeon, dated 18 July 2023. Dr Edis reported that
after some initial
improvement since he started physiotherapy, the plaintiff’s pain had
returned to “
a very high level
”. He said the plaintiff
denied any pain radiating down his leg, but had experienced a dull pain in his
toes to the thighs
that is intermittent and feels uncomfortable, and this has
often been at night time. He noted that the plaintiff had one attempt
returning to work after about three months, but was unsuccessful due to his pain
”. He noted that the plaintiff reported that
physiotherapy only gives him improvement for about a week or so. His current
lifting limit is under 2 kilograms.
Edis noted that an MRI scan taken on 2 June 2023 demonstrated reduced disc
height at both L4-5 and L5-S1 with a posterior disc
bulge but no significant
neurocompressive lesion. Dr Edis had recommended that the plaintiff undergo an
epidural steroid injection;
however, the plaintiff was unsure whether or not he
wanted to undergo that
plaintiff relied upon two reports from Dr Hazem Akil, neurosurgeon: the first
report, dated 6 May 2024, provided in Dr Akil’s
capacity as a treating
neurosurgeon, and the second, dated 12 March 2025, in a medico-legal capacity.
In the medico-legal report,
Dr Akil noted that the plaintiff described
“... a persistent lower back pain affecting both sides
of the lumbosacral region, more on the left than the right.”
“The pain radiates towards his left leg all the way
to the knee and associated with paraesthesia from below the left knee all
way down to the foot. The pain [also] radiates ... up towards the upper part of
his body and affecting his left arm. He described
that this pain started about
seven months ago.”
Akil diagnosed the plaintiff as suffering from elements of aggravation of lumbar
spondylosis. He noted that the surveillance footage
with which he had been
did show someone who is able to sit and squat and bend
”. He noted that the surveillance was dated October 2024,
which could have been at a time where he had minimal pain and exacerbation.
Akil expressed the opinion that the plaintiff is “
obviously in a severe
pain as he is dependent on opiates
”. He noted that the mechanism of
injury as reported by the plaintiff “
is compatible with aggravation of
spondylosis
Akil expressed the opinion that the plaintiff’s prognosis was
”. He said that the plaintiff suffers restrictions in
relation to repetitive bending and lifting of heavy objects as well as
sitting, standing or walking. He thought those restrictions would continue into
the foreseeable future. He did not believe
that the plaintiff would be fit to
return in an unrestricted way to his pre-injury duties. He did not express an
opinion as to the
plaintiff’s capacity for suitable employment, deferring
instead to an experienced occupational physician to give a suitable
relation to this matter.
plaintiff relied upon one medico-legal report from Dr Meena Mittal, pain
physician and specialist anaesthetist, dated 23 November
2023. Dr Mittal noted
that examination of the plaintiff’s lumbar spine revealed
evidence of severe paravertebral muscle spasm
” and increased
tenderness in the paravertebral region and bilateral lower lumbar spine. She
noted left-sided sacroiliac joint
tenderness and a positive result for facet
joint loading bilaterally. She noted that an MRI scan of the lumbosacral spine
2 June 2023 revealed disc desiccation at the L4-5 level. She said the
scan reported a left paracentral disc protrusion causing compression
of the left
L5 nerve root. She also noted that there was mild to moderate facet joint
arthropathy at the same level. She said that
at the L5-S1 level, there was
noted to be disc desiccation with an asymmetrical disc bulge which is more
left-sided in contact with
both S1 nerve roots but slightly more on the
left-hand side. There was also mild facet joint arthropathy at this
Mittal expressed the opinion that the plaintiff was presenting with persistent
low back pain and left lower limb pain. She thought
that the lower back pain
was secondary to myofascial spasm, and very likely discogenic in origin. She
thought the role of the facetogenic
pain was currently unclear. She thought the
left lower limb pain was secondary to left L5 radicular
plaintiff relied upon three reports from Dr Ali Kian Mehr: the first dated
19 July 2024, the second dated 29 January 2025, and
the third dated 7 April
2025. In the second report, Dr Mehr expressed the opinion that the plaintiff is
suffering from chronic lumbar
spine pain as a result of discogenic pain and left
S1 radiculopathy.
expressed the opinion that the plaintiff has no capacity for pre-injury work or
any other physical work, and that this would
remain unchanged for the
foreseeable future.
relation to suitable employment, Dr Mehr thought that the plaintiff had no
capacity for alternative work, firstly, because of his
physical and
psychological limitations, and, secondly, because of his language barrier and
lack of suitable qualifications and
Mehr noted that the plaintiff suffers from a significant limitation of sitting
and standing, and also an inability to bend, squat
and lift. He thought that
these restrictions would persist into the foreseeable
plaintiff relied upon one report from Dr Pouya Hafezi, specialist pain medicine
and rehabilitation physician, dated 11 March 2025.
In that report, Dr Hafezi
diagnosed the plaintiff as suffering from a symptom duration of greater than
three months, likely to be
due to an underlying disease/pathology and resultant
nociceptive stimulus. She thought that the diagnosis was, therefore,
chronic secondary axial spine (lumbar) pain associated with structural
changes of moderate-marked severity
”. She thought that the specific
source of the symptoms was most likely the lumbar intervertebral
She expressed the
opinion that “
more likely than not ... [the plaintiff’s]
employment caused and continues to contribute to the lumbar spine
expressed the opinion that, on the balance of probabilities, the
plaintiff’s lumbar spine injury has an organic basis,
supported by
objective findings and consistent clinical presentation. She thought that the
persistence or worsening of symptoms
may be multifactorial, potentially
involving both organic and secondary pain mechanisms such as central
sensitisation, psychological
distress or biomechanical compensation
Hafezi expressed the opinion that the plaintiff does not have any capacity to
perform his pre-injury duties. In addition, based
on his longstanding lumbar
spine injury, she thought that it is unlikely that he has a realistic capacity
for suitable employment
on a permanent, reliable and consistent basis as a
settled member of the workforce, without a significant risk of re-injury or
deterioration.
expressed the opinion that while symptomatic variations may occur in relation to
the plaintiff’s physical symptoms,
the overall trajectory
suggests that meaningful long-term recovery or full functional restoration is
plaintiff relied upon one medico-legal report from Professor Richard Bittar,
consultant neurosurgeon, dated 3 May 2025. In that
report, Professor Bittar
noted that the plaintiff reported the following
“1. Lower back pain. His lower back pain is
intermittent, being fairly constant if he does not take any pain medications,
occurring at least five to six hours per day if he takes medications. His
lower back pain radiates across the lumbosacral junction
and is worse on the
left-hand side. It varies in character between sharp, burning, gnawing, and
aching. It has an average severity
of 5/10 and a maximum severity of 10/10.
His back pain is exacerbated by bending, lifting more than two kilograms,
pushing or pulling,
sitting for more than short periods (depending upon the type
of chair), standing for more than ten minutes, and walking for more
than fifteen
to twenty minutes. It improves with recumbency, heat packs, and medications.
He finds it painful to look after himself,
and he needs to be slow and careful.
He can lift heavy objects; however, this does cause him additional pain. He
cannot walk more
than two kilometres and cannot sit for more than thirty to
sixty minutes in general. He cannot stand for more than ten minutes.
pain, he has less than four hours of sleep per night. His back pain has
restricted his social life, and he does not go out
as often. He can travel;
however, this causes additional pain.
leg pain. He experiences intermittent pain radiating into his left leg, with
each episode occurring with variable frequency
depending upon his activities,
particularly sitting. His leg pain can last thirty to sixty minutes and is
generally sharp or burning
in character. It has an average severity of around
2/10, and he found it difficult to quantify its maximum severity. His leg pain
radiates through his left buttock into the lateral aspect of his left thigh.
When he sits for long periods and then gets up, he
experiences weakness in his
left thigh.”
Bittar noted that the plaintiff’s current medications are as
“- Targin 10/5mg once or twice weekly (reduced from
- Oxazepam 15mg twice weekly (reduced from daily)
- Duloxetine
- Amitriptyline 10mg once weekly
- Voltaren 50mg twice
Bittar noted that the plaintiff is engaging in physiotherapy weekly at the
Dandenong Superclinic. The plaintiff said that
this provides
temporary relief sometimes, but not
consistently
Professor Bittar also noted that the plaintiff is seeing a psychologist
to the effects of the plaintiff’s current symptoms, Professor Bittar noted
that the plaintiff socialises much less than he
previously did, due to
difficulty with prolonged sitting and standing. He noted that the plaintiff
misses social interaction, but
finds that this activity increases his back pain.
He noted that the plaintiff’s recreational activities are severely
The plaintiff had previously enjoyed playing soccer in Afghanistan
and had hoped to resume playing in Australia. Now he struggles
with soccer, due
to pain from kicking and running. Professor Bittar noted that the
plaintiff’s sleep is severely impacted
and that he frequently experiences
daytime tiredness. Professor Bittar noted that the plaintiff reports his
domestic activities
are impacted, including his ability to garden, shop, clean
and cook. Overall, Professor Bittar noted that the plaintiff’s
examination, Professor Bittar noted bilateral lumbar paravertebral muscle spasm
and tenderness over the lumbosacral junction on
both sides. Professor Bittar
noted that there was no abnormal illness behaviour demonstrated during the
examination.
Bittar diagnosed the plaintiff as presenting with aggravation of lumbar
spondylosis with ongoing lower back pain and referred
leg pain. He expressed
the opinion that the lumbar spine injury is work related, specifically to the
incident which occurred at
work on 31 January 2023. He thought this remained a
significant contributing factor to the plaintiff’s current condition.
thought the plaintiff’s prognosis remained poor due to the chronic and
fluctuating nature of his pain and the limited response
to treatment. He
thought that the plaintiff is incapacitated for his pre-injury duties as a
result of his work-related lumbar spine
condition. He did not think that the
plaintiff had any capacity to undertake suitable employment on a reliable and
consistent basis
as a settled member of the workforce, without a significant
risk of re-injury or
deterioration.
Bittar was provided with the surveillance footage from October 2024. He noted
that in the footage, the plaintiff was shown
standing next to a car, speaking on
a mobile phone. He observed that the plaintiff bent forward to pick up an
object off the ground.
He noted that the range of lumbar spine motion –
both flexion and extension – appeared greater in the surveillance footage
taken on 27 October 2024 than it was when he examined the plaintiff. He said
that he questioned the plaintiff about this, and the
plaintiff indicated that
there had been a significant deterioration in his condition since the time that
the surveillance footage
was taken, particularly over the past month prior to
seeing Professor Bittar. Professor Bittar noted that on the surveillance
the plaintiff was also shown driving a van, sitting for a short period
on a portable chair in a park, and then sitting on the ground
eating a meal. He
said that the plaintiff indicated that on that particular day, he had taken
additional pain medication in order
to be able to enjoy the time with his family
and friends, and that his pain levels increased following this outing. He
to Professor Bittar that he generally takes more medication before such
outings, and “
puts up with the pain
conclusion, Professor Bittar expressed the opinion that as a consequence of his
spinal injury, the plaintiff will continue to be
restricted in his activities of
daily living, including sleep, domestic, social and recreational activities, and
his overall enjoyment
of life. He considered that these impacts on the
plaintiff’s enjoyment of life were permanent, in that they would continue
into the foreseeable future. He also expressed the opinion that the
plaintiff’s current work restrictions for either pre-injury
suitable employment were also
plaintiff relied upon one report from Dr Kilner Brasier, occupational and
environmental specialist physician, dated 19 June 2025.
I note that at the
commencement of his report, Dr Brasier specifically stated that in providing his
opinion, he had “
read and incorporated the documentation
with which he had been
Later in the
report, Dr Brasier specifically stated that he had “
reviewed [the]
surveillance footage provided to
surveillance footage was dated 27 October
For the purposes of
preparing his report and opinion, in addition to reviewing the documentation and
surveillance footage, Dr Brasier
personally interviewed and examined the
Brasier diagnosed the plaintiff as suffering from a chronic aggravation of
lumbar spondylosis. He said that while there was possible
left L5 nerve root
irritation, there was no evidence of radiculopathy. He thought that the
plaintiff’s lumbar spine injury
was consistent with the stated
Dr Brasier expressed
the opinion that the nature of the plaintiff’s employment and the
particular incident described was the
cause, and continues to be the cause, of
his lumbar spine injury.
Brasier was of the opinion that by reason of the plaintiff’s spinal injury
alone, the following restrictions should be imposed
“- lifting and carrying limited to 5 kg;
- avoid heavy or repetitive pushing or pulling;
- avoid bending, twisting or stooping;
- avoid kneeling, squatting or crouching;
- avoid prolonged sitting or standing;
- avoid running or jogging;
- avoid walking up inclines or down declines or over uneven ground;
- avoid use of ladders or elevated platforms; and
- avoid driving a motor vehicle for periods greater than 45
Brasier thought that these restrictions could be regarded as permanent and
likely to persist into the foreseeable
Brasier concluded that the plaintiff had no capacity for work in his pre-injury
duties. He thought this incapacity was permanent
and likely to last for the
foreseeable future.
Brasier was asked to consider whether or not the plaintiff had the capacity to
perform any of the proposed suitable employment
set out in the defendant’s
vocational planning and assessment reports. Relevantly to this case as it
proceeded at trial, those
roles were:
(a) car park attendant;
(b) service adviser; and
(c) ticket collector or usher.
Brasier expressed the opinion that the plaintiff did not have any work capacity
for the abovementioned vocations. He thought that
in relation to each of these
roles, the plaintiff would be prevented from performing these duties by reason
of his lumbar spine functional
limitations that affect his driving, walking,
standing, sitting, bending, and his inability to maintain static body postures.
thought that this incapacity was permanent and likely to last for the
foreseeable future.
plaintiff relied upon an email from an employee of WorkAble Consulting, dated 6
February 2025 to the plaintiff. That email stated:
I have received your current certificate which advises you have no capacity
at this time.
Unfortunately I am not able to assist you further with English skills
training as your certificate with no capacity does not allow
The Defendant’s medical evidence
defendant relied upon one report from the plaintiff’s general
practitioner, Dr Ebrahim Hosseini, dated 17 February 2025.
In that report,
Dr Hosseini expressed the opinion that psychological factors were playing
” in the plaintiff’s current pain presentation.
In the report, it was noted that Dr Hosseini had been asked to express
opinion as to the suitability of certain roles proposed by the defendant as
suitable alternative employment. Dr Hosseini expressed
the view that roles that
would be suitable for the plaintiff included service adviser, car park
attendant, ticket collector/usher
and checkout operator. He thought that the
plaintiff would require appropriate training and regular breaks for stretching
and pain-management
considerations in relation to all of these roles. Dr
Hosseini expressed the opinion that the plaintiff’s limited English
proficiency,
which constitutes a language barrier, may impact his ability to
engage in roles requiring significant interpersonal interaction.
that the plaintiff required further participation in a pain-management program,
psychosocial support, and English-language
defendant relied upon two medico-legal reports from Dr Elie Khoury, consultant
orthopaedic surgeon: the first dated 15 August
2023, and the second dated 3
November 2023. In the first report, Dr Khoury noted that the plaintiff’s
back pain was consistent
with severe muscular spasm and facet joint arthritis
with minimal, if any, nerve root compression symptoms or signs. He noted that
the condition was then worsening, despite treatment. He thought that the
plaintiff was not presently fit for work. He thought that
the plaintiff needed
to be rehabilitated appropriately, but that he may never return to heavy
physical labour. He said that “
Unfortunately, because he is not
educated to a level beyond Year 10, [the plaintiff] may have difficulty with re
expressed the opinion that the plaintiff’s condition had been caused by
lifting as described in the course of the plaintiff’s
relation to the plaintiff’s work capacity, Dr Khoury expressed the opinion
that the plaintiff did not have any capacity either
for pre-injury duties or
suitable employment because he is unable to bend, lift, sit or stand for
prolonged periods of time. He
said that the plaintiff cannot lift at all, and
cannot perform any physical work, and his level of education may preclude him
duties in desk work and data entry on a computer. He did not think
there were any modified pre-injury or alternative duties which
the plaintiff
would be able to perform.
did not think that the plaintiff had any capacity for any duties, including any
light duties.
note that while he is not a qualified psychiatrist, in his first report, Dr
Khoury expressed the opinion that there was an “
psychological issues for which [the plaintiff] is seeing a
psychologist
”, that the psychological issues were causing significant
problems, that these needed to be dealt with and that the plaintiff’s
mental illnesses had “
potentiated”
the plaintiff’s
inability to return to
Khoury’s lack of qualification to express such an opinion, together with
his failure to articulate the factual basis
of the views that he expressed, I
place no weight on these observations.
the second report, Dr Khoury commented on the fact that he had been shown
surveillance footage taken on 23 July 2023. He said
that in the surveillance
footage, the plaintiff did not demonstrate any sign of pain or any levels of
discomfort or restrictions.
He said that the plaintiff’s presentation on
examination was “
in contrast to the surveillance footage which was
basis, Dr Khoury expressed the opinion that the injury was no longer a
materially contributing factor to the plaintiff’s
current presentation.
He also changed his opinion in relation to the plaintiff’s work capacity,
expressing the view that the
plaintiff does have a capacity for pre-injury
duties and hours.
defendant relied upon one medico-legal report from Dr Prabal Kar, consultant
psychiatrist, dated 3 April 2024. In that report,
Dr Kar expressed the opinion
that the plaintiff is not suffering from any psychiatric condition that affects
his psychiatric capacity
to perform any suitable work that he feels motivated to
do. He thought that there was evidence of inconsistencies in the
plaintiff’s
presentation, such as those found in the surveillance footage
dated August 2023. He noted that pain is “
an entirely subjective
”. He thought that the plaintiff is unmotivated for work
and may exaggerate his pain, as there is no objective way to measure
defendant relied upon an MRI scan taken of the plaintiff’s cervical spine
on 14 February 2025. This scan reported identified
the existence of right
preforaminal narrowing and potentially irritation/compromising the right C6
nerve roots.
While there is
no doubt that earlier in 2025, the plaintiff complained of pain in his cervical
spine, which lead to this investigation,
nevertheless, I note that the
consequences of any cervical spine compromise were not relied upon to any extent
by the plaintiff in
this application.
defendant relied upon three reports from Dr Joseph Slesenger, specialist
occupational physician: the first dated 2 September
2024, the second dated 21
January 2025 and the third dated 19 June 2025. In the first report, after
assessing the plaintiff, Dr
Slesenger concluded that the plaintiff had suffered
a soft-tissue injury and aggravation of degenerative disease in his lumbar
He thought that the plaintiff was suffering from chronic lower back pain
with radiating features, but no confirmed evidence of radiculopathy.
Slesenger was satisfied that the plaintiff’s current impairment related to
the alleged injury. He thought that the aggravation
had not yet resolved. He
was of the opinion that the plaintiff’s current impairment was materially
contributed to by the injury
suffered in the workplace. He based this opinion
upon the history given to him, his examination of the plaintiff and the imaging
findings. He thought that the plaintiff would be unable to return to his
pre-injury duties working pre-injury hours. He thought
that the plaintiff, at
that time, retained a capacity for work with restrictions,
“● No push, pull, carry or lift over 5 kg on a
repetitive basis and 10 kg on an occasional basis.
● Avoid repetitive bending and twisting.
● Avoid prolonged static postures.
● Avoid exposure to whole body
vibration.”
Slesenger thought, in 2024, that the plaintiff would be able to return to work,
working four hours a day, four days a week, graduating
over a six-week period. He thought the plaintiff should be reviewed in three to
four months to address
his second report, Dr Slesenger was asked to consider certain duties which may
be suitable for the plaintiff and to provide his
professional opinion in
relation to those potential roles. Relevantly to this case as it proceeded at
trial, these roles were: carpark
attendant, service adviser and ticket collector
Slesenger expressed the view that the plaintiff did have the capacity to return
to work as a carpark attendant, ticket collector
or usher, and service adviser.
He noted that undertaking those roles would be subject to “
adhering to
the restrictions outlined above
”. Those restrictions were the same
restrictions that he had set out in his report in 2024, namely restrictions on
pulling, carrying or lifting, repetitive bending and twisting,
prolonged static positions and exposure to whole-body vibration.
Similarly, the
hours were restricted to four hours per day, four days per week, graduating back
to pre-injury hours over six to eight
his third report, Dr Slesenger again expressed the opinion that that the
plaintiff would never have the capacity to return to pre-injury
duties, but does
have the capacity to return to work as a carpark attendant, ticket collector or
usher, and service adviser, adhering
to the restrictions previously referred
He also noted the
following matters and expressed the following opinions:
(a) the plaintiff has poor English skills and no computer
(b) the plaintiff adjusted his posture regularly when interacting with Dr
Slesenger during the consultation in
(c) the plaintiff walked with a right-sided pronounced
(e) the plaintiff had no history of pre-existing
impairment;
(f) as a result of the examination in 2025, there were some concerns with the
plaintiff’s presentation (which Dr Slesenger
considered to be
significant
”), including the “
evolving symptoms
distal to the site of the initial injury, namely cervical spine with radiating
”. Dr Slesenger also noted “
a number of
inconsistencies on examination
”. On this basis, he concluded that
at least in part
” a functional element to the
plaintiff’s
presentation;
(g) notwithstanding this, he again expressed the opinion that the aggravation of
pre-existing asymptomatic degenerative disease in
the lumbar spine has persisted
materially contributed to by the injury under consideration and
continues to materially contribute to
[the plaintiff’s]
impairment and
(f) overall, he thought that the prognosis for the plaintiff “
guarded given the length of
impairment and disability and his poor
response to treatment to
defendant relied upon two reports from Mr Michael Dooley, orthopaedic surgeon:
the first dated 4 September 2024 and the second
dated 8 July 2025. In the
second report, after reviewing the both the July 2023 and October 2024 video
surveillance footage with
which he had been
Mr Dooley expressed
the opinion that the plaintiff had suffered a soft-tissue injury to his lumbar
spine in the course of his work
in January 2023, which involved some aggravation
of underlying degenerative disc change and may have involved a left-sided disc
at the L4-5 level. He noted that following the incident, the plaintiff
described severe ongoing lower back pain and significant
issues with his mental
health. Mr Dooley expressed the opinion that the constancy and intensity of the
plaintiff’s ongoing
pain and his described disability “
greater than one would expect to see for his organic condition
also noted that there were “
inconsistent signs in relation to assessing
power of the left lower
Dooley noted that:
“The surveillance footage shows ... [the
plaintiff] walking at a comfortable pace. It shows him bending into the side
of a motor vehicle. It shows him getting into the back of a motor
vehicle, a people-mover, to clean it. When standing outside the
rear of the
motor vehicle, he is able to flex his lumbar spine comfortably forward. When in
the squatting position he can lean side
to side and rotate. He walks reasonable
distances. He socialises with a group of friends and is able to sit comfortably
up from a seated position comfortably. At no time during any of the
surveillance footage does ... [the plaintiff] appear to be in
Ultimately,
Mr Dooley expressed the opinion that the surveillance footage shows that the
plaintiff is able to be active in general,
is able to walk reasonable distances
and would be able to undertake regular low-impact exercise. He expressed the
opinion that the
surveillance footage confirms his earlier expressed opinion
that the plaintiff has a physical capacity to engage in at least light
work and clerical-type work.
defendant relied on extracts from the clinical notes of DM Clinic Mulgrave and
Rise Health Group. The substance of the relevant
portion of these records
demonstrated that the plaintiff:
(a) suffered from pre-existing mental health issues prior to the
(b) has suffered from lower back pain of varying degrees since 31 January
(c) did not initially suffer from referred pain into his
(d) has been prescribed medication to manage his lumbar back pain since 31
January 2023;
(e) has consistently rated his pain at 5/10 or above since 31 January
(f) has at times experienced pain which is described as
(g) on one occasion, decided to try using a walking stick, although this had not
been recommended by his
physiotherapist;
(h) has been at times very unhappy that his pain is ongoing and not well
managed. In particular, he described experiencing pain
sitting or standing, and
that he cannot find a comfortable
(i) has described his sleep as being affected by the ongoing lumbar
(j) described himself as becoming “
housebound due to pain
5 September 2023;
(k) described himself as feeling tired, fatigued and socially isolated and
stressed thinking all day about his
(l) on examination on 3 October 2023, was able to bend down, although he
experienced a lot of pain and was also able to “
squat with some
(m) on 4 October 2023, had an epidural injection, but felt his pain worsened
after that procedure;
(n) at a consultation dated 17 October 2023, began to complain of right foot
pain and pain in the right loin
(o) was consistently described as depressed and anxious by his general
practitioner during
attendances;
(p) continued to try to manage his pain by doing exercises, engaging in daily
walking and attending
physiotherapy;
(q) on 31 May 2024, attended his general practitioner complaining that he had
tried everything and continued to experience “
too much pain
and insomnia;
(r) on 21 June 2024, was again diagnosed with insomnia and attended to receive a
mental health care plan from his general
practitioner;
(s) on 22 June 2024, described his pain as being “
his general practitioner and stated that when he takes his medication, the pain
would reduce to
(t) during a consultation on 8 July 2024, was noted to be frustrated and
together with loss
of appetite and memory issues, which were noted as “
side effects of
pain medications
” he was then
(u) on 22 August 2024, described himself as being unable to bend due to pain,
but was noted to be “
able to do cobra on the bed
encouraged by his general practitioner to do more advanced
(v) on 17 September 2024, was noted to be able to sit, stand and
defendant placed particular reliance on four entries in the DM Clinic Mulgrave
medical records: the first dated 7 October 2024,
the second dated 17 October
2024, the third dated 8 November 2024 and the fourth dated 11 November 2024.
the medical note dated 7 October 2024, the plaintiff was noted to be suffering
from pain that was ongoing and worsening over the
last twenty months. He was
prescribed various medications, including Serepax, to help with
the medical note dated 17 October 2024, the plaintiff attended to discuss a
return-to-work report which had been supplied at that
time. The plaintiff
expressed the view that he was unable to work the recommended hours and days due
to severe pain that is not
controlled. He was assessed as suffering from
chronic lower back pain and psychological impairment. It was noted that he
angry when it was suggested to him that he could return to work in some
capacity. It was noted that the plaintiff apologised to
the general
practitioner for his conduct during that
consultation.
the consultation dated 8 November 2024, the plaintiff attended Dr Hosseini for a
return-to-work meeting. He was diagnosed as suffering
from significant reactive
depression following his back injury, together with significant frustration,
He reported a new complaint of pain in his arms,
forearms and wrists which was affecting his sleep. It was noted that his mental
health was also affecting his sleep. He was noted to be opposed to the notion
that he had any ability to engage in any form of alternative
employment. He
reported that he wanted to speak English only for communication purposes and was
not prepared to retrain to do any
other job. He reported that he thought TAFE
attendance would be challenging due to difficulty sitting for sixty to ninety
and the need to stand up frequently due to back pain. The general
practitioner recommended that he attend for one-on-one English
skills training
in the community and to try work in a setting that allowed him to sit and stand
the note of the attendance on 11 November 2024, the plaintiff was noted to be
suffering from lower back pain, was unable to bend
fully and suffered severe
pain on bending 45 degrees, with stiffness. It was noted that the plaintiff
understood that WorkCover
support may not last beyond two years and now realised
that he may need to retrain to perform duties within his physical
defendant relied upon two vocational reports, the first from Nabenet, dated 25
October 2024 and the second from WorkAble Consulting,
dated 18 December 2024.
During closing submissions, counsel for the defendant advised the Court that the
only occupations which
the defendant contended may constitute suitable roles for
the plaintiff to return to work, were carpark attendant, ticket collector
usher and service adviser. To that extent, it is part of the content of the
WorkAble vocational planning report which is relevant
to this application.
that vocational planning report, the following relevant matters were noted in
respect of the role of
service adviser
Constantly sits at a workstation and carries out a variety of both manual and
computerised data entry and word-processing
tasks and general office duties.
● Use of hand-held objects such as pens, calculators and staplers, as
well as telephones will also be occasional to frequent.
Operates printers,
copiers and a range of other office equipment and refills paper trays and ink
● Mental skills include recording, organisation, planning and
communication.”
was noted that training would be required in order to undertake this
It was agreed that the
rate of pay for the role of service adviser is presently $26.70 per
following relevant matters were noted in respect of the role of
“● Constantly sits or stands at sales
counters or occasionally walks about the park assisting customers.
● Either manually or electronically enters customer charges into the
till, receives payments and processes these and issues
receipts. May issue
customers sales invoices.
● Use of minor office hand tools such as pens or calculators will be
occasional.
● Mental skills necessary include calculating and communication
was noted that training would be required to undertake this role. It was agreed
that the rate of pay for the role of carpark attendant
is presently
$25.52 per hour.
following relevant matters were noted in respect of the role of
collector or usher
“● Constantly sits or stands at
sales counters or occasionally walks about the site assisting customers.
● Either manually or electronically enters customer purchases into the
till, receives payments and processes these and issues
receipts and ticket.
● Repetitive hand and finger movements are necessary when operating
electronic tills and issuing tickets.
● Use of office hand-held objects such as pens, ticket checking tools
or calculators will be frequent.
● Mental skills necessary including calculating and communication
was noted as being a requirement for this role. It was agreed that the rate of
pay for the role of ticket collector is presently
The Plaintiff’s credit
plaintiff’s credit was challenged extensively during cross-examination.
In particular, the issue of which consequences
are attributable to the
plaintiff’s spinal injury, was explored in detail. In addition, the
plaintiff was questioned at length
the video surveillance, compared with his presentation to various doctors. The
plaintiff’s
evidence in relation to both of these issues, has been set out
defendant submitted, by reference to the content of the video surveillance, that
the Court ought conclude that the plaintiff’s
credit was so adversely
affected, that “
it infects the entire case resulting in dismissal of
this application
In particular, counsel for the defendant submitted that a fair reading of the
plaintiff’s affidavits, as well as an assessment
of the histories given by
him to the medical practitioners, “
present a misleading picture ...
when adjudicated against the video
[surveillance]
The defendant submitted that the Court ought to conclude that plaintiff is
injury focused
has a tendency to exaggerate
or overstate his pain and restrictions
response, Senior Counsel for the plaintiff made the following
submissions:
(a) as to credit, the plaintiff is an honest witness and his evidence should be
relied upon by the Court for the following reasons:
(i) in the witness box, he made a number of admissions against interest;
(ii) despite the fact that English is his second language and he required an
interpreter in Court, nevertheless, his
evidence was generally
responsive to the questions being asked of him;
(iii) the plaintiff’s
evidence should be seen in light of
the fact that he is suffering some degree of depression and/or anxiety and
requiring medication
(iv) while some medical practitioners have noted inconsistencies on examination,
no medical practitioner suggests that the plaintiff
is consciously exaggerating
or feigning his presentation. In addition to this, I note that Professor Bittar
specifically considered
this issue and found that the plaintiff did not exhibit
any abnormal illness behaviour;
(v) in relation to the cross-examination of the plaintiff concerning the
clinical notes of Dr Hosseini, the following points are
(A) while the clinical notes frequently refer to significant pain, they do
not paint a picture of total disablement. For example:
– pain squat –
able to bend
down and bend sideways;
10/10 without
medication 5/10 with
medication;
far as that it is suggested by the defendant that the clinical notes paint a
picture of extreme disability, this is not reflected
in the general
practitioner’s opinions expressed in his medical reports:
manage a sedentary role involving office desk work or attending
” (as at July
part-time work with restrictions (as at November
(b) in submissions in relation to the 2023 video surveillance:
(i) it shows the plaintiff squatting and bending for a short period of time;
(ii) it is taken at a time when the plaintiff was requiring Panadeine Forte
medication four hourly.
plaintiff’s evidence is that the pain-relieving medication reduces his
(iii) at about the time the video surveillance was taken, the plaintiff had
agreed to undertake an epidural injection which was performed
in October 2023.
This is inconsistent with the plaintiff suffering no pain or symptoms referable
to his back injury;
(iv) the clinical records of the plaintiff’s general practitioner include
reference to the plaintiff being able to bend and
squat (with
(c) in relation to the 2024 video surveillance, the following points are
(i) the plaintiff is generally inactive. The video was taken over many hours
with significant breaks in the video;
(ii) contrary to the suggestion of the defendant, the video surveillance does
not show the plaintiff “
continually sitting for hours
(d) in relation to both pieces of video surveillance:
(i) the short portion of film that was shown to the Court, is part of forty-five
hours of surveillance taken over eight days;
(ii) even if the Court does form the opinion that there are inconsistencies
between what is shown in the video surveillance and the
plaintiff’s
histories to doctors, the video surveillance itself is not reflective of a
capacity to perform work when all the
evidence is taken into account;
(iii) Professor Bittar, Dr Akil and Dr Brasier were shown the 2024 film and
still concluded that the plaintiff had no work capacity;
(iv) Dr Khoury was only shown the 2023 video and forms the opinion that as at
November 2023, the plaintiff was no longer suffering
a compensable injury and
had the capacity to return to pre-injury duties. Dr Khoury did not explain the
reasons why he reached this
conclusion. It was asked rhetorically how a medical
expert could reach this conclusion, having seen the results of the MRI scans
the plaintiff’s lumbar spine and in the knowledge of what was involved in
his pre-injury duties, which consisted of extremely
heavy lifting. Given this,
the Court should conclude that this opinion is against the weight of the
evidence and should reject it;
(v) Mr Dooley is the only medical practitioner who has examined both the 2023
and 2024 video surveillance. After watching this video
surveillance, he formed
the opinion:
plaintiff did not require pain management treatment or formal orthopaedic
treatment; and
plaintiff had a physical capacity to engage in light physical work and
clerical-type work.
He did not express any change in opinion concerning the veracity of the
plaintiff’s account of events, his credibility generally
or the diagnosis
of the injury.
considered all of the evidence concerning these issues, together with the
submissions made by both parties, I prefer the submissions
made by the plaintiff
as to credit.
had the benefit of observing the plaintiff while he was giving evidence to the
Court, I formed the view that in general, he
was an honest and cooperative
witness who appeared to be doing his best to give accurate responses to the
questions asked of him,
notwithstanding his evident language difficulties. I
find that during cross-examination, while at times he became irritable and
somewhat impatient with the cross-examiner, nevertheless, he gave his evidence
openly. In addition, I agree with the plaintiff’s
submissions and find
that the plaintiff made concessions where necessary, many of which were adverse
to his own interests.
relation to the inconsistencies between his evidence as to his present
incapacity and his presentation in the video surveillance,
I note the evidence
given by Professor Bittar, who explicitly explored this matter with the
plaintiff. I also note the plaintiff’s
evidence to the Court that
... some time if I have to do it then I have to bear the pain and I
have to do it, I have no choice
”. I accept this evidence and find
that, consistent with what the plaintiff set out in his affidavits and has
reported to his
treating medical practitioners, his back pain, while always
present, varies in intensity. He manages the need to participate in
activities (such as attending a picnic with his family), by taking additional
medication, and putting up with consequences
of the additional pain that he
experiences afterwards. I note, in particular, the evidence given by the
plaintiff and accept, that
on the day of the picnic shown in the video
surveillance in October 2024, because he began experiencing pain after sitting
ground for some time, he went to his car to lie down to rest. This
explanation was consistent with the account of events which the
plaintiff gave
to the Court and to the medico-legal expert who has assessed him for the
purposes of this case, about the ways in
which he manages his pain.
Furthermore,
I find that the plaintiff’s account of events has remained consistent
throughout the period in which he has seen
his treating medical practitioners,
consulted with the medico-legal assessors and provided evidence to this
a consideration of all of the evidence, particularly the evidence of the
plaintiff as corroborated by the content of the medical
reports, I consider that
he was a credible witness, in the sense of being a truthful person. At no time
did I gain the impression
that he was attempting to mislead the Court or to
exaggerate his symptoms in any way.
Compensable injury
details of the occurrence of the incident are not in dispute, however, the
nature of the injury suffered by the plaintiff was
closing submissions, counsel the defendant acknowledged that the plaintiff
does have elements of aggravation of lumbar spondylosis
but submitted that “
the best that can be said is that this is a
low level back
plaintiff submitted that this later conclusion would be against the content and
weight of the medical evidence.
accept the plaintiff’s submission in this regard and note the following
significant medical evidence which was unchallenged:
(a) the content of the of the two MRI scans taken of the plaintiff’s spine
following the incident. The first is dated 2 June
2023 and reports a
central and left paracentral disc protrusion ... which is causing
compression of the L5 nerve on the left side
” at L5-S1, which “
is in contact with both S1
nerves, slightly more on the left side ...
.” The second is dated 15
August 2024, and shows a “
midline annular tear
” at L4-5 and
(b) the opinions of the plaintiff’s treating doctors, who each concluded
that the plaintiff had suffered an injury to his lumbar
spine which had a
substantial organic basis, including Dr Akil (disc
annular tear at
L4-5 and L5‑S1;
aggravation of lumbar
spondylosis),
(chronic secondary axial spine (lumbar) pain associated with structural changes
of moderate-marked severity in the lumbar
Dr Mittal (disc
desiccation at L4-5 and disc protrusion causing compression of the left L5 nerve
and Dr Mehr
(discogenic pain with left S1
radiculopathy);
(c) the opinions of the medico-legal experts, including those giving evidence
for the defendant, who also concluded without exception,
that the plaintiff had
suffered an injury to his lumbar spine which had a substantial organic basis,
: Dr Brasier (chronic aggravation of lumbar spondylosis with possible
L5 nerve root irritation),
Professor Bittar (aggravation of lumbar
spondylosis),
Dr Slesenger
(soft tissue injury, aggravation of degenerative disease in the lumbar spine
with left leg radiating
and Mr Dooley
(aggravation of degenerative disc change which may involve left sided disc
prolapse at L4-5 level).
note that the opinion of Mr Dooley was not altered after he viewed the video
surveillance relied upon by the defendant in this
considered all of the evidence from the plaintiff’s treating doctors, as
well as the medico-legal experts on both sides,
I am satisfied that as a result
of his employment with the employer, the plaintiff suffered an injury to his
spine which has a substantial
organic basis, namely aggravation of lumbar
spondylosis with ongoing lower back
compensable injury permanent for the purposes of the Act?
considered the relevant reports, and in particular the reports from Dr
I find that the
plaintiff is likely to suffer from the consequences of his lumbar spine injury
sustained while working for the employer,
for the foreseeable future. Given
this, I find that the injury is permanent for the purposes of the
Are the consequences to the Plaintiff of the spinal injury
Does the evidence allow the Court to reach a conclusion about the
consequences of the spinal impairment?
his closing address, counsel for the defendant submitted that on the basis of
the evidence as it stands, the Court:
(a) should be satisfied that the plaintiff suffers from a longstanding
psychological condition;
(b) should reject the plaintiff’s account of the consequences which he
says arise from his lumbar injury, since his credit
has been irreparably
impeached; and
(c) cannot be satisfied about what consequences from which the plaintiff says he
now suffers, are consequences of the physical injury
which arose from the
incident, and what are caused by his psychological condition.
for the defendant placed particular reliance on the fact that the plaintiff
failed to tender any evidence concerning the consequences
of his psychological
relation to this matter, Senior Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the
plaintiff is required to separately identify what
physical injury he has
suffered and what are the consequences of that injury. It was submitted that he
has done this.
to the expert evidence which demonstrates the consequences to the plaintiff of
his back injury alone, the plaintiff relied upon
the opinions of:
(a) Dr Mehr (significant limitations of sitting and standing, bending, squatting
and lifting);
(b) Professor Bittar (ongoing lower back pain which is chronic and fluctuating,
limitations with lifting, walking, standing and sitting
and attending to his
personal care, restrictions in his activities of daily living including sleep,
social, domestic and recreational
activities; incapacity for his pre-injury
duties and no realistic capacity for suitable employment on a permanent,
reliable and consistent
basis without a significant risk of re-injury or
deterioration);
(c) Dr Brasier (limitations in lifting, carrying, heavy or repetitive pushing or
pulling, bending, twisting, stooping, kneeling,
squatting and crouching, sitting
and standing, running and jogging, use of ladders and driving a car, incapacity
for his pre-injury
duties and for suitable employment)
(d) Dr Housseini (limitations with sitting, standing, walking, bending,
squatting, kneeling and
(e) Dr Slesenger (limitations with pushing, pulling, carrying, lifting, bending,
twisting and holding static postures; no capacity
for his pre-injury employment,
limited capacity for suitable duties four days per week, four hours per day,
within the stated
restrictions).
note that all of this evidence was unchallenged.
for the defendant submitted that the Court should reject any medical opinion
which did not specifically refer to the content
of the video surveillance. In
particular, the Court was urged by counsel for the defendant to reject Dr
Brasier’s opinion
as the consequences to the plaintiff of the injury to
his lumbar spine and his residual work capacity, on the basis that Dr Brasier
did not make specific reference to the content of the video surveillance video.
Surprisingly, a similar submission was made in respect
of the defendant’s
own expert occupational physician, Dr Slesenger, whose reports the defendant
nevertheless relied upon.
reject the submission made by counsel for the defendant. In particular, I note
that in the body of his report, Dr Brasier specifically
listed all of the
material that he had read or otherwise taken into account in reaching the
opinion he expressed in his report.
Dr Brasier specifically confirmed that this
material, which included the video surveillance dated 27 October 2024,
was considered in completing this
Similarly, Dr Slesenger listed all of the material with which he had been
supplied in order to provide his opinion, which material
surveillance
least one report that made specific reference to the existence and content of
the video surveillance (report of Dr Akil, dated
Given this, there is
simply no basis upon which the Court ought reject the opinions expressed by Dr
Brasier or Dr Slesenger, either
as to the consequences to the plaintiff of his
lumbar spine injury or as to his present capacity for suitable employment.
addition to the content of the expert evidence relied upon by Senior Counsel for
the plaintiff, I have already found the plaintiff
to be witness of truth, who
gave his evidence without exaggeration or embellishment, and who at times made
significant admissions
against interest. My conclusion as to the
plaintiff’s credibility is strengthened by Professor Bittar’s
assessment of
the plaintiff as a “
cooperative gentleman
demonstrated “
no abnormal illness behaviour
”. I note that in
expressing this opinion, Professor Bittar was not only aware of the surveillance
footage taken in October
2024, but he also discussed its content with the
plaintiff. Professor Bittar said that the plaintiff “
indicated that on
that particular day, he took additional pain medications in order to be able to
enjoy the time with his family and
friends, and that his pain levels increased
following this outing. He reports that he generally takes more medication
before such
outings and ‘puts up with the pain
afterwards’
considered all the relevant evidence, together with the submissions made by each
party, I prefer the submission made the plaintiff
in relation to this matter.
Given this, I accept and find that by reason of his spinal injury alone, the
plaintiff suffers from
the following consequences:
(a) ongoing fluctuating pain and left leg pain, which is at times severe,
necessitating the taking of Targin medication daily (10
milligrams and 5
milligrams per day). I note that the side effects of taking this medication
include a negative effect on the plaintiff’s
(b) necessity for treatment including epidural injection, physiotherapy and pain
management;
(c) reduction in pain when taking pain medication but quite extreme pain when
not taking medication;
(d) restrictions upon day-to-day activities including sitting or standing for
prolonged periods, bending, twisting and lifting;
(e) restrictions upon his ability to
(f) restrictions upon his ability to socialise as he would like
(g) restrictions upon his ability to work and “
his family.
Loss of earning capacity
have considered the evidence which is relevant to the three roles that the
defendant relies upon as constituting “
suitable employment
for the plaintiff in the future, namely service advisor, ticket collector/usher
and carpark attendant.
closing submissions, it was agreed that the plaintiff’s “without
injury” earnings were $1,112 per week. Sixty
per cent of that figure
totals $667.20.
the commencement of closing addresses, the plaintiff applied to re-open his
case, in order to tender a report from Flexi Personnel,
in order to provide
evidence of the hourly rates for each of the occupations relied upon by the
defendant as constituting suitable
employment for the plaintiff. After hearing
submissions from each party and considering the relevant case law, I granted the
sought to the plaintiff and the Flexi Personnel report was received into
the basis of the hourly earnings set out therein in relation to each of the
three occupations relied upon by the defendant, it
was agreed between the
parties that if the Court finds that the plaintiff’s work capacity for
that occupation, as at the date
of the hearing, is 16 hours per week or less,
then the plaintiff will succeed in respect of his claim for economic loss.
Conversely,
it was conceded by both parties that if the Court finds that the
plaintiff has the capacity for full-time hours in any of those three
roles, then
the plaintiff’s claim in respect of economic loss must fail.
the exception of Dr Khoury in his second report, all of the medical experts were
of the opinion that by reason of his lumbar
spine injury alone, the plaintiff
has no capacity for his pre-injury employment. It was submitted by Senior
Counsel for the plaintiff,
and I accept, that Dr Khoury’s opinion should
be rejected as being against the weight of the evidence in this application.
Further, I note that Dr Khoury has not examined the plaintiff for well over
eighteen months and as such, I am unable to place any
weight on his opinion as
it does not take into account recent developments in the plaintiff’s
presentation or indeed, comment
on the plaintiff’s capacity for work as at
the date of this hearing.
considered all of the relevant evidence which has been set out in detail above,
I am satisfied and find, that by reason of
the consequences of his lumbar spine
injury alone, the plaintiff has no capacity for any of the three roles which it
has been submitted
by the defendant constitute “
” for the purposes of the Act.
have reached this conclusion in respect of “
”, for a number of reasons:
(a) each of the three roles requires a degree of organisation, planning and,
importantly, communication with customers in order to
serve and assist them.
The evidence satisfies me, and I find that:
(i) the plaintiff presently has insufficient English language skills to be able
to perform any of the three roles;
(ii) at present, Work Able Consulting is not prepared to offer the plaintiff any
training in English language skills, since his Certificate
of Capacity does not
cover training;
(iii) the plaintiff’s memory is affected by the medication which he is
presently taking for his spinal pain;
(b) each of the three roles requires the plaintiff to undertake training. In
the absence of sound English language skills, the evidence
satisfies me, and I
find, that this requirement could not realistically be met by the plaintiff;
(c) lastly, each of the three roles requires the plaintiff to use office
equipment and undertake tasks such as using a computer for
data entry and word
processing, using a calculator, and manually or electronically entering data
into a till to receive and process
payments and issue receipts, customer
invoices or tickets. The evidence satisfies me, and I find, that the plaintiff
has no past
experience in any office environment, nor with using computers,
calculators, tills or other office equipment. I have already found
lack of English skills would be a barrier to the training required to perform
the three occupations which have been identified.
I have reached the same
conclusion in relation to any suggestion that the plaintiff could be trained in
the use of computers or
other similar office equipment.
I am wrong in my conclusion that the plaintiff lacks any capacity to undertake
suitable employment, nevertheless, the evidence
satisfies me, and I find, that
such capacity as the plaintiff presently has to undertake suitable employment,
does not exceed four
hours per day, four days per week. I note that this is the
conclusion reached by the defendant’s own occupational physician,
Slesenger, in all three reports on which the defendant relied. I also note that
while Dr Slesenger expresses a view that the
plaintiff’s hours may be able
to be increased over time, he acknowledges that the plaintiff’s prognosis
for improvement
”, and that he has had a
poor response to treatment to date
note that the Act requires me to assess the plaintiff’s capacity for
suitable employment as at the date of the hearing. Given
the findings I have
made about the plaintiff’s credit, which are set out in detail above, I am
comfortably satisfied in my
conclusion as to the plaintiff’s maximum
capacity, if any, for undertaking suitable employment.
has been referred to above, both parties agreed that if the Court were to find
that the plaintiff has a capacity for suitable employment
of no more than 16
hours per week, then he must succeed in his economic loss claim.
light of my findings as to the plaintiff’s impairment, his incapacity for
employment and the barriers which exist in respect
of retraining, I am satisfied
that there is no rehabilitation or retraining that would be appropriate to be
undertaken by the plaintiff
which would alter the fact that he has a permanent
loss of earning capacity of 40 per cent or more. As rehabilitation and
have nothing to offer the plaintiff in terms of his capacity for
employment, the plaintiff has satisfied the requirements of the
Act as they
relate to this application.
those circumstances, I am satisfied to the requisite standard, that as a
consequence of the incident, the plaintiff suffered a
”, as defined in the Act, in the form of an organic injury to
his spine. The application for leave is granted in respect of
both pain and
suffering and loss of earning capacity.
will hear the parties in relation to the question of
Kelso v Tatiara Meat Co
[2007] VSCA 267
(2007) 17 VR 592
at 628; see also
Sabo v George Weston Foods
[2009] VSCA 242
at paragraph
Section 325(2)(j) of the
See generally
Transport Accident Commission & Avalanche
[2005] VSCA 1
at paragraphs
Petkovski v Galletti
[1994] VicRp 32
[1994] 1 VR 436
[2005] VSCA 33
(2005) 14 VR 622
(2006) 14 VR 602
Specified pages of the
Plaintiff’s Court Book were marked as Exhibit (“Ex”) P1;
specified pages of the Defendant’s
Court Book were marked as Ex D1
Ex P1, pp22-23 and 69
Ex P1, pp22 and 27
Ex P1, pp28-29
Ex P1, pp28-29
Ex P1, pp28-29
Ex P1, pp28-29
Ex P1, p24 and 29
Ex P1, pp24-25
(“T”) 11, Line/s (“L”) 31-33
T12, L17-18
T12, L30-31
T13, L25-31
T14, L10-14
T16, L16-17
T16, L22-28
T17, L27-28
T17, L29-31
T19, L14-15
T19, L16-20
T20, L25-31
T21, L14-19
T21, L24-27
T21, L28-30
T22, L26-31
T27, L11-14
T27, L11-20
T27, L21-23
T29, L15-27
T30, L13-18
T34, L22-28
T35, L16-30
T36, L19-31
T37, L12-15
T37, L17-20
T37, L21-24
T38, L11-12
T42, L13-15
T42, L16-18
T42, L19-26
T48, L16-21
T49, L24-29
T50, L12-28
T66, L11-14
T67, L12-18
T67, L19-24
T69, L22-27
T69, L28-30
T70, L12-18
T70, L21-28
Ex P1, pp39-40
Ex P1, pp41-42
Ex P1, pp47-49
Ex P1, pp57-58
Ex P1, pp85 and
Ex P1, pp93-94
Ex D1, pp23-25
Ex D1, p30-31 and
Ex D1, pp63-64
Ex D1, pp91 and
Ex D1, p101
Ex D1, p101
Ex D1, p101
Ex D1, p102
Ex D1, p176
Ex D1, p177
Ex D1, p178
Ex D1, pp177ff
Ex D1, pp177ff
Ex D1, p182
Ex D1, p182
Ex D1, p183
Ex D1, pp185-186
Ex D1, p187
Ex D1, p188
Ex D1, p188
Ex D1, p189
Ex D1, p190
Ex D1, p192
Ex D1, p194
Ex D1, p195
Ex D1, p196
Ex D1, pp196-197
Ex D1, p199
Ex D1, p200
Ex D1, p286
Ex D1, p287
Ex D1, p288
Ex D1, p289
Ex D1, p281
Ex D1, p281
Ex P5, Flexi Personnel
report dated 22 July 2025
Ex D1, pp281-282
Ex P5, Flexi Personnel
report dated 22 July 2025
Ex D1, p282
Ex P5, Flexi Personnel
report dated 22 July 2025
T106, L24-27
Ex P4 and Ex D1,
Ex D1, p101
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (582 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter