URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2013/1267.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RFJ v Victoria Police FOI Division (Review and Regulation) [2013] VCAT 1267 (17 July 2013)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
REVIEW AND REGULATION LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. G453/2012
Freedom of Information Act 1982
- sections 30(1),
(4) – application for release of documents relating to the
applicant’s interactions with Victoria Police and others over
a period of
four years in the context of past or ongoing court proceedings and an arson
investigation – whether exemptions
properly claimed – whether in the
public interest to release the documents in full to allow the applicant to
undertake his
own review of police records and to clear his name in relation to
various matters including arson
Victoria Police FOI Division
A Dea, Member
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
6 June 2013
DATE OF ORDER
17 July 2013
RFJ v Victoria Police FOI Division (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT
The decision of the respondent in relation to
each of documents 2, 16, 32, 36, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51 and 57 is affirmed.
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr. R. Sorensen of Counsel
For Respondent
Ms E.A. Bennett of Counsel
17 January 2012, RFJ wrote to the Victoria Police FOI Division (Victoria Police)
requesting access to a number of documents. The
request covered a wide range of
documents including those relating to RFJ’s interactions with the police
between June 2008
and January 2012, his complaints about the illegal cultivation
of drugs by a third person and police investigations of two fires
in April 2011
at a property formerly owned by RFJ’s mother.
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(FOI Act) gives every person a
legally enforceable right to obtain access to documents of any agency unless the
documents are exempt
documents. An agency such as Victoria Police is required
to respond to a request for access within 45 days.
23 January 2012, Victoria Police wrote to RFJ asking that he clarify his
request. On 20 February 2012, RFJ wrote again enclosing
two lists of documents,
marked A and B.
processing of the application was delayed due to a need for some further
clarification to be provided and for the payment of fees.
3 April 2012, Victoria Police wrote to RFJ to say that his requests would not be
finalised within the required 45 day timeframe
and advised that he could appeal
to the Tribunal.
24 May 2012, RFJ applied to this Tribunal under section 53 of the FOI Act for a
decision to be made about his request, Victoria
Police not having complied with
the statutory timeframe for response. Directions were made by the Tribunal and,
on 12 July 2012
and 12 August 2012, Victoria Police made its decisions about the
requests for documents in lists A and B respectively.
Police identified 123 pages of material as falling within the terms of
RFJ’s request A and agreed to release 43 pages
in full and a further 80
pages in part with deletions.
Police identified 53 pages of material as falling within the terms of
RFJ’s request B and agreed to release 19 pages
in full and a further 24
pages in part with deletions.
to the remainder of the documents was refused on the basis that Victoria Police
said that they were exempt documents under
the FOI Act.
2 August 2012, RFJ emailed Victoria Police saying that the only additional
documents he required in relation to his request concerned
the fires (request
27 August 2012, Victoria Police replied to RFJ. It stated that it had
identified a further 18 documents (consisting of 120 pages,
two CD ROMS and one
DVD). Victoria Police agreed to release one document in full and one document
in part with deletions. Victoria
Police denied access to the remaining 16
documents because they were exempt documents under the FOI Act or because, what
it regarded
as necessary deletions, would render the documents meaningless and
devoid of content.
has applied to the Tribunal for review of Victoria Police’s decisions in
respect of requests A, B and C. On hearing that
application, the Tribunal has
all of the powers of Victoria Police and it may decide to affirm, vary or set
aside the decision under
Police has the burden of showing that an exemption applies under the FOI Act so
that it is justified in not releasing the
material in
order of the Tribunal, a sample of the documents has been selected for hearing
and determination of this application. There are
seven categories with either
one or two representative documents for each category. The categories are as
Category 1: Documents disclosing personal information
obtained by Victoria Police – document 36
Category 2: Investigation documents related to the fires – documents
Category 3: Documents containing information obtained during investigations
– document 51
Category 4: Documents containing information provided in confidence –
documents 48 and 50
Category 5: Intervention order documents – document 32
Category 6: Victoria Police internal consultative documents - documents 2 and
Category 7: Documents containing information relating to Children’s
Court matters – document 16
have reviewed each of the sample documents and have perused the others. The
selected sample documents appear to be representative
of the other documents in
the relevant category.
the hearing on 6 June 2013, Counsel for RFJ sought an anonymisation order under
section 101 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(VCAT Act). The application was unopposed and so I made an order adopting
RFJ to refer to the applicant. In order to ensure that
RFJ could not be
identified through some of the other witnesses, I have anonymised them in these
reasons also.
is convenient to turn first to the background to RFJ’s application for the
documents and how that was presented to the Tribunal.
RFJ’S REASONS FOR SEEKING THE DOCUMENTS
original application to Victoria Police sought:
All records
regarding interaction of Police with [RFJ] and their activities with respect to
[RFJ]; Re: charges against him, past,
present or pending; Intervention Orders
against him and Applications for such Orders; any other allegations against him;
made by him about alleged criminal conduct by others and offences
against him or his property.
request then referred to certain dates and events covering the period June 2008
to April 2011.
covering letter, dated 17 January 2012, referred to various police
investigations and said that, without access to the
documents sought, it seemed
to him that the police always seemed to regard evidence against him as
sufficient to lay charges against
him but never regarded evidence he produced as
sufficient to lay charges against persons about whom RFJ had made allegations.
made reference to selective documentation being made available to others
which has resulted in him being subjected to gross and defamatory
misrepresentations, including suggestions that he was about to be charged with
arson in respect of one of the fires. RFJ
said that he felt he was being
totally left in the dark about those fires and that the police had implied he
was paranoid in making
allegations about the cultivation of marijuana by a
certain person. He accepted that the evidence as to the latter may be
insufficient
to lay charges but objected to the suggestion there was no evidence
to support his allegations.
a letter dated 20 February 2012, RFJ said that he was not seeking the documents
for court proceedings. He referred to “
uncontextualised records”
being used against him in non-litigious contexts, such as the Public
Advocate and professional regulatory bodies. He said he wished
documents to contextualise them and that he seeks the documents to put a stop to
“this situation
”. He went on to say that, the documents
might prove to be relevant to litigation, including in respect to his
estate. The letter includes the following:
want these records now to stop other uncontextualised records being used in a
mischievous and misleading non-litigious way
by the same people who are
simultaneously abusing the judicial system to persecute me.
This situation [referring to allegations of improper exchanges of information
has a stink that
reaches into the high heavens and the documents which I am seeking should
accordingly be released to me in the Public
Interest in clearing the air and
expose those that attempt to pervert legitimate justice.
reference to a journalist concerns a record that indicated that a journalist
any article written about the
application filed in the Tribunal in May 2012 indicates that RFJ sought review
in respect of documents he had sought to be used
in an upcoming estate
settlement case.
to RFJ’s submissions dated 22 May 2013 is a table, which groups the
documents, released with deletions or not released
at all and comments on the
basis on which release is sought. The four reasons given are:
interest favours disclosure and/or substance of masked portions of documents
already apparent from unmasked documents already
in applicant’s possession
(because they relate to criminal charges against applicant; allegations of
criminal conduct put to
him, but not resulting in charges and intervention
orders against him).
(ii) Appears to
relate to applicant’s son who has consented to release of information
from release might still apply despite
consent, consent should be sufficient basis for disclosure in public
(iii) Public
interest favours disclosure and/or substance of masked portions of documents
already apparent from unmasked documents
already in applicant’s possession
(because they relate to criminal charges against applicant; allegations of
criminal conduct
put to him, but not resulting in charges and intervention
orders against him). Document 19 also appears to contain a masked reference
the applicant’s son, which should be unmasked for same reason other
reference to the son should be unmasked/documents regarding
son should be
(iv) Public
interest favours disclosure.
submissions then set out an outline of events giving rise to the application for
access. The submissions said that the application
was made to protect
RFJ’s legitimate interests and the integrity of the administration of
justice in Victoria and Australia.
The submissions then set out a range of
events commencing in 2009, including details of various court proceedings
against and involving
RFJ. Further arguments were put regarding the public
interest in releasing certain categories of documents.
Essentially,
RFG wishes to review the documents sought to either show that the police have
misused or will in the future misuse information
held about him or others or to
clear his name in relation to the fires and other matters.
it came time for RFJ to call evidence, Victoria Police objected to the
admissibility of two witness statements.
made a witness statement on 22 May 2013. The 33 page statement sets out in
detail RFJ’s background, details of previous
charges and findings against
him, background to and details of the dispute about his mother’s estate,
details about the fires,
serious allegations against certain persons and
allegations about the conduct of police officers and judicial processes. The
also sets out the basis on which RFJ claims his employment prospects
have been affected by the various events described and police
action. Attached
to the witness statement were various documents including many copies of court
orders and related documentation.
family friend of RFJ also made a witness statement. Her statement set out
details of her knowledge of RFJ’s mother’s
life and dealings with a
number of persons. She also described a range of events involving or relating
to RFJ and his mother’s
Police’s objection centred on the fact that much of the content of the
witness statements was hearsay or it was not
logically probative of any issue in
the proceeding. Victoria Police noted that the statements related to:
Proceedings in
courts in which RFJ was involved as a defendant or a witness;
relating to the propriety or otherwise of the conduct of RFJ, police or
hearsay as to the motivations of various parties; and
Allegations of
criminally negligent or corrupt conduct by police or others.
became apparent that RFJ wished for me to review and compare the content of the
documents and the witness statements and come to
a view about whether the
documents reveal inaccuracies or show that the police hold inaccurate or unfair
views about him and the
events. If I came to the view that there were
inaccuracies or unfair views, it would be in the public interest for the
to be released to allow RFJ to correct or otherwise deal with those
hearing from the parties, I expressed the view that such a quasi-audit is not
the role of the Tribunal. I ruled that the witness
statements (other than the
attached court orders or like documents) were inadmissible for the reasons
argued by Victoria Police.
rulings were also made on the basis that I would consider whether it is in the
public interest for documents to be released
to allow RFJ to determine whether
the material held by the police is accurate or fair or has in the past or is
likely in the future
to lead to RFJ being ill treated, harassed or subjected to
detriment including regarding his employment prospects.
will now turn to Victoria Police’s evidence.
VICTORIA POLICE’S EVIDENCE
was given for Victoria Police by Detective Senior Sergeant AB and Inspector
Andrew Jay, Deputy Freedom of Information Officer
of Victoria Police. On the
application of Victoria Police, a portion of Detective Senior Sergeant
AB’s evidence was given
in a closed hearing. While RFJ was absent, his
Counsel, Mr Sorenson, remained having given an appropriate undertaking not to
the content of the evidence.
Detective Senior Sergeant AB’s evidence
Senior Sergeant AB made a witness statement in this matter and adopted it at the
hearing. He said that he has been a sworn
member of the police for 27 years.
He has extensive criminal investigation and prosecution experience and has been
involved in hundreds
of investigations and prosecutions over that time. He is
currently the unit commander of the crimes investigation unit of the part
Victoria where the fires and other events occurred. As a consequence, he is
responsible for all criminal investigations within
that police area. While the
physical investigation work is delegated to detectives, he is responsible for
monitoring and managing
each investigation and ultimately approving the
finalisation of the investigation. That requires that he is aware of what is
throughout.
Senior Sergeant AB was cross-examined about a limited number of matters.
Victoria Police objected to a number of questions
which touched on other court
matters or on the grounds of relevance. Those objections were upheld.
Senior Sergeant AB gave evidence as to his knowledge of the investigation into
the fires. There were two fires at the property
in April 2011. As noted
earlier, the property was owned by RFJ’s mother before she passed away.
She lived at the property
with a man and there is a lengthy history of disputes
and police involvement between RFJ and that man. The first fire was deemed
to be suspicious but the second fire is considered to be.
second fire is unsolved and its investigation remains open. If new information
came to light, the police would re-commence investigation
or bring charges. The
police do not know who the offenders are and so do not know what documents are
relevant. In Detective Senior
Sergeant AB’s experience, evidence that may
appear innocuous on its own may, in conjunction with other pieces of evidence,
become significant. The police are reviewing the investigation from time to
time and so the investigation is continuing in an endeavour
to solve the crime.
Senior Sergeant AB noted that the crime of arson carries a penalty of up to 15
years imprisonment. Because arson is such
a serious crime, the police are
obliged to retain all exhibits and documents relevant to an investigation and
keep those records
open for at least 50 years. The police are also required to
conduct a criminal investigation of such a nature to a high standard.
The nature of the documents sought
Senior Sergeant AB categorised the documents in issue as either concerning:
Intervention
orders regarding RFJ, family violence matters and RFG’s charge of
breaching intervention orders; or
Documents that
form part of the investigation into the second fire and are relevant to the
progress of the investigation.
first group include: police member’s notes which include references to
third parties involved in family violence or intervention
order related matters;
internal emails regarding intervention orders; court documents relating to an
application for an intervention
order and breaches of intervention orders;
documents showing the names of persons in relation to whom court documents were
on RFJ; and LEAP entries disclosing personal information of a range of
persons, including the assistance or otherwise provided to
the police by named
second group include police member’s notes including personal information
of the fires and
containing lines of enquiry, investigation methods and evidence gathered;
incident fact sheets which include the
names of persons who witnessed incidents;
LEAP entries of the kind referred to above and which also disclose facts,
intelligence
and observations and methods of police members during the course of
the investigation into the fires, internal emails regarding evidence,
evidence gathered, risk assessment documents which refer to personal information
and reports summarising the management of
the investigation of the fires which includes the persons involved, avenues of
confidential methodologies and techniques and opinions of police
members as to the progress of the investigation and what steps need
Potential consequences if documents released
Senior Sergeant AB’s evidence was that the release of documents relevant
to the investigation of the second fire may
prejudice the investigation and any
subsequent prosecution. Given that there are no restrictions on release under
the FOI Act, the
documents could be released broadly by RFJ and could be
received by a potential suspect or suspects. If the documents became known
person who was responsible for the crime, that person would know the information
that the police have obtained. It would make
clear what was known to the police
and also what evidence, if any, has not yet been uncovered. A person or persons
could use that
information to avoid being connected with the crime.
cross-examination, Detective Senior Sergeant AB clarified that his concern about
release of information to others was not an imputation
against RFJ but rather
arose from a general concern that information could be released generally by any
said that, even seemingly innocuous information, could be extremely useful to an
offender as that person could modify his or her
behaviour or prepare an
explanation or alibi in the event they were ever asked about their
involvement.
Senior Sergeant AB said that it is not appropriate for an offender or any member
of the community to have access to information
collected during an investigation
because the offender would know what evidence a witness could give, without the
police confirming
that they would be a witness and formally interviewing them.
Release of documents that would reveal evidence that could be used
charges and subsequent prosecutions, prior to the offender being interviewed and
charged, would call into question the
integrity of a witness’s evidence at
the prosecution. If a witness for the prosecution were to receive that
information before
a trial, it could strengthen that witness’s evidence,
such that the prosecution could be unfairly advantaged.
there could be significant consequences if a person came to know the identity of
a witness or potential witness, where
they lived or information which would lead
to the person having an idea where they lived. The witness or potential
safety could be at risk and impact on the community’s
confidence in being able to provide information to the police. When
assist the police by providing a statement, it does not permit their addresses
to be released. At times information is provided
where a statement is made on
the basis that the police will not release the person’s identity.
Senior Sergeant AB said that the police rely on information from confidential
sources. Release of certain documents would
reveal the confidential sources,
disclose the police’s techniques as to how crimes are investigated and the
methods used.
Release of such information could be made use of by an offender
in the ways discussed above. Also, it may prejudice the police’s
to obtain confidential information in the future. Release of confidential
information could be harmful to the person providing
the information. It could
also damage relationships between the police and other persons and agencies.
police internal working documents contain candid information and opinions. This
is an important part of the police properly and
safely doing their jobs, at
times to protect other members. Similarly, risk assessment information related
to the second fire investigation
is provided to mitigate risks to members and
assist in the resolution of issues. Such documents are designed to assist
do their jobs. Release of such documents would deter similar
documents being prepared in the future.
Senior Sergeant AB gave some further short evidence about confidential
information from external sources and internal police
documents while the
hearing room was closed.
Senior Sergeant AB agreed that material may pass through multiple hands within
the police but said that it remained confidential
provided that it was used as
part of a proper process. As to the risk assessment documents, he explained
that they are not necessarily
directed at physical risks but also to resolve
disputes which may arise and allow for better management of interpersonal
He agreed that, when referring to assistance given by others, it may
include assistance and other information and may refer to material
collected but is not ultimately of assistance in the outcome of the
investigation.
explained that information is held on file irrespective of its veracity. The
police are receivers of information. Each piece
of evidence is judged. Each is
part of a collection of information which may become evidence to be presented to
Senior Sergeant AB agreed that information held about RFJ may be made available
to other officers provided they had relevant
security clearances and the
information was relevant to another matter.
Inspector Andrew Jay’s evidence
Andrew Jay has been a sworn member of the police for more than 38 years. He is
currently the Deputy Freedom of Information
Officer at Victoria Police. He
holds responsibilities as a delegate to make decisions under the FOI Act.
Inspector Jay made a witness
statement and adopted it at the
The documents in dispute
Jay noted that there are 57 documents in dispute and they have been arranged
into the categories mentioned above. Each
document is claimed to be exempt in
whole or in part under section 33(1) of the FOI Act on the basis that its
disclosure would involve
the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to
the personal affairs of a person. The exemption is claimed with respect to
personal information such as person’s names, addresses, locations,
telephone numbers, opinions, personal relationships, criminal
allegations of criminal conduct and interactions with the police.
are also claimed to be exempt from the obligation to release under a range of
other provisions of the FOI Act.
Section 53A notices
of Inspector Jay’s role is to send notices under section 53A of the FOI
Act to certain persons where information relating
to their personal affairs is
subject to an exemption under the FOI Act. The notices are sent to ascertain
whether the persons wish
to intervene in the proceedings.
section 53A notices are in standard form. They explain that an application has
been made to the Tribunal and about the nature
of the personal information
relevant to the person that has been assessed as exempt from disclosure. The
notice then explains that
the recipient has a right to intervene in the
proceeding, not to intervene but to advise the Tribunal in writing that he or
his or her personal information to remain confidential or that he or
she can notify the Tribunal that he or she has no objection
to the personal
information being disclosed. Required documents are also provided.
Police identified 74 persons whose personal information was claimed to be exempt
under section 33(1). A section 53A notice
was sent to 48 persons. It was not
practicable to send notices to the remainder.
Jay received 19 formal responses. Some of the others notified did not reply
because they had left the address to which
the notices were sent. Others
indicated by email that they did not wish to respond, on the understanding that
their information
would not be released.
the 19 only one person consented to release of their personal information.
remaining 18 people gave reasons for why they did not want their identity and
personal information released. Inspector Jay said
that some of the responses
were the strongest he had seen in his time as Deputy FOI officer. He summarised
the reasons given as
Fears that RFJ
is a dangerous person with a history of violence and that release of their
personal information could put their safety
and that of their families at
Fears that RFJ
is seeking their personal information with the worst of intentions;
The information
was provided in confidence to assist the police with their enquiries and fears
that release would prejudice the parties;
Individuals with
only a peripheral role in relevant incidents, who had little or no dealings with
RFJ or no recollection of RFJ did
not wish to be involved in this or any further
matter of which they have no knowledge.
Jay was asked in cross-examination whether the strength of the responses
received was consistent with those persons using
physical violence against RFJ.
Inspector Jay said that was difficult to answer and that he could only say that
they were the responses
Jay’s evidence was that, when the police speak to a member of the public,
particularly in relation to an incident,
they do so in their official capacity.
In his experience, members of the public giving information to police expect
that it would
be held confidentially. The information is provided only for the
investigation of crimes, ongoing investigations and subsequent
prosecutions.
They do not expect it to be disclosed to another person for any other reason.
The release of information gained in
this way would damage this understanding
and expectation and therefore the police’s ability to obtain information
in the future.
I find it difficult to nominate anything
more important for Victoria Police than keeping the confidence of the public
regarding the
core police investigatory function. Without the support of the
public, the police would have to gather information under very different
circumstances.
I consider it in the public interest to keep confidential the names, contact
details, addresses and opinions of people described in
documents created during
an investigation.
Jay was asked in cross-examination whether public confidence as discussed takes
into account the physical safety of RFJ.
His reply was that the public interest
takes into account a lot of things.
stated that, as the police’s primary function is to investigate crime, to
do so properly it needs to maintain confidentiality
of information so it can be
fully examined and tested. It also needs to hold such information securely over
time if need be, so
that an investigation can continue to a resolution if
further information comes to light.
cross-examination, Inspector Jay agreed that the need to continue to hold
information could mean that the documents are retained
for the rest of
RFJ’s life.
Jay stated that these concerns about confidentiality and confidence in the
police also apply to its work with other agencies
to ensure the secure flow of
information.
confidentiality of volunteers, such as those who work in emergency services,
ought to be protected by the police. Otherwise,
people may be less likely to
volunteer if they were aware that their information may be passed to an FOI
applicant or they become
involved in litigation about which they know
Sensitive nature of the documents and circumstances of
Jay’s view is that the circumstances in which the personal information was
obtained is sensitive. The documents show
that there appear to be long-running
and current difficulties between the persons referred to in the documents.
There are allegations
and counter-allegations, various court actions currently
on foot and heated emotions among the parties. He considers that these
circumstances heighten the sensitivity and relevance of the personal information
contained in the documents.
documents refer to family violence allegations, intervention orders, allegations
of assault and claims of criminal histories involving
violence. In his view,
criminal histories or allegations of criminal conduct are extremely sensitive
and should only ever be released
in proper circumstances.
documents also refer to the assistance that people have or have not provided to
the police. Inspector Jay considers these circumstances
are particularly
Information that might already be known
Jay noted that RFJ may already have received copies of some of the documents in
dispute through his involvement with the
courts and in relation to intervention
orders. While he may be restricted in how he can use the documents provided
through court
proceedings, no such restrictions apply to the release of
documents under the FOI Act.
Jay says he is concerned about how RFJ may use the documents if they are
released. He made reference to RFJ’s previously
expressed frustration
with how he has been treated by the police and other persons. He is concerned
that these matters increase
the likelihood that RFJ may use the documents for
non bona fide reasons such as to initiate arguments with or harass and
intimidate,
persons named in them.
Jay says that Victoria Police would not release a document to RFJ where that
would be contrary to the wishes of a recipient
of a section 53A notice, just
because RFJ can or may be able to guess the name of the person. Given the
subject matter of the documents,
Inspector Jay considers it likely that RFJ
could identify a person from references to telephone numbers or addresses.
cross-examination Inspector Jay was asked whether he agreed that, if the
documents contained inaccurate information and is released
by the Tribunal for
that reason, that might lead to greater accuracy in the future. Inspector Jay
said he could not forecast the
future and was not certain to which exemption was
being referred.
Jay was then questioned about his expressed concerns about how RFJ may use the
documents if they were released. He said
his comments were based on his
experience and the written and telephone responses to the section 53A notices.
He was asked whether
the views were based on any assessment as to whether RFJ
used information improperly. Inspector Jay replied that his views were
his experience.
am satisfied that RFJ seeks the documents in dispute so he can undertake his own
assessment as to whether the content is accurate
in respect of him, his history
and his dealings with various people. He also wishes to have the documents so
he can make a similar
assessment about other people. Finally, he wishes to have
the documents to undertake his own investigation of the second fire, in
because he believes that many in the community believe he is the offender. He
wishes to clear his name.
am satisfied that it is more likely than not that RFJ will use copies of the
documents to publicly promote those ends. That might
be by contacting the
relevant persons or their associates or family members or by referring to the
documents in a more public way.
Such actions would mean that any personal
information would be distributed well beyond RFJ and his legal advisers.
accept the evidence given by Detective Senior Sergeant AB and Inspector Jay. In
particular, I accept and give weight to their evidence
concerning:
police’s reliance on confidentiality as a means of obtaining information
and maintaining public confidence;
The risk that
persons and other agencies may be unwilling to provide information to police in
the future if confidentiality is not
maintained;
circumstances surrounding the fires, and specifically the second fire, are part
of an open investigation. New information would
lead to the investigation being
re-commenced. All of the information currently held may become important in the
If information
will be placed in an advantageous position.
An offender may be able to use
information to influence or interfere with the investigation in future; and
Material about
the method and status of an investigation is not released publicly by the
police. Internal police documents created
to assist in an investigation or to
assist members to undertake their duties are not released
reviewed the responses to the section 53A notices, I accept Inspector
Jay’s assessment that they are extremely strong
and reveal very
significant concerns about release of the documents by the notice recipients.
It is fair to say that the concerns
raised by the recipients about release are
strongly worded and are focussed on personal safety and a desire to have no
involvement
in matters relating to RFJ. As explained at the hearing, I have not
made an assumption that what is said in the responses and the
circumstances referred to in support of the responses are true. I will not make
an assessment about whether the personal
safety of the recipients of the notices
is at risk or at greater risk than that of RFJ.
have, however, accepted that the responses reveal the attitudes of the persons
whose personal affairs information is contained in
the documents. Further, it
is apparent from reading the responses and the submissions made by RFJ that
there is significant animosity
between RFJ and a number of other persons and
release of the document might well lead to greater disputation and incidents
or not the bases for their concerns are well-founded, it is apparent that the 18
people who did not consent to release of
their personal information, have no
wish for their information to be released to RFJ.
THE PARTIES’ LEGAL SUBMISSIONS ON THE PUBLIC INTEREST
Police provided detailed submissions as to the meaning of the sections
containing the exemptions relied upon. In addition,
submissions were made
concerning section 50(4) of the FOI Act and whether there are public interest
grounds on which the Tribunal
ought to order release of information, even where
an exemption is found to apply.
legal submissions made for RFJ did not deal individually with the sections
containing the exemptions relied on. Rather RFJ contends
that, wherever the
public interest arises as a consideration under section 50(4) or where there is
a question of reasonableness,
those matters ought to be read as favouring
The public interest override
is convenient to set out here RFJ’s arguments and to also refer to
Victoria Police’s submissions on section 50(4).
50(4) says:
On the hearing of an application for review the Tribunal
shall have, in addition to any other power, the same powers as an agency
Minister in respect of a request, including power to decide that access should
be granted to an exempt document (not being a
document referred to in section
28, section 29A, section 31(3), or in section 33) where the Tribunal is of
opinion that the public
interest requires that access to the document should be
granted under this Act.
RFJ’s submissions
starting point for the matters raised by RFJ is belief that the documents in
issue contain information which may show that he
had no involvement in the
second fire and that they also contain inaccurate information about him which
has affected how he has been
treated by police in the past and will continue to
be treated unless corrected.
the question of the public interest in disclosure in this case, and leaving to
one side matters which go to his proposed audit
of material by the Tribunal, RFJ
public interest in him seeing the documents to clear his name of serious false
allegations and to combat these allegations
swiftly whenever they are raised
again. At the hearing, RFJ’s Counsel clarified that he is referring to
allegations being
circulated in the community rather than allegations which are
the subject of court action;
He has seen some
of the documents which contain deletions already in a form without deletions;
The content of
the documents as they currently stand and their management to date have and will
continue to cause serious detriment
to him in terms of loss of liberty,
prejudice to his employment prospects and his physical safety.
broader terms, RFJ says that access should be given to the documents in the
public interest as described as follows:
The desirability
that just administration of the criminal law be manifest, justice be seen to be
done, and the community informed
regarding the workings of government so that
intelligent discussion may occur with respect to their adequacy and
So as to provide
a more complete picture regarding an issue to be explained regarding
governmental/administrative action or inaction
and/or enough information to
assist consideration of whether there has been a fair, efficient and proper
investigation with a satisfactory
controversy and put to rest hopes and allay fears which otherwise fester, by
ensuring suspicions are either confirmed and
dealt with or dispelled and
The just and
procedurally fair treatment of an individual and ensuring publicly available
information on an issue does not consist
of a distorted, selective portion of
the total information in
concerns over the possible wrongful detention of an individual by the
government to account for its actions and enabling participation in formulating
proposed corrective action;
The enhanced
importance of these factors in the light of the impact of the police’s
activities. In particular, the police exercise
coercive powers which can
inflict serious hardship on individuals if deployed without regard to this
possibility.
accept these statements capture a range of the matters considered and raised by
the public interest test whether arising under section
50(4) or elsewhere in the
Victoria Police’s submissions
public interest based arguments are relevant to the exemptions claimed by
Victoria Police under section 30(1) and 35(1)(b) of
the FOI Act, as well as in
respect of section 50(4).
Police says that there is a public interest in:
The proper and
efficient enforcement of the law;
Protecting the
integrity of the police’s investigative process, particularly where an
investigation of a serious crime is ongoing.
It is contrary to the public
interest to disclose documents that would have an adverse effect on the
integrity or effectiveness
of an ongoing investigation into a serious
Protecting the
confidentiality of the police’s methodologies and sources of confidential
information;
maintaining confidentiality with respect to material obtained during an
investigation so that it can base its investigation
or decisions on thoroughly
and rigorously examined material and evidence;
Protecting the
deliberative process of the police so as to ensure full and frank discussions
between members. Discussions of that
nature will be hindered by an expectation
that such communications may be released to the public or the individual
maintaining the confidentiality of information provided by civilian witnesses in
order to uphold the community expectation,
and the police’s assurances,
that such information is given in confidence and will not be released unless
charges are laid
against a police member and/or a prosecution is commenced. It
is contrary to the public interest to disclose confidential information
do so may result in members of the public being less likely to assist the police
in the future;
Protecting the
integrity of a resulting prosecution in terms of not prejudicing the fairness of
a subsequent trial, not contaminating
evidence and ensuring only relevant
material is before the court;
Not disclosing
information relating to personal affairs of the members of the public against
their wishes, particularly where that
information is sensitive to those persons;
Not disclosing
information contrary to legislative prohibitions against the
disclosure.
Police further says that there is no public interest in :
documents on the basis of mere allegations and assertions made by an applicant
as to the applicant’s ill treatment;
documents in dispute that do not reveal any illegality, injustice, impropriety,
sharp practice or wrongdoing to the applicant;
documents to provide a more complete picture where information is not publicly
available in any case; and
documents to assist consideration of whether there has been a fair, efficient
and proper investigation with a satisfactory
outcome, when an investigation is
Police referred me to the decision of French CJ, Gummow and Bell JJ in
v Secretary to the Department of
where their Honours
observed that the Tribunal may only exercise its power under section 50(4) when
it forms the opinion that the
public interest requires release. Establishing a
public interest is not enough. Requires means “
necessitates
noted earlier, Victoria Police relies on the personal affairs information
exemption contained in section 33(1) of the FOI Act for
each document. For some
documents, other exemptions are also claimed. For some categories of documents,
the heading used by Victoria
Police indicates a particular exemption is relied
on. My approach has been to deal first with the exemption which most readily
to apply, based on the heading Victoria Police has applied to the
category being considered. Where I am satisfied that one exemption
have only briefly considered the others claimed.
CATEGORY 1: DOCUMENTS DISCLOSING PERSONAL INFORMATION OBTAINED BY VICTORIA
document 36 is a running sheet for Sunbury Police dated 6 November 2008.
Police relies on the exemption contained in section 33(1) of the FOI Act for its
refusal to release the document in part.
Personal affairs information
33(1) says:
A document is an exempt document if its disclosure under
this Act would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating
the personal affairs of any person (including a deceased person).
33(9) says that the phrase “
information relating to the personal
affairs of any person”
includes information that identifies any person
or discloses their address or location; or from which any person’s
address or location can reasonably be determined.
33(2A) requires me to take into account whether disclosure of the information
would or would be reasonably likely to, endanger
the life or physical safety of
any person.
Victoria Police’s submissions
Police submitted that information will relate to a person’s personal
affairs if it concerns or affects that person
individual.
It says this is a
concept which is given a wide interpretation and that information which would
aid in the identification of a person
will fall within the
Names, addresses and
telephone numbers are matters within the contemplation of section
Matters relating to the
health, private behaviour, home life or personal or family relationships of
individuals are said to relate
to the personal affairs of an
individual.
Information
pertaining to the willingness or otherwise of individuals to assist with
criminal investigations is material of a personal
The Tribunal has found
that a person’s police record is exempt under section 33(1), as is a
person’s criminal history.
telephone numbers while working are also personal affairs
Police contends that the question of whether it is unreasonable for information
relating to a person’s personal affairs
to be released requires a
balancing exercise to be undertaken. That balancing exercise concerns the
interest in personal privacy
of an individual whose affairs may be unreasonably
disclosed and the object of the FOI Act to extend as far as possible the right
of the community to access to information in the possession of the
Government.
The factors which
may be applied to that balancing exercise are said to
The nature of
the information;
information was obtained, including circumstances of confidentiality;
The likelihood
of the information being information that the individuals concerned do not want
The extent to
which the information is publically available;
Whether any
public or important interest would be promoted by release of the information or
release would be contrary to a public
interest other than the public interest in
protecting the privacy of individuals referred to in the document;
disclosure of the information could lead to the person to whom it relates
suffering stress or anxiety. It may be that disclosure
is likely to cause that
reaction even if it is not the applicant’s intention. It may also be that
the applicant may claim
to know the persons whose personal information is
redacted and claim that provision of the information would not alter the
of those persons. However, the decision maker must consider the
applicant’s likely reaction on seeing the personal information
in the documents and what the applicant might do with those documents; and
The extent to
which the applicant is likely to disclose the information requested if access
were granted. It is relevant that the
documents, once released are beyond the
power of Victoria Police to control such that identification of persons by the
large is potentially at issue. Victoria Police acknowledged that it
cannot be assumed that dissemination will be to the world at
Police noted that the Tribunal has found that concerns raised by a person in
response to a section 53A notice are very significant
in terms of considering
unreasonableness of disclosure. Those responses provide a good indication of
the attitude of the person
affected. Where no response is received, it is not
appropriate to consider that disclosure would not be unreasonable. The
act described is still
RFJ’s submissions
made no submissions as to the meaning of the phrase
“information
relating to the personal affairs of any person”
says that, due to the public interest matters he has raised, it would not be
unreasonable to disclose the information.
did not take issue with the description of the balancing exercise to be
undertaken or as to the other factors to be taken into
am satisfied that Victoria Police has correctly described the meaning to be
applied to section 33(1) and the matters to be considered
on the question of
unreasonableness of disclosure.
36 contains information relating to the personal affairs of a number of persons
as it includes information which may identify
them or includes information from
which their identity may be reasonably determined. Document 36 also contains
information about
relationships.
regard to the content of RFJ’s correspondence referred to above and the
nature of his reasons for seeking the documents,
I accept Inspector Jay’s
expressed concerns about the sensitive nature of documents such as document 36.
The context which
surrounds the application for the document, including
significant personal disputes between a number of people and the fact that
documents make reference to criminal histories and violence, mean that the
personal information they contain is of a very sensitive
am satisfied that the release of document 36 in full would involve the
disclosure of information relating to the personal affairs
of people. Some of
the information is of a confidential nature. It is not all publicly
am satisfied that the recipients of the section 53A notices who responded do not
wish to have their personal affairs information
disclosed to RFJ. As discussed
earlier, it is apparent that those concerns, and in some cases those fears, are
real and disclosure
is likely to cause those persons stress and anxiety.
is apparent that the RFJ’s characterisation of the public interest said to
show that disclosure is reasonable under section
33(1) is centred on his own
personal interests. He wishes to know what information the police have about
him and others and to confirm
his belief that completed criminal charges and/or
court proceedings were improperly brought or dealt with. He seeks to have other
persons charged with criminal offences. He wishes to publicly clear his name in
relation to past criminal matters and the second
of these actions would require him to go behind past decisions of judicial
officers. He seeks some information to deal with
matters which, I was informed
at the hearing, were to come before the courts the following week. If RFJ
wishes to appeal decisions
of courts, he ought to follow the appropriate
processes. There was no suggestion that he could not do so without access to
the documents.
If there are documents relevant to current matters, they can be
sought in the usual way using the applicable court processes.
relies on a number of decisions which have as their focus the interest of the
general public having access to information where
the documents concerned a
matter of public controversy or discussion – for example
Re Easdown and
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) and Ors, Hanbury-Sparrow v Department of
Foreign Affairs
Graham v Frankston Community
There is no
matter of public controversy here about how the police have dealt with RFJ.
There is nothing in document 36 which raises
any matter which would be of
interest to the broader community or require disclosure. There is nothing which
requires oversight
by a body independent of the police.
may be the case that RFJ can guess who is referred to in the redacted parts of
document 36. I accept that the fact he may be able
to do so or thinks he can,
does not mean that the document ought to be released. While RFJ may not be
surprised by the identity
of the persons referred to, given his concern to clear
his name in a range of ways and his wish to see other persons prosecuted,
likely that RFJ will use an un-redacted document to publicly promote those ends.
As discussed in my finding set out in paragraph
80, that might be by contacting
the relevant persons or their associates or family members or by referring to
the document in a more
public way.
RFJ’s reasons for seeking full access to document 36 and the likelihood
that he would use it to take various actions
publicly against the privacy
interests of the individuals whose personal affairs information is contained in
document 36, I am satisfied
that it would be unreasonable for an un-redacted
version of document 36 to be disclosed to RFJ.
discussed earlier, section 50(4) of the FOI Act allows the Tribunal to have
regard to the public interest in releasing documents
even when certain
exemptions apply. The personal affairs exemption is not one of those which
allows for the public interest to be
considered, as it is expressly excluded by
the section.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 33(1) applies such that
Victoria Police was entitled to refuse to release an
un-redacted version of
document 36 and so I will affirm Victoria Police’s decision in respect of
document 36.
CATEGORY 2: INVESTIGATION DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE FIRES
document 47 is a collection of investigation documents of various dates which
are denied in full. In his witness statement,
Detective Senior Sergeant AB
described the document as being evidence gathered.
Police relies on the exemption contained in sections 31(1)(a) and (b) and
section 33(1) of the FOI Act for its refusal to
release these documents.
57 is a collection of interpose reports of various dates which are denied in
full. Detective Sergeant AB described document
57 as a report that contains
summaries of how the investigation into the fires was managed. He says that it
describes persons involved,
avenues of inquiry, methodologies and techniques
that are confidential to the police. It also describes opinions of members as
the progress of the investigation and the steps that would need to be
Police relies on the exemption contained in sections 31(1)(a), (b) and (d) and
section 33(1) of the FOI Act for its refusal
to release these documents.
33(1) has been set out and discussed above.
Law enforcement documents
31(1) relevantly says:
(1) Subject to this section, a document is
an exempt document if its disclosure under this Act would, or would be
reasonably likely
(a) prejudice the investigation of a breach or possible breach of the law or
prejudice the enforcement or proper administration of
the law in a particular
(b) prejudice the fair trial of a person or the impartial adjudication of a
particular case;
(d) disclose methods or procedures for preventing, detecting, investigating, or
dealing with matters arising out of, breaches or
evasions of the law the
disclosure of which would, or would be reasonably likely to, prejudice the
effectiveness of those methods
or procedures; or
Victoria Police’s submissions
Police say that the words “
would or would be reasonably likely
” in sub-section (1) refer to a fair or sufficient chance of an
event occurring.
“prejudice”
is not a term of art. It means to impede or
derogate from.
Police further says that the exemption arising under 31(1)(a) has two
the release of the document may prejudice the investigation of a breach or
possible breach of the law in a particular instance;
the release of the document may prejudice the enforcement or proper
administration of the law in a particular instance.
Police says an investigation by it into a specific breach of the criminal law
falls squarely within the first limb of section
it says that an investigation may be prejudiced by release of documents where
that investigation is not closed. It relies on
the following passage from the
decision of Judge Bowman VP in
Williams v Victoria
regarding an
investigation that was characterised as pending:
Whilst no further
avenues are being explored at this time, the file has not been closed or
completed. Material in relation to fingerprints
has been gathered, and further
enquiries in that regard have not been exhausted.
It may be that no further investigations can be carried out unless there is
some further event or development. However, such an eventuality
may arise, in
which case further investigations and interviews would be conducted.
I accept that the release of these documents has the capacity to prejudice
the investigation of what, in this particular case, has
the appearance of being
the commission of a serious offence or offences. As a matter of common sense, I
accept the proposition that
has been advanced that to release documents of this
nature to the world at large is to afford to a wrongdoer the opportunity to
or tailor a response. I accept the evidence of Detective Senior Constable
McQualter that the releasing of information of this nature
in relation to a file
such as this, which is still classified as pending, could lead to the possible
destruction of evidence in addition
to providing to a wrongdoer the opportunity
to create a false alibi or otherwise give false evidence.
Police also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
v Police Force of Victoria
where the Court found that, in many cases, a police file may be exempt, even
if charges have been laid, because of the apprehended
prejudice to the
investigation of a breach or possible breach of the law under section
RFJ’s submissions
made no specific submission about the meaning or application of section 31(1) as
a whole or in respect of sub-sections (a), (b)
Discussion - section 31(1)(a) exemption
accept Victoria Police’s submissions as to the meaning of section 31(1)(a)
and how it should be approached.
accept Detective Senior Sergeant AB’s evidence about the potential
consequences of the release of material such as documents
47 and 57 and the
prejudice which may arise in relation to both the investigation of the second
fire and the enforcement of the law
in respect of that fire. The identified
prejudice includes:
If the documents
became known to a person who was responsible for the offence, that person would
know the information that the police
have obtained. It would make clear what
was known to the police and also what evidence, if any, has not yet been
uncovered. A person
or persons could use that information to avoid being
connected with the crime;
Even seemingly
innocuous information could be extremely useful to an offender as that person
could modify his or her behaviour or
prepare an explanation or alibi in the
event they were ever asked about their involvement;
If an offender
or any member of the community had access to information collected during an
investigation, the offender would know
what evidence a witness could give before
a formal interview has been conducted;
documents could reveal evidence that could be used in laying charges and
subsequent prosecutions, prior to the offender
being interviewed and charged;
The safety of a
witness or potential witness could be placed at risk if a person came to know
their identity, where they lived or
information which would lead to the person
having an idea where they lived.
regard to Detective Senior Sergeant AB’s evidence, which is consistent
with the comments made by Judge Bowman VP above,
I am satisfied that the release
of documents 47 and 57 would or would be reasonably likely to prejudice the
investigation of a possible
breach of the law and/or the enforcement of the law
in respect of the second fire.
Other exemptions claimed - section 31(1)(b) and (d) and 33(1)
fair trial of a person accused of arson in relation to the second fire would or
would be reasonably likely to be prejudiced if
documents 47 and 57 were
released. On the evidence of Detective Senior Sergeant AB, if the information
given by witnesses was known, that might lead to the
contamination or perception of the contamination of a witness’s evidence
or undermine the veracity of a witness’s evidence. If there is material
in the documents which is inadmissible in a criminal
trial and that material
came to the attention of potential jurors, the fair trial of the accused would
be prejudiced.
Accordingly, I
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 31(1)(b) also applies to
these documents.
reviewed document 47, I am satisfied that it is evidence gathered and that the
evidence may not be used for anything other
than law enforcement. This document
was the subject of evidence from Detective Senior Sergeant AB given in a closed
hearing. The
release of document 47 is reasonably likely to disclose and
prejudice methods of investigating and dealing with matters arising out
breaches or evasions of the law. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the exemption
contained in section 31(1)(d) also applies to
document 47.
Senior Sergeant AB is correct to say that document 57 describes persons
involved, avenues of inquiry, methodologies and
techniques that are confidential
to the police. It also describes opinions of members as to the progress of the
investigation and
the steps that would need to be taken. The release of this
document would reveal not only particular information about the investigation
the second fire, but also about how the police investigates similar incidents.
In particular, disclosure of the parts of the
document which show how the police
have managed the investigation to date, would be reasonably likely to prejudice
the effectiveness
of those methods and procedures in the future as they would be
able to be foreseen by a range of persons including the offender.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 31(1)(d) also applies to
document 57.
documents are full of personal affairs information. For the same reasons as
given in relation to the category 1 document, I
am satisfied that it would be
unreasonable to release the personal affairs information contained in the
25 of the FOI Act deals with changes which may be made to documents to
facilitate their release. It allows for access to
be given to a document where
it is practicable to make deletions of content in such a way that the document
does not disclose the
information of concern. It is not practicable to make
deletions which render the document devoid of
Deletion of the
personal affairs information from document 47 would largely render that document
devoid of meaning. Arguably, some
of the personal affairs information could be
deleted from document 57. That would render parts devoid of meaning and so
be appropriate. Practicable deletions would not overcome the issues
raised under the section 31(1) exemption and so section 25 does
not assist RFJ.
now turn to the public interest override as it applies to section
Public interest override
set out earlier Victoria Police and RFJ’s submissions on this question. I
have discussed them in the context of the category
1 document and the
reasonableness of release of personal affairs information.
accept Victoria Police’s description of the public interest in maintaining
confidentiality in respect to particular investigations
of crime and also in
respect to the methods and procedures used. Those observations are consistent
with the evidence of Detective
Senior Sergeant AB and Inspector Jay and
decisions such as
take on the public interest is his own interest in knowing what the police has
done in the past in matters touching him,
what he thinks the police should do in
the future in respect of himself and others and to clear his name about a number
of matters.
As discussed above, I am satisfied that it is likely that he will
release the documents or their content publicly in order to achieve
discussed in the context of the reasonableness or otherwise of release of
personal affairs information, this is not a case where
there is public
discussion or concern about what the police have done. Documents 47 and 57 do
not contain information that raises
questions about the legality or propriety of
the conduct of the police or others. They do not contain material pointing to
the victim of an injustice.
is nothing in these particular circumstances or in documents 47 and 57 that
demands release of those documents to RFJ.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 31(1)(a) of the FOI Act
applies such that the application for release of documents
47 and 57 was
properly refused and these are not circumstances where the Tribunal should order
release under section 50(4) of the
FOI Act. Accordingly, I will affirm
Victoria Police’s decision in respect of documents 47 and 57.
CATEGORY 3: DOCUMENTS CONTAINING INFORMATION OBTAINED DURING
INVESTIGATIONS
document 51 includes the handwritten notes of a Sergeant with a facsimile sheet
sent to a Senior Constable dated 11 April 2011.
As indicated in Detective
Senior Sergeant AB’s witness statement, they are notes of members which
record observations, names,
affairs of persons spoken to by members in the course of the investigation of
the second fire. They contain lines of enquiry, investigation methods and
evidence gathered.
Police relies on the exemption contained in sections 31(1)(a) and (b) and
section 33(1) of the FOI Act for its refusal to
release the document in
31(1)(a) and (b) and section 33(1) are set out above. I take the same approach
as that discussed above to the meaning and
application of section 31(1)(a) and
(b) and section 33(1).
same concerns about release of documents 47 and 57 apply here, given that
document 51 concerns an ongoing investigation. Given
the similar nature of this
document to documents 47 and 57, for the same reasons as expressed above, I am
satisfied that the exemption
contained in section 31(1)(a) applies.
am also satisfied that the exemption in section 31(1)(b) applies for the reasons
discussed in relation to documents 47 and 57. The
document contains evidence
gathered. The fair trial of a person accused of any offence arising from the
events referred to would
or would be reasonably likely to be prejudiced if the
information about the evidence to be given by witnesses was known as that might
lead to the contamination or perception of the contamination of the witnesses
evidence or undermine the veracity of a witness’s
status of this document is no different to documents 47 and 57 when it comes to
the public interest override under section 50(4)
of the FOI Act. There is
nothing about the content of the document or the circumstances of this case that
requires its release to
document contains a large amount of personal affairs information. For the same
reasons as given in relation to the category 1
document, I am satisfied that it
would be unreasonable to release that personal affairs information to RFJ.
under section 25 of the FOI Act, the personal affairs information was deleted,
document 51 would be devoid of
circumstances, it cannot be said to be practicable to make those deletions and
release the document.
a result, the exemption in section 33(1) applies.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 31(1)(a) of the FOI Act
applies such that the application for release of document
51 was properly
refused and these are not circumstances where the Tribunal should order release
under section 50(4) of the FOI Act.
Accordingly, I will affirm Victoria
Police’s decision in respect of document 51.
CATEGORY 4: DOCUMENTS CONTAINING INFORMATION PROVIDED IN CONFIDENCE
document 48 is a collection of statements of various dates.
50 is a fire scene examination report, dated 15 April 2011, which was obtained
by Victoria Police as part of its investigation
into the second fire.
Police relies on the exemption contained in sections 31(1)(a) and (b), section
33(1) and section 35(1)(b) of the FOI Act
for its refusal to release these
documents in full.
31(1)(a) and (b) and section 33(1) is set out above. I have already discussed
how those provisions are to be understood
and applied.
Information provided in confidence
35(1)(b) says:
(1) A document is an exempt document if its
disclosure under this Act would divulge any information or matter communicated
in confidence
by or on behalf of a person or a government to an agency or a
Minister, and-
(b) the disclosure of the information under this Act would be contrary to the
public interest by reason that the disclosure would
be reasonably likely to
impair the ability of an agency or a Minister to obtain similar information in
the future.
Victoria Police’s submissions
Police says it is a question of fact as to whether a matter has been
communicated in confidence. One must consider the perspective
communicator.
Statements from a
witness or complainant are usually considered to be provided in
confidence.
the document divulges information communicated in confidence, under section
35(1)(b), it must be shown to be contrary to the
public interest to release the
document because release would be reasonably likely to impair the ability of the
police to obtain
similar information in the future. The phrase
“reasonably likely”
means more probable than not and a
possibility that is real rather than fanciful or
Police referred me to the following passage from
Williams v Victoria
In relation to public interest, there is public interest
in maintaining the confidentiality of pending criminal investigations,
particularly
where charges have not yet been laid. It would not be in the public
interest to release the names of suspects unless charges are
laid against those
suspects. There is also public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of
statements given by members of the
public voluntarily to the police. If it were
otherwise, members of the public would be less willing to assist police
investigators
in the future. Release of statements given in confidence prior to
charges being laid could also compromise the physical safety of
persons making
such reports.
Common sense dictates that persons would be less likely to make statements to
the police if they were of the view that the making
of such statements was not
confidential. If it became known that the making of such a statement could be
disclosed to the world at
large, I have little doubt but that persons would be
reluctant to make such
statements.
RFJ’s submissions
made no submissions on the question of whether these documents were provided in
confidence.
accept Victoria Police’s submissions as to the meaning of section 35(1)(b)
and how it should be approached
regard to the nature of the witness statements and the evidence given by
Detective Senior Sergeant AB as to the usual expectations
of persons who supply
statements to the police, I find they were given in confidence. As to the fire
investigation report, I am
satisfied that, as it was part of evidence gathered
during the investigation of the second fire, that it was given to the police
confidence.
discussed above, RFJ wishes to have access to documents which concern the second
fire so he can undertake his own review and also
show that he is not under
investigation or the offender.
the approach in
, I accept it is not in the public interest for
statements given in confidence to be released ahead of charges being laid. It
likely that release of statements would deter persons in general, and
particularly with knowledge of the subject matter, from making
statements in the
future. On the evidence of Detective Senior Sergeant AB as to the
police’s reliance on confidential sources
and the importance of
relationships between police and others, if the fire scene examination report
was released, it is reasonably
likely that the instigator and/or author of the
report would be unwilling to cooperate with this investigation further or with
similar investigations in future.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 35(1)(b) of the FOI Act
applies such that the application for release of documents
48 and 50 was
properly refused.
the same reasons just given on the question of the public interest under section
35(1)(b) and as discussed earlier in relation
to the category 2 documents, I am
not satisfied that these are circumstances where the Tribunal should order
release under section
50(4) of the FOI Act.
Other exemptions claimed – section 31(1)(a) and (b) and 33(1)
so far as the statements and fire examination report relate to open
investigations which may lead to charges and a trial in future,
they fall within
the exemptions contained in sections 31(1)(a) and (b) as discussed in respect of
the category 2 documents.
statements contain a large amount of personal affairs information. For the same
reasons as given in relation to the category
1 document, I am satisfied that it
would be unreasonable to release that personal affairs information to RFJ.
Having reviewed the
statements, it would not be practicable to make deletions of
that information under section 25 of the FOI Act. Accordingly, document
also exempt under section 33(1).
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 35(1) applies such that
Victoria Police was entitled to refuse to release documents
48 and 50 in full.
Accordingly, I will affirm Victoria Police’s decision in respect of
documents 48 and 50.
CATEGORY 5: INTERVENTION ORDER DOCUMENTS
document 32 is an application for an intervention order dated 11 April 2011.
Police relies on the exemption contained in section 33(1) of the FOI Act for its
refusal to release an un-redacted version
of document 32. Identifying details
of the applicant for the order have been redacted. As required by the standard
form, an outline
of the basis for the application has been included with
identifying details redacted.
Personal affairs information
33(1) is set out above. I have discussed above the parties’ positions
regarding personal affairs information.
is an example of a document where RFJ may say he is aware of or able to deduce
the identity of the person whose personal affairs
information has been deleted.
RFJ may or may not know the name of the person involved. However, if he were
able to obtain the name
of the persons concerned in the document, the question
would be what he would do with that information and what would be his likely
reaction and the likely reaction of the persons whose personal information is
contained in the documents?
responses to the section 53A notices make it plain that persons whose details
appear in these types of documents do not want their
personal affairs
information released to RFJ.
am satisfied that it is more likely than not that RFJ would disclose the
document as widely as he thought appropriate in support
of his wish to clear his
name in the way I have described above. Release of the document may also lead
to further disputes. In
these circumstances, I consider it likely that an
un-redacted version of the document would be disclosed by RFJ to a range of
He may not seek to publish the document in the newspapers or on the
internet but, taking into account his own account of his persecution
harassment from police and others, it is likely to be widely dispersed.
these circumstances and having regard to my earlier discussion as to
reasonableness of release of personal affairs information
and the responses to
the section 53A notices, I consider it would be unreasonable to release the
personal affairs information contained
in document 32.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 33(1) applies such that
Victoria Police was entitled to refuse to release an
un-redacted version of
document 32. Accordingly, I will affirm Victoria Police’s decision in
respect of document 32.
CATEGORY 6: VICTORIA POLICE INTERNAL CONSULTATIVE DOCUMENTS
document 2 is an internal police email dated 10 April 2011.
Police relies on the exemptions contained in section 30(1) and section 33(1) of
the FOI Act for its refusal to release the
document in part.
46 is a Hume CIU report dated 21 April 2011.
Police relies on the exemptions contained in section 30(1), section 31(1)(a),
(b) and (d) and section 33(1) of the FOI Act
for its refusal to release the
document in full.
Senior Sergeant AB stated that document 46 is a document provided to members as
part of a risk assessment. It provides
members with advice about how to
approach a situation in order to mitigate risks to members based on the
information contained in
the document. He stated that the document contains
names, addresses and other identifiers on a number of individuals together with
matters relevant to the second fire investigation. He stated that the document
is circulated so that members are aware of the context
of the matter to assist
in resolving disputes. It is headed “
Police in Confidence Not for
further distribution
” so that recipients are aware of its sensitivity.
31(1)(a), (b) and (d) and section 33(1) are set out and have been discussed
Internal consultative documents
30(1) relevantly says:
(1) Subject to this section, a document is
an exempt document if it is a document the disclosure of which under this
(a) would disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation
prepared by an officer or Minister,
or consultation or
deliberation that has taken place between officers, Ministers,
or an officer and a Minister,
in the course of, or for the purpose
of, the deliberative processes involved in
the functions of an agency or Minister
or of the government; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest.
(3) This section does not apply to a document by reason only of purely
factual material contained in the document.
Victoria Police’s submissions
Police says that, if a document discloses an opinion, advice or recommendation,
it will fall within section
Matter will be in the
nature of opinion, advice or recommendation where it conveys matters in the
nature of a personal view, an
opinion recommended or
document may fall within the second limb of section 30(1)(a) where it contains
consultation or deliberation that has taken place
in the course of the
deliberative process of the agency. Deliberative process has a wide meaning and
may extend to deliberative
processes which lead to a decision as to how to act
in a particular situation.
to the public interest raised by section 30(1)(b), Victoria Police says the
Tribunal must have regard to all of the circumstances
of the case and balance
the factors in favour of disclosure against the factors against disclosure. It
is for the respondent to
establish that disclosure would be contrary to the
public interest.
matters which might be relevant to take into account include:
The nature of
the information and of the document;
The degree of
sensitivity of the issues involved in the consideration. The more sensitive or
contentious the issues involved, the
more likely it is that the communication
should not be disclosed;
disclosure would be likely to inhibit frankness or candour in the making of
communications; and
The likelihood
that disclosure would create mischief in one way or another such as a risk of
mischievous interpretation.
30(1)(3) requires that consideration be given to whether the document contains
purely factual material. Victoria Police says
that, where factual material is
so embedded in the deliberative content of a document such that it is
impractical to produce an edited
document, the information is not required to be
A practical approach
is to be taken to the question of whether factual information may be extracted
from the document and one must
consider the document in its entire
circumstances.
RFJ’s submissions
made no submissions as to the interpretation of section 30(1). RFJ adopts the
same arguments as summarised above, in respect
of the public interest question
raised by section 30(1)(b).
accept Victoria Police’s submissions as to the meaning of section 30(1)
and how it should be approached.
2 contains material in the nature of an opinion, advice or recommendation as it
contains personal views. The document does
contain some factual material but,
given that a redacted version has been released, no further editing is called
for under section
46 also contains matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation. The
document contains factual material but that
material is embedded in the
consultative and deliberative nature of the document.
am satisfied that each document falls within section 30(1)(a).
am satisfied that the public interest (under section 30(1)(b) or 50(4)) in
keeping confidential communications which contain the
opinions of police members
or which reveal how the police approach a particular matter relevant to an
ongoing investigation, outweighs
RFJ’s interest in undertaking his own
audit and public explanation as to his position. If these documents were
revealed that
would by likely to inhibit the police from using communications of
this type in future. I accept that open and candid communications
associated with specified persons in respect to ongoing investigations are
important to protect police members and the
community more
Other exemptions claimed – section 31(a), (b) and (d) and 33(1)
so far as the internal email and risk assessment document relate to open
investigations which may lead to charges and a trial in
future, they fall within
the exemptions contained in sections 31(1)(a) and (b) as discussed in respect of
the category 2 documents.
am satisfied that document 46 also falls within section 31(d) as it would
disclose methods or procedures for preventing, detecting,
investigating or
dealing with matters arising out of breaches of the law and disclosure would be
reasonably likely to prejudice the
effectiveness of those methods or procedures.
Detective Senior Sergeant AB’s description of the content of the document
that plain.
affairs information has already been redacted from document 2. I am satisfied
that was reasonable.
46 contains a large amount of personal affairs information. For the same
reasons as given in relation to the category 1
document, I am satisfied that it
would be unreasonable to release that personal affairs information to RFJ.
Having reviewed the
document, it would not be practicable to make deletions of
that information under section 25 of the FOI Act. Accordingly, document
also exempt under section 33(1).
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 30(1)(a) applies such that
Victoria Police was entitled to refuse to release
an un-redacted version of
document 2 and document 46 in full. Accordingly, I will affirm Victoria
Police’s decision in respect
of documents 2 and
CATEGORY 7: DOCUMENTS CONTAINING INFORMATION RELATING TO CHILDREN’S COURT
document 16 is a LEAP database incident report dated 20 October 2008.
Police relies on the exemptions contained in section 33(1) and section 38 of the
FOI Act and
section 534(1)(a)
Children Youth and Families Act 2005
(CYF Act) for its refusal to release the document in part.
is set out above.
Secret information
A document is an exempt document if there is in force an
enactment applying specifically to information of a kind contained in the
document and prohibiting persons referred to in the enactment from disclosing
information of that kind, whether the prohibition is
absolute or is subject to
exceptions or qualifications.
534 of the CYF Act says relevantly:
(1) A person must not publish
or cause to be published-
(a) except with the permission of the President, a report of a proceeding in
the Court or of a proceeding in any other court arising
out of a proceeding in
the Court that contains any particulars likely to lead to the identification
(i) the particular venue of the Children’s Court, other than the Koori
Court (Criminal Division) or the Neighbourhood Justice
Division, in which the
proceeding was heard; or
(ii) a child or other party to the proceeding; or
(iii) a witness in the proceeding; or
(b) except with the permission of the President, a picture as being or
including a picture of a child or other party to, or a witness
in, a proceeding
referred to in paragraph (a); or
(c) except with the permission of the President, or of the Secretary under
subsection (3), any matter that contains any particulars
likely to lead to the
identification of a child as being the subject of an order made by the
(a) In the case of a body corporate-500 penalty units;
(b) In any other case-100 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years.
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsections (1) and (3), the
following particulars are deemed to be particulars likely to
lead to the
identification of a person-
(a) the name, title, pseudonym or alias of the person;
(b) the address of any premises at which the person resides or works, or the
locality in which those premises are situated;
(c) the address of a school attended by the person or the locality in which
the school is situated;
(d) the physical description or the style of dress of the person;
(e) any employment or occupation engaged in, profession practised or calling
pursued, by the person or any official or honorary position
held by the
(f) the relationship of the person to identified relatives of the person or
the association of the person with identified friends
or identified business,
official or professional acquaintances of the person;
(g) the recreational interests or the political, philosophical or religious
beliefs or interests of the person;
(h) any real or personal property in which the person has an interest or with
which the person is otherwise associated.
redacted material in document 16 falls within section 534(4) of the CYF
public interest override in section 50(4) does not apply to section 38 of the
says that he knows what the redacted information is because the document relates
to his son. That is not a relevant matter under
either section 534 of the CYF
Act or section 38 of the FOI Act.
is no question that Victoria Police is prohibited from releasing the information
which falls within section 534 of the CYF Act.
my earlier discussion of section 33(1), I am satisfied that it would have been
unreasonable for the document to be released
without the personal affairs
information having been redacted.
am satisfied that the exemption contained in section 38 applies such that
Victoria Police was entitled to refuse to release an un-redacted
document 16 and so I will affirm Victoria Police’s decision regarding
document 16.
I have found that Victoria Police was entitled to rely on exemptions under the
FOI Act in respect of all of the sample documents
and I have not found that any
of the documents ought to be released under section 50(4) of the FOI Act, I will
affirm Victoria Police’s
Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Re Lawless and Secretary to
Law Department and Ors
(1985) 1 VAR 42
Re Easdown and Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) and Ors
(1987) 2 VAR 102
Robinson and Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations
[2002] AATA 715
Hanbury-Sparrow v
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
[1997] AATA 323
Re Coleman and
Director-General, Local Government Department, Pentland
(1985) 1 VAR 9
Lawless; Re Graham and Frankston Community Hospital
(1986) 1 VAR 255
Re MJB and the Health Department
(1989) 3 VAR 391
Re Downie and
Department of Territories
[1985] AATA 313
Attorney-General’s Department
[1994] AATA 528
Hanbury-Sparrow
Hanbury-Sparrow
[2010] HCA 24
Department of Premier
and Cabinet v Hulls
[1999] VSCA 117
Secretary to the Department of
Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96
Hanson v Department of
Education and Training
[2007] VCAT 123
Hutchison v Department
of Human Services
(1997) 12 VAR 422
Mickelborough v Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
AB v Department of Human
[2001] VCAT 2020
Re F and Health
(1988) 2 VAR 458
Drew v Victoria
[2012] VCAT 572
O’Sullivan v
Victoria Police (No 5)
(Unreported, AAT of Vic, Judge Fricke DP, 22 March
Pasamonte v Victoria Police
(Unreported, AAT of Vic, Dimtscheff
DP, 18 May 1993)
McNamara v Department of
Human Services
[2004] VCAT 1085
Towie v Medical Practitioners Board
(Unreported, VCAT, Davis DP, 8 December 2000)
Vaughan v Department of
Sustainability and Environment
[2004] VCAT 1562
Victoria Police v Marke
[2008] VSCA 218
Page v Metropolitan Transit Authority
(1988) 2 VAR
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
Horrocks v Department of
[2012] VCAT 241
Edwards v Museum of Victoria
[2011] VCAT
AB v Department of Education and Early Childhood Development
Beauchamp v Department of Education and Training
[2006] VCAT
XYZ v Victoria
See citations in footnotes
paragraph [71]
Sobh v Police Force of
[1994] VicRp 2
(1994) 1 VR 41
[2007] VCAT 1194
paragraphs [64] to [66]
[1994] VicRp 2
(1994) 1 VR 41
JCL v Victoria Police
[2012] VCAT 1060
Mickelborough
Mickelborough
Ryder v Booth
[1985] VicRp 86
XYZ v Victoria Police
Gunawan v Department of
[1999] VCAT 665
Akers v Victoria Police
[2003] VCAT 398
Williams; Biviano v Victoria Police
[2006] VCAT 2542
Department of
Agricultural and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836
Mees v University
of Melbourne
[2009] VCAT 782
paragraphs [37] and [73]
AB v Department of
Education and Early Childhood Development
Re Mildenhall and
Department of Education
(1998) 14 VAR 87
Halliday v Office of
Fair Trading
(Unreported, AAT of Vic, Coghlan DP, 20 July 1995
Borg v Department of
Premier and Cabinet
(1989) 3VAR 201;
Corry v Victoria Police
Sportsbet Pty
v Department of Justice
[2010] VCAT 8
McIntosh v Department of
Premier and Cabinet
[2009] VCAT 1528
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (418 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter