URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/1005.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MG Estates Pty Ltd v Coliban Water Corporation [2025] VCAT 1005 (12 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P276/2024
Water Act 1989
section 271
; Subdivision of land to create
residential estate; Construction by owner of extensions to water and sewer
mains; Review of Authority’s
decision on the owner’s objection to
make a requirement under
section 268(2)
; Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction
MG Estates Pty Ltd
DECISION MAKER
Coliban Water Corporation
SUBJECT LAND
244 Edwards Road
MAIDEN GULLY VIC 3551
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
20 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
12 November 2025
MG Estates Pty Ltd v Coliban Water Corporation [2025] VCAT 1005
Questions of law
answers to the questions of law raised in Tribunal Application P276/2024 are as
Can MG Estates Pty Ltd apply to the Tribunal under
section 271(3)
Water Act 1989
If the answer to question 1 is ‘no’, does the Tribunal have
If the answers to questions 1 and 2 are ‘no’, could MG Estates Pty
Ltd apply under
section 145
Water Act 1989
Leave to amend the application
Estates Pty Ltd has leave to amend Tribunal Application P276/2024. An
application to amend must be filed by
24 November
Practice day hearing
application is listed for a practice day hearing as detailed below.
If there is any change to these details, the Tribunal will notify you.
Practice Day Hearing:
5 December 2025
For details of the start time, please refer to the Tribunal’s website (
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/todays-hearings
after 5.00pm on the day before the hearing
Online platform.
The online details will be provided to the parties prior to the practice day
purposes of the practice day hearing are:
To consider any
application to amend Tribunal Application P276/2024 filed in accordance with
application to amend Tribunal Application P276/2024 in accordance with order 2
has been filed, to consider the future conduct
of the proceeding. This may
include a consideration of dates, duration, compulsory conference and/or
What all parties must do before the practice day
4:00pm on 1 December 2025
, the parties must provide to the Tribunal and
all parties an electronic copy of submissions and associated material. The
submissions
must address the specific purposes of the practice day hearing and
attach (as relevant):
any proposed
orders that you will ask the Tribunal to make; and
evidence and documents.
All material for the Tribunal must be sent to
admin@courts.vic.gov.au
Geoffrey Code
Senior Member
Nick Wimbush
APPEARANCES
For applicant
Nicholas Tweedie SC and Daniel Robinson of counsel, instructed by HWL
Ebsworth Lawyers.
For decision maker
Andrew Sherman and Tamika Chikulin, lawyers, Russell Kennedy Lawyers.
Application P276/2024 concerns a Water Authority’s conditions requiring an
owner to provide water and sewerage services
to a residential subdivision by
constructing works for those services and then gifting those works to the
conditions raise a question of law as to whether they require the owner to meet
or contribute to the costs of the works under
section 268(2)
finding is that, as a matter of statutory construction, they do not.
Accordingly, we do not have jurisdiction to determine Tribunal
Application
P276/2024 (‘works application’).
will not presently dismiss the works application as misconceived because it may
be able to be made under different provisions of
will not amend the works application as part of this order. The applicant has
foreshadowed a possible amendment to the works application.
We will give leave
to allow an application to be made to amend the works application.
will fix a practice day hearing to consider any application to amend the works
application and the future conduct of the proceeding.
If an application to
amend the works application is not made, we will dismiss the whole of the works
application.
WHAT IS THE PROCEEDING ABOUT
Estates Pty Ltd (‘MG Estates’) disputes Coliban Water
Corporation’s (‘Coliban Water’) requirements
to provide water
and sewerage services to a proposed residential subdivision.
Estates is intending to develop the subject land as a new housing estate which
includes 1,380 residential lots.
Bendigo City Council has issued a permit under the Greater Bendigo Planning
Scheme for the project.
condition of the permit is, in effect, to provide reticulated water and sewerage
services in accordance with Coliban Water’s
specifications.
8 November 2023, Coliban Water issued two notices that approved MG
Estates’ ‘preliminary design plans’ for extension
of water and
sewer mains to the estate (‘works notices’), largely along roads
leading to the estate. The approvals were
subject to conditions. Coliban Water
said the conditions were made under
section 268
Estates objected to the works notices and Coliban Water decided to refuse the
objections. The works application seeks to review
Coliban Water’s
7 February 2025, and in response to referral of a plan of subdivision for 60
lots in stage 1A of the estate, Coliban Water issued
a further notice that
included requirements to pay ‘new customer contributions’
(‘NCC’) of $2,858.44 per
lot for water and $2,286.75 per lot for
sewer with a rebate of $1,331.30 for a sewer pump station (‘NCC
NCC notice said these charges were a one-off charge made under ‘
and/or 269’ of the
Estates objected to the NCC notice and Coliban Water refused the objection and
confirmed the requirements in the NCC notice. MG
Estates has applied (in
Tribunal Application P419/2025) to review the decision to refuse the objection
to the NCC notice (‘NCC
application’).
hearing of both the works application and the NCC application started on 20
October 2025.
a preliminary matter, Coliban Water said it had confirmed earlier notice to MG
Estates that the works application is misconceived
because it was made under
section 271
but could not be made under that section.
Coliban Water did not ask that we determine this question before determining the
merits of the whole proceeding, we decided
this was a threshold matter that
should be decided before we heard the merits of the works application.
proceeded to hear argument from the parties on the question raised by Coliban
Water. We then stood the matter down and, after
a short break, returned to
inform the parties that we had decided that did not have jurisdiction to
determine the works application.
We reserved our reasons. With the consent of
the parties, we then proceeded to hear the parties on the NCC
application.
have formulated the question as three discrete questions and the following are
our answers and
Can MG Estates Pty Ltd apply to the Tribunal under
section 271(3)
Water Act 1989
which is headed ‘Finance and
accountability’ and within Division 6 which is headed ‘Owner
Section 271
is headed ‘Review of required
Authority in
section 271(1)
includes Coliban
includes paragraphs (ea) and (f) but they are not relevant for present
requires an Authority to notify the owner of the decision on its
Estates applied to review Coliban Water’s decisions to refuse the
objections on the grounds the amounts payable are unreasonable
and excessive (ie
paragraphs (b) and (c)).
follows that an application to the Tribunal may only be made if MG Estates was,
by the works notice, ‘required to make a
payment under
sections 268
’. We agree with the parties that
section 268
is the relevant
section in this proceeding.
is headed ‘Authority may require payment’ and
includes sub-sections (5) and (6) relating to inspection of an
Authority’s ‘proposed services and the costs’ and
cost must be borne by the Crown. They are not relevant, and it is unnecessary
to set these out.
parties agree that Coliban Water issued the works notices under
section 268(2).
MG Estates’ subdivision ‘masterplan’ had earlier been referred
to Coliban Water under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
critical part of section 268(2) is whether the works notices require MG Estate
to ‘meet or contribute to the present day
cost of any works
requires making a finding about the requirements in the works notices and the
construction of section 268. We will deal with
these in turn.
Works notices
of the works notices contain 11 conditions relating to, respectively, the water
and sewerage works. Both works notices include
the following
Ownership of the assets will revert to Coliban Water at the Date of Practical
parties referred to this condition as the ‘gifting’ condition.
of the works notices include one condition requiring payment of a small
specified ‘project management fee’.
works notices do not require payment to Coliban Water in the form of money for
the construction of the works. MG Estates is not
required to ‘meet or
contribute to’ Coliban Water’s costs in constructing the services.
The works notices contemplate
MG Estates engaging contractors to construct the
works and MG Estates paying those contractors for constructing the works. We
no basis for an argument that the works notices require MG Estates to pay
Coliban Water to construct the works.
Coliban Water’s stated basis for the works
turning to the construction of section 268, we refer to two of MG Estates’
contentions that Coliban Water has accepted
that section 268 applies to the
works notices.
both works notices state:
These conditions have been determined in accordance with
Sections 145(3)
and/or 269 of the
Water Act 1989
. You may object to these conditions in
writing within:
receiving these conditions under
section 145(3A)
Water Act 1989
one month of
receiving these conditions on any of the grounds specified in
section 271
Water Act 1989
These conditions have been determined in accordance with
Section 268
. You may object to these conditions in writing within one
month of receiving these conditions on any of the grounds specified in
statements are unclear because they refer to the conditions having been made
sections 145
Estates also submits that Coliban Water proceeded to consider an objection by MG
Estates to both notices under
section 271
without expressing any doubt that MG
Estates could object on the grounds that
section 268(2)
suffices to state that Coliban Water’s opinion of the correct legislative
basis of the works notice and its handling of the
objection are not
determinative of question 1.
MG Estates refers to Coliban Water’s statement of grounds that, until
shortly before the hearing started, stated:
At paragraph 15(a) of the Amended Statement of Grounds, the Applicant seeks
review under
section 271(1)(b)
on the basis that several
properties will allegedly benefit and the basis of the distribution of the cost
is unreasonable. In this
respect Coliban Water contends:
(a) This ground of review is available to the owner.
(b) The ground is not made out.
before the hearing, Coliban Water sought to rely on amended grounds that
substituted paragraph (a), with:
(a) This ground of review is not available to the owner.
Water claimed that the word ‘not’ had been excluded by inadvertent
mistake. MG Estates objected to the granting
of any leave to amend the
statement of grounds.
Estates did not press its objection when we decided that whether the works
application was correctly made under
section 271
was a threshold legal question.
Both Coliban Water and MG Estates had addressed the essence of question 1 in
their written submissions
filed before the start of the hearing.
Construction of
section 268
the conditions in the works notice are a requirement to ‘meet or
contribute to the ... cost’ of works in a manner
that does not require MG
Estates to pay Coliban Water a sum of money is a matter of statutory
construction.
principles of statutory construction are settled. In summary, and without
referring to the many authorities, it requires consideration
of the text,
context and purpose of
section 268.
Estates’ primary submission is that the requirement in
section 268(2)
be to ‘meet or contribute’ to costs of works and the gifting
condition in the works notice meets this description
because MG Estates will
meet those costs by constructing the works.
primary submission applies
section 268(2)
as a standalone provision. We
consider we must construe subsection (2) in the context of
section 268
whole. If subsection (2) was not to be construed within
section 268
as a whole,
the legislature could have enacted
section 268(2)
as a separate section.
though subsection (2) does not contain the word ‘payment’, the
section 268
refers to ‘Authority may require
section 268
may be an aid to interpretation of the
but does not form part
of the section. This is because the heading was inserted into the original Act
in 1989 and therefore before
the relevant date of 1 January
our opinion, to meet or contribute to the costs of works involves making a
‘payment’. This is confirmed by
section 271
which provides that
‘an owner who is required to make a payment under
section 268
Estates’ alternative submission is that the gifting condition in the works
notices are, in effect and in any event, a payment.
is not defined in the
Interpretation of Legislation Act
(Vic), so its ordinary meaning applies. Dictionary meanings can assist
with finding the ordinary meaning for the purposes of section
268. We emphasise
they can assist but they do not determine.
meanings include:
the act of paying.
that which is paid; compensation; recompense.
requital (in turn: “repayment; something given or serving to
The action or process of paying someone or something or of being paid; or
An amount paid or payable.
A sum of money (or other thing) paid ...
The action, or an act, of rendering to a person anything due, deserved, or
befitting, or discharging an obligation; the thing so
A payment is an amount of money that is paid to someone, or the act of paying
this money.
A sum of money (or equivalent) paid or payable, esp. in return for goods or
service or in discharge of a debt ...
The action or an act of paying money owed; the remuneration of a person with
money or its equivalent, in discharge of a debt or in
exchange for goods,
services, etc.
The action, or an act, of paying; the remuneration of a person with money or its
equivalent; the giving of money, etc. in return
for something or in discharge of
meanings suggest payment could be in the form of money or other forms that
discharge an obligation etc. A payment might therefore
be in this broader
Estates referred us to a number of decisions of various courts that had
considered the ordinary meaning of payment, all of which
supported the broader
form of a payment ‘in kind’ i.e. a payment other than in
We would be cautious in
applying those meanings in present circumstances because they were in commercial
contexts or under legislative
regimes concerning taxation or corporations.
parties were unable to draw our attention to authorities about whether meeting
or contributing to works under section 268(2) by
the gifting of those works upon
completion constituted a payment.
Water relied on
St Edmonds Road Project Pty Ltd v South East Water
’). This case concerned
sections 27
(now repealed) and
63 (now repealed) of the
Water Industry Act 1994
Act’). We consider those sections analogous to
sections 268
(respectively) of the
. The Authority in that case required a
payment under section 28 of the WI Act but had also required new sewerage
, the Tribunal, in effect, said the challenge to the works
conditions could only be properly made under section 63 and not under section
It is common ground that the first dispute arises under the first proceeding and
s 30 WI Act. It was submitted, on behalf of St
Edmonds that the second dispute
could also arise in the first proceeding and under that section, as an
alternative to the second
proceeding pursuant to s 63 WI Act. It seems to me
that s 28, and reviews of decisions under it pursuant to s 30, concern the
payment of money
rather than the imposition of conditions. Accordingly I
favour the view that it is the first proceeding concerning ss 28 and 30
relate to the charges for connection or increased usage and that it is the
second proceeding under s 63 that relates to the
150 mm connection with
associated maintenance hole
[Our emphasis]
reasoning in this case provides support for a conclusion that the contribution
in section 268(2) needs to be a payment of money.
context of payment in section 268 as a whole leads us to prefer a narrower
meaning of payment than the broader meaning in the
dictionaries and the
authorities relied on by MG Estates.
268(3) requires an Authority to assess the ‘amount of payment’
required from an owner under section 268(2) to
be fair and reasonable. Section
268(4) states the Authority’s notice must specify ‘the amount of the
payment required’
and that if payments are required in relation to a group
of properties, the ‘amounts’ required in relation to each
emphasis on the ‘amount’ of payment means the context is one of
payment by money. We are not persuaded that payment
in some other form,
including ‘gifting’ of assets, is payment by an
context of section 268 is confirmed by the context of the division of the
in which the section exists.
are not relevant to the works application because Coliban Water does
not propose to carry out works to the subject land. However,
consistent with payment in money form because both sections also refer to
‘amount’ of the payment.
, which we have set out above, sets out grounds on which an owner may object
to an Authority. In the works application, one of the
two grounds on which MG
Estates relies is that the ‘amount’ is excessive. Again, this is
consistent with payment in
money form.
we have stated,
section 268
sits within Division 6 of
and the heading to the Division is ‘Owner finance’. The heading to
the Division may be an aid to interpretation of the
but does not form part
because the heading was inserted into the
enactment in 1989 and therefore before the relevant date of 1 January
Nonetheless the heading
gives some support to payments under the Division being an amount in money form
because ‘finance’
connotes an owner meeting or contributing to the
costs of works by ‘financing’ those works with an amount of
section 268
may also be an aid to interpretation of the
but (as we have said)
does not form part of the section for the same reason in relation to the heading
to Division 6.
have also had regard to other provisions in the
. MG Estates drew our
attention to Division 7 of
Division 7 is headed ‘Payment and
recovery of money’. MG Estates submitted that if payments under Division
were intended to be payments of money, the legislature could have
headed Division 6 in a similar way and therefore we should draw
an inference
that Division 6 was not intended to refer narrowly to payments of money. We
consider this is giving too much weight
to the heading in construing
summary, the context of Division 6 helps us construe
section 268
so that the
meeting or contribution to the costs of providing services must be a payment
being an amount in money form. We do not
therefore agree with MG Estates’
central contention that the gifting condition meets the requirements of
interpreting
section 268
, we must prefer a construction that promotes the
purpose of the section,
may consider relevant documents, including explanatory memorandum presented to
Parliament and reports of Parliamentary
proceedings.
has no express purpose. Nor does Division 6. We have considered the
explanatory memorandum for the Water Bill and clause 268 states:
Clause 268 provides that an Authority can require the owner of a property to
contribute towards works that are used or will be able
to be used directly or
indirectly to provide a service. An Authority can make a requirement when it
intends to provide a service
or when a subdivision proposal is referred to it.
The amount required must be fair and notice must be given.
explanatory memorandum is of limited assistance, other than to confirm that a
contribution must be an ‘amount’ that
Ascertaining
the purpose of section 268 from the
as a whole, we gain some
assistance from the ‘general powers’ of Authorities in
section 145
headed ‘Control over connections’ and
section 145A
‘Offences as to connections and discharges without consent’. Under
section 145A
it is an offence to, inter alia, knowingly cause or permit the
connection of any works to the works of an Authority without the consent
Authority under
section 145.
the works applications, MG Estates is proposing to construct
‘extensions’ to water and sewer mains on land outside
the estate so
that those mains join the proposed water and sewerage services within the
estate. By definition, the extensions will
provide a connection between
services in the estate and the wider services outside the estate provided by
Coliban Water.
does not specify who will carry out or construct the ‘extension’
works. It is clear that it will not be Coliban Water
section 145
an Authority may consent or refuse or consent subject to terms and
conditions.
Estates submitted that
section 145
is part of an Authority’s
‘general powers’ in
section 268
a ‘specific power’ that enables an Authority to require an owner to
meet or contribute to the present day cost of
any works that are used or will be
used directly or indirectly for the provision of those services.
agree with MG Estates that it is a legal principle that if a statute provides
both a general power that is not subject to qualification
or limitation and a
specific power that is so subject, the general power cannot be exercised to do
that which is the subject of the
our opinion, that principle is not engaged because the specific power is not
available in present circumstances and the general
power therefore remains
available and is unconstrained by the specific power.
therefore find that
section 145
more accurately contemplates the works in the
works notices than
section 268.
section 145
, the purpose of
section 268
is not to approve, subject to
conditions, the extension works proposed by MG Estates in the works
If the answer to question 1 is ‘no’, does the Tribunal have
follows that, if MG Estates cannot apply under
section 271
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider the works application.
If the answers to questions 1 and 2 are ‘no’, could MG Estates Pty
Ltd apply under
section 145
Water Act 1989
states that, on application, an Authority may consent to the connection of
any works to the works of the Authority subject to any
terms and conditions that
it thinks fit.
we have stated, the legal principle about general and specific power does not
preclude an application by MG Estates under
section 145(3A).
application may be made if Coliban Water has consented to the connection of any
works to its works. The works notices meet that
description. The works notices
allow MG Estates to construct water and sewerage mains outside its land to
to Coliban Water’s works in both Edwards Road and
Rathbones Lane.
remaining question is whether the gifting conditions in both works notices are
valid conditions under
section 145.
is no express limitation in
section 145(3)(c).
This does not mean it is
unconstrained. The constraint we would accept is whether the condition is
reasonably related to the three
section 145(1).
The condition is
reasonably related to those matters because, among other things, it clarifies
who has future responsibility for
the maintenance of the water and sewerage
mains constructed by MG Estates and that are connected to Coliban Water’s
we said at the hearing, we consider it ‘open’ to Coliban Water to
include a condition such as the gifting condition
in the works notices.
However, whether it is an acceptable condition goes to the merits of the
condition rather than to its lawfulness.
FUTURE CONDUCT
the hearing, we gave an oral decision without reasons in line with the answers
to questions 1 to 3.
Estates foreshadowed that it may apply to amend the works application but wanted
to first read and understand the reasons for our
oral decision. This order
provides those reasons.
NCC notice includes some works conditions relevant to stage 1A and as the works
application was made before the issue of the NCC
notice, MG Estates may need to
include the works conditions in the NCC notice in any application to amend the
works application.
We will leave this question to MG Estates for further
consideration.
will not dismiss the works application in this order but give MG Estates leave
to apply to amend the works application.
will fix a practice day hearing to consider any amendment that may be filed by
MG Estates to the works application, including whether
it is necessary to extend
time to file an application under
section 145(3A).
If no amendment is filed, we
will proceed to wholly dismiss the works application as misconceived.
Geoffrey Code
Senior Member
Nick Wimbush
The submissions of the
parties, and the documents they filed or tendered (including those in the
Tribunal Book), relevant to the
questions of law raised in Application P276/2024
have all been considered in determining the questions of law. In accordance
the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this material will be cited or
referred to in these reasons.
Permit AM/798/2017/A dated 28
March 2018 (‘permit’).
Ibid condition 24.
The hearing of the NCC
application concluded on 24 October 2025. This order makes no determination of
the NCC application, about
which we are presently deliberating.
As these questions go to our
Lawyer member of this
division of the Tribunal and the answers to the question
are those of Senior Member Code. References to ‘we’ in these
reasons are a reference to Senior Member Code. For completeness, Member Wimbush
concurs with the order and reasons.
Section 271(4)
relevantly require the application to be made within 30 days of the day of the
decision. This requirement is not in dispute.
For completeness,
section 269
is headed ‘Contributions for increased services’ and
section 270
headed ‘Payments on connections’.
Section 268(1)
does not apply
because the parties agree that Coliban Water does not ‘intend to provide
services which will benefit a property’.
Section 271(2)
requires, in summary, the use of the works to benefit the property, but this may
be relevant to the merits but not to the question
Coliban Water, statement of
grounds for works application, paragraph 2.2.
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
(Vic) (‘IL Act’) section 35(b).
Ibid section 36.
Macquarie Dictionary,
online edition.
Oxford Languages (as quoted
in written submissions on behalf of Coliban Water at paragraph 8.16).
Oxford Shorter Dictionary,
edition, 1973.
Collins online
dictionary.
Oxford English Dictionary
Oxford English Dictionary,
edition, 1989 p 379 – as quoted by the Federal Magistrates
Court of Australia in
CFMEU v Mammoet Australia Pty Ltd
[2011] FMCA 802
. We observe the definition in the online edition of the dictionary
differs from that in the 2
edition by adding ‘money
owed’ to the act of paying.
These included
Elmdene Estates Ltd
[1959] 2 All ER 605;
Commissioner of Taxation v
[2010] FCA 324
CFMEU v Mammoet Australia Pty Ltd
[2011] FMCA 802
Urginovski v Naumovksi
[2016] VSC 555
Wong (No 2)
[2025] FCA 693.
[2010] VCAT 762.
IL Act s 35(b).
Ibid s 35(b).
Ibid s 35(a).
Ibid s 35(b)(ii),
We are aware that clause
145 in the Water Bill was amended in the Parliament before it was enacted. We
are also aware that section
145 was amended by the Parliament by legislation
enacted in 2012, 2013 and 2019. None of these amendments are relevant for
Leon Fink Holdings Pty
Ltd v Australian Film Commission
(1979) 141 CLR 672
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter