URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2018/732.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v Vu [2018] VSC 732 (26 November 2018)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
HUNG ANH VU
DATE OF HEARING
9 November 2018
DATE OF SENTENCE
26 November 2018
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2018] VSC 732
CRIMINAL LAW – Sentence – Manslaughter and recklessly causing
serious injury – Stabbing of partner and her husband
in circumstances of
infidelity – Partner suffered serious injury, and her husband died –
Previous offer to plead guilty
to manslaughter – Extent of discount to be
allowed on account of that – Plea offer not an indication of remorse or
subjective criteria in the circumstances – Serious example of crime
of manslaughter – Mid-range example of recklessly
causing serious injury
– Total effective sentence of 15 years – Non-parole period of 11
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Mr J Cain, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr S Bayles
Stary Norton Halphen
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
1 Hung Anh Vu, following a trial which
occupied two weeks of Court time, and following three days of deliberations, you
guilty by a jury on 18 October 2018 of the manslaughter of Hung Viet
Nguyen (‘Viet’) and recklessly causing serious injury
to Laura Chan
(‘Laura’). The crimes took place on 5 August
2 The maximum penalty for manslaughter is
imprisonment for 20 years. The maximum penalty for recklessly causing serious
imprisonment for 15 years.
3 Your killing of Viet and causing of
serious injury to Laura took place in the context of their having carried out a
relationship
behind your back, and your becoming angry and resentful upon
finding out about that fact.
4 At the time of the
events, you were living in a relationship with Laura at 10 McGregor Court in
Sunshine West. Also living at the
premises and present on the evening of the
offending were the two sons you had with Laura, Kevin, aged 15, and William,
5 During a period of time during which you
were serving a sentence in NSW for drug trafficking, which had you away from
your two children for some years, Laura commenced a relationship with
Viet. He moved in with her and the children at McGregor Court.
They even took
the step of getting married in September 2015, an event which was kept from you
and from all but their closest friends.
6 Upon your
release from prison in late August 2016, you returned home to live with Laura
and your children at the McGregor Court
property. Viet moved out before your
return and for the last year of his life, he lived a short distance away,
maintaining his relationship
with Laura behind your back. In that time, he had
been introduced to you by Laura as a friend, and he became a friend and work
to you as well.
7 Evidence indicated that
in the months leading up to 5 August 2017, you had started to hear talk about
the possibility of a relationship
between Laura and Viet. You had even
confronted Laura about this, but she had denied the truth of the rumours. Your
relationship
with Laura was not going well. On her evidence in the trial, it
seems you had been sleeping in separate rooms for much of the time
release from prison. She stated there were frequent disagreements between the
two of you, and said that the two of you
had not spoken for a few weeks leading
up to 5 August 2017.
Lead-up events on 5 August 2017
8 As it turned out, on the day of the
killing of Viet, it was confirmed to you by your mother and your sons that there
was, indeed,
a relationship going on between Laura and Viet. You found out that
the relationship had been going on for some time, and that Viet
had occupied
your place in the family home for much of the time you had spent in custody in
9 On your arrival home from your visit to your
mother, you telephoned Viet and invited him around to your home that evening.
thing you did was to remove a hunting knife from a drawer in the
kitchen, and then hide it under a cushion on a chair at the dining
room table.
Subsequent examination of the knife showed the blade to be slightly in excess of
16 cm in length. You told the police
you hid the knife intending to use it to
confront Viet and Laura. I am satisfied that in the hours leading up to the
stabbing of
Viet and Laura, you intended at least to confront them over the
affair, and to use the knife you had hidden in pursuit of that aim
to confront
10 A friend of yours named Hai Minh Nguyen
(‘Minh’) gave evidence that he received a telephone call from you on
the afternoon
of Saturday 5 August 2017. You told him of your concerns that
your partner was involved with another man. You told Minh you intended
confront the two about the relationship. You sounded very sad during the call.
Minh was concerned about you, and invited you
to come to join him at a barbecue
being held in Keysborough. You said you would come but wanted to speak to Laura
first. So concerned
was Minh about your demeanour and your stated intention to
confront Laura and Viet that he telephoned his brother, Nam, and told
and pick you up. He also telephoned your daughter Kim Nguyen and told her of
his concerns. He then drove over from Keysborough
to Sunshine West to see
11 As it turned out, a group of your friends,
including Minh, congregated at the house in Sunshine West. You were seen to be
sad and down state, and you consumed a number of glasses of Hennessey
Cognac. There was differing evidence as to the extent to which
you may have
been affected by alcohol during the evening. Your daughter Kim said in evidence
that you were drunk and sad. Laura
also said you were drunk. You said in the
interview that whilst you had had a number of drinks and were somewhat affected,
not feel drunk.
satisfied that you were affected to an extent by the alcohol you had
12 At some stage during the evening, Laura
arrived home and having greeted people in the kitchen/living area, she went to
her bedroom.
Either before or after the arrival home of Laura, Viet also
attended at the house. Not long after this, you went into Laura’s
and asked her to come out into the other room and talk with you. She refused to
do so and you commenced to drag her out of
the bedroom. She asked to be able to
get dressed. You left her in the room and she locked the
13 You returned to the living room and asked
the others present in the room, with the exception of Viet, to go outside, so
talk to Viet and Laura. All the others went outside and waited near
the front door. You then went to Laura’s bedroom and
kicked the locked
door open, damaging the lock, before entering the room. You grabbed her arm and
forced her out into the living
area. You made her sit on one side of the dining
table, alongside Viet, facing the sliding door which led outside. You took up
position sitting on the other side of the table, facing them. Your sons were
present in their bedrooms at the rear of the
14 In the meantime, your friends and daughter
who were outside had heard the sound of the bedroom door being kicked in. Minh
others tried to get in the front door but found it was locked. They then
went around to the sliding door facing into the living
area where you and the
others were seated. Minh found this door, too, was locked. He knocked, but you
did not let him in. He detected
the atmosphere inside the room was tense. He
decided to gain entry to the house by another route, and, having gone further to
back, was able to get inside through a small gap in Kevin’s bedroom
window. He went quickly through into the kitchen and sat
next to you on the
same side of the table.
The two stabbings
15 Minh noticed there was a good deal of
tension when he arrived in the kitchen. He told you to relax, but that was the
on your mind. You asked Viet and Laura what was going on, and
according to Minh, they both denied anything was going
Things very quickly got very
heated, with you yelling at Viet and Laura. You did not accept the denials and
persisted in the questioning,
at some point apparently saying, ‘Just tell
me the truth. I just want to know the truth.’ Minh continued to try to
you down, reminding you that your children were present in the
16 You stood up and so did Minh. He told you
to calm down again and that just seemed to make you more angry. You told him to
up. He grabbed hold of you, again urging you to calm down. There was a
brief struggle between you and Minh and you pushed him away,
causing him to move
back a bit. He could see your hands at this time and he saw no knife in them.
The overall evidence, however,
would indicate that you must have had the knife
in your possession, either in your hand or secreted on your person, when you
up from the seated position at the
17 According to Minh, you then moved past him
towards the kitchen area. It was at this point that Minh saw the knife in your
He grabbed you again, this time by the arm or shoulder. He again told
you to relax but you told him to ‘Fuck off’.
You struggled with him
and broke free, before he grabbed you again from behind, with his front facing
your back. At this point,
Laura and Viet were still seated on the other side of
the table, with Viet closest to the kitchen and Laura on the other side of
You were between Minh and the others, and Minh claimed he could not see what was
taking place, his view being obstructed by
your body. He said he could see your
hands and those of Viet, and now, could not remember seeing the knife. Viet was
still partially
seated. He could not remember noticing
18 On the account of Minh, things suddenly
went quiet, and everyone sat down. Shortly after this, he could hear the noise
of someone,
who must have been Viet, ‘chucking up a bit’. Then he
saw an expanding area of blood on Viet’s
19 As can be seen from the account related
thus far, Minh did not see the stab wounds inflicted upon either of your
victims. Indeed,
he claimed he did not observe any event which could have been
either of the stabbing incidents, although he was standing very close
both victims were stabbed. This seems most surprising. Imperfect and
incomplete though his account may be, however, it
was considerably more
plausible than that of Laura Chan.
20 There were many
unsatisfactory aspects to Laura’s evidence. Not only did she not see a
knife and not see either Viet or
herself get stabbed by you, she did not even
recall Minh being in the room. In any event, on her account, after you became
while questioning her and Viet, to the extent of having something she
described as a ‘tantrum’, she saw you reach for
something from the
bottom drawer in the kitchen. Although she did not see what it was, she said
she called out, ‘No, no, no’,
and then ran over and tried to grab
the thing from your hand. She then described the positions and movements of
herself and you,
and the position of Viet at the table, which provided no
explanation for the infliction of the two stab wounds which were, undeniably,
inflicted by you right in front of her.
described the events as follows:
I remember putting my hand and try to grab things off
him, and I remember when I put in there was like – there was other hands
and I remember there was hands everywhere, we were kind of like pull it off him,
and I don’t know in a few seconds, at that
time I feel like there was a
prick, but I didn’t know until later on, when I realised I was stabbed, at
that time kind of like
pulling in, I can feel the prick but I didn’t know
what’s going on.
22 Laura indicated after this she was
aware of Viet bleeding, and she described the efforts which were then made to
care for him.
23 Two other eye witnesses, namely Kim
Nguyen, your daughter, who rushed into the house shortly after Minh and got a
glimpse of things
taking place in the kitchen, and Minh’s brother Nam, who
was standing outside the sliding door throughout the proceedings,
position where they should have been able to observe the stabbing motions you
must have carried out which led to the stab
wounds to each of your victims.
Their evidence was of no more assistance in revealing the exact circumstances of
the two stabbings.
24 In short, of the four eye
witnesses in a position, on the face of it, to see you stab your two victims,
not one of them claimed
to have seen any such thing. The evidence was very
unsatisfactory. I make it clear I do not hold that fact against you, but it
does limit my ability to make specific findings of fact about the precise
mechanics of the stabbings.
Aftermath of the stabbings
25 The evidence revealed that shortly
after being stabbed, Viet collapsed, and he ended up on the floor being attended
to by you and
your daughter. Emergency services were called and you and Kim
made extensive efforts to provide CPR to Viet, to no
26 The knife you had used to stab Viet and
Laura was, for some reason, removed by Nam from the kitchen bench where you had
it and taken to another location from where it was later recovered by the
27 At some point during the time when you
and your daughter were caring for Viet, you grabbed another knife and held it
against your
chest, as if intending to stab yourself. You were dissuaded from
doing so, if it was ever your intention, by your daughter and Laura.
Police attendance, your early statements, and the police interview
28 Police and ambulance officers attended
promptly. It was confirmed that Viet was
29 You were spoken to by two different
policemen in the immediate aftermath of your crimes. One of them was Senior
Constable William
Calleja who spoke to you in the front yard of the property.
He asked you to say what had happened, and you said, ‘He did
Shortly after this, you spoke to Senior Sergeant Papadopoulos,
who also asked you what had happened. You told him that your friend
wife were having an affair, and that both of them had stabbed themselves out of
30 By the time you were being interviewed by
the police the day after these events, the dishonest and implausible account you
given of your victims having stabbed themselves had been replaced by another
dishonest and implausible account that you had stabbed
each of them by mistake.
You claimed that you had stabbed Viet as a result of an accidental mechanism
when you sought to free your
hand holding the knife from the grip of Minh, your
hand and arm flew backwards, and the knife must have come into entirely
this at the time. Then, you claimed that in identical circumstances
that led to your stabbing Viet by mistake, you also stabbed Laura by
31 In the circumstances in which this trial
was fought, the jury verdict means that the jury were satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt
that the explanation you gave to the police was false. This is
hardly surprising.
Autopsy upon Viet
32 Dr Gregory Young carried out an
autopsy on the body of Viet on 6 August 2017. The single stab wound which
caused the death was
oriented on the 3 o’clock to 9 o’clock plane on
the right side of the chest. The wound was squared off at the 9 o’clock
end and sharp at the other end, indicating a single sided blade had penetrated
the chest. There was an abrasion around the entry
wound, which could have been
caused by the hilt of the knife contacting the skin at the time of the wound.
The wound tract proceeded
from front to back, right to left, and from up to down
into the body. The efforts of the pathologist to determine a maximum depth
the wound tract led to a figure of 18 cm, but that figure was heavily qualified
by the expert. The knife travelled through skin,
the underlying subcutaneous
tissue, the right pectoralis muscle, the second intercostal space, into the
pericardial sac, and then
into the aorta, also penetrating the right lobe of the
lung. The cause of death was a stab wound to the chest, and death would have
occurred very quickly. Taking into account the fact that the pectoralis muscle
had been penetrated, the force involved in the stab
wound would have been at
least moderate, on a four-level scale.
33 There was
extensive cross-examination of the expert on the question of the depth of the
stab wound. In his closing address, Mr
Doyle for the prosecution argued that
when the jury looked at all of the material pointing to the depth of the wound,
they should
be satisfied that this was a very deep wound with a significant
percentage of the blade having entered the body of the
34 In order to reach their verdict on
Charge 1 on the indictment, and the alternative offence of manslaughter, the
jury would not
have needed to form any concluded view on the issue of the depth
of the stab wound. Nor would I need to reach any view on the matter
in order to
sentence you. Having said that, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
this must, indeed, have been a very deep
wound. Such a conclusion is the only
reasonable conclusion to be reached on the overall material. Insofar as Dr
Young made concessions
pointing to the possibility of a relatively shallow
wound, I consider these to have been overly conservative, and I rule out as a
reasonable possibility that anything other than a very deep wound could have
caused all the injuries to Viet in this case.
Medical treatment of Laura Chan
35 Laura Chan was taken by ambulance to
Royal Melbourne Hospital, where she was treated initially in the Emergency
Department, was
admitted under the care of the trauma team, and then spent 4
days as an in-patient being treated for her wound. The medical records
considered and interpreted by Dr Joanne Parkin, a forensic physician. Dr Parkin
indicated that Laura had a stab wound to the
same part of the chest as the wound
to Viet. She was short of breath in the Emergency Department and scans revealed
bleeding from
the right internal thoracic artery, one of the main arteries
coming from the aorta. There was damage to the wall of that artery.
also damage to a smaller artery in the subcutaneous fat, just under the skin.
In respect of the damage to the internal
thoracic artery, a decision was made
that surgical intervention may not be required. In the end, it would seem this
damage must
have repaired itself.
36 Also revealed
by scans was a small right haemothorax in the extra-pleural space of the right
lung. There was air in the space
around the lung as well, which was later
identified to be a pneumothorax. The right lung of Laura was partially
37 Dr Parkin identified the concerns that
would have been felt by those who had the task of caring for Laura in the
hospital. Haemothoraces
and pneumothoraces are worrying because of the
possibility they may develop into something known as a tension pneumothorax, a
condition which if left untreated, would quickly lead to
38 The medical notes indicate that to avoid
the prospect of such an outcome, doctors inserted a right intercostal catheter
tube to drain the fluid and air. This procedure is not one to be
undertaken lightly, coming with its own risks. The catheter was
installed at
1.30 am on 6 August 2017, and then removed 12 hours later, it being the
preferred practice for such tubes to remain
in place for as short a period as
possible. However, in Laura’s case, when the first catheter was removed,
a pneumothorax
was detected in a follow-up X-ray. This necessitated the
insertion of a second catheter. This occurred at 8.45 pm on 6 August 2017.
This catheter was removed just after midday on 8 August 2017. Follow up
observations in hospital until Laura was discharged, and
then on review of her
in the Trauma Clinic after her discharge, indicated that there was no remaining
pneumothorax. Furthermore,
all wounds she had, including at the sites of the
catheter insertions, had healed well.
39 There was a
live issue in the trial whether or not the injury sustained by Laura was
serious, in light of the definition of ‘serious
It was asserted by
the prosecution that the injury sustained by Laura endangered her life, and was
also substantial and protracted.
On your behalf, it was asserted that her
injury was not serious on either score. The jury verdict on Charge 4 shows that
were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that this was, indeed, a serious
Sentencing facts in light of the verdicts
40 I have already mentioned the
unsatisfactory nature of the eye witness evidence in this case. The
shortcomings of that evidence,
however, do not prevent me from being able to
come to some clear conclusions as to your commission of these offences. Some of
matters clearly flow from the jury verdicts. Some do not. All are
consistent, however, with the jury verdicts. I am satisfied beyond
doubt of all of these things:
i. Your stabbing of
both victims occurred in the context of your growing anger and resentment
towards them both as a result of the
affair they had carried on behind your
back, which was confirmed to you on the day of the
ii. You decided you would confront them
both, and lured Viet to your home for that
iii. You hid the hunting knife in a
location where you would be able to easily access it during the course of the
intended confrontation.
You told police you hid the knife where you did for the
purpose of using it to scare Viet and Laura. Therefore, on your own admission,
it is apparent that your reason for secreting the knife was to use it for an
illegal purpose in the course of the proposed
confrontation.
iv. You physically forced Laura to
come out from her bedroom to the dining table, intent on confronting her with
your suspicions.
v. The action of Viet in denying
the affair made you become even more angry. However, all the steps you had
taken before those denials
show the substantial level of anger you already felt
towards them both.
vi. Your stabbing of both victims
occurred in circumstances where Minh was using all available means, including
physical force, in
order to try to prevent you from carrying out these attacks.
You entirely refused to see reason, or to control your
vii. Neither of your victims presented any
sort of physical threat to you.
viii. Each stabbing
was inflicted by you by a deliberate action to thrust the knife into the chest
of the victims. The fact of the
chest containing crucial bodily structures was
perfectly clear to you.
ix. The two stabbings
followed very closely upon each other. I am satisfied that you stabbed Viet
first, and then Laura.
x. The stab wound to the
chest of Viet was a very deep one.
xi. The stab
wound to the chest of Laura, while not as deep, was still sufficient to
penetrate her chest and damage an important
artery. As a result, she suffered
serious injury. I am satisfied that this injury was serious on both criteria
Crimes Act 1958
Your background
41 You were born in Vietnam in 1971 and
are now aged 47. You are the youngest of three children, and were born during
the Vietnam
war. Your family was from the Hai Phong Province near Hanoi in
North Vietnam. Your mother was an electrician and your father a
truck driver in
Vietnam. During the war, they were required to work in the war effort and as a
result, you and your siblings were
sent away to live in the country with distant
family members and volunteers, away from the bombings of Hanoi and surrounding
These were times of hardship and deprivation. There was limited food
and limited schooling for children. Yours was not a normal
42 The period after the war was a time of
recriminations and reprisals. Your father was caught trying to make
arrangements for the
family to leave the country. He was imprisoned for 3 to 4
years during which time he had no contact with the family. Circumstances
very difficult for the family during those
43 Your father was released from prison when
you were 10, and not long after that, the family was able to flee Vietnam by
family spent 4 to 5 years in a refugee camp in Hong Kong.
Eventually, when you were 15 years old, you arrived in Australia with
family. You settled in Adelaide where you commenced English language courses
and schooling. The family later moved to Melbourne
where you completed your
schooling at Maribyrnong High School to the Year 11
44 When you left school you commenced working
in the textile industry, machine-sewing
45 You married at a young age and you and
your wife had three children together. You worked hard in the textile industry
for several
years, but it was hard physical work with long hours. At the
encouragement of your then wife, you found work as an apprenticed mechanic.
left this then worked as an air conditioning fitter with Melbourne City Toyota
and then Le Mans Toyota. Eventually you were
promoted into a sales role. You
did well and remained there until 2013.
meantime, you had separated from your wife and commenced a relationship with
Laura Chan in the early-2000s. You have sons
aged 14 and 16 to that
relationship.
47 2013 was the year in which you were
imprisoned in New South Wales for serious drug offending.
Your offers to plead guilty and the issue of remorse
48 One of the central matters relied upon
on your behalf by Mr Bayles on the plea hearing was the fact that you had, in
offered to plead guilty to the crime of manslaughter of Viet, that is,
the crime of which you were found guilty by the jury. I was
informed that an
offer was made on your behalf that you would plead guilty to manslaughter before
the committal hearing, and the
offer was renewed in writing between the time of
the committal hearing and the trial. The offer was made on the basis of an
and dangerous act manslaughter, that is, the type of crime of which you
were found guilty by the jury. At all material times, the
offer was rejected by
the prosecution. As a result, no discussions were ever entered into with a view
to an agreement being reached
in respect of the charges you faced concerning
Laura Chan.
49 It was the submission of Mr Bayles on
the plea that you are entitled to a significant discount in sentence for your
previous offer
to plead guilty to manslaughter. He submitted, in particular,
that the discount you should receive by virtue of your offer to plead
connection with the utilitarian value of a plea of guilty should be, as he put
it, ‘at its highest in this case’.
His submission was that your
conduct in connection with this trial should not lead to any reduction in the
allowance to be made
to you for the utilitarian benefit of your offer to plead
guilty. That conduct included your pleading not guilty to murder and not
entering a plea of guilty to manslaughter, and conducting the trial in pursuit
of a complete acquittal, in which the defence on which
you relied involved a
complete denial of wrongdoing.
50 In addition to
entitling you to a reduction for the utilitarian benefit, Mr Bayles submitted
that your offer to plead guilty was
indicative of your remorse, and other
matters which could be described as subjective
51 The law dictates that had you pleaded
guilty to the crime of manslaughter when arraigned on the charge of murder, I
been required to take the fact of that plea of guilty and the stage
at which you indicated an intention to enter that plea into account
sentencing you.
The authorities
make it clear that in almost all cases, a plea of guilty is a matter which goes
in mitigation of sentence.
52 You did not plead
guilty on arraignment, but you did offer to plead guilty at an earlier time, as
I have detailed. The authorities,
again, dictate that in most cases, such an
offer will be a matter which will lead to a reduction in
53 For some years, it has been the law
that a distinction is to be drawn between the discount to be allowed to a person
for the utilitarian,
pragmatic benefits of a plea of guilty, known as the
objective criteria, and the discount to be allowed for remorse, willingness
facilitate the course of justice, and acceptance of responsibility, known as the
subjective criteria.
for the utilitarian benefit of the plea will almost always be allowed. As for
the question of whether remorse, a willingness
to facilitate the course of
justice and an acceptance of responsibility should be inferred from the plea,
that will be a question
for the sentencing judge to
54 The principles are essentially the same
when a plea of guilty has been offered, but not
55 As I have already mentioned, in this
case, Mr Bayles asserts that you should receive a significant discount in
sentence on account
of your previous offer to plead guilty to manslaughter,
which discount should contain components not only for the utilitarian benefits
of the plea offer, but also for the subjective criteria which should be inferred
56 Mr Doyle for the prosecution, on the
other hand, submitted that you should receive some discount for the utilitarian
the offer, but that your plea offer did not bespeak ‘remorse,
genuine contrition, acceptance of responsibility and willingness
to facilitate
the course of
have been referred to a number of decisions on the question of the extent to
which I should take into account, in your favour,
your offer to plead guilty to
manslaughter.
I have taken each of
the decisions into account, as well as the submissions made by both sides during
58 There is no question that you are
entitled to a reduction in sentence on account of the utilitarian benefits
attaching to the plea
offer you made. Had your offer been accepted, no trial
would have been necessary, and there would have been the corresponding saving
time, resources and emotional energy expended in the
59 Furthermore, I accept that there should be
no diminution in the reduction you receive for the utilitarian benefit due to
that in the end, you did not plead guilty to manslaughter in front of
the jury, and indeed, conducted your trial on the basis that
you were not guilty
of any crime.
60 That is not to say that you are
entitled to a significant discount in sentence due to your plea offer. In my
view, in the overall
circumstances of this case, the reduction in sentence to
which you are entitled is quite modest.
61 In order
to determine the extent to which, if at all, your offer to plead guilty would
evidence remorse or any of the other subjective
aspects of a plea, I have looked
at the entirety of the circumstances, before, at the time of, and after the plea
62 One aspect of those circumstances is that
immediately after your stabbing of the two victims, you asked for 000 to be
called, and
then took part in drawn-out endeavours to provide CPR to Viet, in
combination with your daughter. It was put on your behalf that
these efforts
showed your care and concern for Viet, and were indicative of your remorse for
having stabbed him.
63 A number of aspects of your
later conduct point against that proposition. Within minutes of the arrival of
the police, and close
to the time that it was confirmed Viet was deceased, you
lied to police on two separate occasions about what had happened to him.
asserted that he had stabbed himself.
interview that occurred the next day, you told a different lie about what had
happened to lead to his death. You claimed
that you had stabbed him by
65 In spite of the plea offer which was
made on your behalf before and after the committal hearing, by the time the
trial had arrived,
you persisted in the defence which you had set up during the
interview. In the trial, you relied on the asserted truthfulness of
dishonest account you had given in the interview. You pleaded not guilty to
murder, and conducted your defence principally on
the basis that you were not
criminally responsible for the death of Viet.
these circumstances, your conduct in the immediate aftermath of the stabbing of
Viet might be seen to take on a different hue.
If you really were remorseful
for your actions, why did you lie to the police in the immediate aftermath and
in your interview?
Why did you persist in the interview lie during your
67 As for your offer to plead guilty, of
course there will be situations in which such an offer, although rejected, will
indicative of remorse. In my view, that is not the case here. The
offer made on your behalf needs to be assessed in the context
of the surrounding
circumstances, which were known to you. You knew you had stabbed Viet to death
with a knife. You knew this had
taken place in the presence of a number of eye
witnesses who may be in a position to implicate you. You knew you had used a
which you had admitted to the police had been secreted by you for use in a
planned confrontation of Viet and Laura. You knew you
had lured Viet to your
position to confirm your obvious
anger towards Viet and Laura immediately before
the stabbings. You knew you had told two different sets of lies to the police
how Viet came to be stabbed. These and other matters make it clear that
the evidence against you was powerful, and you well knew
68 The law does not permit me to take the
strength of the prosecution case into account in arriving at the discount you
should receive
for the utilitarian benefit of your rejected plea
I do not do so. But the
position of the subjective criteria is different. The apparent strength of the
prosecution case is relevant
to an assessment of those
69 Knowing, as you did, the strength of the
prosecution case against you, and the risk that you would be found guilty of
is hardly surprising that you authorised an offer on your behalf to
plead guilty to the lesser crime of manslaughter. It was a rational
pragmatic step, but to my mind, when all of the surrounding circumstances are
considered, there was nothing about that step which
was indicative of your
feeling remorseful, or of your being willing to facilitate the course of justice
and to accept responsibility
for your actions. As your conduct in the trial
showed, far from being willing to accept responsibility for your actions, you
to avoid responsibility.
70 Counsel on your
behalf submitted that once you were in the adversarial situation of the trial
which you faced, there were strategic
and forensic decisions made on your behalf
which should not obscure the fact that your offer to plead guilty could evidence
and the other subjective aspects. I do not
71 Whilst of course I in no way hold against
you the fact that you exercised your right to plead not guilty and have a
defence run
on your behalf, as the prosecutor submitted, what you did in running
the trial was to put your weight behind the version of events
you had given in
the interview. This was no mere strategic decision. This was you saying that
you did not deliberately stab Viet,
and seeking to be absolved of criminal blame
for your criminal conduct.
72 In all of the
circumstances, I believe there is no real evidence of remorse in this case. I
say this in spite of the fact that
in the bundle of personal reference tendered
on your behalf as Exhibit 2 on the plea, four of the five authors, including,
remarkably,
Laura Chan, spoke of your remorse. I do not accept this material
in support of a finding of remorse. The overall, credible evidence,
points to a
different conclusion. That is not to say that I have not had regard to the
contents of those references more generally
in speaking about your
73 Furthermore, I do not believe your
previous offer to plead guilty evidenced your accepting responsibility for your
conduct or a
willingness to facilitate the course of justice. As a result, the
only discount to which you are entitled is that flowing from the
utilitarian
value of your plea offer. I take that into account in your favour in sentencing
you on the charge of manslaughter.
74 In respect of
the charge of recklessly causing serious injury, there were no discussions
between your legal representatives and
the Crown, and no offer was put. That is
because the Crown rebuffed your approach in respect of the manslaughter. It may
had that offer been accepted, discussions might have led to resolution
of the charges in respect of Laura Chan. That is speculative,
however, and no
reduction in sentence can be allowed in respect of the sentence on the charge of
recklessly causing serious injury
on account of your offer to plead guilty to
manslaughter.
Background to the offences
75 Your attacks upon the two victims did
not happen out of the blue. They occurred in the context of the relationship
they were having
behind your back, your having found out about that
relationship, and the powerful anger and resentment that arose due to that
76 Mr Bayles stopped short of submitting
that the facts of the infidelity of your partner and the duplicity of Viet were
circumstances. He did submit, however, that these were important
matters of background. There was a lengthy history leading to
a build-up of
tension and increasing despondency and sadness in you. He submitted that this
despondency went beyond a simple reaction
to the fact of your wife having an
affair. Mr Bayles urged me to apply a level of understanding of what he
described as the complex
nature of what was going on for you. He submitted that
what occurred that night ‘really represented...a kind of breakdown
rational and normal and proper thought processes and reactions and
behaviours’.
that regard, however, Mr Bayles made it clear he was not submitting that at the
time of the two stabbings, you were not in a
position to make rational decisions
and know what was right and what was wrong. I note that no psychological or
psychiatric material
has been tendered on your behalf. There is nothing to
indicate you did not have a full appreciation of the seriousness of your
at the time you carried it out.
sentencing you, of course I take into account the circumstances in which your
offending occurred. Those circumstances include
the fact that your partner and
a person who you took to be your friend had been engaging in an affair behind
your back, you had had
suspicions for a time and those suspicions were confirmed
on the day of the crimes, and the news was very upsetting for you. You
and despondent. The offending happened in that
79 As I pointed out to Mr Bayles during the
plea, however, it is not unusual for interpersonal relationships to create
and sadness and frustration. It was perhaps understandable that you
wanted to confront Laura and Viet. However, to decide to confront
them with a
knife was a step much further than that, and to go to the extent of stabbing
them both with the knife was a very extreme
response even to that level of
sadness and frustration and disappointment.
The seriousness of the manslaughter
80 One of the matters to which I am
required to have regard in passing sentence upon you is the nature and gravity
of the offences
of which you have been found
Mr Bayles submitted
that the offence of manslaughter should be viewed as being no higher than
mid-range. Mr Doyle, on the other
hand, submitted that for the reasons he
outlined, this should be viewed as being a crime at the upper end of the range
of seriousness.
81 In my view, a consideration of
all of the circumstances of your crime of manslaughter would make it clear that
this crime is a
very serious example of the crime of manslaughter and should be
viewed as being in the upper range of seriousness. Those circumstances
a number of the matters mentioned in paragraph 40 of these reasons. To those, I
add the following matters:
was some degree of planning of the confrontation during which the crime was
made the others present at the house go outside before the confrontation;
conduct in overcoming the attempts by Minh to restrain you, in which you
physically shrugged him off not once but twice, showed
your great level of
persistence and determination in carrying out the stabbings;
stabbings were carried out due to anger, which you seemingly made no effort to
weapon you used to carry out the stabbings was a very dangerous one;
stabbings took place in a house in which your two children with Laura were
stabbed two people, not just one;
the time you stabbed Viet, he presented no physical threat to you at all. In
fact, the evidence would suggest he was almost certainly
seated at the table
when you stabbed him;
was a very high level of danger associated with your action in stabbing Viet
deep to the central chest area;
jury verdict on the charge of recklessly causing serious injury to Laura shows
that shortly after stabbing Viet to the chest,
you stabbed Laura to the chest,
realising that serious injury would probably be caused to her. You must have had
such a realisation
at least at the time of stabbing Viet.
seriousness of the recklessly causing serious injury charge
82 As for the crime of recklessly causing
serious injury, the starting position of Mr Bayles was that this was an example
offence which ‘could not be said to be much higher than a low end
example of the offence.’
In justification for that position, Mr Bayles submitted that a crucial part of
assessing the relative seriousness of any instance
of the offence is an
assessment of where the serious injury sits in the range of possible injuries.
On that score, he emphasised
the fact that in this case, Laura Chan sustained no
permanent, ongoing impairment. On the submission of counsel, hers was a shallow
wound from which she made a full recovery.
discussion proceeded, however, and having been challenged about a number of
aggravating features of your crime against Laura,
Mr Bayles accepted that the
crime was some distance away from the lowest end of the scale of
seriousness.
84 I believe that Mr Bayles was right
to make that concession. A consideration of the features of this crime against
Laura Chan make
it clear that it was a serious example of that crime,
notwithstanding the fact that Laura ended up making a full recovery from her
injury. I point to many of the matters mentioned in respect of the charge of
manslaughter. In addition, of particular relevance
where the seriousness of
this crime is concerned is the fact that the person you stabbed was your
partner, and, of course, the mother
of your two children. Sad and angry though
you may have been about her conduct, to attack her in that fashion was a breach
You were meant to be her protector, not someone who would seriously
attack her. You stabbed her with that hunting knife to the
central chest area
shortly after you had inflicted the fatal injury upon Viet. And you did so
while your children were in another
part of the house, and apparently able to
hear much of what was going on.
85 It was a very
serious and dangerous step to take to stab Laura Chan in the chest. It had the
effect of damaging an important artery
in her chest and leading to her being
hospitalised for four days. She received important medical treatment, which
reduced the risk
that the haemothorax and pneumothorax she sustained might
develop into what could have been a fatal condition. You are very fortunate
that Laura received a high level of medical care, and that she has made a full
recovery. That does not change the fact, however,
that she did sustain serious
injury caused by your assault upon her, and that your actions led to her life
being endangered.
86 As was recently stated by the
Court of Appeal in
Recklessly causing serious injury using a knife is an
inherently grave offence. In combination with alcohol the consequences can be
life threatening, as was the case
87 In connection with the passage above,
the Court made reference to the decision of the Court in
Ejupi v The
in which Priest JA,
with whom Coghlan JA agreed, stated:
As against those mitigating aspects, this was a serious
example of the offence of recklessly causing serious injury. This Court has
often remarked on the dangerousness of knives, given the obvious risk in their
use of damage to a victim’s internal organs
and blood supply and thus to
life. Those who would venture forth with a knife anticipating its use to inflict
injury, and those who
would use knives foreseeably to inflict serious injury,
need to be deterred from so
88 In my view, your attack upon Laura was
a serious one, and can be viewed as being comfortably within the mid-range of
seriousness
of offences of recklessly causing serious injury, if not towards the
more serious end of the mid-range.
Your prior criminal history
89 The criminal record filed in this
matter shows prior convictions arising from one appearance in the Port Adelaide
Magistrates’
Court in 1990 on charges including one charge of illegal use
of a motor car. You were fined on those
90 More importantly, you were sentenced in
the District Court of New South Wales for supplying a commercial quantity of a
drug. You initially were sentenced to 7 years’ imprisonment
with a non-parole period of 4 years 9 months. On appeal, the
conviction on the
charge of supplying a commercial quantity was quashed, and in its place, the
charge was amended to one of supplying
an indictable quantity. The sentence was
reduced to 4 years 6 months’ imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 3
91 Mr Bayles relied in your favour
upon the fact that you have no convictions for offences of violence. That is
certainly true, but
the fact is, you cannot call in aid in sentence your
previous good history, because you have been sentenced for serious drug
92 Indeed, you were on parole for the
offending at the time of the commission of the crimes before this Court. That,
as Mr Bayles
accepted, is an aggravating feature of your offending. On the
other hand, there is at least the possibility that your parole may
be breached
and that you might be called upon to serve the period of time owed on that
sentence, which I understand to be thirteen
months. I am not permitted to
speculate about whether this will actually occur, but I do take into account in
your favour the degree
of uncertainty and concern which that situation may
create in your mind as you serve the sentence of imprisonment I will pass upon
Your prospects of rehabilitation
93 Mr Bayles submitted that in the
circumstances, I should consider your prospects of rehabilitation to be good.
Those circumstances
included the lack of any prior convictions for violence, the
fact that Laura Chan indicated you had never been violent towards her
course of your relationship, your age, and your good work
94 Mr Doyle did not take issue with the
submissions by Mr Bayles about rehabilitation, adding to the mix the submission
offending in this case can be seen to have occurred in a particular,
slightly unusual, context. He submitted I would be entitled
to take the view
that your prospects of rehabilitation are ‘reasonably
95 I sentence you on the basis that I
consider your prospects of rehabilitation to be at least reasonably good.
The issues of concurrency, cumulation, and totality
96 It is necessary in this case to impose
individual sentences on each of the two offences of which you have been found
the absence of any order for cumulation, by operation of
such sentences would be
served concurrently.
97 In his submissions to me, Mr
Bayles submitted that the requirement to have regard to the principle of
totality may raise the need
for there to be some moderation of the individual
sentences, or for there to be a degree of concurrency between the individual
98 Mr Bayles further submitted
that in arriving at the appropriate degree of cumulation and concurrency, I
should have regard to the
fact that both stabbings took place in one sequence of
events. The two events took place within moments. There was, as he submitted,
‘almost entire overlap, in terms of motivation and the factual background
to the two offences.’
submitted that there is an argument for a significant degree of concurrency
between the sentences for the two crimes.
prosecutor acknowledged that the totality principle, the common motivations for
the crimes and the fact that the events occurred
so close in time, as part of
the one course of conduct, would mean there is a need for some concurrency
between the sentences. He
submitted, however, that the overall sentence must
reflect the fact that there were two separate victims of the two separate acts
of stabbing. He submitted that whilst there might be said to be the need for
significant concurrency, so, too, was there the need
for significant
cumulation.
100 Whilst it is true that your
stabbings of the two victims occurred as part of the one course of conduct, were
very close in time,
and were seemingly carried out for much the same motive, it
cannot be forgotten that you carried out attacks upon not one but two
victims, each attack necessitating a decision by you to deliberately stab the
particular individual, and then your action
in pursuit of each decision.
Furthermore, each act was, in its own right, a serious criminal offence. In
those circumstances, it
is clear in my mind that a significant degree of
cumulation is required.
101 Paying regard to the
totality principle, I have reviewed the total effective sentence at which I have
arrived to determine whether
it is just and appropriate in the overall
circumstances. I have done my best to ensure that it is so.
Current sentencing practices and comparable cases
102 One of the matters I am required by
law to take into account in arriving at a proper sentence is current sentencing
In seeking to
understand these, I have considered, amongst other things, the
from the Sentencing Advisory Council in respect of each offence,
and the helpful material contained within the Judicial College of
Victorian Sentencing Manual
, including the manslaughter
and recklessly causing serious injury case collections. There is a limit to the
use of statistics and
sentences passed in other cases, particularly in the case
of crimes such as manslaughter and recklessly causing serious injury which
such a wide breadth of criminality. Where comparable cases are concerned, it
must be remembered that no sentence passed in
any other case amounts to a
precedent for the sentence I must pass on you. At best, sentences in so-called
comparable cases may
provide a general guide or impression of the appropriate
103 As was recently stated by Justice
Weinberg in the case of
sentences for
manslaughter have increased significantly in recent years. That was an
application for leave to appeal against a sentence
of eight years with a minimum
of five years for a manslaughter brought about by the infliction of a single
punch to the head. The
applicant had pleaded guilty. The single ground of
appeal was that the sentence and non-parole period were manifestly excessive.
In refusing leave, his Honour had this to say:
Perhaps, in the past, a sentence of eight years’
imprisonment, with a non-parole period of five years, might have been considered
stern for an unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter, involving a punch to the
head, leading to a fall, and resulting in death.
Even so, as far back as 1991 (when, it should be noted, that the maximum penalty
for manslaughter was 15 years’ imprisonment,
and not 20 years as it is
now), sentences of five and [a] half years’ and four and a half
years’ imprisonment were increased,
on appeal by the Crown, to nine
years’ and eight years’ imprisonment respectively.
As the sentencing judge correctly noted, sentences for all forms of manslaughter
have increased significantly in recent years. In
the past few years, the
sentencing statistics, produced by the Sentencing Advisory Council, show that
there have been a number of
sentences for manslaughter which have exceeded 10
years’ imprisonment. Those statistics indicate that there is nothing at
unusual about a head sentence of eight years for manslaughter, still less a
non-parole period of five years. Indeed, the most recently
available sentencing
snapshot for manslaughter indicates that, the average sentence for this offence
is currently between about seven
years and nine years’
imprisonment.
104 Whilst as I have already said, the
sentences in comparable cases never amount to precedents which must be followed
by subsequent
sentencing Courts, it can be observed that the sentence which was
subject to consideration in the case of
followed a guilty plea,
and was for offending considerably less serious than the crime you
105 As long ago as 2009, Beach
, in a sentence later the
subject of an application for leave to appeal to the Court of
passed a sentence of 14
years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 10 years on a man who had
been found guilty by a jury
of the unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter of
his partner. The killing was by strangulation, and on any view, it was a very
serious example of the crime of manslaughter. The applicant had offered to
plead guilty to manslaughter before each of the two trials
he faced, a matter
which was taken into account in the applicant’s favour by his Honour, but
which he said would attract a
discount which ‘cannot be particularly
106 In considering the sentence passed
by his Honour, the Court of Appeal held by majority that his Honour’s
conclusion about
the level of discount was correct. The Court also held that
his Honour had been right to characterise the offending as being at
the serious
end of the range of the crime of manslaughter, and that the sentence was not
outside the range of permissible
Impact of your offending on its victims
107 In sentencing you, I am required to
have regard to the impact of your offending on any victims of the offences, and
also to the
personal circumstances of any victims. No victim impact statements
have been filed. That does not mean, of course, that these crimes
did not have
victims, beyond Viet whose life you unlawfully cut short, and Laura, whose life
you endangered.
108 As a result of scope of the
evidence in the trial, I know little of Viet, and the effect his sad death has
had on those close
to him, other than Laura Chan. I can comfortably conclude,
however, that his loss has been felt far more widely than just by Laura.
loss of any human life is always a sad and serious event. That is especially so
when a life has been needlessly cut short by
the sort of senseless violence you
engaged in here.
109 One of your victims, Laura
Chan, somewhat surprisingly, as I have already noted, provided a personal
reference in support of you.
In the letter to the Court, she spoke of the grief
that your actions had caused to her and the children. In reality, of course,
she is a victim of each of your crimes. In respect of your killing of Viet, she
was an eye witness to your brutal stabbing of the
man who was, after all, her
husband, and for whom she must have cared deeply. She had been with him for
some years, and in a few
moments of violence, you killed him in front of her
very eyes. It must have been a most traumatic event for
110 No doubt, this was made all the worse for
her by the fact that your dangerous action in stabbing her to the chest
immediately
after stabbing her husband led to her being treated for several days
in hospital for the serious injury you had
111 I take all of these matters into
account in sentencing you.
Important sentencing considerations
112 In my view, the most important
purposes to be served by the sentence I pass upon you are just punishment,
denunciation, and general
deterrence. The sentence must punish you to an extent
which is just in all of the circumstances. The sentence must also manifest
denunciation by the Court of the shockingly violent conduct which you carried
out. Furthermore, the sentence I pass on you must
be such as to bring it home
clearly to others in the community who may be minded to act with extreme
violence in carrying out attacks
upon partners and others, for reasons of anger,
resentment and jealousy, that such behaviour will be met with strong
punishment.
113 I agree with the submissions of Mr
Bayles that specific deterrence, that is, the need to deter you from further
offending, does
not loom large in this case. I also agree that the prospects of
your rehabilitation, which as I have said, are quite good, must
encouraged. To that end, the non-parole period I will set will hopefully
encourage you with the knowledge that you might
end up being supervised in the
community for a significant period of time on parole.
114 Hung Anh Vu, for the manslaughter of
Hung Viet Nguyen, you are sentenced to be imprisoned for a period of 12 years.
This is the
base sentence.
115 For recklessly
causing serious injury to Laura Chan, you are sentenced to be imprisoned for 6
116 I order that 3 years of the sentence on
the charge of recklessly causing serious injury is to be served cumulatively
sentence on the charge of
manslaughter.
117 The total effective sentence is
therefore a period of 15 years’
imprisonment.
118 I fix a period of 11 years before
which you will not be eligible to be released on
119 I declare a period of 478 days up to and
including yesterday, 25 November 2018, as being a period already served under
this sentence.
120 I have made the forfeiture and
disposal orders requested by the prosecution and consented to on your behalf by
Interview at Q 427.
According to Laura, she did
not say anything in response to the questioning. Viet was the one who denied the
allegations.
Crimes Act 1958
Sentencing Act 1991
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140
(2012) 37 VR 594
[36] (Redlich JA and Curtain AJA.).
This phrase used by Mr Doyle
Ciantar & Rose v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 313
[31] (Nettle and
Bongiorno JJA).
R v Cardoso
DPP v Pennisi
[2009] VSCA 322
Sherna v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 242
(2011) 32 VR 668
[2015] VSC 346.
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140
(2012) 37 VR 594
Sentencing Act 1991
[2018] VSCA 292 (Beach
Hargrave JJA and Almond AJA).
[2014] VSCA 2.
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1991
[2018] VSCA 18
As he then was.
Sherna v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 242
(2011) 32 VR 668.
Sherna v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 242
(2011) 32 VR 668 (Whelan
AJA, with whom Hansen JA agreed.).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (333 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter