URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Savvinos v Director of Public Prosecutions [1996] VicRp 55; [1996] 2 VR 43 (22 February 1996)
SAVVINOS v DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, CALLAWAY JA and HAMPEL AJA
22 February 1996
Winneke P, Callaway JA and Hampel AJA
This is an application for leave to appeal against the order of a County Court judge sitting at Morwell, by which his Honour ordered
forfeiture of certain real and personal property in which the applicant had an interest, following the applicant's conviction upon
plea of guilty for trafficking in marijuana. The conviction had been recorded on 15 February 1994 when the applicant had been arraigned,
pleaded guilty and remanded for sentence. The applicant had been sentenced by the learned judge at Morwell on 29 November 1994 to
two years' imprisonment with a minimum of one year. On that same day his Honour had made the order for forfeiture to which we have
already referred. The forfeiture order was made under s5 and s7 of the
Crimes (Confiscation of Profits) Act 1986
(hereinafter called "the Act").
The matter comes before this court challenging only his Honour's order for forfeiture. It comes before us on a notice which is described
as a "Notice of Application for leave to appeal against a forfeiture order", which bears the date 12 December 1994. An application
has been made by Mr Holdenson on behalf of the applicant to amend the notice to include not only the property known as Lot 1 Red
Hill Road, Callijnee but also the other 13 items which were the subject of application for forfeiture and which are set out in the
schedule to the forfeiture order made by the County Court on 29 November 1994. That application by Mr Holdenson is consented to by
counsel for the Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Silbert. We will accede to the application and permit the notice of application
for leave to appeal to be amended accordingly.
On the hearing of the application Mr Holdenson submitted to us that, notwithstanding the notice of application, his client had an
appeal as of right, as distinct from a right to make an application for leave to appeal, as would normally be the case under s567(d)
of the Crimes Act. His submission was founded on a decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal of this State in Winand v R
(1994) 73 A Crim R 497.
In so far as the reasons for decision given by the court in that case suggest that there is an appeal as of right as distinct from
a right to seek leave to appeal, what is there said seems to be at odds with what was said by this court in R v Tsolacos (unreported,
6 July 1995). In the latter case, in delivering a judgment in which the other members of the court agreed, Winneke P said at 8: The
application for leave to appeal against his Honour's order is made pursuant to s51(2) of the Act, which gives a right of appeal "as
if the order were part of the sentence imposed in respect of the offence". S51(3) empowers the court to confirm, discharge or vary
the order made or to remit it for re-hearing with or without directions. This section not only gives a right of appeal to this Court,
but implicit in the section is the mandate that the Court is to treat the order appealed against as part of the exercise of the sentencing
discretion. This proposition is confirmed, I think, by
Sentencing Act 1991
, which permits the Court to take into account (in specified circumstances), in fixing an appropriate sentence, the making of confiscation
of the Act, to which that passage refers, provides:
(1) Without affecting any other right of appeal, a person who has an interest in property in respect of which a forfeiture order is
made may appeal against that order -
(a) in the case of a person convicted of an offence in reliance on which the order was made - in the same manner as if the order were,
or were part of, the sentence imposed in respect of the offence; ...
In our view, there is no reason to resile from what this court said about the nature of the right of appeal given by that section
in its decision in Tsolacos. (See also MacAlister v R
[1990] HCA 15
(1990) 169 CLR 324.)
In so far as leave to appeal is necessary, which we are disposed to think it is, we are in this case prepared to grant such leave.
The application for forfeiture was made by the Director of Public Prosecutions under
of the Act. That section, to the extent that is relevant to this application, reads as follows:
(1) If a person has been convicted of a serious offence, the Director of Public Prosecutions ... may ... apply to the Supreme Court
or the court before which the person was convicted of the offence for one or both of the following orders:
(a) A forfeiture order in respect of tainted property;
(b) A pecuniary penalty order.
The applicant had "been convicted of a serious offence", such an offence being defined in
to include "an indictable offence against the laws of Victoria". He had pleaded guilty, as we have indicated, to an offence against
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
, namely trafficking in a drug of dependence.
The application for forfeiture was made partly in respect of land in which the applicant had an interest, which was situated at and
known as Lot 1 Red Hill Road, Callijnee, the property more particularly described in certificate of title vol 9646 folio 999, and
partly in respect of certain personal property in which he had an interest, comprising the equipment used for the purposes of harvesting,
storing and packing marijuana.
An application of that kind required compliance by the director with certain procedures that were set out in
In particular, subs(2) of
(2) Except with the leave of the court before which the person was convicted, an application must be made under subs(1) before the
end of the relevant period (if any) in relation to the conviction. Subs(2A), which was inserted by Act No 90 of 1991, reads:
(2A) A court must not grant leave under subs(2) unless it is satisfied that -
(a) the property or benefit to which the application relates was derived, realised or identified only after the end of the relevant
(b) necessary evidence became available only after the end of the relevant period; or
(c) it is otherwise in the interests of justice to do so.
"Relevant period" is defined in
to mean: ... the period of 6 months, or any longer period that is fixed by the court before which the person was convicted on an
application made by the Director of Public Prosecutions on notice to that person during that period of 6 months, after -
(a) if the person is to be taken to have been convicted of the offence by reason of subs(2)(a) - the day on which the person was convicted
of the offence; ...
In the present case the applicant was arraigned on 15 February 1994 and pleaded guilty. The plea of guilty following the arraignment
was accepted by the court. That plea and the acceptance of it by the court amounted for the purposes of the Act, to a "conviction"
which set the relevant period running. We refer to Director of Public Prosecutions v McCoid
[1988] VicRp 89
[1988] VR 982.
On the application for forfeiture before his Honour, it was accepted that the relevant period did indeed commence on 15 February
1994. It was also accepted that it expired on 15 August 1994.
It will be noticed that
of the Act refers to an application in respect of both a "forfeiture order" and a "pecuniary penalty order". Those orders are -
compendiously described in the Act as "confiscation orders". The application for a forfeiture order is specifically dealt with under
, which requires by subs(3) that the applicant for an order of that kind must give written notice of the application in the manner
prescribed by the rules of court:
(a) to the person in reliance on whose conviction the application is made; and
(b) to any other person whom the applicant has reason to believe has an interest in the property.
Subs(3A) of
empowers the court to waive the requirement of notice in certain circumstances.
Although time began running for the making of a forfeiture order on 15 February 1994 when the applicant pleaded guilty, and notwithstanding
that upon that date the director had foreshadowed that an application for a forfeiture order would be made, no notice in writing
of any such application was given to the applicant or any other person interested in the property in accordance with O10 of Ch2 of
the County Court Miscellaneous Rules, which is entitled "Crimes (Confiscation of Profits) Rules". R10.05 provides:
1. An application, an affidavit and a copy of a notice given in proceedings under the Act shall be filed in the Court unless the
Court or a Judge otherwise orders.
2. A copy of an application, a copy of an affidavit and a notice given in proceeding under the Act shall be served personally or
in such other manner as the Court directs.
The Director of Public Prosecutions, as applicant in this case, gave no written notice within the time prescribed by the relevant
provisions; nor was there any compliance with the rules; indeed no notice of application was given at all until October 1994, some
two months after the relevant period had expired.
At the hearing of the application for forfeiture before the learned sentencing judge in November 1994, it was contended by counsel
representing the applicant that his Honour ought not give the leave which s5 and s7 of the Act contemplated could be given to extend
the time for the making of the application. It was submitted that there was no sufficient warrant for granting such leave.
It was contended by counsel representing the director before the learned sentencing judge that his Honour should grant leave to make
the application out of time because, within the meaning of s5(2A)(c), it was "otherwise in the interests of justice to do so". His
Honour acceded to that submission and on 28 November ruled that the director should have leave to make the application, saying: It
seems to me that it is simply a question of time being overlooked, there being no other prejudice to the accused of any substance.
In all the circumstances I think it is in the interests of justice that the Crown have leave to make this application, albeit out
of time, and I so order.
No viva voce or written material had been placed before his Honour to explain or justify why it was that the application had not
been made within the constraints provided for by s5 and s7 of the Act, nor was there explanation or justification given for the failure
to comply with the rules to which we have referred. His Honour was told from the bar table by counsel representing the director that
those responsible for processing the application had not realised that the prisoner had been arraigned on 15 February, or alternatively,
if such realisation had occurred, had not realised that that had triggered the relevant period prescribed by the Act. His Honour,
in the course of such explanation being proffered from the bar table, -
had been moved to suggest that the failure to realise that time was running was an indication of what he described as "extraordinary
laxity" on behalf of the director.
Be that as it may, it was contended upon the application before this court that his Honour was wrong in his interpretation of s5
and therefore was wrong in granting leave to the director to make his application out of time. Mr Holdenson submitted that a judge
faced with an application under this Act for extension of time to apply for a forfeiture order is not to be regarded as being at
large in granting the leave required.
It was submitted that the provisions of this Act are penal in their nature and ought to be construed strictly; that the framework
of the Act was designed to impose a strict time limit on the making of an application by the director for an order which would materially
affect the interests of the person against whom it was sought; and that leave to bring an application out of time was not to be lightly
granted, but only upon proof by the director of circumstances entitling him to the grant of leave.
It was clear on the making of this application that para(a) and para(b) of s5(2A) could not be called in aid by the director in support
of his application to extend the period. His office had been aware at all times of the property to which the application was directed,
and all the necessary evidence was available to him at the outset of the relevant period. It was for that reason that the director
was thrown back on para(c), namely, "it is otherwise in the interests of justice to do so".
Mr Holdenson argued that that paragraph should not give carte blanche to the judge to extend the time and that the width of the paragraph
is to be limited by the two preceding para(a) and para(b). In other words, the circumstances in which it is in the interests of justice
to enlarge the time are to be confined to circumstances of similar weight to those which are set out in para(a) and para(b). His
contention was that those circumstances did not extend to cover a simple mistake made by the director of the sort that was here made,
and which in no way was contributed to by the applicant. This construction, Mr Holdenson argued, was made clear by the word "otherwise".
The legislature did not intend to give an unfettered discretion to the judge to whom the application was made but indicated by the
language it had chosen that the discretion given by para(c) was to be guided by the circumstances expressly described in para(a)
and para(b).
Mr Holdenson submitted that there were many circumstances in which it might "otherwise be in the interests of justice" to extend
the time at the instance of the director, including circumstances such as the relevant period expiring during holidays or when the
registry was closed, or circumstances in which the offender or respondent to the application was avoiding service of the necessary
documentation.
We are disposed to agree with the interpretation for which counsel contended. It is our view that a court exercising its discretion
under s5(2A) is not to regard itself as being at large in extending the time for the making of the application simply because it
thinks that no prejudice has been occasioned to the respondent by the making of the late application. In our view, the discretion
is not available to be exercised in the circumstances which were exposed in this case, where the director was effectively asking
for an indulgence by the court to relieve him of his own simple mistake caused by error on his part and in no way attributable to
conduct on the part of the respondent to the proposed application. -
For those reasons, we are prepared to grant the application, to allow the appeal and to discharge the forfeiture order that his Honour
Application for leave to appeal granted; appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the applicant: Galbally Fraser and Rolfe.
Solicitor for the respondent: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter