URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/677.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mazi v Kao (No 4) (Costs ruling) [2025] VSC 677 (5 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
JUDICIAL REVIEW AND
APPEALS LIST
S ECI 2024 06285
SPENSER HSIUNG-PIN KAO & ORS
to the attached Schedule)
Respondents
DATE OF HEARING
On the papers
DATE OF RULING
5 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Mazi v Kao (No 4) (Costs ruling)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 677
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Costs orders in three related matters –
Contempt application – Two appeals from VCAT –
In one matter
extension of time granted and appeal dismissed – In second matter appeal
allowed and VCAT decision set aside
– Whether usual order for costs
appropriate in the circumstances – Claim for fixed costs by the
Respondents – Whether
the matters were a public interest matter –
Costs awarded on standard basis taxed in default of agreement.
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Gulfmeand Pty Ltd v Smarelli
[2022] VSC 119.
APPEARANCES
For the Applicant
Respondents
Ms M Hardinge
MMR Lawyers
Respondents
Mr M Thomas
Carter Newell Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
7 October 2025 I delivered judgment in three separate matters brought by
Ms Mazi. In delivering judgment I foreshadowed the general
form of the
orders I intended to make, but invited the parties to address me on costs and
the final form of orders in writing. Each
of the parties filed and served
written submissions. My orders contemplated that each party would deliver
submissions on the same
day and that I would consider whether a further hearing
on the question of costs was required.
matters transpired, Ms Mazi sought leave to file her submissions a day later.
As it turns out, Ms Mazi received the submissions
of the other parties before
filing her submissions, and took the opportunity to respond to those
submissions. In light of that,
it has been unnecessary to provide Ms Mazi with
a further opportunity to address the submissions made by the Respondents.
parties indicated that the final orders, including the costs orders, could be
made on the papers. There was no debate of any
significance concerning the
dispositive orders in each proceeding. This is my ruling in relation to costs
in respect of each matter.
Orders will be made in each proceeding accordingly.
I will deal with each matter in turn.
2024 05284 (The Contempt Application and the Bygrave appeal)
is convenient to deal with the liability to pay costs in each matter, and then
to deal with the quantum.
v Kao (No.1) (Contempt Ruling)
Mazi brought a summons alleging contempt. The reasons for judgment make clear
why the summons will be dismissed. While the Court
has a wide discretion in
relation to costs, the usual approach is that a successful litigant is entitled
to recover their costs.
Mazi contends that the each party should bear their own costs of this aspect of
the proceeding. Citing the Court’s broad
discretion as to costs, and
relying upon
Oshlack v Richmond River
she says that a
departure from the usual rule is justified given the novel and public interest
nature of the questions raised in
this matter, she say raised in ‘good
my view, the summons did not raise a novel point, nor can it be described as one
brought in the public interest. The application
brought on by summons was
grounded in Ms Mazi’s misguided belief that Ms Hou (the Fourth Respondent)
had conducted herself
inappropriately in the conduct of other proceedings,
conduct which Ms Mazi sought to attribute vicariously to Ms Hou’s employer
(Third Respondent) and its real estate clients (Ms Mazi’s landlords
– the First and Second Respondents).
the outset, and for the reasons set out in my judgment, Ms Mazi’s charges
of contempt confronted significant difficulties.
Rather than raising a novel
point, the application traversed well-trodden jurisprudence, the effect of which
rendered her application
meritless. There was no public interest in the points
sought to be raised. The Fourth Respondent did not commit contempt. There
no evidence supporting the contention that the First and Second Defendant were
responsible for Ms Hou’s conduct. The application
was a waste of
their written submissions, the Third and Fourth Respondents drew my attention to
correspondence from Ms Hou’s solicitor inviting
Ms Mazi to withdraw her
application as early as 7 March 2025, before the substantive hearings commenced.
When the hearings commenced,
and owing to the fact that orders made by the
Judicial Registrar had not been complied with, I concluded (with the consent of
parties) to proceed to hear the contempt summons first. Given that Ms Mazi
appeared self-represented, I decided that the most efficient
course was to
invite the responding parties to put their case on the summons first, and before
Ms Mazi (the moving party), to enable
Ms Mazi to hear the full argument
against her before she was required to address the Court in support of the
summons. Again, parties
agreed to this approach and the hearing of the summons
proceeded in that way. At the conclusion of the Respondents’ submissions,
I adjourned the hearing to enable Ms Mazi time to consider her position. In
adjourning the proceeding I gave a preliminary indication
that her contempt
allegations confronted significant hurdles. Following that first day of the
hearing and before the matter returned
for Ms Mazi’s submissions on the
point, the solicitors for Ms Hou again offered to forego any claim for their
legal costs incurred
to date if Ms Mazi withdrew her charges of contempt.
She nonetheless pressed on when the hearing resumed.
of the Respondents each seek their costs on the standard or ordinary basis. In
my view their applications show restraint, given
the conduct of the case by Ms
Mazi. At the very least they are each entitled to an order for their costs on
the standard basis.
address the question of quantum below.
v Kao (No.2) (Notice of Rent Increase)
the substantive proceeding challenging the notice to increase rent, Ms Mazi also
contends that each party should bear their own
costs. I cannot agree. While it
is true that in the result, an extension of time to bring the appeal, and leave
to appeal were
granted – the appeal itself was dismissed. The grant of an
extension, and leave, should not be taken to disguise the fact
applications were misconceived from the outset.
the judgment records, Ms Mazi was informed on a number of occasions that the
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to entertain her
application for declarations
as formulated. Accepting that the
Residential Tenancies Act
(Vic) is not without its complexities, the result on the substantive appeal
before me does no more than confirm established principle
in relation to the
powers of the Tribunal.
is true that the judgment in this matter does clarify the operation of some
aspects of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, but it
does so by applying
established principle to a discrete part of the
Residential Tenancies Act
that was only brought into question by the persistence of
Ms Mazi in taking what was ultimately a bad point. Nothing about
case tends to the conclusion that the litigation was in the
public interest, or should be regarded as being of such a character that
deny the Respondents their costs in defending the proceeding in this case.
Mazi also submits that no costs should be awarded in relation to her application
to commence proceedings out of time as, in this
respect she was ultimately
successful. I reject that submission. The costs of that application were
reserved, and fall to be dealt
with as costs in the proceedings. Ms Mazi also
submits that, in the assessment of whether costs should be awarded, she is
to bring to account what she says was the late service of materials,
and delays caused by the Respondents. She says that these matters
should weigh
heavily against fixing costs. As I have decided not to fix costs for the
reasons that follow, this complaint falls
my view, costs should follow the event as they would in the ordinary
these proceedings all four respondents seek orders fixing costs at specified
First and Second Respondents rely on the decision in
Gulfmeand Pty Ltd v
in which Attiwill J
observed that the then operating equivalent of the
Supreme Court (Civil
empower the Court to order that costs be
fixed, rather than taxed, to avoid the expense, delay and aggravation involved
in the taxation
of costs. His Honour referred to factors which might weigh in
favour of such an award, including that the costs claimed were in
respect of a
small number of items and in a broadly reasonable amount.
is a case where I might have been tempted to consider making an order fixing the
costs to avoid the aggravation associated with
possible future debate about the
amount of costs payable, but in the result I have concluded that costs will be
awarded on the standard
basis, to be taxed in default of agreement. The costs
claimed here are across many items, involving three separate pieces of
litigation,
which overlap in different ways. For example, the contempt summons
was brought in the Bygrave appeal, but was said to be relevant
to the grounds in
the Elmes appeal. In all aspects of the case, Ms Mazi appeared
self-represented. She opposes the fixing of costs,
and prefers them to be
Respondents relied upon affidavit material to set out the basis upon which they
had arrived at their respective claims for the
fixing of costs.
First and Second Respondents say that they have incurred $56,020.83 costs on a
standard basis across all three proceedings. They
allocate the costs incurred
as follows: 20% to the contempt proceeding; 40% to the substantive hearing of
the Bygrave appeal, and
presumably 40% to the Elmes appeal in which they were
not successful. They apply a 25% reduction to each amount. Accordingly, they
seek costs orders on the contempt summons and the Bygrave appeal fixed in the
amounts of $8,403.13, and $16,806.25, respectively.
The total fixed costs
sought by the First and Second Respondents is $25,209.38.
First and Second Respondents participated in all three proceedings. The Elmes
proceeding involved a considerable amount of effort
and time. The premise of
the First and Second Respondents’ submission as to costs is that the Elmes
appeal and the Bygrave
appeal should be treated as contributing to the costs
incurred in the proceeding in equal measure. That is difficult to accept at
face value given the breadth of the Elmes Appeal.
Third and Fourth Respondents’ claim that they have incurred $58,376 in the
proceeding, but seek orders fixing costs at $36,767.60
– representing what
on its face appears to be a very significant discount on fees incurred on a
solicitor client basis. It
is of note that the amount sought by the Third and
Fourth Respondents is significantly higher (by approximately 30%) than the fixed
costs claimed by the First and Second Respondents, notwithstanding that the
Third and Fourth Respondents’ involvement in this
part of the proceedings
was confined to the contempt summons, whereas the First and Second Respondents
were required to deal with
the contempt summons as well as the substantive
appeal. The differences in the amounts claimed makes it difficult to reach a
view as to whether the amounts ‘appear reasonable’ in all
the circumstances such as to weigh in favour of fixing costs
for any of the
Respondents.
Mazi objects to the calculation of a fixed costs order and the assumptions made
by the Respondents. She says there was necessary
overlap which is not properly
accounted for in the assumptions made by the First and Second Respondents.
Ms Mazi submits that all
the costs should be taxed.
all the circumstances, I will award costs on the standard basis to be taxed in
default of agreement. I am conscious that a taxation
of the costs might result
in a higher overall amount to be paid in costs than those presently claimed by
the Respondents, and in
so observing, I remind the parties that the orders that
I make allows them the opportunity to agree on the amount of costs before
embark upon the costly and time consuming process of taxation.
2024 06285 (The Elmes Appeal)
v Kao (No.3) (Notice to Vacate)
First and Second Respondents accept that I should make the orders generally as
foreshadowed in the judgment.
Mazi broadly agrees, but instead seeks an order requiring the First and Second
Respondents pay the fee for commencing the appeal,
in the amount $939. I will
make that order.
SCHEDULE OF
S ECI 2024 05284
S ECI 2024 06285
SPENSER HSIUNG-PIN KAO
First Respondent
HUNG-HSIA KAO
Second Respondent
ARG PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PTY LTD
Third Respondent
LUCIA SEC HOU
Fourth Respondent
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[2022] VSC 119.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (193 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter