URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brent Running at Dawson St Liquor & Foodmart premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 39 (15 December 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by DFL Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of the decision to
refuse to grant a temporary limited licence to extend trading hours, for the
premises trading
as Dawson St Liquor and Foodmart, located at 274 Dawson Street,
Sale, Victoria 3850.
Commission:
Ross Kennedy, PSM, Chair
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell PSM, Deputy Chair
Mr Des Powell, AM, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
15 December 2021
Date of Decision:
15 December 2021
Date of Reasons:
21 December 2021
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
delegate and refuse to grant the temporary limited licence.
Ross Kennedy, PSM
4 October 2021, DFL Pty Ltd (the
) lodged an application with
the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
) for a temporary limited licence (the
Application
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act
business trading as Dawson St Liquor and Foodmart, located at 274 Dawson Street,
Applicant holds a packaged liquor licence, licence number 32020789 (the
) for the Premises.
Licence permits the supply of packaged liquor during the following hours (the
Existing Trading Hours
On any day other than Sunday,
Good Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas day Between 9am and 11pm
ANZAC Day Between 12noon and 11pm
Sunday Between 12 noon and 11pm
Original Application sought a temporary limited licence to extend the Existing
Trading Hours, to enable the Applicant to supply
liquor on Christmas Day 2021
and Good Friday (15 April 2022), between the hours of 9am and 8pm (the
Proposed Temporary Licence Trading Hours
Proposed Temporary Licence Trading Hours fall outside of ‘ordinary trading
hours’ as defined in section 3 of the LCR
Act. In relation to the packaged
liquor licence held by the Applicant, section 3 provides that ‘ordinary
trading hours’
...in relation to a packed liquor
licence or late night (packaged liquor) licence –
(i) the hours between 9am and 11pm on each day, other than Sunday, good
Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas Day; and
(ii) the hours between 12noon and 11pm on ANZAC Day...
Minister for Consumer Affairs, Gaming and Liquor Regulation has published
guidelines representing the policy of the Victorian
Government concerning the
trading hours of liquor licences that allow the sale of packaged liquor (the
The Guidelines
state that the grant of a licence permitting the provision of packaged liquor
from licensed premises during hours
outside of ordinary trading hours should
only be granted in exceptional circumstances, which are to be demonstrated by
the Applicant.
section 9(4) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Regulation Act
), the Commission must have regard to any
decision-making guidelines issued by the Minister when exercising its internal
review function.
Original Application was submitted through the online liquor portal and had no
supporting documents attached. The detail of the
‘event’ provided in
the online application stated that the first event was on 25 December 2021 and
the last event was
on 15 April 2022.
6 October 2021, an authorised delegate of the Commission (the
wrote to the Applicant via email requesting additional supporting information to
assist in determining the Original Application.
In this email, the Delegate
highlighted that the Commission was required to have regard to the Guidelines in
determining the Original
Application and invited the Applicant to provide a
submission showing the exceptional circumstances that applied in this case.
the email the Delegate set out to the Applicant the following information in
relation to making a submission for exceptional
circumstances:
“Please keep in mind that for a circumstance
to be considered exceptional, the relevant circumstances must be:
• out of the ordinary;
• uncommon; or
• not regular, routine or normally encountered.”
7 October 2021, the Applicant provided written submissions in response to the
Delegate’s request, via email attaching a letter
in support of the
Original Application (
Submission Letter
), signed by the Director of the
Submission Letter stated the following points:
Applicant runs a small family-owned grocery store that services the local
community with groceries, takeaway foods and liquor;
store is not just a retail store it is an important social outlet for people in
the community, the past couple of years with covid
restrictions and lockdowns
has highlighted the social importance;
customers are elderly and do not drive and rely on the business for daily needs;
customers are daily shoppers and rely on daily shopping to provide sense of
purpose and the opportunity to socialise with others;
liquor department is a significant contributor to overall sales;
who are low income earners rely on the holiday pay wages which contributes to
their quality of life;
store has been granted approval to trade on Christmas Day and Good Friday for
the past two years, it has been a huge benefit to
the community as well as to
employees; and
store has not had any past liquor licence issues and take liquor licence
responsibilities very seriously.
5 November 2021, the Delegate determined to refuse the Application, citing that
the reasons provided in the Submission Letter did
not represent exceptional
circumstances as envisaged by the Guidelines (the
Application for Internal Review
16 November 2021, the Applicant lodged an application for internal review (the
Application
Applicant made the following submissions in support of the Review
Application:
to having previously been granted a liquor licence to trade on Christmas Day and
Good Friday, we kept our submissions as has been
previously accepted;
therefore did not include information about our catering functions for Christmas
Day and Good Friday;
is provided for the community on Christmas Day and Good Friday, which includes
hot food, liquor and ice all ready to be picked
up on the day;
and pick up can still be provided if liquor trading hours are extended to 6 pm
on Christmas Day and Good Friday;
is a needed and valued service to the community.
2 December 2021, the Applicant via email consented to the Review Application
being determined on the papers and informed the Commission
that it had begun to
receive “enquiries and orders for Christmas Day”.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the Delegate’s decision in respect
of the Original Application is a
reviewable decision, and the Applicant is eligible to apply for review of that
decision. The Review
Application was made under section 153.
section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to a review
application is to make a fresh decision that:
or varies the Original Decision; or
aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the Commission
on review considers
appropriate.
the LCR Act, an application to grant a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1) of the LCR Act, an
uncontested application relevantly
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or
relocation of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division
for that objection (or that period as extended under section
is noted that the Original Application was uncontested, and the Review
Application similarly remains uncontested.
effect, the Commission, on internal review, stands in the shoes of the Delegate
and makes a fresh decision with respect to the
Original Application. In doing
so, it must consider all the information, material and evidence before the
Delegate. It may also consider
further information, material or evidence as part
of making its
the internal review power
9 of the VCGLR Act requires the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 5 of the VCGLR
the Review Application, the Commission must determine whether exceptional
circumstances have been demonstrated by the Applicant
to be granted a temporary
limited licence to provide packaged liquor from licensed premises during hours
that are outside ordinary
trading hours, as defined by section 3 of the LCR Act.
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1), which provides:
“(1) The objects of this Act
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
4(2) provides further that:
“It is the intention of
Parliament that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty
conferred or imposed by this
Act must be exercised and performed with due regard
to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of
Court of Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court has made it clear in
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
) that harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of
the LCR Act, and can properly be regarded as
“the primary regulatory
object of the Act and therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing
However, as
was also noted by the Court of Appeal, “
this is not to say ... that it
[harm minimisation] is to be taken into account, or given such weight, to the
exclusion of the other
Commission considers that while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the ultimate determination
uncontested application is to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission with reference
to the objects of the LCR
Act, including the development of a diversity of licensed facilities reflecting
community expectations.
Conduct of an inquiry
34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to the VCGLR Act, gambling legislation
or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any manner it
considers appropriate.
the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides that the
Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however the Commission must
comply with the rules of natural justice.
noted in paragraph 5 above, ‘ordinary trading hours’ in relation to
a packaged liquor licence or a late night (packaged
liquor) licence are defined
under section 3 of the LCR Act as:
(i) the hours between 9 a.m. and 11 p.m. on each day, other than Sunday, Good
Friday, Anzac Day or Christmas Day;
(ii) the hours between 10 a.m. and 11 p.m. on Sunday; and
(iii) the hours between 12 noon and 11 p.m. on ANZAC Day.
Material before the Commission
Commission had before it and considered all the materials received by the
Delegate which included:
Original Application, as at paragraph 8 above; and
submissions
from the Applicant in support of the Original Application, listed at paragraph
Commission also had before it and considered additional information and evidence
Original Decision, in an email dated 5 November 2021;
Review Application, dated 16 November 2021 which included submissions in support
of the Review Application as listed at paragraph
15 above; and
email from the Applicant dated 2 December 2021, in which the Applicant confirmed
agreement for the matter to be determined on the
papers and informed the
Commission that it had started to receive orders for Christmas Day, as provided
above at paragraph 16.
Reasons for decision on
Issues for determination on review
making its decision on review as to whether to grant the temporary limited
licence the subject of the Review Application, the issues
for the Commission to
consider are as follows:
application of the Guidelines, which the Commission is required to have regard
to under section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act, given the
Proposed Temporary Licence
Trading Hours contained in the Review Application; and
the Commission should exercise its discretion to grant the temporary limited
licence the subject of the Review Application,
having regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and, in particular, harm minimisation, which is the primary object.
of these issues are discussed in turn.
Application of the Guidelines
section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act, the Commission must have regard to the Guidelines
in exercising its internal review function
in this matter. The operative section
of the Guidelines is outlined at paragraph
above, and their relevance to this Review
Application is discussed below.
3 of the Guidelines requires applicants for licences, excepting those specified
in paragraph 2,
that allow for the
provision of packaged liquor from licensed premises during hours that are
outside ordinary trading hours to demonstrate
exceptional circumstances. The
Proposed Temporary Licence Trading Hours sought in the Review Application are
not those specified
in paragraph 2 of the Guidelines, meaning that paragraph 3
of the Guidelines applies to this Review Application. Accordingly, the
Guidelines set out that the Commission should only grant the Licence if
exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated by the Applicant.
summary, the Applicant’s submissions in this regard centre on a commitment
to provide catering and pick up services on Christmas
Day and Good Friday to the
local community. The Applicant has submitted that the community has a reliance
on this service, and the
Applicant has started to receive some orders for
Christmas Day.
Commission has considered the submissions from the Applicant and has determined
the following:
the Commission acknowledges the Applicant’s submissions that there have
been no negative issues with the Licence, a history
of compliance does not
demonstrate exceptional circumstances in this case. Licensees are expected to
comply with the conditions set
out in a licence or will be otherwise committing
an offence against the LCR Act.
Applicant’s submission that trading on Christmas Day and Good Friday will
allow its mostly elderly customers and other locals
in the area, to shop daily
as a preference and to allow for some social interactions, amounts to a desire
for greater convenience.
While the Commission notes the Applicant has submitted
the importance of socialising through daily shopping by its elderly customers
the Premises, the decision of the Liquor Control Commission on 7 July 1998 in
the matter of Rosstown Hotel
), establishes the basic principles underpinning
Victoria’s approach to applications for extended hours for the selling of
liquor. In Rosstown, the Liquor Control Commission took the view that a
slight inconvenience of a customer not being able to purchase
packaged when it
is suitable to them cannot be converted into a substantial need.
the Commission’s view, the Applicant’s submission that trading on
Christmas Day and Good Friday will allow for the
provision of catering to the
local community is not an exceptional circumstance. The main benefit to
customers would be the convenience
of not needing to purchase liquor (and other
groceries) prior to Christmas Day, something that can be arranged with a small
of planning and without the increased risk of persons who, having run out
of liquor, seek to purchase additional alcohol, from which
the consequential
risks of harm, misuse or abuse of alcohol would be adverse to community
Commission does not agree with the Applicant’s submissions regarding the
positive effect of public holiday wages for staff
in a lower income bracket
combined with the positive impact on the Applicant’s revenue, if the
Review Application is granted,
as an exceptional circumstance. If other venues
in the area are operating under ‘ordinary trading hours’ there are
to be unintended consequences to the Applicant’s revenue.
Applicant also submits that the Commission should grant the Review Application
as the Applicant was granted a temporary limited
licence to trade on Christmas
Day 2020, and because of the impact of COVID-19 pandemic during 2021.
The Commission notes that the Applicant was granted a
temporary limited licence to trade on Christmas Day 2020 and further that the
Commission aims for consistency in its decision making. However, the Commission
is not bound by its earlier decisions, as each decision
is made on a
case-by-case basis having regard to the individual circumstances and merits of
each application. The Commission notes
that 2020 was a year in which the impacts
of COVID-19 were far reaching with many lockdowns and other restrictions imposed
on businesses,
and the approach taken by the Commission to temporary limited
licence applications during this year was unique to the circumstances
consistent with the objects of the LCR Act, and the governmental directions. The
Commission finds that the circumstances
related to COVID-19 in 2020 are not
replicated in 2021 (or, in any event, not to the same extent). The Commission
finds that the
previous granting of a temporary limited licence for Christmas
Day 2020 does not constitute an exceptional circumstance.
Further, having regard to the Guidelines, and the circumstances of 2021, the
Commission finds that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
during 2021, could not
be considered as an exceptional circumstance.
Commission has carefully considered all the Applicant’s submissions and
finds that collectively these do not meet the test
of exceptional circumstances,
in accordance with paragraph 3 of the Guidelines.
Whether to grant the Review Application having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act
Commission must exercise its discretion under section 44(1) when determining
whether or not to grant the Licence the subject of
the Review Application,
having regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm minimisation,
which is the primary object.
the reasons set out above, the Commission is not satisfied that the Licensee has
demonstrated exceptional circumstances in relation
to the Review Application.
Taking into account all other relevant circumstances presented by the Review
Application and the objects
of the Act, especially harm minimisation, the
Commission finds no other reason why the Premises should be granted a temporary
licence which contains trading hours exceeding the ordinary trading
hours for a packaged liquor licence.
Commission notes that an object of the LCR Act is to facilitate the development
of a diversity of licensed facilities reflecting
community expectations. The LCR
Act defines ordinary trading hours (as outlined at paragraph 5 above) to
specifically exclude trading
on Christmas Day or on Good Friday. Accordingly,
the Commission is of the view that community expectations in this regard would
for liquor outlets to be closed on Christmas Day, so the grant of the Review
Application would not further this object as outlined
in section 4(1)(b) of the
considering all the material before it and having regard to the Guidelines and
the objects of the LCR Act, in particular section
4(1)(a)(i) concerning
minimisation of harm from the misuse or abuse of alcohol by providing adequate
controls on supply and consumption,
the Commission has determined that, in this
instance, it is not appropriate to exercise its discretion to grant the Review
Application.
Decision on review
the reasons set out above, the Commission has determined to affirm the decision
of the Delegate and has refused to grant the temporary
limited licence the
subject of the Review Application.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr Ross Kennedy,
Chair, Ms Deirdre O’Donnell, Deputy Chair, and Mr
Des Powell,
Commissioner.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
The Guidelines are dated 7 June
2012 and are titled the “Grant of Licences for the Sale of Packaged
Sections 4(2) and 157(2) to (5)
of the LCR Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act further prescribe the
manner in which the Commission
is to undertake internal reviews.
See section 157(3).
VCGLR Act, section 9(3) and
, at [19] per Warren CJ and Osborn JA; [188] per Tate JA.
, at [188] per Tate JA.
Paragraph 2 of the Guidelines
provides: “
That, in the case of a general license or a packaged liquor
licence that allows for the provision of packaged liquor from licensed
during the hours specified in section 8(1)(a)(ii)–(iii) of the Act in the
case of general licences or section 11(1)(b)–(c)
of the Act in the case of
packaged liquor licences, the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation should consider the
position of Government in these guidelines in
determining the grant of the licence. In all circumstances, the extended hours
a packaged liquor licence should not extend past 12 midnight.
completeness, section 11(1)(b)-(c) of the LCR Act provides for packaged liquor
licensed trading that have been granted
for between 11 pm and 1 am and, for
opening hours prior to 9 am but not before 5 am,
Rosstown Holdings Pty Ltd v
Liquor Licensing Commission
[1998] LLCV 611A
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter