URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corporation v Miller [2025] VMC 11 (8 July 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-250011478
OWNERS CORPORATION 2 PLAN
NO. PS336788D
/ Respondent
LARISSA MILLER
Defendant / Applicant
Magistrate M A Hoare
DATE OF HEARING
22 May 2025
DATE OF DECISION
8 July 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Owners Corporation v Miller
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 011
APPLICATION – Strike out for lack of
a lot owner’
– Jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court –
Statutory interpretation –
Owners Corporations Act
Magistrates’ Court Act
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr C J Hender
Chambers Russell Lawyers
For the Defendant
Mr D P Willis
Boris Pogoriller Solicitor
INTRODUCTION
1 Ms Larissa Miller, the applicant /
defendant (
), makes application to strike out the current
proceeding (
the application
) and seeks a declaration that the
Magistrates’ Court does not have jurisdiction to determine the proceeding.
2 Miller is a lot owner within the meaning of the
Owners Corporations Act
) of a lot on registered
Plan of Subdivision No. PS336788D. The respondent / plaintiff is the Owners
Corporation (
) of the Plan, an OC within the meaning of the
the application, Miller raised a matter of broader importance to OCs and lot
owners related to jurisdiction of the Magistrates’
Court. This same
Owners Corporation Plan No. 000675 v
this Court was asked
to decide whether the Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to hear and
determine claims by OCs recover
money owed to the OC by a lot owner upon a final
fee notice under the OCA.
Magistrate agreed with the lot owner that the Court did not have such
interpretation.
6 In the present case, the sole issue
for determination was:
(i) Whether Parliament
intended that VCAT has exclusive jurisdiction regarding recovery of money owed
by a lot owner as a matter of
statutory construction of the OCA;
, the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction to
hear and decide such claims brought by OCs under
Magistrates’ Court Act
) and s 30 of the OCA
the jurisdiction question
7 The application proceeded in the usual
way, upon summons and affidavits and by way of oral argument and
submissions.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
8 It is necessary to
set out the proceeding’s procedural history only briefly.
9 By complaint dated 23 January 2025, the OC
commenced the proceeding against Miller and claimed, upon a final fee notice
issued under
s 32 of the OCA, the sum of $2,807.05 (being outstanding interest
and charges owing) plus interest since the date the proceeding
was commenced and
10 By defence dated 26 February 2025, Miller
pleaded an objection to jurisdiction and sought dismissal of the proceeding with
11 By amended summons dated 16 May 2025,
Miller made the application presently before the Court. In support of the
application, the
following affidavits were filed:
(a) Affidavit of
Miller’s legal practitioner Mr Pogoriller affirmed 16 April 2024 [sic]
(the first Pogoriller affidavit);
(b) Supplementary affidavit of Mr Pogoriller
affirmed 21 May 2025 (the second Pogoriller affidavit).
12 By affidavit of the OC’s legal
practitioner, Mr Joseph, affirmed 8 May 2025 and submissions in writing dated 21
the OC opposed the application.
therefore turn now to the jurisdiction question.
SUBMISSIONS
14 In essence, with respect to
statutory construction of s 30(2) of the OCA, the lot owner relied upon the
analysis in
, which it was said was consistent with the intention
of Parliament. That was according to the Second Reading speech (
and the Explanatory
Memorandum (
15 Reliance upon
did not support the OC’s
argument as that section did not confer jurisdiction but rather confirmed the
mechanism (ordinary
resolution) giving rise to the OCs power to commence
litigation.
16 As for the contention based on it not
being mandatory for the OC to issue a s 32 final notice, that matter did not
assist the OC
in terms of the Court having jurisdiction for recovery of money
owed from a lot owner. That was squarely answered by the Parliament’s
intentions regarding ‘dispute resolution’ contained in the Second
Reading speech. Further, the word ‘may’
was used in this context
simply to make it clear that OCs were not legislatively obligated to commence a
litigation process to recover
money owed to them, by lot owners.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE OWNERS
CORPORATION
17 The OC submitted that nowhere
within Division 1 of
of the OCA does a provision provide that a
proceeding must be commenced in VCAT, nor conversely that a proceeding commenced
than in VCAT must be stayed.
18 In accordance with long established authority,
for a statute to remove jurisdiction of a superior Court of law, it must be
in clear terms.
it was submitted that the absence of clear words stood in ‘stark
contrast’ to various other legislative schemes
where the Parliament
intended for VCAT to have exclusive or primary
19 Instead,
use of the word ‘may’ in s 30(1) as to recovering money in any court
of competent jurisdiction; in 32(1) with
respect to a final notice; and in s 162
that VCAT ‘may’ hear and determine disputes, should all be construed
powers that may be exercised. That was supported by s 45(1) of the
Interpretation of Legislation Act
(Vic) 1984 (
) which provides:
(a) Where in this Act or any
Act passed ... the word "may" is used in conferring a power, that word shall be
construed as meaning
that the power so conferred may be exercised, or not, at
discretion.
20 It was contended that there is a
general premise or assumption in statutory interpretation that certain matters
are to be heard
only by or before the Magistrates’ Court. That was by
reason of s 52 of the ILA which provides that –
(a) authorises or requires a
proceeding or matter to be heard and determined—
(i) summarily; or
(ii) by or before the Magistrates' Court; or
(b) uses any other words that
imply that a proceeding or matter is to be heard and determined by or before the
Magistrates' Court;
(c) does not provide a form
or mode of procedure for the hearing and determination of a proceeding or
then, unless the contrary intention
appears, the proceeding or matter must be heard and determined only by or before
the Magistrates'
21 Pausing here, in my view,
reliance on s 52 of the ILA regarding the present jurisdiction question is
misconceived. It is clear
from the heading ‘Summary proceedings’,
that s 52 is intended to clarify as a matter of statutory interpretation that
matters dealing with ‘summary proceedings’ will be heard in the
Magistrates’ Court as opposed to superior courts.
22 Next, it was said that the s 32 notice is only
required if proceedings are intended to later be brought in VCAT. Further, the s
32 notice is not a precondition to liability for a debt and not an element of
such a cause of action. That is plain from s 32 which
provides that a
‘final fee notice’ is a notice sent after the due date, and states
that the fees are overdue. The ‘final
fee notice’ is in effect a
final and discretionary warning or demand for payment.
therefore turn now to the jurisdiction question.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
24 The purposes of the OCA are
contained in s 1 which include (a) to provide for the management, powers and
functions of OCs; and
(b) to provide for appropriate mechanisms for the
resolution of disputes relating to OCs.
created and regulated by the OCA and have powers conferred by s
26 Part 3 ‘Financial Management’,
Division 1 ‘Financial powers’ contains the OC’s powers to
and set fees and charges payable by lot owners which are based on a
lot owner’s lot liability and/or lot
entitlement.
The time for payment
is a matter for the OCs determination.
obligation of the lot owner to pay outstanding fees and charges arises under s
28(1). Subject to some other provisions, s 28(2)
provides that a lot owner is
not liable to pay or contribute to OC funds, a proportion of any amount required
to discharge a liability
of the OC exceeding the lot owner's lot
28 As for the power of an OC to commence
legal proceedings, s 18(2) provides that if a matter is within the civil
of the Magistrates' Court and, if authorised to do so by
ordinary resolution, the OC may commence any legal proceeding in (a) the
Magistrates’ Court; or (b) VCAT ...
provision central to the jurisdiction question is s 30 which is headed
‘Recovery of money owed’ and provides:
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an owners corporation may recover any money
owed to the owners corporation in any court of competent
due to the owners corporation.
(2) Sections 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part 11 apply to the recovery of
money owed to the owners corporation by a lot owner.
30 Also central to the dispute are the
provisions referred to in s 30(2) that apply to recovery of money owed to the OC
by a lot owner.
31 Those are: firstly, the fee
notice provisions being ss 31 and 32; and secondly, Division 1 ‘Owners
corporation disputes’
contained in Part 11 which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’.
32 A fee notice
under s 31(1) in approved form must be given to a lot owner by the OC. The fee
notice must inform a lot owner that:
outstanding fees are due within 28 days of
the notice; interest may apply; and it must also include dispute resolution
information
applicable under the rules of the
33 A final notice under s 32(1) in approved form
may be given to a lot owner if money owing is not paid 28 days after the date of
the fee notice. There are requirements regarding information to be provided in
the final notice including: confirming the obligation
to pay the overdue fees
and charges and interest immediately.
34 Additionally, s 32(2)(c) requires that the final
notice inform the lot owner of the following: that the OC ‘intends to take
action under Part 11 to recover the amount due if the overdue fees and charges
and interest owing are not paid within 28 days’
of the final notice being
35 The fee notice provisions contain
two key differences. Firstly, the fee notice is mandated to be given by the OC,
whereas the final
notice may be, but is not required to be given (subject to an
important proviso to which I will return). Secondly, the final notice
notify the lot owner of the OC’s intention to ‘take action under
36 I now turn to the provisions
contained in Division 1 of Part 11.
Division 1, an OC dispute includes: ‘an alleged breach by a lot owner ...
of an obligation imposed on that person by
this Act or the regulations or the
rules of the OC’.
application regarding such a dispute may be brought either by a lot owner or the
in determining an OC dispute, s 165(1) provides that VCAT may make any order it
considers fair including one or more of the
(c)(i) an order for the payment of a sum of money found to be owing by one
party to another party;
(ca) an order requiring a lot owner to pay to the OC reasonable costs incurred
by the OC in recovering an unpaid amount from the
lot owner (other than costs in
the proceeding);
39 Under s 165(4), VCAT’s power to
award costs under s 109 of the
1998 (Vic) (
40 Finally, mandatory considerations
apply to the making of an order by VCAT in an OC dispute under s 167(1) of the
OCA. These are:
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) an act or omission or proposed act or omission by a party;
(c) the impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on the lot owners as a
(d) whether a resolution or proposed resolution is oppressive to, unfairly
prejudicial to or unfairly discriminates against, a lot
owner or lot owners;
(e) any other matter VCAT thinks relevant.
MAGISTRATES’ COURT ACT
41 For present
purposes, the Court’s civil jurisdiction is conferred by
s 100(1)(a)
the MCA with respect to hearing and determining of ‘... any cause of
action for damages or a debt or a liquidated demand
if the amount claimed is
within the jurisdictional limit ...’
CONSIDERATION
42 It is plain that recovery by an OC of
money owed by a lot owner is an OC dispute, thus, a matter that VCAT has
hear and decide.
43 To reiterate,
therefore, the jurisdiction question, is this: whether Parliament intended that
VCAT has exclusive jurisdiction regarding
the recovery of money owed by a lot
owner as a matter of statutory construction of the OCA; or, whether the
Magistrates’ Court
has concurrent jurisdiction to hear and decide such
claims under
of the MCA and s 30 of the OCA.
44 Somewhat surprisingly, although the OCA has been
in operation for some twenty years, the jurisdiction question was not a matter
of reported judicial determination prior to the decision of
45 Of course, the interests of
justice are generally served by consistency of decision-making where identical
questions arise. However,
decisions of judicial officers are not binding upon
other judicial officers of the same Court.
was not the subject of appeal.
Notwithstanding this, the OC contends it was decided incorrectly and seeks to
have the jurisdiction
question fully ventilated in each of the cases presently
before the Court. It should be stated that, unlike in
, the Court
has had the considerable benefit of detailed submissions of Counsel and fully
developed arguments.
47 There was no challenge to
the correctness of the principles of statutory interpretation enunciated in
as follows:
The starting point for determining the meaning of a statutory provision is
its text, considered in light of its context and purpose.
The primary aim of statutory interpretation is
to construe the relevant provision(s) in a way that aligns with both the
language and
purpose of the statute as a whole.
Where the words of a statute are plain and
unambiguous, they should be given their ordinary and grammatical meaning.
The hierarchy of provisions may also be
important. For example, the phrase "subject to" is a standard means of
establishing which
provisions are dominant and which are subservient. The
subservient provisions, therefore, operate only to the extent that they are
inconsistent with the dominant provisions.
further relevant principle is that when a statute confers a power subject to
qualifications and conditions, general expressions
in the statute are to be read
as subject to those qualifications and conditions.
generalia specialibus non
(general provisions do not override specific ones) applies in
situations where the application of a general provision would undermine
nullify a specific provision. While this principle is typically applied to
provisions within the same statute, it may also be
applied by analogy to
provisions in separate statutes.
Finally, where
two statutes are the product of the one legislature, there is a general
presumption that there is no contradiction
48 Applying those principles of statutory
interpretation with respect to s 30, his Honour said:
First, I consider the meaning of s 30 is plain and
unambiguous. By s 30(1), it confers a general jurisdiction on the
Magistrates’
Court to hear proceedings where ‘any monies are owed to
an owners corporation’. This would include any general commercial
involving an owners corporation and a third-party debtor. However, where a
proceeding relates to the ‘recovery of money
owed to the owners
corporation by a lot owner’, the conditions in s 30(2)
at a later point, his Honour went on to say:
effect of s 32(2)(c) and s 163(2) is that fee recovery proceedings against lot
owners may only be commenced in VCAT if the amount
remains outstanding 28 days
after the notice has been given. As Division 1 of
refers exclusively to
VCAT and the orders it may make, it simply cannot follow that the Magistrates'
Court has concurrent jurisdiction.
To my mind,
that submission is only open if the phrase ‘subject to sub-section
(2)’ in s 30(2) is disregarded contrary
to principles of statutory
interpretation set out previously. Moreover, it is not that s 30(2) imposes
requirements when the proceeding
is brought before VCAT. Rather, when the Owners
Corporation is recovering money owed by a lot owner (as opposed to any other
s 31, 32, and Division 1 of
for reliance by the OC upon
of the MCA, his Honour was not persuaded
that took the jurisdiction question further. That was said to be because the
general jurisdiction conferred by
was broadly equivalent
to s 30(1) of the OCA. Applying the ‘specific over general’ rule of
construction, s 30(2) should
prevail over both s 30(1) and
the correctness of the principles of statutory interpretation set out in
was not disputed, it was said nevertheless that the resulting
analysis led to a consequence which offended an important presumption
statutory construction. The presumption was that legislation is not to be
interpreted to withdraw or limit a conferral of jurisdiction
on Courts, unless
the implication appears clearly and
unmistakably.
52 Although
the presumption enunciated by Dixon J in
Magrath & Ors. v Goldsbrough
referred to the power of superior
there is little doubt
the presumption extends to inferior courts. Herzfeld & Prince in the text
Interpretation
the following helpful commentary as to operation of the presumption:
It is presumed that when a legislature confers
absence of expressed words or reasonably plain intendment to the
contrary, a conferral of jurisdiction or grant of power does not
alter the usual procedure of the court or the ordinary incidents of its
to superior courts. It can be
applied even to inferior courts of limited jurisdiction created by statute where
the question is whether
a newly conferred jurisdiction or newly granted power is
to be subject to the court's ordinary procedure and other ordinary incidents
its jurisdiction
example of the presumption applying to an inferior court’s jurisdiction
was the South Australian case of
Integrated Waste Services Pty Ltd v Harvey
Mullighan J held that clear words would be needed to oust the jurisdiction of
the Magistrates’ Court conferred by
Magistrates’ Court Act 1991
concerned jurisdiction regarding certain summary offences (which s
9 of the SA Act granted jurisdiction to hear), in circumstances
where another
piece of legislation, namely the
Environment, Resources and Development Court
) established a different court (the ERD Court) and granted to
it jurisdiction to hear summary offences. Section 7 of the ERD Act
used language
such as “the [ERD] court will deal”. Despite that, the court held
that such words were not sufficiently
clear as to exclude jurisdiction of the
Magistrates’
that case concerned criminal rather than civil jurisdiction, there is no
suggestion in the authorities to say that the presumption
operates differently.
55 Here, the OC maintains that the OCA’s
grant of powers upon VCAT did not exclude or alter the Magistrates’
‘ordinary incidents of jurisdiction’, namely,
determining causes of action for debts or liquidated
56 Certainly,
the OCA (first enacted in 2006) contains no express words regarding a withdrawal
or alteration of the Court’s
civil jurisdiction conferred by s 100(1) of
(first enacted in 1989).
Shergold v Tanner
plurality stated that the presumption against ouster of jurisdiction (per Dixon
reflected general principles regarding implied repeal of an
earlier statute. The plurality endorsed the following explanation of
Saraswati v The Queen
It is a basic rule of construction that, in the
absence of express words, an earlier statutory provision is not repealed,
or derogated from by a later provision unless an intention to that
effect is necessarily to be implied. There must be very strong
support that implication, for there is a general presumption that the
legislature intended that both provisions should
operate and that, to the extent
that they would otherwise overlap, one should be read as subject to the
Attorney-General
, the plurality then referred to the analysis in
as follows:
, Kitto J expressed the
question as being whether the two items of legislation could stand or live
together. In the same case, Fullagar
J spoke of "contrariety",
Taylor J of "direct conflict", and Windeyer J asked whether the two
statutes were clearly and indisputably
contradictory displaying such repugnancy
that they could not be reconciled. Later, in
Travinto Nominees Pty Ltd v Vlattas
Gibbs J used the expression "could stand together" (citations
seems to me, distilling these principles, that the following considerations
apply to the jurisdiction question:
the legislature intended both statutes (s 100(1) of the MCA and provisions of
the OCA, in particular, s 30) to stand or live
together or whether there is such
repugnancy or contrariety that they could not be reconciled;
the OCA provisions contain a clear and unmistakeable implication to alter or
remove the Court’s jurisdiction;
the requisite ‘very strong grounds’ exist to infer that the
Court’s jurisdiction to hear and decide ‘debt
and liquidated
demand’ claims under s 100(1) of the MCA is altered, or derogated from, by
60 Having set out those additional
principles, I return to the text of the OCA.
61 Certainly, it was incontrovertible that –
under ss 18(2)(a) and 30(1) – an OC has a general power to recover any
owed to the OC, in any court of competent jurisdiction as a debt due to
the OC. Specifically, such a cause of action may be commenced
by an OC in the
Magistrates’ Court,
being authorised to do so by ordinary resolution.
62 The OC submits that it is plain from s 18 that
it may proceed in this Court against a lot owner for money owed. That is because
s 18(2) provides that, 'if a matter is within the civil
of the Magistrates' Court
and an [OC] is authorised to do so by ordinary
resolution, the [OC]
may commence any legal proceeding in (a) the
Magistrates' Court...
' (emphasis added).
reject that submission with respect to s 18. The purpose of s 18 (as substituted
by Act No 4 of 2021) was to reduce the burden
for an OC regarding authorisation
to litigate. Whereas formerly a special resolution was required to authorise an
OC to bring litigation,
under the amendment, a special resolution was required
to bring litigation, subject to subsection (2). Section 18(2) meant that an
ordinary (not a special) resolution was required to bring litigation under the
Magistrates' Court jurisdictional limit, or at
64 Moreover, that construction offends
established principles of statutory construction as it considers the text of s
18(2) in isolation
from its context in the OCA more broadly and all of the
provisions, in particular s 30(2) and Division 1 of Part
65 As stated, there is no question that an OC
may litigate in the Magistrates’ Court to recover money owed to the OC by
contractors
or service providers or other third-party debtors (as his Honour
OC argued that, in the same way, it could bring a recovery action in the
Magistrates’ Court for money owed by a lot owner
(while acknowledging that
the notice provisions apply). That was because Parliament intended the two
statutes to work harmoniously
together and, in no way, had derogated from the
67 Pausing,
as for s 100(1) of the MCA, a preliminary issue arises with respect to the
of money owed’ by
a lot owner under the OCA is, or ought properly be, construed as a ‘debt
or liquidated demand’.
68 Under the OCA
statutory regime, the basis for recovery by an OC of money owed by a lot owner
arises this way:
(a) The OC has exercised
statutory functions and powers under Part 2 of the
(b) The OC has levied lot owners with fees and
charges, the setting of which must be based on the lot liability and lot
entitlement
of the lot owner under ss 23, 23A and 24; and has determined the
times for payment of such fees and charges.
liability is a defined term under in s 3 and means a number specified in the
plan as the lot liability for that lot, expressing
the proportion of the
administrative and general expenses of the OC which the lot owner is obliged to
(d) Lot entitlement is also defined in s 3 and
means a number specified in the plan as the lot entitlement for that lot,
the extent of the lot owner's interest in any common property
affected by the OC.
(e) The obligation of the lot
owner to pay such fees and charges arises under s
(f) The OC is empowered to charge (or waive)
interest, if money is outstanding after the due date and authorised by
resolution at
a general meeting, under s 29.
OC is authorised by ordinary resolution under s 18(2) to commence proceedings
(subject to the notice provisions).
69 The fact that
the recovery of money owed by the lot owner arises under statute is not, of
itself, inconsistent with the Court’s
determine debt and liquidated demand claims.
‘debt’ is ‘a liquidated sum in money presently due, owing and
payable by one person, called the debtor, to
another person, called the
of a ‘liquidated sum’ is said to be: whenever the amount to which
the plaintiff is entitled ... can be ascertained
by calculation or fixed by any
scale of charges or positive data it is ...
liquidated.
the OCA, the provisions set out above provide a mechanism to calculate or
ascertain a specific amount that is due and payable
by a lot owner. Accordingly,
that amount is a liquidated sum and is thus a debt within the scope of s 100(1)
of the MCA.
72 Accordingly, to that extent, no
contrariety arises in the bringing of a cause of action to recover money owed by
a lot owner under
the OCA in the Magistrates’ Court.
73 I turn now to construction of s 30 and to
examine the intended inter-relationship of ss 30(1) and 30(2). As for
interpretation
of the phrase ‘subject to’, the following commentary
is instructive:
The effect of the provision was
correctly described by Cooke J in
Harding v Coburn
[1976] 2 NZLR 577
as being ‘a standard way of
making clear which provision is to govern in the event of conflict. It throws no
light, however,
on whether there would in truth be a conflict without it’.
See also Megarry J in
C & J Clark Ltd v Inland Revenue
Commissioners
[1973] 1 WLR 905
: ‘Where there is no clash, the phrase does
nothing: if there is collision, the phrase shows what is to prevail. The phrase
provides no warranty of universal
collision.’
was submitted there simply was no clash or collision arising between s 30(1) and
s 30(2). That was because each subsection could
– and ought – be
construed without the words ‘subject to’.
75 I reject that argument. On a plain reading of
the text of s 30, by reason of the words ‘subject to subsection 2’,
OC’s general power to recover any money in a court as a debt due to
the OC under s 30(1), is altered or bound by – or
conditional upon –
the application of other legislative provisions within the OCA and specifically,
the provisions referred
to in s 30(2) as being
applicable.
76 Thus, the potential for collision
within s 30 arises due to the very requirement that when recovering money owed
by a lot owner
(as opposed to a third-party debtor), there are additional
specific legislative requirements that apply, namely: the notice provisions
ss 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part 11.
further apparent difference in language arises between the two subsections of s
30. The phrase ‘recovery of money owed
to the OC’ in subsection (1)
is replicated in s 30(2). Yet, the accompanying phrase ‘as a debt
due’ appears only
in s 30(1) and is not contained in s 30(2) with respect
to recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
sense, the eschewing of the words ‘as a debt due’ in s 30(2) may not
be of great weight in terms of an assumption
of legislative intent (especially
as s 30(2) is specific and s 30(1) is general).
79 Yet, the High Court has confirmed that the
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
it is consistent with the language and purpose of all the provisions of
the statute and that the context, the general purpose and
policy of a provision
and its consistency and fairness are surer guides to its meaning than the logic
with which it is
constructed.
process of construction must always begin by examining the context of the
provision that is being construed
. Context should be regarded in its widest
80 Applying
those principles, the absence of the words ‘as a debt due’ in s
30(2) may be significant in the broader context
of the OCA as a whole.
81 Returning to the language of s 30(2), it is
necessary to examine closely the provisions stated to apply to the recovery of
owed by a lot owner.
82 It is clear the OC
accepts some aspects of s 30(2) apply to recovery of money owed by a lot owner
when coming to this Court, namely,
the notice provisions of ss 31 and 32. That
is evident from the notices being pleaded in the statement of
83 Thus, to this point, it appears that a
harmonious reading of s 30(2) and the Court’s general jurisdiction under
achievable by reason of the OC giving a fee notice to the lot owner
(and, optionally, a final notice – a matter to which I
will return), prior
to the commencement of proceedings.
84 Pausing, in
, his Honour was not taken to extrinsic materials by the parties
and did not consider them to be of
assistance.
However, in my view,
the EM and the Second Reading speech provide some guidance relevant to the
30 of the EM confirms the OC’s general right of recovery of money owed in
a court of competent jurisdiction. Where
recovery is for money owed by lot
owners, that is ‘subject to’ the application of
the specific
procedure in the fee notice provisions
for money owed by lot owners
the language of cl 30 – in referring to a ‘specific procedure in the
fee notice provisions’ applying to
recovery of money owed by lot owner
– arguably supports the OC’s contention that s 30(2) is capable of
standing harmoniously
with the general jurisdiction under s 100(1) of the MCA.
87 Again, it was said that construction was correct
because it accorded with principles of statutory interpretation (s 30(1) being
dominant or general, whereas s 30(2) was subordinate).
88 However, importantly, the OC’s
construction of s 30(2) requires that – in litigating in the
Magistrates’ Court
for recovery of money owed by the lot owner –
either some provisions referred to in s 30(2) do not apply,
do apply, but in a selective sense. I refer to subsection 32(2)(c) as well
as to provisions within Division 1 of Part 11 (‘Applications
89 It is at this point, therefore,
that the potential conflict, repugnancy or contrariety referred to
, arises such that the two statues may not be capable of being
reconciled for the purposes of the Magistrates’ Court having
MA 46 Pty Ltd v Paglia Properties
Delaney J had to
consider an apparent intersection of rights of parties under two different
legislative regimes. His Honour described
the task helpfully as follows:
To determine whether there is an inconsistency
requires a comparison of the
ual language of each statute to see
whether they stand together or whether the later statute has abrogated the
earlier statute. When
comparing two intersecting statutory provisions it is to
be assumed that Parliament normally intends both statutes to work harmoniously
together so that each operates within its respective field of application; this
position is only displaced by clear and unmistakeable
implication. It is
with these principles in mind that the question of the asserted inconsistency
... is to be approached (omitting
citations).
91 Accordingly,
I turn now to consider the language and construction of subsection 32(2)(c) as
well as provisions within Division
1 of Part 11; and, to examine whether or not
harmony is able to be achieved in the sense referred to by Delaney J.
92 In my view, there are four matters that
potentially displace the presumption that the statutes were intended to work
together (such
that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction),
with respect to recovery of money owed by lot owners. I consider
those matters
i. The requirements that the final notice be
in approved form and inform the lot owner of the OC’s intention to
action under Part 11’ if fees remain unpaid after 28 days.
ii. The requirement that Division 1 of Part 11
applies to the recovery of money owed by a lot owner pursuant to s 30(2).
iii. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the operation of
s 165(1) and the considerations contained in s 167(1) including fairness,
oppressiveness,
prejudice and discrimination.
iv. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the requirement
under s 165(4) that ‘VCAT’s power to award costs under s 109 of the
Act 1998 is not affected’.
93 I now turn
to each of those matters in turn.
I. The requirements that the final
notice be in approved form and inform the lot owner of the OC’s intention
action under Part 11’ if fees remain unpaid after 28
94 The fact that lot owners must be
informed that the OC will take action under Part 11 (which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’);
yet find themselves defending actions in
the Magistrates’ Court is contradictory and difficult to reconcile.
95 Final notices must be in approved forms.
Pursuant to s 200 of the OCA, the Director of Consumer Affairs must approve and
each approved form.
96 The approved form of
the final notice (published on the Consumer Affairs website) states: ‘If
payment is not received within
28 days after the date this final notice is
given, the owners corporation intends to take action under
Corporations Act 2006
to recover the amount due.
This includes applying to
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
seeking an order
requiring you to pay’ (emphasis added).
fact that the approved form (as currently published) states that taking action
applying to VCAT’ is indicative of no
more than the uncertainty that has existed for lot owners for the past twenty
led to the jurisdiction question before the Court now. It also is at
odds with the language of the Note contained at the foot of
98 Clause 32 of the EM does not
assist as it simply confirms the final notice must inform the lot owner that the
OC intends ‘to
take action under
’ to recover the amount due
if the overdue fees, charges and interest owing are not paid within 28
99 Returning to the text of the OCA, the Note
at the foot of
states that
provides that
an application to
by the OC for an order requiring a lot owner to pay an amount payable
by the lot owner to the OC can only be made if the amount is
not paid within 28
days after the final notice is given under
100 A note at the foot of a provision forms
part of the Act if the Act was passed after 1 January
the Note expressly articulates the link between the operation of s 32 and
applications to VCAT. Importantly, the Note does
not state an alternative such
as ‘or a court of competent
102 The OC answers the apparent
conflict in taking action in the Magistrates’ Court, contrary to that
prescribed stated intention
in this way (in addition to the argument referred to
previously that s 30(2) is subordinate to s
103 It was said that the giving of a final
notice under s 32 was not a mandated step; thus, it was not required before
recovery action in the Magistrates’ Court for money owed
against a lot owner. Further, s 162 provides that VCAT
decide OC disputes.
104 However, this submission is
misconceived. The word ‘may’ is used in s 162 in the permissive
sense with respect the
grant of VCAT’s powers by the legislature. Also,
the contention does not address the apparent contradiction that – although
the final notice is not a mandated step (unless commencing at VCAT) – s
30(2) states that ss 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part
11 ‘applies’
to recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
105 Pausing here, reliance upon the word
‘may’ in ss 32 and 162 in support of the OC’s construction of
absent consideration of the whole of the OCA and of the provisions
in Division 1 of Part 11 – is at odds with modern principles
of statutory
construction regarding context and purpose to which I have already referred.
106 To reiterate, and as the plurality observed in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is
the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context
and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at some
later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to deny
the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how it
ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that, understood in
its statutory, historical or other context, some other
meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning
must be rejected
107 Yet it was said that the language of the
OCA was nevertheless insufficiently clear and unmistakeable to displace the
presumption
against ousting the Court’s jurisdiction to hear and decide an
OC’s claim for recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
108 I am of the view that the legislative
requirement that the OC inform the lot owner of an intention by way of the final
to ‘take action under Part 11’ which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’ is directly contradictory to then initiating
a complaint in the Magistrates’ Court.
OC seeking to remedy this practically may opt to add a sentence such as:
‘This includes applying to VCAT or
a court of competent
seeking an order requiring you to pay’. However, for an
OC to amend or add to the wording of the approved form has the consequence
it is no longer the approved form under the OCA and is contrary to the Note, s
163(2) and, arguably, the legislative regime
as a whole under Division 1 of Part
110 Next, I turn to a further inherent conflict
that is not easily reconciled with the OC’s construction of s 30. A
consequence
of the OC’s interpretation is this. Because a final notice
does not have to be given, the OC could sue a lot owner in the
Magistrates’
Court for money owed as soon as 28 days elapsed on a s 31 fee
notice (and, indeed, at any time after any final fee notice was issued).
Whereas, in contrast, a VCAT application to recover money cannot be initiated
– by ss 32 and 163(2) – until after 28
days had elapsed on the final
111 To my mind, that consequence appears
repugnant to a purposive reading of the OCA which was intended to under s 1
“appropriate mechanisms” for the resolution of
disputes’. Moreover, the need for clarity and for parties to know
they stand was emphasised by the Attorney-General in the Second Reading Speech
as follows:
In keeping with this scheme, the
process for collection of owners corporation fees from lot owners is clearly set
out in the bill,
all parties will know where they stand
will be a mandatory 28-day notice upon failure to pay fees. A second and final
28-day notice is discretionary, but the owners
corporation cannot go to VCAT
unless this final notice is given (emphasis
requirements of s 32(2)(c) and 163(2) are thus very difficult to reconcile with
the Magistrates’ Court having concurrent
sought of money owed by the lot owner.
II. The requirement that Division 1 of
Part 11 applies to the recovery of money owed by a lot owner pursuant to s
113 The heading to Part 11 is
‘Applications to VCAT’. Headings to Parts of Acts form part of the
Pursuant to s 30(2),
Division 1 of Part 11 applies to the recovery of money owed to a lot
114 Within Division 1, numerous provisions
refer to the powers (and parameters to powers) of VCAT as follows: s 162 VCAT
and determine ... ; s 163 Who may apply to VCAT ... ; s 164 VCAT may
dismiss ... ; s 165 what orders can VCAT make ... ; s 166 If
VCAT determines
..., VCAT may make an order ... ; s 167 What must VCAT consider ... ; and so on.
115 Accordingly, the only possible construction of
s 30 as urged by the OC is that all the provisions within Division 1 apply to a
proceeding in the Magistrates’ Court, as though the reference to VCAT in
all these instances is to be interchangeable with
116 Although the EM is an aid only, the EM is
silent regarding the prospect of such a course being adopted by a court of
hear and determine ‘an owners corporation dispute’
as defined within
the clause.
Clause 163 refers to
who may apply to VCAT in relation to an OC dispute and so
117 As stated previously, the purpose under s
1(b) of the OCA is to provide for appropriate mechanisms for the resolution of
relating to OCs.
118 The Attorney-General
identified in the Second Reading one issue as ‘critical’ to all OCs
which was the need for a
comprehensive dispute resolution system and then went
Dispute resolution options are limited to
services available for resolving neighbourhood disputes, or, if a dispute
relates to the
OCA, regulations or rules, applying for a formal order from the
Magistrates’ Court. These options are too limited for the diverse
disputes and parties operating in today’s complex owners corporation
environment.
119 Reference
by the Attorney-General to ‘the diverse range of disputes’ in the OC
environment and to the obtaining of
a formal order from the Magistrates’
Court being ‘too limited’ is highly significant in the present
context. The
Second Reading articulates explicitly the legislature’s
awareness of the multiplicity of statutory bases upon which, in combination,
money may be owed by a lot owner or may be the subject of
120 Again, examining the text of the
provisions with Division 1 of Part 11, the breach of the obligation of the lot
owner to pay money
owed is, as stated, a dispute that VCAT may hear and decide.
However, the task of VCAT is expressed very broadly in s 162 as follows:
and determine a dispute or other matter arising under this Act or the
regulations or the rules of an owners corporation that
affects an owners
corporation (an owners corporation dispute) including a dispute or matter
relating to – ... (b) an alleged
breach by a lot owner ... of an
obligation imposed on that person ... to pay money
121 Again, this much broader expression of the
task of VCAT is, to my mind, consistent with the language in s 30(2) in which
‘as a debt’ do not appear in connection with recovery of
money owed by a lot owner (although they do in s 30(1) to recovery
of money owed
by third-party debtors).
122 For these reasons,
having regard to the express and unambiguous language contained in Division 1 of
Part 11 (including but not
limited to the heading), these provisions point to a
clear and unmistakeable implication to alter or remove the Court’s
with respect to recovery of money owed by lot owners.
III. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the
operation of ss 165(1) and 167(1) including with respect to considerations of
fairness, oppressiveness,
prejudice and
discrimination
123 Notwithstanding my stated
findings regarding the language and provisions as a whole in Division 1 of Part
11, it is appropriate
to deal with certain specific provisions in further
124 In s 165(1) there is a reference to the
making of orders that requires close examination. It is stated that, in
determining an
OC dispute, VCAT
may make any order it considers fair
including an order for the payment of a sum of money found to be owing by one
party to another party (emphasis
125 Of course, it is well-established that the
grant of power to make any order that the Tribunal considers fair does not
the Tribunal from an obligation to apply the law and not merely be
that extent, putting aside the difficulties referred to in the language overall,
the requirement regarding fairness in s 165(1)
causes no obvious contrariety.
127 Additionally, under s 167(1), in making an
order regarding an OC dispute, VCAT must have regard to specific considerations
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) an act or omission or proposed act or omission by a party;
impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on the lot owners as
(d) whether a resolution or proposed resolution is oppressive to, unfairly
prejudicial to or unfairly discriminates against, a lot
owner or lot owners;
(e) any other matter VCAT thinks relevant (emphasis added).
128 Clause 167 of the EM confirms that
VCAT, in making an order, is required to consider the conduct of the parties,
their acts or
omissions, the
impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on
the lot owners as a whole
, including whether it would be oppressive or
unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminate against, a lot owner, as well
other matter VCAT thinks relevant (emphasis
course, questions of fairness, oppressiveness and prejudicial or discriminatory
are not generally matters that arise for judicial consideration
in a cause of action in the Magistrates’ Court for recovery
of a debt or
liquidated demand. Such considerations are more commonly within the remit of
administrative tribunals and decision-makers.
Meringnage v Interstate
Enterprises Pty Ltd
is authority for the proposition that because in Victoria, there is no
strict separation of powers at the State level, State courts
exercise administrative power as well as State
judicial power (and, conversely, State tribunals are not precluded
from exercising
judicial power).
131 Nevertheless, it seems to
me that the requirement under s 167(1)(c) that VCAT must consider, in making an
order, the impact of
a resolution or proposed resolution ‘on the lot
owners as a whole’ does create a contrariety with judicial consideration
of a claim for debt or liquidated demand under s 100(1). The Court may find
itself be in the unusual position of having to consider
interests of non-parties
(being other lot owners).
132 Moreover, an ordinary
resolution is required to authorise the OC to bring litigation to recover money
against a lot owner. Hence,
if challenged, it is difficult to see how or on
what basis the Magistrates’ Court would look behind the making of a
resolution.
To that extent, a repugnancy appears to arise to alter the
Court’s jurisdiction.
IV. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the
requirement under s 165(4) that ‘VCAT’s power to award costs under s
109 of the VCAT
Act 1998 is not
133 There is a fundamental
difference between a judicial exercise of awarding costs and VCAT’s power
to award costs under s
109 of the VA.
principles that a Court is to apply were very helpfully articulated in
Sandpiper Developments Pty Ltd v Main Beach Developments Qld Pty Ltd (No
by Garde J as follows (omitting citations):
The relevant principles as to costs are well known. The court has a
broad discretionary power to make orders as to costs. The court’s
discretion is unfettered but is
exercised judicially upon facts connected
with the litigation and not by reference to irrelevant or extraneous
considerations
. Although costs are in the discretion of the court
the ordinary rule is that, in the absence of sound reasons to the contrary, a
successful litigant should receive his or her costs
. The purpose of an order
for costs is to compensate the successful party and not to punish the
unsuccessful party (emphasis
135 By contrast, the starting point with
respect to costs under s 109(1) of the VA is that each party is to bear their
own costs in
the proceeding.
136 Further, the
Tribunal may only order that a party pay all or part of the costs of another
party in a proceeding ‘if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so’,
having regard to the factors set s 109(3).
137 Thus, s 165(4) of the OCA would require the
Magistrates’ Court to award costs in a way contrary to well-established
governing a judicial award of costs.
138 In this way, the Magistrates’
Court’s jurisdiction with respect to questions of costs – arising in
recovery of money owed by a lot owner – is clearly and
unmistakably altered and, arguably, withdrawn.
139 In summary, the inconsistencies or
contrarieties that displace the presumption the two statutes were intended to
work harmoniously
– such that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent
owner) – are these:
(i) The plain language of
s 30(2) - which states that ss 31 and 32 and all of the provisions of Division 1
of Part 11 (‘Applications
to VCAT’) apply.
(ii) The express and unambiguous language contained
in Division 1 of Part 11 (including but not limited to the heading).
(iii) The contradictory and irreconcilable
practical consequences that flow from the requirements contained s 32(2)(c)
combined with
the content of Note at the foot of s 32 and 163(2) – when
read together and in the broader context of the Act.
(iv) The apparent withdrawal or alteration of the
Court’s costs jurisdiction with respect to OC disputes by way of the
requirement
under s 165(4) of the OCA that VCAT’s power to award costs
under s 109 of the VA is not affected.
required considerations under s 167(1) of the OCA that appear to alter the
ordinary incidents of the Court’s jurisdiction.
140 Therefore, having examined closely the language
and broader context of these provisions and upon a purposive reading of the OCA
in accordance with the principles referred to previously, I conclude these
matters are directly contradictory or repugnant to a conclusion
Magistrates' Court has jurisdiction under s 100(1) of the MCA and/or under s
30(1) of the OCA with respect to recovery of
money owed by a lot owner to an OC.
141 These matters conflict in an unreconcilable way
with the purpose and intention of the legislature. They create a clear and
unmistakeable
inference that the Court’s broad jurisdiction to determine
debts and liquidated demands is altered and derogated from with
claims for recovery of money owed by a lot owner under the OCA.
142 In other words, there is a clear and
unmistakeable implication to alter or remove the Court’s jurisdiction with
to claims for recovery of money owed by a lot owner under the
143 Moreover, the construction contended for by
the OC has the undesirable effect of creating uncertainty and irreconcilable
contradictions,
and of increasing confusion for lot owners and inevitably, OCs
(who are, in effect, collectives of lot owners who must make resolutions
empower litigation). These matters constitute further very strong grounds to
displace the presumption that the legislature intended
both statutes to operate,
such that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction to determine
actions to recover money
from lot owners under the OCA.
144 Finally, notwithstanding my conclusion that the
Court lacks jurisdiction to hear and determine the substantive proceeding, the
Court retains the authority to consider and determine questions concerning its
own jurisdiction, and to make such orders as are necessary
or incidental to that
determination, given that the proceeding has been commenced in this
145 I will hear from the parties as to next
Magistrate M A Hoare
8 July 2025
Owners Corporations Act
[2024] VMC 12
Parliamentary
Legislative Assembly, 20 July 2006
Second Reading’
Explanatory Memorandum, Owners
Corporations Bill (‘
Plaintiff submissions [13].
Plaintiff submissions [16].
Plaintiff submissions
Plaintiff submissions [44].
(n 1) ss 23, 23A and
Ibid s 163(1)(b)-(c).
Ibid [38]-[39].
[1932] HCA 10
(1932) 47 CLR 121
’), per Dixon J cited in
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(Lexis Nexus,
ed, 2023) [5.58]-[5.59] (‘
Perry Herzfeld and
Thomas Prince,
Interpretation
(Thomas Reuters Australia, 2
ed, 2020) [9.670].
Ibid [9.680].
[1999] SASC 82
Magistrates’ Court
[2002] HCA 19
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
v Commissioner for Public Employment
[2006] HCA 5
225 CLR 130
per Gleeson J
Provided the claim does not
exceed the jurisdictional limit of $100,000.
Rothwells Ltd v
Nommack (No 100) Pty Ltd
[1990] 2 Qd R 85 [86] cited by Randall
AMD Resources Ltd v TRS Management Pty Ltd
v Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd
[1923] HCA 21
(1923) 32 CLR
by quoting from the then current edition of Odgers on
Pleading cited by Randall AsJ in
AMD Resources Ltd v TRS Management Pty
(n 16) [12.4].
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
SZTAL v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
91 ALJR 936
[14] per Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
(n 4) 5, 30.
[2020] VSC 695
[2017] HCA 34
347 ALR 405
91 ALJR 936
[14] per Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ.
Second Reading
(n 4) 22, 162.
Second Reading
165(1)(c)(i).
Christ Church Grammar
School v Bosnich & Anor
[2010] VSC 476
(n 4) 23, 167.
[2020] VSCA 30.
[2024] VSC 581
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (496 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter