URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Capodicasa v Herald and Weekly Times Limited [1998] VADT 14 (11 September 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 59 of 1996
Carlo Capodicasa
COMPLAINANT
Herald and Weekly Times Limited
FIRST NAMED RESPONDENT
John Batten
SECOND NAMED RESPONDENT
THIRD NAMED RESPONDENT
REASONS FOR DECISION ON THE HEARING OF THE COMPLAINT
Ms Cate McKenzie
Deputy President
Ms Jan King
Mr Glenn Carleton
DATE OF DECISION: 11 September 1998
CATCHWORDS: Equal Opportunity - impairment discrimination in employment -
relevant comparitor for direct discrimination- principles
for assessment of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
ss17 and 46.
On 15 September 1995 Mr Capodicasa lodged
a complaint with the Equal Opportunity Commission ("the Commission") against
these three
Respondents under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
August 1996 the Commission, acting under s45(5) of the
, referred the
complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal ("ADT").
On 1 January 1996 the bulk of the provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act
had come into operation. They included a provision repealing the
Opportunity Act 1984
. They also included s217. Section 217 is a transitional
provision. Its effect is that the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
continues to apply
to a complaint which had not been referred to the ADT at the date of
commencement of the section (1 January 1996).
For that purpose, the ADT has the
functions of the former Equal Opportunity Board established under the
Opportunity Act 1984
. Accordingly, the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
this complaint.
The Respondents then applied to have the complaint struck out. This
application was refused on 20 November 1996.
Subsequently a Preliminary Conference was held and Particulars of Complaint
and Defence were filed with the ADT and served on the
This complaint came on for hearing on 10 11 12 13 and 16 March 1998. At the
hearing the ADT gave leave to Mr Staindl of Counsel to
appear for the
Complainant and to Ms Young of Counsel to appear for the Respondents. The
Tribunal reserved its decision.
On 1 July 1998 the provisions of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
and the Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Act 1998 came into operation. The first of those Acts establishes
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT). The second of those Acts
contains consequential amendments and transitional
provisions resulting from
that establishment. The combined effect of these two Acts is that VCAT now
exercises the jurisdiction formerly
given to the ADT. This proceeding is to be
taken to have been commenced before VCAT, and anything done by the ADT or the
in relation to it is to be taken to have been done by or in relation to
VCAT, but VCAT only has the procedures, powers, functions
and duties in relation
to that proceeding that the ADT would have had (see particularly Tribunals and
Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Act 1998, Schedule 2 clause
Mr Capodicasa claims that the first Respondent (the Herald) who was his
employer, and the second and third Respondents who were that
Managers, discriminated against him while he was an employee of the Herald. He
claims that the Respondents discriminated
against him on the basis of his
impairment. Under heading 2, we set out the relevant legislation and some
general principles applying
to this case. Under heading 3, we set out our
findings of fact. Under heading 4, we consider the submissions made by the
and make some more detailed comments about the application of the law
to this case.
Legislation
We now set out the provisions of the Act
applying to this case.
S.4 Definitions
(1) In this Act unless the contrary intention appears-
"impairment"
(a) total or partial loss of a bodily function;
(aa) the presence in the body of organisms that may cause disease;
(b) total or partial loss of a part of the body;
(c) malfunction of a part of the body; and
(d) malformation or disfigurement of a part of the body-
and includes-
(e) in relation to a person with a past or present impairment, an impairment
which presently exists or existed in the past but has
now ceased to exist;
(f) an impairment which is imputed to a person;
in relation to a person means-
(d) the impairment-
of that person....
(7) A reference in this Act to the doing of an act on the ground of status
or by reason of the private life of a person includes
a reference to the doing
of an act on two or more grounds or for two or more reasons that include, as a
substantial ground of reason,
the ground of status or the reason of the private
life of a person.
Criteria for discrimination
(1) A person discriminates against another person in any circumstances
relevant for the purposes of a provision of this Act if on
the ground of the
status or by reason of the private life of the other person the first-mentioned
person treats the other person
less favourably than the first-mentioned person
treats or would treat a person of a different status or with a different private
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) a comparison of the cases of persons
of another status or with a different private life shall
be a comparison where
the relevant circumstances in the one case are the same, or are not materially
different, in the other.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1) , a person discriminates against
another person in any circumstances relevant for the purposes
of a provision of
this Act if-
(a) by reason of a characteristic that appertains generally to persons of
the status or with the private life of the other person;
(b) by reason of a characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of
the status or with the private life of the other person-
the first-mentioned person treats the other person less favourable than the
first mention person treats or would treat a person of
a different status or
with a different private life.
Discrimination against applicants and employees
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of status or by reason of the private life of
the employee-
(a) in determining who should be offered employment;
(b) by dismissing the employee or subjecting the employee to any other
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), status includes impairment which
arose before or arises during the period of the employment
and whether or not
the impairment was apparent before employment or became apparent during the
period of employment.
Liability of employers and principals
Subject to sub-section (2), where a
person acts in contravention of this Act on behalf of another person either as
his agent or employee,
the person by whom the act is committed and the person on
whose behalf the act is committed shall be jointly and severally liable
this Act in respect thereof.
What must the Complainant prove?
This Complainant claims discrimination on the ground of impairment in the
area of employment. The Act prohibits discrimination in
certain aspects of
employment on the ground of status. "Status" includes impairment and imputed
impairment. Under s17(1) of the Act,
discrimination occurs if on the ground of
status (in this case, impairment) one person treats another less favourably than
she treats or would treat persons of a different status (that is, without
that impairment) in the same circumstances or in circumstances
that are not
materially different (s17(2)). Impairment need not be the sole ground of
discrimination. If there are several reasons
for treating a person in a
particular way, it is sufficient if impairment is a substantial reason for that
treatment (s4(7)). Discrimination
also occurs if, on the ground of a
characteristic generally appertaining or generally imputed to appertain to a
particular status
(in this case, impairment), one person treats another less
favourably than he or she would treat others without that characteristic
(s17(4)). Under s21(2) of the Act, it is unlawful (among other things) for an
employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of status (in this
case, impairment) by limiting or denying access to a benefit connected with
employment or by subjecting
the employee to a detriment (s21(2)(a) and (b)). The
Tribunal's predecessor, the Equal Opportunity Board, has held that the words
"benefit" and "detriment" have very broad meanings (
Leonard v Youth Hostels
Association [
1995] EOC 92-763).
However, "detriment" must be real and not
If an employee or agent contravenes the Act then the employer or principal on
whose behalf he or she is acting is also liable for
the contravention (s34(1)).
Section 34(2) provides a defence. That sub-section was not relied on in this
The way in which s17(1) and (2) operate was the subject of detailed
submissions in this case. We deal with those submissions in general
this point. Later, under heading 4, we comment on how those sub-sections apply
to the facts of this case.
The notion of less favourable treatment is central to the concept of
discrimination in s17(1) and (2). S17(1) and (2) only deal with
discrimination
in an aspect "relevant for the purposes of a provision of this Act"- that is, to
one of the areas of activity dealt
with in the later provisions of the Act.
These include s21(2) (
Waters v PTC
[1991] EOC 92
- 390). Under s17(1) and
(2), two things are required before discrimination can occur. First, the
treatment in question must be on
the ground of status or private life. It is
clear from s4(7) and the decision of the ADT in
Oyenkami v National Forge
Operations Pty Ltd
([1996] EOC 92 - 797) that, if status or private life
is a ground of substance for the treatment, it need not be the sole or dominant
ground for the treatment.
Second, for discrimination to occur, the conduct must amount to treating the
person with the particular status (in this case, impairment)
less favourably
than the discriminator treats or would treat a person of a different status
(that is without that impairment) in
circumstances that are the same or not
materially different. This second part of the test contains a number of
difficult concepts.
A better idea of their meaning can be obtained by examining
them separately, but, in the end, the test is a composite one. Care must
taken that the separate examination of the constituents of the test does not
obscure the nature of the composite concept as a
whole, or give that composite
concept an artificial meaning which it would not have, if examined as a single
We now set out a number of propositions about this composite concept. First,
"treat" has its ordinary meaning. An examination of that
meaning as set out in
the Oxford and Macquarie dictionaries reveals that a person "treats" another
person in a particular way if
the first deals with, behaves or acts towards the
second in a specified way. The Supreme Court has held that "treat", in the
of s17(1) of the Act, does not include every decision. It held that
"treat" would not cover a philosophical, metaphysical, theoretical,
provisional,
private or semantic decision. The Supreme Court also held that a decision made
by a body which controlled the subject
matter and implementation of the
decision, announced the decision and intended to give it effect, was engaged in
"treatment" for
the purposes of s17(1) (
Waters v Rizkalla
[1991] VicRp 2
A decision, then, that is communicated to no one or that is never
intended to have, or is incapable of having, any practical effect
in the real
world would not constitute "treatment". On the other hand, "treatment" is not
confined to implemented proposals. The
question is whether conduct amounts to
"treatment" of a person - whether it can be said to be dealing with or acting
toward the person
in a particular way; or whether, on the other hand, it is so
fluid, uncertain, undefined, conjectural or speculative that it cannot
to deal with a person at all. It is to be noted that the
Equal Opportunity Act
deals with the matter by including proposed treatment as well as treatment
in the definition of direct discrimination in s8. That
concept is far wider than
the concept in s17(1) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
What is the correct comparitor? First, the comparison must be between the
person with the status (in this case the impairment) and
a person with a
different status (that is, without that impairment). In
HJ Heinz Company
Australia Ltd v Turner
(Supreme Court of Vic, Court of Appeal, 1 July 1998),
Winneke P (with whom Calloway and Buchanan JJA agreed) pointed out the
difficulties
of trying to compare a person with an impairment with a person "of
a different status". In the Tribunal's view, Parliament intended
section should be interpreted in a way that would make it possible to make the
relevant comparison. On this basis, that
comparison should be between the person
with the impairment and a person without that impairment. For this purpose, the
person without
that impairment is said to be of a "different status" either by
assuming the person to have a status apart from impairment (for example,
person of a particular sex or marital status), or to have a different impairment
that did not require medical treatment (for
example, disfigurement at
The Complainant does not have to show that the employer treated an actual
person without that impairment more favourably than it did
him. A hypothetical
comparison is sufficient. It is enough if the Complainant shows that the
employer would have been treated a person
without that impairment more
favourably.
Second, s17(1) uses the words "less favourable". It does not use "unfair",
"unequal", or "different". Different treatment may not
always be less
favourable. Equal treatment may not always be as favourable treatment. This
Complainant must show that the unimpaired
person would have treated better than
Third, the comparison cannot be made in a vacuum. The circumstances for both
comparitors must be the same or not materially different.
This allows for some
slight variation but very little. No material change in the circumstances can be
made from one comparitor to
The fourth question is: What should these circumstances include? In our view,
they should include the circumstances of the Complainant's
situation as the
Tribunal finds them to be. However, the circumstances of that situation should
not be defined in a way that automatically
compels a conclusion about whether or
not the treatment is less favourable, or in a way that makes a comparison
between the person
with a particular status and a person without that status
impossible. To illustrate the first proposition, if a Complainant claims
or she is treated less favourably by his employer in relation to his absence
from his workstation to receive medical treatment
for a back injury, it would
not be a proper comparison under s17(1) to compare this situation with the
situation of a hypothetical
employee who did not have a back injury and
continued at his workstation. The use of this comparitor would compel the
that the employer would have treated the hypothetical worker who
continued to work more favourably. A comparison of this kind is
not what the
sub-section intends. The circumstances used for each comparitor are materially
To illustrate the second proposition, we use similar examples. If the
situation of the Complainant, absent from his workplace to receive
treatment at
a medical centre for a back injury, were compared with a hypothetical worker who
is absent at the medical centre although
uninjured, there might well be a
conclusion that the hypothetical worker would have been treated as favourably or
no less favourably
than the injured worker. In our view, the use of that
comparitor is also not what s17(1) intends. This is because it places the
hypothetical
worker in a situation of attending a medical treatment centre- a
situation so closely linked to the status of the Complainant worker
injured worker, and so much a characteristic of those who are injured, that it
makes it impossible to make a proper comparison
between the Complainant (a
person with a back impairment) and an unimpaired person.
The fifth question is: Should the circumstances include the reasons for the
treatment as found by the Tribunal? Clearly, the circumstances
cannot include
the status or private life of the Complainant, if the Tribunal finds that to
have been a reason for the treatment.
The inclusion of that reason in the
circumstances would make it impossible for the Tribunal properly to compare the
situation of
the Complainant with a particular status and a person without that
status. But what if the Tribunal finds that a Respondent's conduct
was wholly or
partly based on some reason unrelated to the Complainant's status or private
life- for example, dislike springing from
some earlier incident totally
unrelated to status or private life, or incompetence totally unrelated to status
or private life? In
our view, facts should be distinguished from perceptions.
So, the fact of inability to perform certain work should be part of the
surrounding circumstances used for a comparison under s17(1), but the
perceptions of the Respondent should not be part of those circumstances.
if the Tribunal finds that a Complainant is unable to do particular work tasks,
then that is part of the circumstances to be
used for a comparison under s17(1).
But to take as part of those circumstances a Respondent's perception that a
Complainant is unable
to do certain work tasks may make it impossible to compare
a Complainant with a particular relevant status and a person without that
particularly when the perception may be grounded on status (for example,
impairment) rather than the inability to perform
the work task. (As to
comparitors generally see,
Peninsula Country Golf Club v Corp
Court of Vic, Harper J, 7 June 1996;
Boehringer Ingelheim P/L v Reddrop
[1984] EOC 92-108).
The Complainant must prove his case on the balance of probabilities (
Supreme Court of Vic, 21 October 1993).
Evidence and findings of fact.
We now set out our findings of fact. Where we state that a matter is not in
dispute, we find that it is proved on the balance of probabilities.
We make some brief comments on the witnesses who appeared before us. Mr
Capodicasa appeared to us to be a truthful and credible witness,
whose evidence
was generally consistent and given with a vividness that leads us to regard him
as a witness of truth. The same comments
apply to evidence given by the Herald
Managers, Mr Cordina, Mr Wood and Mr Batten.
We found the evidence of Mr McKenna (a shop steward and an employee of the
Herald) and Mr Hood (one of the Managers of the Herald)
less convincing. It was
clear from Mr McKenna's evidence that he disliked Mr Hood, and this lessens the
weight which we give to his
evidence about Mr Hood. Mr Hood's evidence contained
a number of inconsistencies and on a number of points his recollection failed
him or he was confused. Where there is a conflict between the evidence of these
two witnesses and the other witnesses, we prefer
the evidence of the other
The evidence includes a number of medical reports from Psychiatrists and a
Psychologist. These were tendered by the Complainant with
the agreement of the
Respondents, and the makers of the reports were not called by any party to give
evidence. In making findings
based on these reports, we have given greater
weight to the reports of Dr Payne. He has been Mr Capodicasa's treating
Psychiatrist
for a number of years, has seen him frequently and on a continuing
basis. The other reports are based on fewer and less frequent
examinations.
We now turn to our findings of fact.
One of the locations at which the Herald
produces a variety of publications is Westgate Park, Melbourne. The production
area is divided
into five separate departments or "rooms". One of these is the
press room, in which the printing presses are located. In 1995, when
incidents which form the basis of this claim were alleged to have taken place,
Mr Reg Cordina was the General Manager of the
Herald, reporting to the Managing
Director of the company. Mr Neil Wood was the Production Manager, reporting to
Mr Cordina. Mr John
Batten was the Press room Manager, reporting to Mr Wood. Mr
Brian Hood was the day operations Manager of the press room. Mr Monohan
night operations Manger of the press room. Both reported to Mr Batten. Tom
Gardiner and Mal Waterhouse were Supervisors in
the press room. Brian McKenna
worked in the press room and was a shop steward (exhibit 1). These matters are
not in dispute.
Mr Capodicasa's work history
and position are not in dispute. After coming to Australia from Italy in 1965 at
the age of 18, he worked
as a laborer in a number of positions. He worked as a
laborer for 9 years with the then Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of
In 1979, he began work with the Herald. He began working
there as a general hand, and by 1995 had become a grade 4 press operator
press room.
We now make findings concerning Mr
Capodicasa's back injury. They are based on Mr Capodicasa's evidence. That
evidence is not in dispute.
In 1983, Mr Capodicasa suffered a
back injury at work. He said that he did not make a "big deal" of it and
continued to work. In 1995,
he began to suffer great pain in his back and his
leg. He saw his treating general practitioner about this, and took 2 weeks off
work. When he returned to work, he saw Dr Knight, the Herald company doctor,
and advised Mr Capodicasa
to see a specialist. He wrote a report to Mr Capodicasa's immediate supervisor,
Mr Gardiner, dated 10 August
1995. That report states that Mr Capodicasa suffers
from a severe and genuine back problem, is working with difficulty, and that
prolonged sitting or standing aggravates the problem. It states that Mr
Capodicasa finds relief from heat treatment, and may need
to visit the medical
centre once or twice during his shift to enable him to continue working (exhibit
A subsequent report from Dr Knight dated 31 May 1996 states that, as he was
unable to speak to Tom Gardiner on 10 August 1995, he
asked the nurse employed
at the medical centre (Belinda Steel) to speak to him and hand the report to
him. The report contains a
copy of a memorandum from that nurse to Dr Knight,
dated 13 August 1995. That memorandum confirms that the nurse spoke to Tom
sympathetic and appeared to understand Carlo's problem". The memorandum
discussion about the times when Mr Capodicasa would need the heat treatment, the
fact that additional staff could at that
time be released from the poster press
to perform Mr Capodicasa's duties and that, if Mr Capodicasa needed treatment at
time, Mr Gardiner would attempt to accommodate this. On 26 September
1995, Mr Capodicasa saw a specialist in relation to his back,
and was given a
medical certificate that permitted him to return to work on 2 October 1995 on
restricted duties. These involved no
repeated bending or lifting, lifting a
maximum weight of 2 kg from floor level and 10 kg from bench level and no
washing up (or cleaning)
work (exhibit A).
We now make findings about an incident
involving Mr Capodicasa occurring at the medical centre on 19 August 1995 ("the
medical centre
incident"). The findings are mainly based on the evidence of Mr
Capodicasa and Mr Batten and another worker in the press room in
Mr Capodicasa's
team, Mr Paul Connellan.
Mr Capodicasa was working on the night
shift on 19 August 1995. On that night Tom Gardiner, his supervisor, was absent
Mr Waterhouse was his supervisor on that occasion. Shortly after the
lunch break, Mr Capodicasa experienced considerable back pain
and could not
straighten up. There was no supervisor present. He told Paul Connellan that he
was going to the medical centre and
left. Paul Connellan then tried on more than
one occasion to ring a supervisor to arrange for a replacement for Mr
Capodicasa, so
that the press could start to run.
The medical centre consists of a waiting room, the door to which is open, and
a number of rooms opening off this waiting room. These
include a room occupied
by Dr Knight, and a room occupied by the nurse. They also included a room in
which treatment is carried out.
On that night, Mr Capodicasa was given heat lamp treatment to his back. He
lay on a couch in the treatment room, with his shirt raised
and his trousers
lowered slightly, so that the heat lamp could be directed to his back. The nurse
commenced the heat treatment, but
did not stay in the treatment room. She
returned from time to time to check the progress of the treatment.
Mr Batten gave evidence, which we accept, that on that night there were
machinery breakdowns and production delays. He noticed that
D press (the press
on which Mr Capodicasa worked) was not running and asked Mal Waterhouse, the
supervisor, why. He was told that
Mr Capodicasa was in the medical centre, and
that this was why the press was not running, Mr Batten gave evidence that at
he did not know of Mr Capodicasa's back injury or need for medical
treatment. He said that he decided to go to the medical centre
to find out why
Mr Capodicasa was there and that, depending on the length of time for which Mr
Capodicasa would be there, he could
decide whether or not to replace him on the
press. We accept this evidence. He also said that he could not recall whether he
Mr Waterhouse why Mr Capodicasa was at the medical centre or how long he
was likely to be. Given that there is no dispute that Mr
Batten went to the
medical centre, we find, on the balance of probabilities, that he did not ask Mr
Waterhouse these questions.
Mr Capodicasa gave evidence that the door of the room in which he was having
treatment was closed. Mr Batten gave evidence that it
was ajar. We accept Mr
Capodicasa's evidence on this point.
Mr Batten knocked at the door of the treatment room and entered immediately,
without waiting for a response from the person inside.
Mr Batten gave evidence
that he did not recall seeing a heat lamp, but also gave evidence that it
occurred to him that Mr Capodicasa
might have fallen asleep under the heat lamp.
On the whole of the evidence, we find that Mr Batten saw the heat lamp when he
the treatment room. On Mr Capodicasa's evidence, Mr Batten asked what Mr
Capodicasa was doing, and Mr Capodicasa replied that he
was having treatment. Mr
Batten then asked what the treatment was for, and Mr Capodicasa replied that it
was for his back. On Mr
Capodicasa's evidence, Mr Batten then told him a number
of times that the paper had to be printed, and on each occasion Mr Capodicasa
replied that he would be there soon and could not leave at that moment.
Eventually, Mr Capodicasa told Mr Batten to go and read Dr
Knight's letter. In
his evidence, Mr Batten agreed that he asked Mr Capodicasa how long he would be
and stressed the need to have
the paper printed, but he maintains that he did
not stress this persistently and that the conversation was very brief. On the
and length of the conversation, we accept Mr Capodicasa's evidence.
After the mention of Dr Knight, Mr Batten left the treatment room.
Mr Batten gave evidence that, if Mr Capodicasa had been absent for a reason
other than attendance at the medical centre (for example,
in the changing room)
he would either have gone himself or have asked a supervisor to ascertain the
reason for the absence. He would
have entered the changing room for this
purpose. We accept this evidence.
Mr Hood gave evidence, which we accept, that on the night of 19 August 1995,
Mr Batten came to his office and told him that D press
would not run because Mr
Capodicasa was absent at the medical centre. He asked Mr Hood to find out what
was happening and to get
the press started. Mr Hood checked with the workers on
the press, who told him that there was an electrical problem. He then went
the medical centre to find out how long Mr Capodicasa would be, so as to be able
to make a decision whether or not to replace
him on the press. He knocked on the
outside door of the medical centre, to alert the nurse. He did not go in. The
nurse came out
to him, and he asked her how long Mr Capodicasa would be. She
told him about 5 to 10 minutes. In his evidence, Mr Capodicasa said
could hear, from the treatment room, Mr Hood asking these questions in a raised
voice. Mr Hood denies that his voice was
raised. On this point, we accept the
evidence of Mr Hood.
Mr Capodicasa gave evidence, which we accept, that he left the treatment room
after completing his heat treatment but before being
rubbed down. In his
evidence, he described Mr Batten's conduct as a "vulgar intrusion" and as
lacking decency and integrity. He described
himself as being both upset and
angered by the treatment.
On returning to work from the medical centre, Mr Capodicasa spoke to Mr
Batten. On the whole of the evidence, he was clearly upset
and angry. His
evidence is that Mr Batten told him "if you're crook you stay home". He said
that he asked Mr Batten why Mr Batten
had not got a stretcher for him to take
him back to work. Mr Batten's version of this incident is that Mr Capodicasa was
and was yelling at him. Mr Batten asked him whether he was fit enough to
continue working. On this point, we prefer the evidence
of Mr Capodicasa.
Mr McKenna gave evidence that, on the Monday following Saturday 19 August
1995, Mr Hood had told him that Mr Capodicasa's absences
for medical treatment
at the medical centre would have to be in his own time or Mr Hood would have to
consider docking his pay. Mr
Hood denies this conversation. We prefer Mr Hood's
evidence on this point.
It was clear from the evidence that Mr Waterhouse and Mr Gardiner, both Mr
Capodicasa's supervisors, knew of his need to be absent
for medical treatment at
the medical centre from time to time. Mr Batten did not know of that need, until
he was told by Mr Waterhouse
that Mr Capodicasa was at the medical centre on 19
August 1995. On the whole of the evidence, we find that there was no clear rule
attending the medical centre. At the most, management
expected that a worker
would usually ask permission from a supervisor or manager before attending the
medical centre, but this depended
on the gravity of the injury and the need for
treatment, and the practice was not observed in all cases. We find that Mr
Capodicasa's
supervisors, Mr Waterhouse and Mr Gardiner, had authorised him to
go to the medical centre, when he needed to do so because of the
pain in his
We now make findings concerning Mr
Capodicasa's claim that he was removed from the weekend roster on 2 September
1995 (the "roster
incident"). On the whole of the evidence, we find that the
various teams of workers who worked on the printing presses at the Herald
Westgate site were rostered throughout the year on a rotating basis. On the
evidence of Mr Wood and Mr Hood, we find that one of
the aims of rostering was
to distribute Saturday night work, which involved extra penalty rates but also a
restricted staff, relatively
evenly across the Herald's workforce. Mr Capodicasa
gave evidence, which we accept, that the result of this rostering was that he
would usually work 3 Saturday nights on and 4 Saturday nights off, in any
seven-week period.
On the whole of the evidence, we find that the
rosters for the press room were prepared by Mr Hood. He gave evidence, which we
that he prepared the rosters on the information available to him,
including computerised records as to any workers who were absent
leave. He would then give the roster to Tom Gardiner to be checked for errors
and inaccuracies. Tom Gardiner would then
consult Brian McKenna, and any changes
resulting from that consultative process would then be made. Finally, he would
is, publicly display) the roster. On the evidence, we find this to
have been the usual practice followed in preparing and posting
the roster.
On the night of 2 September 1995, Tom Gardiner was absent from work. Mr Hood
was working on that night. Mr McKenna gave evidence that,
on that night, Mr Hood
came to him and asked him (because Mr Hood did not have the key to the cabinet
in which the rosters were posted)
to open that cabinet and post the roster. Mr
McKenna said that, as he was doing this, he noticed that Mr Capodicasa was not
on at weekends in September. Mr Hood explained this by telling Mr
McKenna that Mr Capodicasa could not do the job and that the company
fill in for him on a Saturday night. There was a heated discussion between Mr
McKenna and Mr Hood, and Mr McKenna left.
He said that he could not recall
whether Mr Hood had agreed to change the roster. Mr Capodicasa gave evidence
that Mr McKenna had
told him that Mr Hood had removed him from the roster
because he had had a "crook back".
In his Particulars of Complaint, Mr Capodicasa concedes that, after the
discussion with Mr McKenna, Mr Hood reinstated him to the
roster, and that Mr
McKenna told him that he had been so reinstated.
Mr Hood gave evidence that on a Saturday night no additional production
assistants were rostered on to take up duties as and when
required. During the
week, there were a number of these "floating" staff. On the whole of Mr Hood's
evidence, it is clear that he
did not consider it appropriate that people on
restricted duties worked on Saturday nights, where staff were short. Mr Batten
a similar opinion in his evidence. Mr Wood stated that this was
company practice.
Mr Hood said in evidence that he removed Mr Capodicasa's name from the roster
because he thought that Mr Capodicasa was on restricted
duties. He said that he
could not recall any computer print out or certificate from which he had gained
this impression. He said
that, after learning from Mr McKenna that Mr Capodicasa
was not on restricted duties, he restored his name to the roster.
On the whole of the evidence, we find that the roster which Mr Hood showed to
Mr McKenna was a draft. It did not become final until
consultation with Mr
McKenna was complete, and any necessary changes had been made, and it was
posted. We find that Mr Hood removed
Mr Capodicasa's name from the draft roster
because he thought him to be on restricted duties and that, after consultation
McKenna, he restored the name before posting the roster.
Mr Capodicasa gave evidence, which we accept, that he was greatly upset when
Mr McKenna told him that his name was not on Mr Hood's
roster for Saturday
nights in September 1995. He said that he felt like an injured beast in the
jungle. "If you are hurt, something
will come and eat you". Mr McKenna (whose
evidence we accept on this point) described Mr Capodicasa as "shaking and
yelling" when
he told him about the roster.
We now make findings about the events
following the roster incident. Those findings are based on the evidence of Mr
Capodicasa, Mr
McKenna, Mr Wood and Mr Cordina. For the most part, these matters
are not in dispute.
Mr Wood became aware of the medical centre
incident on the Monday following the Saturday, when the incident occurred, by a
message left for him by Mr Batten. He contacted Dr Knight, Mr Batten,
and then Mr Capodicasa. He told Mr Capodicasa that he was a
valued employee,
that he believed Mr Batten's behavior in entering the treatment room in the
medical centre had been inappropriate
and he arranged a meeting with Mr
Capodicasa in his office.
That meeting took place on the Tuesday or Wednesday following the incident.
Mr McKenna, Mr Capodicasa and Mr Wood were present. Mr
Wood apologised for the
incident on behalf of the company. He offered to put the apology in writing, and
Mr Capodicasa said that
this was not necessary. Mr Wood's evidence is that Mr
Capodicasa accepted this apology. Mr Capodicasa's evidence is that he told
Wood that there was nothing for him to apologise for, but that he did not accept
this apology as an apology from Mr Batten. On
this point, we accept Mr
Capodicasa's evidence.
On the day after the roster incident, Mr Hood reported the incident to Mr
Wood. From the report, Mr Wood understood that Mr Capodicasa
was upset by the
incident. Mr Wood telephoned Mr Capodicasa. He then arranged a meeting between
himself, Mr Capodicasa, Mr McKenna
and Mr Cordina.
This meeting occurred on 19 October 1995. By this time, Mr Capodicasa's
complaint had been lodged with the Commission and Mr Cordina
was aware of that
complaint. The medical centre incident was discussed briefly. The bulk of the
meeting was taken up by discussion
of the roster incident. Mr Capodicasa asked
for Mr Hood to be either sacked or transferred. Mr Cordina refused, on the basis
Mr Hood was a senior manager. Mr Cordina discussed with Mr Capodicasa the
possibility of moving his work location so that he would
have no further contact
with Mr Hood. He offered to have regular meetings with Mr Capodicasa, at a place
and time determined by Mr
Capodicasa. Mr Cordina assured Mr Capodicasa that he
was a valued employee. Mr Cordina gave evidence that, at the meeting, he agreed
to pay for psychiatric treatment which, he said, he understood that Mr
Capodicasa by then required. We find that Mr Batten treated
the medical centre
incident and Mr Hood treated the roster incidents so seriously that they
reported them to their senior managers,
and that their senior managers treated
them and their effect on Mr Capodicasa so seriously that they arranged meetings
with Mr Capodicasa,
made apologies for the medical centre incident to him on
behalf of the company, and after the roster incident, offered to pay for
psychiatric treatment.
Mr Capodicasa did not request any further meetings with Mr Cordina, and none
Mr Wood telephoned Mr Capodicasa on a number of subsequent occasions,
including once when Mr Capodicasa was in hospital. He also attended
with Mr Capodicasa in February 1996, to discuss a return to work plan.
After a short period of long service leave in September 1995, Mr Capodicasa
briefly returned to work on restricted duties at the beginning
of October 1995.
He then left the workplace, and has not worked since. In November 1995, he had
an operation on is back.
It is common ground that, on 2 September 1996, the Herald's accident
compensation insurer informed Mr Capodicasa that his make up
pay would end on 7
September 1996 and that, because he continued to be unfit for his previous work,
his job would then be terminated.
Mr Capodicasa ceased to work for the Herald at
the end of 7 September 1996.
We now make findings concerning Mr
Capodicasa's state of health after the medical centre incident and the roster
incident and the
impact of those incidents on his state of health. Our findings
are based on Mr Capodicasa's evidence and on a number of medical reports
(exhibits B - L). There was no evidence that contradicted Mr Capodicasa's
evidence on these points.
Mr Capodicasa's evidence is that he
currently takes prescribed medication to help him sleep, valium,
anti-depressants and panadiene
forte. He feels himself unable to go on holidays
or outings or to restaurants with his wife, children or relatives. Previously,
had enjoyed family life. He feels that he is unable to go shopping with his
wife. He has asked his wife to leave him. In evidence,
he said "if you love
somebody you don't want to take her down with you".
We now turn to the medical reports. There are four reports from Dr Payne
(exhibits C - F) covering the period from 5 June 1996 to
29 September 1997. Dr
Payne is Mr Capodicasa's treating Psychiatrist. The first of these reports
states that, when this doctor first
saw Mr Capodicasa, Mr Capodicasa described
back pain and other emotional symptoms which Mr Capodicasa stated were work
related. The
first report goes on to give details of the injury to the back. It
mentions the operation on Mr Capodicasa's back in 1995, followed
rehabilitation, and states that Mr Capodicasa "has apparently had a good
response to surgery". The report states that Mr Capodicasa
is at present unable
to return to work because he feels unable to cope with it emotionally, but is
keen to return. The doctor describes
Mr Capodicasa's problem as appearing to
"centre on his relationships with his employers", and goes on to refer to the
medical centre
incident and the roster incident. He states that the patient
feels humiliated and that his treatment has been unfair and unacceptable,
that he has lost trust in all levels of the company's management. The doctor
states that apart form one of Mr Capodicasa's family
members, there is no family
history of psychiatric illness, and that Mr Capodicasa does not appear to have a
past history of psychiatric
problems. He describes Mr Capodicasa's personality
as "somewhat rigid and sensitive to slights. His thinking seems preoccupied with
decency (which he felt absent from his treatment at work)". He also notes
symptoms of sleep disturbance, depression, and loss of
interest in normal
pursuits. The doctor diagnoses a reactive illness with elements of depression
and anxiety. He states "this illness
is related more to his perception of the
way his back problem has been approached by his immediate supervisors than to
any features
intrinsic to the injury itself". He goes on to say that the status
of his problems at work depends on whether his perception is objective
whether he is over sensitive in his objections and his perceptions are coloured.
The doctor expresses the view that, if the discrimination
which he describes is
objective, his anxiety can be regarded as arising from the workplace. The doctor
expresses the view that Mr
Capodicasa is unable to return to work at present,
because of his emotional distress at returning to what he perceives as a place
of discrimination. The doctor expresses the view that "the resolution of his
current difficulties should improve his mental state"
and "there should not be
any psychiatric reasons for permanent incapacity". Mr Capodicasa was prescribed
various medications. The
doctor expresses his prognosis as reasonable with a
good probability of recovery of normal functioning when his conflict with his
employers was resolved.
At the time Dr Payne wrote his next report on 12 December 1996, Mr
Capodicasa's condition had worsened. On 14 June 1996 he had attempted
He told the doctor that he had attempted this following "a period of
ruminations" about his perceived ill treatment at work.
He took another overdose
on 31 July 1996, and was then hospitalised for 4 months. He was prescribed a
number of further medications,
but "continued to ruminate about his workplace
and their treatment of him". The doctor described the overall impression as "a
tormented by his emotions". The doctor reports that Mr Capodicasa has not
responded well to therapy and his prospects of a return
to normal functioning
are diminishing.
In his next report dated 26 February 1997, Dr Payne reports that Mr
Capodicasa's condition is not significantly improved and he continues
respond well to therapy. His prospects of a return to normal functioning were
continuing to diminish. The doctor reports that
Mr Capodicasa told him that his
back was "still aching but bearable". He told the doctor that he could not cope
emotionally with
returning to work. The doctor states "his preoccupations with
the injustice of his treatment at work have permeated his entire life".
doctor's opinion is that the prognosis is now questionable, that it remains to
be seen whether Mr Capodicasa will return to full
functioning when his conflicts
are resolved, and that his level of impairment is likely to be high for the
foreseeable future.
In his last report dated 29 September 1997, Dr Payne notes that Mr Capodicasa
was again hospitalised in June 1997 because of a depression
"precipitated" by
concerns about "his legal situation, family issues, and his ongoing
preoccupation with his old work situation".
He remained hospitalised for
approximately 3 months. He continues on medication. The doctor describes him as
remaining distressed,
and describes his family situation as one of conflict. The
doctor describes Mr Capodicasa's preoccupation with his perceived ill
at work as "intense". He describes his likelihood of return to employment as
slender. He states that it is out of the question
that Mr Capodicasa can return
to work in the same setting. The prognosis is that Mr Capodicasa is likely to
suffer emotional problems
for the foreseeable future and the doctor suggests
early retirement as an appropriate option.
The Tribunal has 3 reports before it on Mr Capodicasa from Dr Kaplan, dated 7
and 14 October 1996 and 7 April 1997 respectively (exhibits
G H and J). Dr
Kaplan is a Psychiatrist. These reports set out the history of Mr Capodicasa's
back injury, and mentions the medical
centre incident and the roster incident.
They state that, after surgery, in November 1995, the sciatica has resolved.
However, the
reports also state that Mr Capodicasa still suffers from constant
lower back pain, although the pain is tolerable. They also mentions
preoccupation with his perceived ill treatment at work.
The reports state that Mr Capodicasa still thinks of suicide. He suffers from
sleeplessness, nightmares, and lack of concentration.
In the section of the
reports dealing with prognosis, the doctor describes Mr Capodicasa as devastated
by what he regarded as continuing
harassment and discrimination by the Herald,
and as being preoccupied with this treatment. The doctor states that these
are consistent with a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder. He
regards Mr Capodicasa as unable to return to his current workplace,
likely to require continued psychiatric treatment for the foreseeable future.
The doctor expresses the view that the psychiatric
condition "appears to have
developed following the alleged discriminatory acts of his employer" because,
apart from the back condition,
there appear to have been no other "major life
stressors over recent years" which would explain the condition. The doctor
that it is difficult to determine to what extent, if any, the back
condition has contributed to his psychiatric condition. He expresses
that, given that Mr Capodicasa states that the back pain is now tolerable and
remains preoccupied with his perceived ill
treatment at work and his sense of
betrayal, those preoccupations are "likely to be the major cause" of his
psychiatric condition.
The doctor's last report, in April 1997, concludes that
this condition has not improved and that Mr Capodicasa remains severely
He still thinks of suicide. The doctor concludes that the prognosis is
now likely to be unfavourable. Mr Capodicasa remains unable
to perform work of
any nature and requires continued intensive psychiatric treatment.
There are 2 further reports. There is a report of Dr Fail dated 2 June 1997
(exhibit B). That report emphasises Mr Capodicasa's preoccupation
perceived treatment at work. It diagnoses him as suffering from a severe
depressive illness that has developed into a psychosis,
characterised by
hallucinations. It expresses the view that the psychosis has been "precipitated"
by events at work. The doctor expresses
the view that there are no ongoing
factors attributable to employment that contribute to this illness, and that its
continuance "must
be related to constitutional factors". He states that he
believes the prognosis to be poor and that Mr Capodicasa will not recover
significant extent, although there can be no certain prognosis until
anticonvulsive therapy has been tried.
The last report is from David Stickels, a Psychologist. It is dated 19 April
1996 (exhibit K). That report mentions the medical centre
incident and the
roster incident, and Mr Capodicasa's continuing preoccupation with these
incidents. It diagnoses him as suffering
from reactive depression illness of
moderate severity. The report recommends regular psychological counselling. This
Psychologist
expresses the view that the illness is "entirely due" to Mr
Capodicasa's situation at work, dating from the medical centre incident
including the roster incident, and is also directly linked to his treatment for
his back condition.
On the whole of the evidence, we find that, from 1996 onwards, Mr Capodicasa
suffers from a severe depressive illness which effectively
makes him unable to
work and to lead a normal life with his family. He has attempted suicide 3 times
and continues to think of suicide.
This illness requires continued and extensive
psychiatric treatment, psychological counselling and medication. The prognosis
A major factor contributing to this illness was Mr Capodicasa's
continuing preoccupation with his treatment at work and, in particular,
roster incident and the medical centre incident. Until approximately mid 1996, a
minor factor contributing to this illness
was continued back pain, but there is
no evidence that this continued to be a significant contributing factor to the
illness after
mid 1996. The medical centre incident and the roster incident are
of equal weight in the degree to which they contributed to this
illness. We find
that Mr Batten, Mr Wood, and Mr Cordina, were aware that the medical centre
incident and the roster incident greatly
distressed and upset Mr Capodicasa and
that, in the circumstances, it was reasonably foreseeable that this should be
so. We find
that the extent or severity of his distress was not reasonably
foreseeable in the circumstances. We find that constitutional or physiological
factors, independent of Mr Capodicasa's preoccupation with his treatment at
work, were not a significant cause of his psychiatric
We now make findings concerning the
proceedings commenced by Mr Capodicasa in the County Court. This evidence is not
in dispute.
On 8 October 1997 Mr Capodicasa commenced proceedings
against the Herald in the County Court. Paragraph 3 of the statement of claim
alleges that, from about 1992 and 1993 to 5 July 1995, (which is called in the
statement of claim "the said period"), the Herald
required the plaintiff to
perform certain work for excessive periods of time. That work is stated to
include the lifting of heavy
weights, the moving of heavy reels of paper, and
pushing heavy trolleys. The statement of claim refers to that work as "the said
Paragraph 4 of the statement of claim alleges that "as a result of performing
the said work or part of it for the whole of the said
period or part of it, the
plaintiff was injured and has suffered and will continue to suffer loss and
damage". The particulars of
that loss and damage are stated to be injuries to
the spine, which are described, and "depression, stress reaction, anxiety".
is a claim for damages for loss of earnings and earning capacity. The
statement of claim alleges that the plaintiff is unable to
Paragraph 5 of the statement of claim claims that these injuries were
suffered as a result of the defendant's negligence and goes
on to describe the
matters that are alleged to constitute that negligence. They include the failure
to provide a safe system of work
or a safe place of work or safe plant and
equipment, and failing to properly instruct, train, assist or supervise the
and requiring the plaintiff to move excessive weights for excessive
periods of time. In the alternative, paragraph 6 of the statement
of claim seeks
damages for serious injury under the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
The reference to the back injury, as well as to anxiety and depression, is
consistent with the description of Mr Capodicasa's injuries
in the proceedings
initiated by him in the County Court against the Herald and requiring the issue
of a certificate under
Accident Compensation Act 1985
, to permit
him to claim common law damages for these injuries (exhibit 2).
On 17 November 1997 the Herald made an offer of compromise to the plaintiff
(exhibit M). The offer was $350,000, plus retention of
weekly compensation
payments and other compensation payments under the
Accident Compensation Act
, totaling $30,060. By notice of acceptance of compromise dated 20 November
1997, the Herald accepted the sum offered "in satisfaction
of the claim in
respect of which it is offered" (exhibit N).
Mr Daryl Botrouney, Solicitor for the Herald's Workcover insurer, gave
evidence that the figure included in the offer of compromise
was based on a
figure of $250,000 for estimated future economic loss and that it was
recommended that the offer could then include
a figure of up to $150,000 for
damages for general pain and suffering. We accept that the offer of compromise
made by the Herald
was calculated by it on the basis recommended by Mr
Botrouney. Mr Botrouney said that he based the calculation of general damages
a number of medical reports annexed to affidavits in the County Court
proceeding, including reports by Dr Payne, Dr Kaplin and
the Psychologist David
Stickel (exhibits A-K in this proceeding).
The Submissions
Discrimination
Respondents conceded that Mr Capodicasa's back injury was an impairment within
the meaning of the Act. They did not argue that
Mr Batten's treatment of Mr
Capodicasa during the medical centre incident and Mr Hood's treatment of him
during the roster incident
did not amount to either subjecting him to a
detriment or denying him access to a benefit (a benefit of quiet enjoyment of
employment)
within the meaning of s21(2) of the Act. Leaving to one side the
question of discrimination, we find that the conduct of Mr Batten
medical centre incident and the conduct of Mr Hood during the roster incident
did constitute subjection to a detriment
or the denial of a benefit falling
within s21(2) of the Act.
The Herald did not rely on the defense in s34(2) of the Act that it had taken
reasonable precautions to prevent a contravention of
the Act. Accordingly, if Mr
Batten and Mr Hood discriminated against Mr Capodicasa, then the Herald will
also be liable for the actions
of these employees and managers and will also
contravene the Act.
It is submitted for Mr Capodicasa that Mr Batten discriminated against him
during the medical centre incident, and Mr Hood discriminated
against him during
the roster incident, on the ground (or a substantial ground) of his back injury.
The Complainant claims that the
discrimination comprised less favorable
treatment of him by Mr Hood and Mr Batten. The Respondents deny
discrimination.
It is convenient to deal first with the roster incident. Under heading 3(5),
we have found that in the version that omitted Mr Capodicasa's
name, the roster
was a draft roster. Mr Hood had not communicated its contents to Mr Capodicasa.
The roster did not become final
until it was discussed with Mr McKenna,
appropriate changes were made, and the roster was posted. We find that the
omission of Mr
Capodicasa's name from the draft roster did not constitute
"treatment" of Mr Capodicasa for the purposes of s17(1) of the Act. The
did not represent a final or announced decision. It represented only a
provisional decision which was still subject to change.
The fact that Mr McKenna
chose to communicate the contents of the draft roster to Mr Capodicasa does not
change its status as a draft.
Because there is no relevant "treatment", there is
no discrimination under s17(1) of the Act. This part of the complaint therefore
fails. It is unnecessary for us to deal further with the elements of s17(1) of
the Act in relation to it.
We now deal with the medical centre incident. We have found that Mr Batten
went to the medical centre unaware that Dr Knight had authorised
Mr Capodicasa
to be treated there. However, having been told that Mr Capodicasa was in the
medical centre, Mr Batten must either
have suspected that he had an injury
needing treatment or that he was feigning injury. In either case, we find that
the question
of Mr Capodicasa's impairment was in his mind when he went to the
medical centre. We have found that, on Mr Batten's going into the
centre, he became aware of the heat lamp. From this point on, Mr Batten was
aware that Mr Capodicasa was receiving treatment
for his back. We find that Mr
Capodicasa's impairment was in Mr Batten's mind from the time when he went to
the medical centre, and
that it was a basis of substance for his conduct there.
It was not the only basis. Another basis was his concern at the delay in
production of newspapers that night.
In his conduct at the medical centre, did Mr Batten treat Mr Capodicasa less
favorably than he would treat a person without a back
injury and in the same or
similar circumstances? It was submitted for the Complainant that the correct
comparitor was with a press
room employee who was absent for a reason (other
than impairment) known to and authorised by the Herald. It was submitted for the
Respondents that the Tribunal must, in addition, take into account the fact of
delay in production of the newspaper. In other words,
the absence used for the
purposes of the comparison must be an absence which would affect the employer's
work output. Applying the
propositions about s17(1) and (2) of the Act that we
have set out earlier, we take into account, for the purposes of the comparison,
the circumstances mentioned both in the submissions of the Complainant and the
Respondents. We find that Mr Batten's conduct at the
medical centre constitutes
less favorable treatment. On the evidence, he would not have treated a press
room employee who was absent
in the change room during an authorised break in
the same way. He would not necessarily have gone himself to find the reason for
the absence. We are not satisfied that he would have requested that person to
immediately cease changing and return to the printing
presses. We are not
satisfied that he would not have found an alternative way of discovering the
reason for the absence, rather than
entering the room without permission from
the person occupying it.
It is clear from Mr Hood's evidence that there was an alternative way of
finding out how long Mr Capodicasa would be at the medical
centre. We have found
that Mr Hood simply asked the nurse, and did not enter the treatment room. We
find that Mr Batten's entry into
the treatment room and persistent request to Mr
Capodicasa to discontinue treatment and return to the press immediately
less favorable treatment on the ground of his impairment (the back
injury) and amount either to the denial to him of the benefit
of quiet enjoyment
of employment in this respect, or the subjection of him to a detriment. Mr
Batten's behaviour, then, falls within
s21(2) of the Act. By the operation of
s34(1), both Mr Batten and the Herald are liable.
2. The Damages
The Complainant does not claim damages for economic loss. He claims general
damages for the depressive illness which, he claims, has
resulted from his
reaction to the medical centre incident and the roster incident. Under heading
3(7), we have found that these incidents
contributed equally to that illness. We
have also found that the back injury was a minor cause of the illness, but that
this factor
did not contribute to the illness after mid 1996. We have found that
the illness is of a very serious nature, and that it has destroyed
Capodicasa's ability to work and his entire life, including his family life. He
remains in continuing need of extensive psychiatric
care, and this need will
continue for the foreseeable future. There is little hope for improvement of
this condition.
It was submitted for both the Complainant and the Respondents that, in
assessing damages, we should apply a number of principles applicable
assessment of damages in tort. First, the Complainant submitted that we should
apply the principle that one must take the
victim as one finds the victim. A
defendant cannot avoid damages by arguing that the injury is greater because the
victim was a particularly
vulnerable or fragile person. Secondly, the
Respondents submitted that the test of causation in torts should apply, and that
matter should be determined by a practical judgement of cause and effect.
Thirdly, the Respondents submitted that the principles
of remoteness of damage
should apply, and that the kind of damage must be reasonably foreseeable,
although the extent or severity
of the damage need not be reasonably
foreseeable. The Respondents submitted that the kind of damage in this case was
not reasonably
foreseeable by them. Fourthly, the Respondents submitted that we
should apply the principle that substantial damages should not be
awarded where
the wrongdoer's conduct merely accelerates the inevitable. They submitted that
the Respondents' conduct merely accelerated
a physiological condition which
would inevitably have led to Mr Capodicasa's current state. Fifthly, the
Respondents submitted that
we should apply the principle that damages should be
reduced to take into account compensation already received for the same injury
Under s46(2)(b) of the Act the Tribunal may order a Respondent to pay to the
person who made the complaint "such damages as it thinks
fit to compensate the
last mentioned-person for loss damage or injury suffered by that person in
consequence of the act of discrimination
to which the complaint relates". These
words govern the way in which the Tribunal must assess damages. "Loss damage or
injury" are
broad terms, and encompass both economic and non-economic loss
(Hall v Sheiban
[1989] FCA 72
[1989] EOC 92-250
Spencer v Dowling
[1996] VSC 51
[1997] 2 VR
They are compensatory in nature. To adopt the definition of "compensate"
from the Macquarie dictionary, their purpose is to make
up for or make amends
for the loss, damage or injury suffered. The loss damage or injury must be
suffered "in consequence" of a contravention
of the Act. Adopting the definition
of this phrase in the Macquarie dictionary, the loss damage or injury must be
suffered as a result
of that contravention. In other words, there must be a
causal link between the loss and the contravention. A similar requirement
causal link between loss and contravention of the relevant legislation exists in
other Australian legislation dealing with
discrimination, although "by reason
of" or "caused by" are sometimes used instead of "in consequence of" (see for
example Anti-Discrimination
Act 1992 (QLD) s209;
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Initially, awards of damages under Anti-Discrimination legislation in
Australia were made on the basis that the principles to be applied
were closely
related to those applicable in the law of tort (
Allders International Pty Ltd
v Anstee and Ors
[1986] 5 NSWLR 47
at 65 (per Lee J)). However, as the
authorities have now developed, the position is that the Tribunal should not
automatically apply
principles of tort to the assessment of damages in this
statutory jurisdiction, although those principles may in some cases be helpful
Hall's case
, cited above, at p77, 395 (per Lockhart J);
, cited above, at p144 (per Winneke P with whom, on this point,
Calloway JA agreed). So, in
Spencer's case,
Winneke P expressed the view
that the analogy between tort and the
Equal Opportunity Act
was "an imperfect
one", that principles as to the measure of damages in tort would have "no place
in a law which seeks to eliminate
discrimination in defined relationships", and
that the principles concerning amends and reparation in the law of defamation
and mitigation
of damage in the law of negligence and "other principles would
seem to me to have little scope for operation in the context of an
damages under Equal Opportunity legislation which, when all is said and done, is
sui generis".
Hall's case,
which arose in relation to the
Sex Discrimination Act
, (Commonwealth), French J expressed the view that, although the Complainant
need only prove that loss or damage occurs "by reason
of" a contravention of
"That is not to say that every adverse consequence, however remote, is to be
compensated, for In this context, as in the wider reaches
of the law, "causation
is to be understood as the man in the street, and not as either the Scientist or
the Metaphysician understand
it"...and within the cause-effect framework created
by the language of the statute the selection of effects which give rise to
may be influenced by policy and not merely by logic. In this regard
the reasoning of Gummow J in relation to sec82 of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
is of assistance -
Elno Australia Pty Ltd v International
(Australia)
[1987] 75 ALR p271 at p279"
In the passage referred to by French J, Gummow J, in
Elno's case
points to the need of the law to select from the "entire conditions" surrounding
loss or damage, a finite number of events which
can be said to cause the loss or
damage. He notes that this selection is not a matter of logic only, but is based
on the policy of
the particular legislation concerned, and that the relevant
legislation (rather than the common law) must determine the test to be
French J went on to say that the question to be determined is: What was the
effect of the Respondent's conduct on the Complainant?
This is a practical
judgement of cause and effect, and the reasonableness of the victim's reaction
is not a relevant element.
In the light of these propositions, we deal briefly with the application of
each of the principles argued for by the parties. We deal
first with the
principle that the wrongdoer must take the victim as he or she finds the victim.
This principle has been applied on
a number of occasions when assessing damages
under Anti-Discrimination legislation (see for example
Fares v Box Hill
College of Tafe
[1992] EOC 92-391
Judge v Durovic
In our view, this principle should apply to the award of damages under
the Act. To adopt a different approach would amount to the
denial to the
Complainant of compensation for damage actually suffered and to substituting for
the test of what loss or damage has
been suffered "in consequence" of the
contravention of the Act, some other test involving a consideration of what
damage might have
been suffered in the circumstances by a hypothetical person
without the Complainant's susceptibilities.
We next deal with the issue of causation. In our view, s46(2)(b) of the Act
only requires that the loss or damage must result from
or be consequence of the
contravention of the Act. This is to be determined on the evidence by the
application of practical judgement
and common sense. No test of reasonableness
is involved. This is the plain meaning of the words of s46(2)(b) of the Act.
We next deal with the principle of reasonable foreseeability of the kind
(although not the extent) of damage. It seems that reasonable
foreseeability of
damage is not a test of causation but instead limits the extent to which the
wrongdoer will be held liable (
Kenny and Good Pty Ltd v MGICA
at 581). We do not think it is consistent with the objectives of the Act
(according to its long title, to render unlawful certain
discrimination) or the wording of s46(2)(b) to apply this principle to the
assessment of damages under the Act. This approach
is, in our view, consistent
with the fact that, under some provisions of the Act, an awareness of
discrimination or a conscious intention
to discriminate is not a pre-condition
of liability. The provisions to which we refer are in s17(5), which makes it
discriminatory
to impose certain requirements or conditions in specified
circumstances - a provision regarded as directed to requirements which
their face neutral but whose impact is differential and discriminatory
Waters v Public Transport
Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
[1991] EOC 92-390).
However, this does not mean that the other principles commonly referred to as
principles concerning remoteness of damage will not
apply to the assessment of
damages under the Act. For example, it may be that, because some new cause has
arisen after the alleged
discrimination, or because loss or damage is too
indirect, practical person would say that the loss or damage did not occur "in
consequence"
of the discrimination.
We now deal with the principle that substantial damages should not be awarded
for an act that merely hastens the inevitable (
Del Campo v Uniting Church of
[1996] VicRp 84
[1996] 2 VR 525
at 529 (per Winneke P)). As Winneke P pointed out
Del Campo's
, this principle needs to be balanced against
the principle that the wrongdoer takes his or her victim as he or she finds that
To the extent that this principle means that, where a Complainant
suffers from a pre-existing condition which (apart from any discriminatory
conduct) would inevitably cause the relevant loss or damage, this is another
statement of the principle of causation. To the extent
that the principle might
be applied to refuse to justify a refusal to award damages where an unlawful act
of discrimination clearly
accelerates loss or damage, which would otherwise have
occurred later, we conclude that the principle is inconsistent with the wording
of s46(2)(b) of the Act and should not be applied to it. The Tribunal, when
assessing the cause of damage, cannot ignore either the
pre-existing condition
or the discriminatory conduct, and must also assess what additional damage was
caused by the acceleration
of the pre-existing condition.
Finally, we deal with the principle that damages under the Act should be
reduced by any compensation already received in respect of
the same loss or
damage. In our view, this principle should apply to the assessment of damages
under the Act. Under s46(2)(b), the
Tribunal can only award damages to
compensate (that is, to make good or make up for) the loss or damage. As was
observed in
Hall's case
, one method of assessment is to compare the
Complainant's position after discrimination has occurred with the position that
the Complainant
would have been in if the discrimination had not occurred. If
the Tribunal did not reduce damages by the amount of compensation already
received, it would in effect be compelling the Respondent to pay compensation
twice, and the damages would not be compensating the
Complainant for the
Under heading 3(7), we have found that the Complainant's psychological
injuries are severe, lasting and worsening. We have found that
incident and the medical centre incident were the major contributors to that
psychological injury, and that a minor contributing
factor until mid 1996 was Mr
Capodicasa's back injury. We assess the total damages appropriate to compensate
the Complainant for
this injury at $200,000. We discount this figure by 10%
($20,000) to take account of that part of the injury caused by Mr Capodicasa's
back injury - a matter unrelated to what we have found to be the act of
discrimination of the Herald and Mr Batten. We have found
that the medical
centre incident and the roster incident contributed equally to Mr Capodicasa's
psychological injury. We have found
that the roster incident did not constitute
discrimination. We discount the damages by a further $90,000, to take account of
findings. We have concluded that it is inappropriate in this jurisdiction
to apply the principle that the damage must be reasonable
foreseeable. If this
conclusion is wrong, we nevertheless have found that the kind of damage
(psychological injury) was reasonably
foreseeable by the Respondents, although
not its extent.
It was submitted by the Respondents that this Tribunal should not award
compensation, because Mr Capodicasa's psychological injuries
had already been
fully compensated by the Herald when the offer of compromise in the County Court
proceedings was accepted by Mr
Capodicasa. It was submitted for the Complainant
that no part of the amount accepted by way of compromise should be deducted from
the damages awarded in this proceeding. First, the Complainant submitted that
this was a different proceeding from the proceedings
in the County Court. The
proceedings in the County Court were proceedings in tort, and not under the Act.
The County Court proceedings
were against the Herald, and not against Mr Batten.
The County Court proceedings related to conduct of the Herald alleged to have
occurred before 5 July 1995, whereas the act of discrimination (the medical
centre incident) was found by the Tribunal to have occurred
after that date.
Second, although the Respondents submitted that the Herald had included in
the offer of compromise approximately $100,000 in respect
of Mr Capodicasa's
psychiatric injuries (as described in the medical reports which are exhibits in
this proceeding also), that offer
was only made in respect of the proceedings in
the County Court. There was no evidence before us of the basis on which Mr
accepted that offer of compromise. He could have accepted it as
compensation for what he claimed was loss of income alone; or as
compensation
for loss of income and in relation to his psychological injury. That offer was
accepted only in relation to the proceedings
before the County Court. On the
terms of the offer of compromise and its acceptance, the compromise only related
to the loss as set
out in the statement of claim in those proceedings - that is,
the depression, stress reaction and anxiety resulting from the events
Capodicasa's workplace up to 5 July 1995.
We are not satisfied that the compensation received on the compromise of the
County Court proceedings is compensation for the loss
or damage resulting from
the medical centre incident or the roster incident. To the extent that it is
compensation for psychological
injury resulting from the back injury, we have
already discounted the damages which we propose to award.
Taking all the evidence into account, we assess the damages in respect of the
contravention of the Act involving the medical centre
incident at $90,000. The
damages are awarded jointly and severally against Mr Batten and the Herald.
conclude that Mr Capodicasa should be awarded $90,000 general damages, which the
first and second Respondents are jointly and severally
liable to pay. Those
damages relate to the contravention of the Act represented by the medical centre
incident. In all other respects,
we find the complaint not proven.
The parties did not seek costs. Accordingly, there is no order for costs.
This complaint coming on for hearing on 10 11 12 13 and 16 March 1998, and on
hearing Mr Staindl of Counsel for the Complainant and
Ms Young of Counsel for
the Respondents THIS TRIBUNAL DOES ORDER-
Pursuant to section 46(2)(b) of the
Opportunity Act 1984
that the first and second named Respondents pay to the
Complainant the sum of $90,000 general damages to compensate the Complainant
stress, anxiety, depression and psychiatric injury suffered by the Complainant
in consequence of the act of discrimination which
the Tribunal has found the
Respondents committed.
That the first and
second named Respondents are jointly and severally liable for the payment of the
amount referred to in paragraph
1 of this order. That amount must be paid by
them to the Complainant on or before the expiration of 30 days from the date of
Pursuant to section 46(2)(d) of
that Act, that in all other respects the complaint is
That the parties have general
liberty to apply.
That there is no order as
Dated this 11th day of September 1998.
Ms Cate McKenzie
Deputy President
Ms Jan King Mr Glenn Carleton
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter