URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v Australia Post No.2 [1998] VADT 24 (27 August 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 172 of 1997
Eric Clayton
COMPLAINANT
Australia Post
REASONS FOR DECISION ON THE HEARING OF
A COMPLAINT UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
27 August 1998
Mr John Wolters
Senior Member
Catchwords:
discrimination - impairment - goods and services -
characterisation of manifestations of an impairment - s8(1)
Equal Opportunity
The proceeding
On 6 August 1997 the complainant lodged with the Equal Opportunity Commission
(the Commission) a complaint under the
Equal Opportunity Act
Act) claiming unlawful discrimination on the grounds of impairment in the area
of goods and services.
On 21 October 1997 the Commission referred the complaint to the Tribunal
pursuant to s108(3) of the Act enclosing the original complaint
form and the
complaint documentation. On 20 January the Tribunal gave its reasons for
decision on an application by the respondent
under s109 of the Act to strike out
the proceeding. The Tribunal refused that application. A preliminary conference
was held on 20
February 1998 at which the parties were directed to serve and
file particulars of complaint and defence. The complainant served and
particulars of complaint on 20 April 1998 and amended particulars on 8 May 1998.
The respondent served and filed particulars
of defence on 25 May 1998.
The legislation
The relevant provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act
that apply in this matter are as follows:
Definitions
"impairment"
total or partial loss of a bodily
the presence in the body of
organisms that may cause disease;
partial loss of a part of the
malfunction of a part of the body,
(ii) a mental or psychological disease or
(ii) a condition or disorder that results in a person learning more slowly
than people who do not have that condition or disorder;
e malformation or disfigurement of a part of the body;
The following are the attributes on the basis of which discrimination is
prohibited in the areas of activity set out in
(b) impairment;
Meaning of discrimination
(1) Discrimination means direct or indirect discrimination on the basis of an
(2) Discrimination on the basis of an attribute includes discrimination on
(a) that a person has that attribute or had it at any time, whether or not he
or she had it at the time of the discrimination;
(b) of a characteristic that a person with that attribute generally has;
(c) of a characteristic that is generally imputed to a person with that
(d) that a person is presumed to have that attribute or to have had it at any
Direct discrimination
(1) Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats, or proposes to treat,
someone with an attribute less favourably than the person
treats or would treat
someone without that attribute, or with a different attribute, in the same or
similar circumstances.
(2) In determining whether a person directly discriminates it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not that person is aware of the discrimination or considers
the treatment less favourable;
(b) whether or not the attribute is the only or dominant reason for the
treatment, as long as it is a substantial reason.
Motive is irrelevant to discrimination
In determining whether or not a person discriminates, the person's motive is
irrelevant.
Discrimination in the provision of goods and services
(1) A person must not discriminate against another person-
(a) by refusing to provide goods and services to the other person;
(b) in the terms on which goods and services are provided to the other
(c) by subjecting the other person to any other detriment in connection with
the provision of goods and services to him or her.
(2) Sub-section (1) applies whether or not the goods and services are
provided for payment.
Applicable principles of law
To establish his case, the complainant must satisfy the Tribunal on the
balance of probabilities that the respondent or any of its
discriminated against him on the basis of an attribute - in this case impairment
- either because the complainant had that
attribute or because of a
characteristic displayed by the complainant that someone with that attribute
generally has or that is generally
imputed to someone with that attibute (s 7 of
the Act), in an area relevant for the purposes of the Act, in this case the
of goods and services, either:
directly, (s8 of the Act) by
treating him or proposing to treat him, a person with an impairment, less
favourably than they treat
or would treat someone with an impairment, in the
same or similar circumstances - the discriminator does not have to be aware of
the discrimination or to consider the treatment less favourable but the
attribute must be a substantial reason for the treatment;
indirectly, (s9 of the Act) by
imposing, or proposing to impose, a requirement, condition or practice that
someone in Mr Clayton's
position could not comply with, that a higher proportion
of native speakers could comply with, and that is not reasonable -
reasonableness
depends on the relevant circumstances of the case (s9(2)(a)-(c)),
and again the discriminator does not have to be aware of the discrimination.
Although indirect discrimination was alleged in the original
complaint, there was nothing in the particulars of complaint or in the
before the Tribunal to indicate any indirect discrimination. The Tribunal will
therefore only discuss the requirements of
The operative words in s8(1) are wide: 'treats, or proposes to treat someone
with an attribute less favourably than the person treats
or would treat a person
without the attribute'. In other words, there do not have to be two different
kinds of actual treatment in
the same relevant context; all that is required is
for the Tribunal to be satisfied that a person of a different status would not
have been treated in the same way.
Section 8(1) further requires the comparison of the different cases of
treatment to be one where the relevant circumstances are not
different, so that it could not be said in defence that other customers of
Australia Post were treated no differently,
or that other people with an
impairment were not treated as alleged by the complainant, if the circumstances
of the other persons
were not the same as those of the complainant.
The treatment of a person without an impairment or another person with an
impairment must have happened in not materially different
circumstances as that
of the treatment of the complainant. In that regard one of this Tribunal's
predecessors said in
Oyekanmi v National Forge & Anor
[EOB of Vic, No
20 of 1994] at p8, in dealing with substantially the same provision in the 1984
'the proper comparison is with the normal or usual way in which (persons with
a different attribute) are treated, or with the way
in which the majority of
(them) are treated. It may be, in some cases, that there is no normal or usual
treatment, or treatment of
the majority of the relevant class which can be used
for comparison. In such a case it might be possible to find that differential
treatment existed, but not less favourable treatment'
The expression 'less favourable treatment' was also discussed in
. At p9 of its decision the (Equal Opportunity)Board said the
'We now comment on what is meant by less favourable treatment. ... The first
thing to be said is that the Act focuses on treatment
that is less favourable
rather than treatment that is different or equal. The words "treats....less
favourably" call for a comparison
of the treatment of the alleged victim of
discrimination and other persons. Indeed, s17(2) (of the 1984 Act) makes the
comparison clear. That sub-section deals with the kind of comparison
to be made. It requires a comparison in relevant circumstances
that are the same
or not materially different. It would appear from this sub-section that the
circumstances in each of the cases
used for the purposes of the comparison need
not be identical. Only the relevant circumstances of each case must be the same
materially different. Again, a difference in the circumstances of each
case that is not material can be ignored.'
'Who are the persons between whom the comparison is to be made? One is
obviously the alleged victim of discrimination. The other is
a person with a
different status (in this case, race or colour) from the alleged victim of
discrimination. It is clear from the use
of the words "treats or would treat"
that this person of a different race or colour from the alleged victim of
discrimination may
be real or hypothetical (
Boehringer Ingelheim v.
[1984] EOC 92-108
at page 76, 052;
Haines v. Lewes
at page 76, 842).'
The less favourable treatment must also be on the grounds of the attribute,
in this case impairment. This Tribunal again refers to
the discussion in
, where at pp10 and 11 the (Equal Opportunity) Board said:
'Section 17(1) does not make all kinds of less favourable treatment
discrimination. It only deals with less favourable treatment on
the ground of
status (including impairment) or by reason of private life. Other kinds of less
favourable treatment may be relevant
in other forums but are not covered by this
Act. What does the complainant have to prove to establish less favourable
treatment on
the ground of race or colour? It is clear that "on the ground of "
indicates a connection between the treatment and race or colour.
But what kind
of connection? Is it simply cause and effect, or is some kind of intention or
consciousness necessary on the part of
the discriminator?'
'The authorities on the subject are conflicting and difficult to reconcile.
Australian Iron and Steel v. Banovic
([1989] EOC 92-271) Gaudron and
Dean JJ, in considering similar provisions in the New South Wales
Anti-Discrimination Act
, indicated that a ground prescribed in the
Act must be the "true basis" of less favourable treatment, whether or not the
discriminator
was actuated by a motive to discriminate (see pages 77, 732-733).
Their Honours went on
"and there may be other situations in which habits of thought and
preconceptions may so affect an individual's perceptions of persons
particular characteristics that generally assigned reasons for an act or
decision may in fact mask the true basis for that decision".'
Waters v. Public Transport Corporation
([1991] EOC 92-390) Mason
CJ and Gaudron J, with whom Dean J agreed, came to a similar view. They approved
the approach of Gaudron
and Dean JJ in
Banovic' s case
In asking what test should be applied, the Board then concluded that less
favourable treatment would be on the relevant grounds if
these were found to be
the true basis for the treatment; a discriminator might not be conscious of the
fact that this was the true
basis for the treatment because of a preconception
or because the decision to treat on that basis was justified in some other way,
but the relevant grounds had to be a factor in the decision.
In the present matter the question is whether in the same or materially
similar circumstances the respondent would have treated a
person without a
disability or another person with a disability in the same way as it allegedly
treated the complainant. If the answer
is 'yes' then there can be no
discrimination under
If the answer is 'no', then the next question is
'was the complainant's disability or the respondent's perception of disability
substantial basis for the alleged discriminatory treatment?'. If the answer
is 'yes', the requirements of
would be fulfilled.
The evidence and findings of fact
The evidence in this matter can be summarised in small compass, much of it
being either common ground or not seriously contested between
the parties.
Between December 1996 and early 1998 the complainant experienced a number of
difficulties regarding his mail. He had during that time
made a large number of
change of address requests giving a rooming house at 14/36 Nicholson Street
Fitzroy as his old address and
consecutively the Post Offices at 377 Gore Street
Fitzroy, 291 Brunswick Street Fitzroy and Elgin Street Carlton, the Australia
delivery centre at Fitzroy, the Post Office at 170 Victoria Street North
Richmond, the delivery centre at Fitzroy and the Post Office
at North Richmond
as his new addresses.
Some of the change of address requests were made after expiry of the previous
request, giving Australia Post no choice but to send
the mail to the address on
the mail item. The difficulties regarding Mr Clayton's mail concerned delays in
delivery, mail received
in an opened state and mail not being redirected as
requested. Although not referred to in the original complaint or in his
particulars
of complaint, Mr Clayton gave evidence that on one occasion he was
given mail at the Fitzroy delivery centre that he said he had
seen in the
holding folders on a previous day, although he had not been able to see the
front of the mail item in question, and that
some mail had not been delivered to
him at all.
Although Mr Clayton had requested an investigation of the delays from the
investigation department of Australia Post, there was no
change in the
irregularities affecting his mail. Mr Clayton told the Tribunal that the hold-up
with regard to his mail, the lack
of proper investigation he perceived of his
complaints, the attitude of the counter staff and of other officers of Australia
and his general treatment by the carrier generally reflected perceptions
that staff had of him and his impairment.
These perceptions were not due to some characterisation by the alleged
discriminators of him having the manifestations of an impairment,
said, but were based solely on information that they had obtained by opening and
reading an item of mail sent to him by
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission in December 1996 from which it would have been apparent that he had
in the past as a patient at Royal Park Hospital. Mr Clayton
maintained that there was otherwise nothing whatever in his conduct that
in the eyes of the staff at Australia Post or any one else, have characterised
him as having an impairment.
Mr Clayton said that he therefore relied totally on the assumption that the
staff at the Fitzroy delivery centre knew he had been
at Royal Park. Although Mr
Clayton produced no evidence to the Tribunal that the mail item concerned had
been opened and read by
staff at Australia Post - he was only able to give
evidence that he had received the item concerned in an open state - he asked the
Tribunal to draw the inference that the delays in delivery of his mail, the
failed redirections, the non delivery and withholding
of mail were all instances
of less favourable treatment that he received from Australia Post staff
substantially because of the knowledge
that the staff had of his earlier
hospitalisation.
The Tribunal is not prepared to draw such an inference because it is of the
view that there is no evidence whatever to support it
other than Mr Clayton's
own perception of this state of affairs as the truth. Mr Clayton was not able to
produce any evidence linking
any perceived less favourable treatment to an
impairment or an imputation of an impairment suffered by him. The Tribunal
should observe
in this regard that the complainant did not give evidence that he
suffered from an impairment. He only alluded to documents that
had been in the
December 1996 letter that he said he received in an opened state, which letter
he said referred to his hospitalisation
at Royal Park. Mr Clayton did not
produce this letter.
Additionally there is Mr Clayton's firm assurance to the Tribunal that he had
no manifestations or traits that would have enabled
staff at Australia Post to
characterise him as having an impairment and that his behaviour at no time could
have given rise to any
such characterisation. On the other hand the evidence
called by the respondent was overwhelmingly and convincingly that Mr Clayton
received every helpful consideration from staff and management at Australia
Post, with quite exceptional personal attention to his
needs by management.
It was clear that the respondent's staff were baffled by what might have
caused the mail delays experienced by Mr Clayton. Although
counsel for the
respondent attempted to do so in cross examination of the complainant, Australia
Post staff did not seek to explain
any delays in terms of the redirection
process, even with multiple redirections in place at any one time or with
redirections away
from the delivery centre area, although it was admitted that
the inexperience of temporary sorting staff could give rise to missed
redirections.
The evidence of Mr John Baker, the manager at the Fitzroy delivery centre at
material times, of Mr Harold Wilkinson, the delivery
manager at the centre
during Mr Baker's absence mid 1997 and of Mr John Nightingale, a senior
investigation officer with Australia
Post was that Mr Clayton's complaints had
been dealt with seriously and that measures had been put in place to enable to
and to monitor any difficulties.
Mr Clayton did not in any way seriously challenge that evidence but asked the
Tribunal to consider the attitude of Australia Post
staff which he said was
patronising and condescending towards him because of the assumptions about his
mental health. Mr Clayton
sought to demonstrate such a discriminatory attitude
by producing and playing a tape recording he had made of the first telephone
call he had made to Mr Wilkinson when the latter took up duty in Mr Baker's
absence in May 1997.
The Tribunal heard a very helpful and responsive Mr Wilkinson who immediately
offered to find a solution for Mr Clayton's problems
by personally supervising
the holding and delivery of his mail. There was not, in the voice of Mr
Wilkinson, who could not have been
aware he was being taped, any hint of
condescension or a patronising attitude. Mr Clayton told the Tribunal that Mr
Wilkinson's tone
of voice and manner of speech was comparable to that of other
people who were similarly discriminatory towards him because of their
of his impairment.
The Tribunal, considering all of the material before it, can only find that
Mr Clayton has not succeeded in establishing to the standard
of proof required
in this jurisdiction, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent has
unlawfully discriminated against
him in the area of goods and services on the
basis of impairment.
For the reasons given above the Tribunal concludes that this complaint should
be dismissed.
The Tribunal makes no order as to costs.
This complaint having come on for hearing before the Tribunal on 25 and 26
August 1998, and on hearing the complainant in person and
Ms O'Brien of counsel
for the respondent-
THIS TRIBUNAL DOES ORDER-
That this complaint be
That there is no order as to
Dated this 27th day of August 1998.
Mr John Wolters
Senior Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter