URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/90.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murphy v Obst and Ors [1996] VicRp 90; [1996] 2 VR 613 (25 March 1996)
MURPHY v OBST and ORS
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
TADGELL, PHILLIPS AND CALLAWAY JJA
5 September 1995, 28 February, 25 March 1996
Having enjoyed the considerable benefit of studying in draft the contrasting opinions of my brethren I can explain quite shortly,
and without -
rehearsing in detail either facts or legislation, my agreement in the conclusion that the appellant's principal contention fails.
The appeal exposes two of the questions that are thrown up by the terms of subs(1) of s18 of the Appeal Costs Act 1964. The subsection
was readily comprehensible when first enacted but has since been so teased about by amendments as to render its interpretation an
oppressive ordeal. It is difficult confidently to assign a meaning to that part of it which follows para(d). The difficulty is perhaps
pointed up by the evident inability of any of the members of this court to concur entirely in the sense of the provision.
The first of the two questions stems from the following portion of the passage that now follows para(d): ... who pays or is ordered
to pay additional costs ... by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive
or as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial or as a consequence of the adjournment, as the case may be ...
The question is whether a claimant's entitlement to payment under the subsection depends, as the respondents decided, upon a new
trial's being had in a case such as the present, where the claimant has successfully appealed against a conviction on indictment,
the conviction has been quashed and a new trial has been ordered. The second question requires definition of the costs properly payable
to a claimant who establishes an entitlement to be paid under the subsection.
What I have called the first of the two questions is complicated by the words "as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial"
that were inserted into the subsection in 1969 by s4 of Act 7792. The difficulty in giving a comfortable operation in its context
to the phrase "an order for or upon a new trial" has been referred to by the other members of the court. I should not read the words
as meaning "an order for a new trial or an order upon a new trial". So to read them produces not only the unintelligible concept
adverted to by Callaway JA of "the new trial that is had ... as a consequence of an order ... upon a new trial": it produces also
an awkwardness, or perhaps an unacceptable tautology, in " ... who ... is ordered to pay additional costs ... as a consequence of
an order ... upon a new trial". These objections are avoided if one treats "a new trial" as serving not only the words "an order
for" but also (along with the word "upon") the preceding words "who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ...". The passage
would thus be understood to say " ... who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ... [1] as a consequence of an order for or
[2] upon a new trial ...". So to understand the passage appears to me to do no violence to any language and to avoid the incongruities
produced by "an order ... upon a new trial" that are borne of the draftsman's frugality of expression. The construction that I favour
seems the more justifiable because the words " ... pays or is ordered to pay ..." and " ... as a consequence of an order for or upon
a new trial ..." were all introduced into s18(1) together by s4 of Act 7792.
I would accordingly construe subs(1) of s18, as it now stands, as providing for payment of costs to a claimant who pays or is ordered
to pay (or on whose behalf there are paid or ordered to be paid) "additional costs":
(a) by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being rendered abortive in circumstances contemplated
by para(a) of subs(1); or -
(b) as a consequence of an order for a new trial made in circumstances contemplated by para(b) or para(c) of subs(1) or (probably)
deemed by subs(3) to have been made; or
(c) upon a new trial as contemplated by subs(1); or
(d) as a consequence of an adjournment in circumstances contemplated by para(d) of subs(1) -
as the case may be.
It might be objected that the draftsman is unlikely to have intended to treat additional costs paid or ordered to be paid "upon a
new trial" as a discrete entitling circumstance because those costs would be paid anyway "as a consequence of an order for" a new
trial. That is a possible view but I do not think that it is correct: additional costs that were paid or ordered to be paid upon
a new trial would not necessarily be paid or ordered to be paid as a consequence of an order for a new trial.
Although s18(1) may be regarded as providing for an indemnity for costs in cases where it applies, it is not expressed so to provide.
Unlike s14, s14B and s19, it entitles a qualified claimant to be paid not "an amount equal to" relevant costs but "such costs as
the Board considers have been reasonably incurred ...". Enumerating the entitling circumstances as I have proposed, it is very plain
that no new trial need be had as a prerequisite to an entitlement to payment of costs under para(b) of s18(1). The present appellant
founds his claim on that paragraph, purporting to satisfy the description of an: ... appellant ... who pays or is ordered to pay
additional costs ... as a consequence of an order for ... a new trial ...
I can envisage no case in which an appellant referred to in s18(1)(b) (being a successful appellant against conviction on indictment)
could be ordered to pay additional costs as a consequence of an order for a new trial or, indeed, that such an appellant could (or
at all events would) ever be ordered to pay costs. Even so, it seems to be common ground that here the appellant has paid some additional
costs as a consequence of an order for a new trial following the quashing of his conviction on indictment. He is therefore: ... entitled
to be paid from the moneys appropriated by Parliament for the purpose such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably incurred
by him ... in the proceedings before ... the conviction was quashed ...
What I have called the second question raised by the appeal - concerning the extent of a claimant's entitlement - depends on the
meaning to be given to the words last quoted. S18(1), as originally enacted, made clear its purpose to render the appeal costs fund
liable for a claimant's own costs incurred but rendered practically futile because of certain itemised circumstances not attributable
to the claimant, additional costs being ultimately incurred by reason of a new trial. The costs that the claimant was entitled to
be paid from the fund were not the "additional costs" but those costs to which the costs incurred by reason of the new trial were
"additional". The amendments to the subsection that have been traced by my brethren have produced the result that the recoverable
costs may extend beyond the claimant's own costs and include those of another party which the claimant is ordered to pay. Other results
produced by the amendments have been curious and possibly unintended. The amendments cannot, however, in my opinion be sensibly taken
to have altered the purpose of the subsection so radically as to confer an entitlement to payment of costs other -
than those to which costs subsequently incurred - whether by reason of or upon a new trial or not - were additional. That is to say,
a claimant under s18(1)(b) remained entitled after the enactment of Act 7792, as before it, to payment only of costs to which the
costs paid or ordered to be paid after the quashing of the conviction were additional.
As s18(1) now stands the costs which a claimant is entitled to be paid by virtue of para(b) seem to me to be those costs:
(a) to which the costs paid as a consequence of an order for a new trial were additional costs; or
(b) to which the costs paid or ordered to be paid upon a new trial were additional costs.
The entitlement does not arise merely because the claimant pays costs as a consequence of an order for a new trial or pays or is
ordered to pay costs upon a new trial. The entitlement arises only when what are paid as a consequence of an order for a new trial,
or paid or ordered to be paid upon a new trial, are "additional" costs.
That which is characterised by the adjective "additional" may be merely an extra, in the sense of something further, or more; or
it may be a measure of something over and above, or a quantitative accretion to, what exists. The distinction feeds on its context.
Hence, to speak of adding fuel to a fire connotes, no doubt, a supplementation of additional fuel; but that would ordinarily mean
(I should think) no more than that some extra fuel had been added. Probably no comparison of the nature or quantity of the fuel on
the fire before and after the addition would matter: to understand what was meant in the context one would need no close knowledge
of what was being added to what. When, however, "additional" is used with reference to measure or value a comparison will often be
required by way of designation of that which is "additional". To understand what is meant you need to know something of what already
exists and of what is being added. In the context of s18(1) the concept of "additional costs" suggests, I think, an exercise in comparison.
The comparison is between what was, without addition, and what is, with addition. What constitutes additional costs, therefore, is
the difference to be determined by the subtraction of the former from the latter. The comparison, however, is necessarily of like
with like. The subtrahend and the minuend must always be numbers or quantities designating essentially the same substance if the
difference is properly to be called "additional". A dozen apples added to a half-full barrel are not appropriately called a dozen
additional apples if the existing content of the barrel was only pears.
The concept of "additional costs" is not unique to the Appeal Costs Act. It is to be found, for example, in r63.24(1) of Ch I of
the Rules of the Supreme Court, which derived from earlier rules of court and has for many years had counterparts in other jurisdictions.
The rule regulates the costs recoverable by a plaintiff who, having sued in the Supreme Court, obtains judgment for a sum not exceeding
one-half of the amount to which the jurisdiction of the County Court is limited. The plaintiff is in that case entitled prima facie
only to County Court costs "less an amount equal to the additional costs properly incurred by the defendant by reason of the proceeding
having been brought in the Supreme Court instead of the County Court ...". In Ditton v Gallagher
(1992) 110 ACTR 12
Gallop J had occasion to consider the meaning of "additional costs" in a comparable rule of court, namely O65 r7A of the Rules of
the Supreme Court -
of the Australian Capital Territory. This, in part, regulates the costs recoverable by a plaintiff who obtains in the Supreme Court
a judgment for a sum which could have been recovered in the Magistrates Court, limiting the plaintiff to costs on the appropriate
Magistrates Court scale "reduced by an amount equal to the additional costs properly incurred by the defendant by reason of the suit
having been instituted in the Supreme Court instead of the Magistrates Court ...". His Honour, at 16, gave his opinion that: ...
the proper meaning of "additional costs" in O65 r7 a is to be determined according to a simple subtraction from the costs which have
been incurred in the Supreme Court of the amount of costs which would have been incurred if the proceedings had been instituted in
the Magistrates Court. The difference then will demonstrate the additional costs. Such a meaning is within the scope and purpose
of O65 r7a(3).
The decision, with respect, would have seemed obvious enough had it not been given on review of a taxing officer's decision which
expressed a different opinion. However that may be, the present relevance and value of the opinion given by Gallop J is to illustrate
a distinction between additional costs (in a comparative sense) and further or extra costs which are on top of others to which a
comparison or relationship is irrelevant.
The circumstances of that case required a quantification of "additional costs" so that any appropriate deduction might be made from
the costs to which the plaintiff might otherwise be entitled. In the present case no such quantification of "additional costs" within
the meaning of s18(1) is strictly required. It is necessary, however, to identify as "additional" those costs which have been paid
as a consequence of the order for a new trial so that the costs to which they were additional, in the appropriate sense, may be ascertained.
The exercise requires a comparison of like with like as a matter of fact. For this reason it cannot be assumed that all the costs
reasonably paid by a claimant in the course of preparation for a new trial following a successful appeal against conviction upon
indictment were necessarily "additional" to those of the first trial, in the sense in which "additional" is used in s18(1).
I agree with Phillips JA that the respondents misdirected themselves in determining that, if s18(1) applied at all in the appellant's
favour, the costs of his trial having been reasonably incurred, he was entitled to have paid to him under the subsection all of those
costs. Those which are additional costs, and those to which they are additional and are recoverable under the subsection, are to
be ascertained as a matter of fact. It is therefore necessary to allow the appeal but, for the reasons I have assigned, I would reject
the principal submissions for the appellant. I concur in the order for the disposition of the appeal which Phillips JA proposes.
Phillips JA
The appellant in this proceeding is one Daniel Joseph Murphy. When the appellant succeeded in his appeal to the Court of Criminal
Appeal against his conviction in the County Court on a charge of conspiring to defraud the Commonwealth in relation to the payment
of sales tax, a new trial was ordered. The Director of Public Prosecutions subsequently entered a nolle prosequi and the appellant
was never re-arraigned. Relying upon the fact that his appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal had succeeded on a question of law,
the appellant applied for an indemnity under s18(1) of the Appeal Costs Act 1964 ("the Act") for the costs he had incurred on the
lengthy trial he had undergone in -
the County Court. The Appeal Costs Board refused the indemnity. The appellant obtained an order for review under the
Administrative Law Act 1978
, but that order was discharged by order of a judge of this court on 16 June 1994. It is against that order that the appellant now
appeals to the Court of Appeal.
THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
The criminal proceedings giving rise to the present appeal may be outlined. The appellant, who is now well into his seventies, had
been conducting a large scale business as a liquor merchant for many years. The business was carried on through various companies
the identity of which does not matter. The records of the business indicated that during 1983 to 1986, the appellant sold liquor
to one Salerno, conducting a like business elsewhere, to the value of a little less than $10 million. According to the records, the
sales were conducted on a wholesale basis so that no sales tax was payable. The case against the appellant was that no such sales
took place and that the records were brought into existence as part of a scheme to avoid payment of sales tax; and upon the premise
that the records were part of a sham, sales tax amounting to approximately $1.9 million had been avoided. In the result, the Commissioner
of Taxation assessed the appellant to sales tax, together with penalties and interest and in July 1988 the appellant was charged
with the offence of conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth in respect of sales tax. The trial commenced in July 1991 and concluded
some five months later when, on 23 October, the appellant was convicted. On 1 November he was sentenced to two and a half years imprisonment,
but it was ordered that he be released on recognisance after serving six months. In addition he was fined $10,000.
On 18 November 1991, the appellant was granted bail by Smith J pending an appeal against conviction and sentence and reference was
made, not for the first time, to the appellant's poor health. On 7 April 1992, the Court of Criminal Appeal quashed the conviction
on a point of law and ordered a new trial. In passing, the court pointed out that although a new trial was ordered, "the Director
of Public Prosecutions (Commonwealth) might [nonetheless] elect not to represent the applicant for further trial", having regard
(inter alia) to his age and state of health. In the event, the director did decide to represent the appellant for trial and the trial
was first listed to commence in the County Court on 31 August 1992.
In consequence of the listing, the appellant's solicitor engaged counsel to appear for the appellant on the retrial and to commence
preparation. Certain findings of the Court of Criminal Appeal in favour of the appellant entitled the appellant to access to certain
documents and the names of potential witnesses in the possession of the Australian Tax Office, subject to an issue of relevance and
a claim of public interest immunity. The appellant's solicitor wrote accordingly to the Director of Public Prosecutions in July 1992
suggesting that these issues be determined before the retrial commenced. The director's response was that the trial should not be
delayed. On 30 June 1992 for a reason not immediately apparent, the trial had been refixed to commence on 3 February 1993.
After representations from the appellant's solicitor, the matter was listed for mention on 6 November 1992 and the parties appeared
by counsel. On behalf of the appellant mention was made of certain "preliminary issues which had to be determined by the trial judge"
and a date was requested for the purpose. Shortly thereafter, advice was received by the appellant that his Honour Judge Hassett
had been assigned as trial judge and that the matter would be mentioned before -
him on 20 November 1992. On that day, counsel for the appellant informed the judge that the appellant wished to make application
for a permanent stay and, if that failed, to bring on a subpoena directed to the Australian Taxation Office for the production of
documents in order to have issues relating to relevance and public interest immunity determined. His Honour said that the application
for stay would be heard on 10 December 1992 and that the proposed subpoena should be made returnable on 15 December.
In the result, the questions raised by the subpoena were never heard and determined; the application in that respect was simply adjourned
sine die. That was because on 10, 11 and 14 December 1992 his Honour heard the application for a stay and on 17 December handed down
judgment in which a permanent stay was granted. His Honour granted the stay after considering five factors in particular; namely,
the inadequacy of public benefit, the age of the appellant and his ill health, considerations of "common humanity" and, finally,
the possible outcome of the retrial.
Dissatisfied with this result, the Director of Public Prosecutions commenced proceedings in this court for judicial review of the
decision made on 17 December 1992. This application came before Ormiston J at the end of April 1993. After two days of argument,
it was announced by counsel for the director that a new medical report about the appellant's medical condition was being obtained
and that it was possible, in consequence, that the director would be entering a nolle prosequi. That was on a Friday, and on the
Monday counsel announced that the director had in fact agreed to enter a nolle prosequi. Although the director sought to press on
with the application before Ormiston J, his Honour exercised his discretion to refuse relief and, without considering the merits,
dismissed the application on 3 May. On 6 May, the nolle prosequi was entered.
THE APPELLANT'S CLAIM
As already mentioned, the appellant's application for indemnity was made under s18(1) of the Act. It is a lengthy subsection but
it must, I think, be set out in full. As it stood when this application was made to the board, the section read thus:
Where after the commencement of this Act -
(a) any civil or criminal proceedings are rendered abortive by the death or illness of the judge, magistrate or justice before whom
the proceedings were had or in the case of proceedings had before the Industrial Appeals Court on appeal from the Metropolitan Industrial
Court or a magistrates' court, of any member of the court or by disagreement on the part of the jury where the proceedings are with
(b) an appeal on a question of law against the conviction of a person (in this section referred to as the appellant) convicted on
indictment is upheld and a new trial is ordered; or
(c) the hearing of any civil or criminal proceeding is discontinued and a new trial ordered by the presiding judge, magistrate or
justice for a reason not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default, in the case of civil proceedings, of all or of any
one or more of the parties thereto or their legal practitioners, or, in the case of criminal proceedings, of the accused or his legal
practitioners, and the presiding judge, magistrate or justice grants a certificate (which certificate the presiding judge, magistrate
or justice is hereby authorized to grant) -
(i) in the case of civil proceedings - to any party thereto stating the reason why the proceedings were discontinued and a new trial
ordered and that - the reason was not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default of all or any one or more of the parties
to the proceedings or their legal practitioners; or
(ii) in the case of criminal proceedings - to the accused stating the reason why the proceedings were discontinued and a new trial
ordered and that the reason was not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default of the accused or his legal practitioners;
(d) a criminal proceeding in any court is adjourned by or on behalf of the prosecution and the presiding judge, magistrate or justice
grants a certificate (which certificate the presiding judge, magistrate or justice is hereby authorized to grant if he is satisfied
that by reason of the adjournment the accused has necessarily incurred expense) to the accused stating the reason why the proceedings
were adjourned and that the reason was not attributable in any way to the act neglect or default of the accused or his legal practitioners
any party to the civil proceedings or the accused in the criminal proceedings or the appellant, as the case may be, who pays or is
ordered to pay additional costs or on whose behalf additional costs are paid or ordered to be paid by reason of the new trial that
is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive or as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial or
as a consequence of the adjournment, as the case may be, shall be entitled to be paid from the moneys appropriated by Parliament
for the purpose such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before
they were so rendered abortive or were adjourned or the conviction was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings was so discontinued,
as the case may be. Since the matter was before the board the section has sustained a minor amendment in that the words "appropriated
by Parliament for the purpose" now read "available for the purpose": see Act No 31 of 1994 s3.
The situations in which the subsection is called into play are set out in para(a) to para(d). There are four, which, in criminal
proceedings, may be described shortly thus: (1) where the proceedings are rendered abortive (by death or illness of the judge or
magistrate or by disagreement of the jury); (2) where an appeal against conviction succeeds on a question of law and a new trial
is ordered; (3) where the proceeding is discontinued and a new trial is ordered by the presiding judge or magistrate for some reason
not attributable to the act, neglect or default of the accused or his legal practitioners, if a certificate to that effect is granted;
and (4) where the proceeding is adjourned by or on behalf of the prosecution and, again, a certificate is granted that the reason
therefor was not attributable to the act, neglect or default of the accused or his legal practitioners. Whenever in any of these
four situations the subsection is called into play, the accused may be entitled to payment out of the moneys available for the purpose
(formerly called the Appeal Costs Fund) of "such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf
in the proceedings before they were so rendered abortive, or were adjourned or the conviction was quashed, or the hearing of the
proceedings was so discontinued, as the case may be".
The structure of the subsection is perhaps curious to this extent: that whereas the PRECONDITION of entitlement under s18(1) is that
"additional costs" shall have been incurred by reason of or as a consequence of (and hence after) the event which calls the subsection
into play in a given case, entitlement under s18(1) is to payment of costs incurred before that event. The subsection thus looks
both forward and back and may be contrasted with other sections entitling the applicant to payment of costs, such as s14 and s19,
which appear to look principally to pay the costs of the appeal and any new trial. S18(1) looks -
to pay instead the costs PREVIOUSLY incurred and on the face of it, this allows for a certain lack of symmetry. Perhaps it is so
provided because the subsection is concerned with (inter alia) situations in which the first trial will have ended prematurely; the
legislative intention is then understandable that the applicant should have his costs thrown away, rather than the costs of the second
and perhaps much longer trial that necessarily ensues. But whatever the reason, the subsection is plainly directed at affording the
payment of costs previously incurred, although the trigger for entitlement is the incurring of "additional costs" after the termination
of the first trial.
It is that apparent lack of symmetry which, I think, has given rise to the difficulty experienced in this case. The appellant is
seeking payment under s18(1) of the costs incurred by him upon his trial, which the Appeal Costs Board found to be $1,090,161.90.
It is not in dispute that his case falls within para(b) of s18(1); his conviction was quashed on a question of law and a new trial
was ordered. But his entitlement to payment is said to arise because of his having incurred certain fees for solicitors and counsel
in preparation for the second trial - a trial which, in the events which happened, never got under way. Portion of this expense was
directed, of course, to the appellant's application for a permanent stay which succeeded before the nolle prosequi was entered and
it may be questioned whether such expense, directed at ensuring that there should be no second trial, can be "additional costs" within
the meaning of s18(1). But I put that to one side for the moment; for it was common ground that, quite apart from such expense, the
appellant had incurred, after the new trial was ordered and before the stay was granted, other fees and costs which were more plainly
incurred in preparation for his second trial - and it is by reference to such costs, at least, that the appellant claims to be entitled
to the payment under s18(1) of the costs of his first (and, as it turned out, only) trial. On any view, however, there is a great
disparity between the sum claimed for payment under s18 and the "additional costs" now relied upon as having been incurred since
the new trial was ordered.
The appellant contends that this disparity is nothing to the point. It is enough, it is said, that the case falls within para(b)
of s18(1) and that the appellant in fact incurred costs in preparing for his second trial before the stay was granted. It is not
in dispute that such costs were paid by the appellant or on his behalf. Such costs fall squarely within the description of costs
paid "as a consequence of an order for ... a new trial" and that is enough, it is contended, to entitle the appellant to payment
under the section of all the costs reasonably incurred of the first trial, amounting, as I have said, to more than a million dollars.
The appellant's claim under s18 was rejected by the Appeal Costs Board, principally, I think, because the second trial never got
under way. The board's decision having been upheld on review, the appellant now contends that both the board and the judge erred
in the construction they placed upon s18(1). It was submitted that both misdirected themselves by referring to the section as it
stood before amendment by Act No 7792. According to the appellant, the amendments made by Act No 7792 in 1969 significantly changed
the operation of s18 in a relevant respect; the section must now be read independently of its history; and when so read, the entitlement
of the appellant was plain beyond argument.
THE APPELLANT'S CASE
The strength of the appellant's submission can be explained quite shortly. Reference must be made first to the words of entitlement
with which s18(1) -
concluded immediately before amendment by Act No 7792 in 1969. At that time the subsection contained no reference to the adjournment
of proceedings: there was no para(d) and correspondingly the concluding words of the subsection did not mention adjournment. (The
reference to adjournment was introduced only in 1971 by Act No 8145.) In setting out the words of entitlement as they stood immediately
before their amendment in 1969, I bracket the alternative which is not presently relevant, I italicise what was subsequently altered
by Act No 7792 and I break the whole up to make it easier to follow: ... any party ... who INCURS additional costs [or on whose behalf
additional costs are INCURRED] by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive
or as a consequence of THE ORDER FOR A NEW TRIAL, as the case may be, shall be entitled to be paid from the Fund such costs as the
Board considers to have been reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before they were so rendered abortive
or the conviction was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings was so discontinued, as the case may be.
Now, while the provision stood thus it was readily enough apparent that a new trial was required to be "had" in all cases in which
the section was called into operation - whether after the first trial was rendered abortive (as mentioned in para(a) of s18(1)) or
a new trial was ordered on appeal against conviction (para(b)) or a new trial was directed upon the discontinuance of the first trial
(para(c)). The "additional costs" which were critical to the section's coming into play were to be incurred "by reason of the new
trial which is had" in consequence of one or other of the things mentioned in para(a), para(b) and para(c). And this was reflected
by the final words which afforded indemnity for the reasonable costs of the first trial, before it aborted or the conviction was
quashed or the hearing was discontinued "as the case may be".
Immediately after the amendment of s18 by Act No 7792, the words in question went as follows (and again I break it up, bracket the
alternative not presently relevant and italicise the changes made):
... any party ... who PAYS OR IS ORDERED TO PAY additional costs [or on whose behalf additional costs are PAID OR ORDERED TO BE PAID]
by reason of a new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive or as a consequence of AN ORDER
FOR OR UPON A NEW TRIAL, as the case may be shall be entitled to be paid from the Fund such costs as the board considers have been
reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before or the conviction was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings
was so discontinued, as the case may be.
The appellant contended that once Act No 7792 came into effect, it was no longer open to read the subsection as requiring, as previously,
that in order for "additional costs" to be relevant a new trial be "had" in every case - and the argument went as follows. It was
not in dispute that it was still apt to require that -
a new trial be had as a consequence of the proceedings being rendered abortive; there was no change there. But whereas it still made
sense, it was said, to require that a new trial be had "as a consequence of an order FOR ... A NEW TRIAL", it made no sense to require
that a new trial be had "as a consequence of an order ... UPON A NEW TRIAL" - and if the latter was not a permissible construction,
then neither was the former, because the syntax was such as to make the expression "an order for a new trial" the grammatical alternative
to "an order upon a new trial". Accordingly, the words "as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial" could not be taken
to qualify, grammatically, the expression "by reason of a new trial which is had", but must be taken instead to relate directly to
the "additional costs" paid or ordered to be paid. In the result, when an applicant under s18(1) relied upon "additional costs" incurred
"as a consequence of an order for a new trial", that was sufficient; it was no longer required that a new trial be "had" before those
"additional costs" could qualify as such under s18(1). Accordingly, it was contended, even if (which was not conceded) the permanent
stay or the nolle prosequi meant that no new trial was "had" in the present case, that was no bar to the appellant's succeeding on
his application for payment of the costs of the first trial.
This is the argument that has appealed to Callaway JA and I acknowledge its force; but like his Honour, I very much doubt that the
result which it produces reflects the intention of the draftsman and it seems to me to lead to some extraordinary results. Before
mentioning these, however, I note the very limited character of the issue raised on this appeal. As I have said, it was not in dispute
that a new trial must still be "had" if the "additional costs" relied upon are incurred after proceedings have been rendered abortive,
as provided for by para(a). So much cannot be denied on the wording of the subsection, even as amended. Secondly, when "additional
costs" are incurred "as a consequence of an order ... upon a new trial" (or if, as Tadgell JA prefers, simply "upon a new trial")
there is obviously a new trial occurring, or else the order could not satisfy the description. Thirdly, where the "additional costs"
relied upon are incurred "as a consequence of an order for a new trial", and whether ordered after a successful appeal against conviction
or after the hearing on the first trial has been discontinued, such "additional costs" will ordinarily be those incurred for and
in relation to the new trial which is then held. Thus when s18(1) is called into play by virtue of one or other of the events mentioned
in para(a), para(b) and para(c), it will still commonly be the case that a new trial is "had". Arguably it was not so in this case,
for the new trial never got under way. But that occurred in unusual circumstances and so the question raised on this appeal is an
uncommon one. It will presumably arise in practice only when the "additional costs" are incurred in anticipation of a new trial that
is ordered but which never takes place.
Nevertheless, it is contended that in such cases - and they will be few - no new trial need be had. If that be so, it is the remarkable
product of an amendment intended only to bring within the net of s18(1) a further case, that of costs to be paid of the first trial
in consequence of an order made on the second. In his second reading speech on 4 March 1969 (Hansard, Legislative Assembly, vol 293,
p3007) the minister said: Cl4 gives effect to a recommendation for amendment of s18 to clarify the position where an indemnity certificate
is granted because of proceedings being rendered abortive, and a subsequent order made by the court covers not only the costs of
the current proceedings but also those incurred before the hearing became abortive. On the present wording of the section cases have
arisen where, because of the terms of -
the order, the parties have been debarred from making a successful application to the board for costs incurred before the trial became
abortive. The clause seeks to remedy this position.
Much play was made of this by both parties in argument, neither side professing to follow what precisely was the mischief to be remedied
or how precisely a remedy was achieved by the amendments that were made to s18 by s4 of Act No 7792. But that does not matter. What
does matter is that the intention, as expressed, was plainly enough to expand the operation of s18 in order to include a case in
which costs were ordered to be paid by an order that was made on the second trial. Hence "incurred" was changed to "paid or ordered
to be paid" and the possibility added of "an order" being made "upon a new trial". To say the least, it would be most surprising
to find that, by reason of an amendment intended simply to encompass an order made upon the second trial, the previously existing
need, for a second trial to be "had" before additional costs could qualify an applicant under s18(1), was done away with - and by
a side wind, as it were.
Furthermore, so long as the applicant's entitlement to a payment under s18(1) was linked to a second trial being "had", it was not
difficult to comprehend the policy which afforded an applicant his costs of the first trial out of the public purse in circumstances
where the retrial had come about through no fault of his. But once break that link and it is much more difficult to understand the
policy behind the results that flow. Thus, if a new civil trial is ordered within para(c) and amended pleadings are ordered at the
same time with a view to the more expeditious dispatch of the matter upon the new trial, is it open to the party ordered to pay (and
subsequently paying) the costs of those amendments to claim by reason thereof the payment under s18(1) of all the costs incurred
by him before the proceedings were discontinued? It is difficult to see why not, if the appellant's argument is correct. Nor does
the example depend upon the order for some further interlocutory step being made at the time when the new trial is ordered. If an
order, say for further discovery on the application of one party but at the expense of the other, be made in the ordinary way pending
commencement of the new trial, does payment of those "additional costs" of itself qualify the payer for an indemnity in relation
to all of the costs of the first trial under s18(1)? Again it is difficult to see why not (if the appellant's argument is correct),
but the result is certainly curious. Why should such a relatively small expense be sufficient to attract such a liberal indemnity;
or, if it is to be so, why is any expense at all required in order to qualify an applicant for indemnity under s18(1)?
Of course, it cannot be gainsaid that some difference between outlay and indemnity will ordinarily flow from the very scheme of s18(1)
so long as the subsection is understood as not requiring any correspondence between, on the one hand, the amount of the "additional"
costs incurred (whether paid or ordered to be paid and which serve to qualify the applicant) and, on the other hand, the costs of
the previous trial, which comprise the amount for which indemnity is being provided under s18. That the section does not in terms
require any such correspondence is plain enough (although whether such a requirement is implicit is a matter to which I shall return).
As already mentioned, the legislative scheme found in s18 is to afford payment from the public purse of costs incurred BEFORE the
event which calls the section into play, if the applicant qualifies himself by incurring costs "by reason of" or "as a consequence
of" (and hence AFTER) the event in question - and there is nothing to say expressly that the two need -
correspond in amount. Frequently there will be some rough correspondence where a second trial, having been ordered, goes ahead, but
it must sometimes occur that the costs of the first trial are significantly different from the costs of the second (a difference
which is likely to be the greater where the first trial has been rendered abortive or otherwise discontinued prematurely). But whether
the costs of the first trial be more or less than those of the second, it is only when the second trial, though ordered, is never
pursued - as in the case under appeal - that the amount claimed for payment under s18 is likely to be far, far greater than any sum
expended for "additional costs" in consequence of the order for a new trial. It is that very discrepancy which raises doubt in my
mind about the construction of the section which the appellant advocates.
The appellant insists that the result for which he contends is the necessary result of the changes made by Act No 7792 in 1969, yet
thus far I remain unconvinced. The sense of the amendments was simply to include within the ambit of the s18(1) a case in which additional
costs were ordered against the applicant by an order made upon the retrial. Why that was not already covered was not satisfactorily
explained to us; but accepting the intention (which seems to me confirmed by the actual text of the relatively minor amendments set
out in s4 of Act No 7792), the sense could surely be achieved by some straining of the syntax. Callaway JA describes the amended
s18(1) as a "drafting disaster", which is to say that the grammatical construction of the words as they now appear does not reproduce
the intention. I agree, and that makes me all the more reluctant to regard the court as powerless to give effect to that intention,
particularly nowadays when a purposive approach is taken to the construction of statutes (formalised now in s35(a) of the Interpretation
of Legislation Act 1934) and the more literal approach once favoured is eschewed in appropriate cases.
Thus, while acknowledging the force of the ordinary, grammatical meaning of the language used by Parliament, McHugh JA was able to
say in Kingston v Keprose Pty Ltd
(1987) 11 NSWLR 404
at 421: Equally the natural and ordinary grammatical meaning of the provision is not decisive. The courts no longer follow statements
to the effect of that of Higgins J in Amalgamated Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 129
at 162, that "when we find what the language means, in its ordinary and natural sense, it is our duty to obey that meaning, even
if we think the result to be inconvenient or impolitic or improbable": see Cooper Brookes (at 319-320).
Later in the same judgment McHugh JA said at 424: The days are gone when judges, having identified the purpose of a particular statutory
provision, can legitimately say, as Lord Macmillan said in Inland Revenue Commissioners v Ayrshire Employers Mutual Insurance Association
Ltd [1946] 1 All ER 637 at 641, of the means used to achieve the purpose: "The legislature has plainly missed fire". Lord Diplock,
in an extra judicial comment on that decision has said, that "if ... the courts can identify the target of Parliamentary legislation
their proper function is to see that it is hit: not merely to record that it has been missed": "The Courts As Legislators", The Lawyer
and Justice (Sweet and Maxwell) (1978) at 274.
Those words of McHugh JA were contained within a dissenting judgment but one that has since been cited with apparent approval by
Mahoney JA, speaking for the Court of Appeal, in Tokyo Mart Pty Ltd v Campbell
(1988) 15 NSWLR 275
at 283 and by Clarke JA (for the Court of Appeal) in Brown v Petranker
(1991) 22 NSWLR 717
In the end there is no need, however, to pass finally upon the proper meaning of the Act as it stood immediately after the amendments
made by Act No 7792 -
in 1969; for we are not concerned with s18 as it stood then. The section was amended subsequently and, although the argument before
us centred largely on the changes made by Act No 7792, we are called upon to consider the meaning and effect of s18(1) as it now
stands. I do not think it appropriate, therefore, to construe the section first in some other form. The proper approach must be to
consider the section as it is now and to refer to its legislative history only if and when the need arises. As will be seen, I think
that s18(1) may now be significantly different and that its legislative history is of no importance to its construction.
THE SECTION NOW
In 1971 s18 was further amended by Act No 8145, the
Appeal Costs Fund Act 1971
. By that Act, s18(1) was expanded to encompass the case of a criminal proceeding which was adjourned for some cause beyond the control
of the accused or his legal representatives. That was spelled out in the new para(d) (already set out in full earlier in this judgment)
and certain changes were made in consequence to the concluding portion of the subsection. In the result that concluding portion read
as follows (and again I break it up as I did earlier, but italicising this time the 1971 amendments): ... any party ... who pays
or is ordered to pay additional costs [or on whose behalf additional costs are paid or ordered to be paid] by reason of a new trial
that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive or as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial
OR AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE ADJOURNMENT, as the case may be
shall be entitled to be paid from THE MONEYS APPROPRIATED BY PARLIAMENT FOR THE PURPOSE such costs as the Board considers have been
reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before they were so rendered abortive OR WERE ADJOURNED or the conviction
was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings was so discontinued, as the case may be.
By setting out the subsection in this way it becomes apparent why the construction of the subsection may now be very different. Whatever
was the position after amendment by Act No 7792 and before amendment by Act No 8145, it is now no longer open to read s18(1) as requiring
in every case that "additional costs" shall have been incurred (in the sense of paid or ordered to be paid) "by reason of a new trial
which is had". Obviously it is still so in the first case dealt with - that of the earlier trial rendered abortive, within para(a).
But equally obviously it is not so in the last case now dealt with - that of the adjourned trial within para(d) - because, ordinarily
at least, no "new trial" (except perhaps in a very loose and imprecise sense) is "had ... as a consequence of the adjournment". The
adjournment may be only for a day through the illness of a Crown witness. Of course, the draftsman may have had in mind only the
adjournment of the whole trial on Day 1 upon the application of the prosecutor (cf Hansard, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly,
vol 302, p4325) but it cannot be said that the provision made by para(d) is so limited in terms and I doubt that para(d) has been
so construed since its enactment: see, for example, Grimwade v R
(1990) 51 A Crim R 470
at 474-5. -
Indeed, more than once in the course of his first trial the appellant himself obtained a certificate for his costs under s18(1)(d)
when the trial was temporarily adjourned for one reason or another. If, then, in a case of adjournment under para(d) it cannot sensibly
be required that a "new trial" be "had ... as a consequence of the adjournment", it follows that that third clause commencing "as
a consequence" must be taken to relate directly to - and qualify - the "additional costs" that have been paid or ordered to be paid.
Of course, the appellant seized upon this result, which seems plain enough, to bolster the argument that a new trial was not required
to be "had" in cases in which the second clause commencing "as a consequence" came into play - and I think that must now be accepted.
Whatever was the position immediately before the amendments made by Act No 8145, once the symmetry of the provision was more obviously
destroyed by the addition of the third clause of "consequence", dealing with adjournment, it became no longer permissible (even if
it was formerly) to seek by some straining of syntax or otherwise to maintain what until then might perhaps have been understood
as the continuing intention of the draftsman. Of course, what I have just said does not affect the interpretation of the first of
the three clauses of "consequence"; that first clause retains its original significance as qualifying directly the expression "by
reason of the new trial that is had". But the following two clauses commencing "as a consequence" must now, I think, be taken as
qualifying only the "additional costs" which are to have been incurred. It must then be enough that those additional costs have been
paid or ordered to be paid "as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial or as a consequence of the adjournment, as the case
may be"; and where that is so there is no further express requirement that a "new trial" shall also have been "had".
That conclusion opens the way for the appellant's success on his application under s18 despite the failure of his second trial to
get under way (if indeed on that account no new trial was "had"), but it still does not mean that the appellant must succeed in having
all of the costs of his first trial paid under s18. It will be apparent from what I have said thus far that in my opinion the amendments
made in 1971 by Act No 8145 made a significant change to the structure and effect of s18(1), even if (contrary to the appellant's
submission) that change was not earlier wrought by the amendments made by Act No 7792 in 1969. I mentioned earlier the apparent lack
of correspondence between the amount of the "additional costs" incurred after the event calling s18(1) into operation and the amount
of the costs incurred before that event, payment of which is provided for out of the public purse. Although, as already explained,
some imbalance in that regard may be a direct result of the very scheme adopted by the draftsman, the problem became much more obvious
with the introduction of para(d) and provision for payment of costs in the event of adjournment. Indeed the imbalance became so great
if the language is given the construction for which the appellant is contending, that the result may be characterised as absurd -
and that in itself dictates that the court should adopt some other construction if reasonably open on the language which the Parliament
The absurdity is simply demonstrated by reference to the very words introduced by amendment in 1971. Where "additional costs" are
incurred by an accused "as a consequence of the adjournment" which has been ordered in the circumstances described in para(d), the
accused, if he applies under s18(1), appears to be entitled to an indemnity for "such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably
incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before they ... were adjourned". Read literally, and without regard to context
or purpose, -
this appears to entitle the applicant to have all his costs to date paid out of the public purse, even if the adjournment be only
temporary - say, for a day during the currency of the trial. It is true that s18(1) requires first that additional costs shall have
been incurred as a consequence of the adjournment, but such costs may be only an extra day's brief fee (or even less) and if that
relatively small expense is to lead to the accused's being indemnified for all costs incurred prior to the adjournment, the result
can fairly be described as absurd. Indeed it is bizarre - and I doubt if the section has ever been so construed. Moreover, because
there seems to be no rhyme or reason behind it, such a result may also be described as capricious. In argument, this was acknowledged
to be "a difficulty" in the construction being advocated by the appellant but it was said to be a difficulty that did not arise and
therefore did not have to be addressed. Yet in my opinion it is central to the problem under consideration; for once the difficulty
has been perceived it is the duty of the court to avoid it if, consistently with proper principles of statutory construction, some
other construction be reasonably open that would better give effect to the legislative intention.
It has long been accepted that a literal reading of the language used by Parliament may be forsaken where some other construction
is open which avoids absurdity. Nearly 140 years ago, Lord Wensleydale said in an oft-qoted passage in Grey v Pearson
[1857] EngR 335
(1857) 6 HLC 61
Grey v Pearson
[1857] EngR 335
(1857) 6 HLC 61
[1857] EngR 335
at 1234, that: ... the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words is to be adhered to, unless that would lead to some absurdity,
or some repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the instrument, in which case the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words
may be modified, so as to avoid the absurdity and inconsistency, but no farther.
In Pinner v Everett
(1969) 64 Cr App R 160
at 161; [1969] 3 All ER 257 (Note) at 258-9, Lord Reid said: In determining the meaning of any word or phrase in a statute the first
question to ask always is what is the natural or ordinary meaning of that word or phrase in its context in the statute? It is only
when that meaning leads to some result which cannot reasonably be supposed to have been the intention of the legislature, that it
is proper to look for some other permissible meaning of the word or phrase.
It is a very small step to infer that Parliament did not intend absurdity. Thus, in Hall v Jones
[1942] NSWStRp 22
(1942) 42 SR (NSW) 203
at 208, Jordan CJ said that: ... if words in a Statute when read in their primary or natural sense would produce a result which,
in relation to the provisions of the Statute itself, are fantastic or absurd, a Court is entitled to pay the Legislature the not
excessive compliment of assuming that it intended to enact sense and not nonsense. General words in an Act of Parliament must always
be construed in accordance with the circumstances to which the Act is intended to apply: In short, where absurdity is the product
of a literal adherence to the language of the statute some departure from that language may be warranted, if such departure is justified
by either context or purpose: for example, Barnard v Gorman
[1941] AC 378
; Wiltshire v Barrett [1966] 1 QB 312; Luke v IRC
[1963] AC 557
(although contrast IRC v Hinchey
[1960] AC 748)
; Cooper Brookes (Woollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR 297
at 304-5 per Gibbs CJ and at 320-1 per Mason and Wilson JJ. See generally Cross, Statutory Interpretation, 1st ed, (1976), p74 ff
and Pearce, Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 3rd ed, (1988), p19 ff, and now Parramore v Duggan
[1995] HCA 21
(1995) 70 ALJR 1
at 7. As will be seen, I am not by any -
means clear that, strictly speaking, the case under appeal requires any departure at all from the actual words of the statute; rather,
I think it a matter of bringing to the language of s18(1) a full and proper understanding of the context in which the critical words
appear and keeping firmly in mind the purpose of this particular piece of legislation. In other words, it is largely a matter of
reading the section as a whole and in the light of its purpose - and the legitimacy of that approach cannot be doubted.
So far as purpose is concerned, I suggest that the purpose of the Act as a whole is obvious enough from its provisions. Indeed, the
purpose was confirmed by the minister in the second reading speech made in 1969 (Hansard, vol 293, p3008), when he said in relation
to certain amendments being made then to s19 of the Act: Giving effect to these latter two amendments will ensure that parties pay
for only one trial, which is the spirit of the Act.
That "spirit" is plainly demonstrated in s14 and s19 of the Act and it is surely evidenced also by s18; for s18 ensures that the
litigant who finds himself saddled with a retrial for no fault of his own shall be required to pay the costs of only one trial -
and it matters not that (under the scheme adopted in s18) that one trial is the second, not the first. When the scheme in s18(1)
was extended to cases involving only adjournment it would have been altogether inexplicable if the payment afforded under s18 was
to go beyond what may be called, in short, the costs thrown away. To afford indemnity for the costs thrown away if additional costs
are incurred as a consequence of the adjournment is wholly consistent with the purpose - or spirit - of the Act. To afford a complete
indemnity for all costs incurred before the adjournment is not; it would be a nonsense.
Turning back, then, to the words of the concluding portion of s18(1), the key to their proper construction is to be found, I think,
in the phrase "additional costs". Such costs are required to be "additional" - and so "additional" to what? They are, I should have
thought, "additional" to costs previously incurred. Where the section is called into operation upon the incurring of such "additional
costs" and the section is seen to afford indemnity in relation to costs previously incurred, it is but a short step to link the two.
In other words, the section should be read and understood as coming into play when costs are incurred which are additional to costs
previously incurred and, correspondingly, as affording indemnity in respect of those costs, previously incurred, to which the later
costs are truly additional - in the sense of incurred again or repeated. Were it not so, it is difficult to see what the word "additional"
really adds to the words that follow, which in themselves serve to link causally the later costs with the event which calls the subsection
into play: the "additional costs" are already required to be incurred (in the sense of paid or ordered to be paid) "as a consequence
of ... the adjournment". But by emphasising the significance of the word "additional" and by interpreting the indemnity being afforded
in the light of the precondition for the operation of the subsection, it is possible in my opinion to arrive at a sensible construction
of the subsection which is consonant with its purpose and sufficient to avoid absurdity. In the result, in a case of temporary adjournment
the accused will ordinarily be limited to the costs thrown away, and may seek no more than that from the public purse by virtue of
As I see it, there is no need to add any words to s18(1) in order to achieve the result I have just described, but if it were thought
necessary I would not balk -
at reading the concluding words of s18(1) as if the expression "such costs as the Board considers" read "such costs thrown away as
the Board considers". As I apprehend it, the extra words "thrown away" are necessarily implied anyway if the purpose of the legislation
is to be effected. Indeed, perhaps they must be implied if the purpose of s18(1) is not to be altogether frustrated; for, whatever
the source of the funds to make payments under s18, the supply of money is limited and it would be unfairly drained, and all too
shortly exhausted, if an accused might properly claim a full indemnity for all his costs incurred to date whenever a criminal trial
were temporarily adjourned at the instance of the Crown and through no fault of the accused. In my opinion, the introduction by implication
of such words as "thrown away" can be justified as necessary to give effect to the purpose of the Act. That is entirely consistent
with the approach taken by Lord Diplock in Kammins Ballrooms Co Ltd v Zenith Investments (Torquay) Ltd
[1971] AC 850
at 880; Director of Public Prosecutions v Hester
[1973] AC 296
at 323 and Jones v Wrotham Park Settled Estates (aka Wentworth Securities Ltd v Jones)
[1980] AC 74
at 105-6; see also Tokyo Mart Pty Ltd v Campbell
(1988) 15 NSWLR 275
Tokyo Mart at 283-4 per Mahoney JA. Nor is it inconsistent, I believe, with anything said in Smith v R
(1994) 181 CLR 339
where the High Court was plainly of the view that no departure from the actual words of the statute was necessary.
It is through this solution to the awkward problem arising out of the words added in 1971 to deal with adjournment that I find the
solution to the present problem; for the same interpretation must be placed on the concluding words of the subsection, whether the
case falls within para(d) or one of the other paragraphs which introduce the provision. In the case under appeal, the appellant suffered
the event in para(b) and incurred further costs in preparation for the new trial which was ordered by the Court of Criminal Appeal.
Such costs could fairly be said to be "additional costs" if and to the extent that they were the counterpart of costs incurred on
the occasion of the first trial; for to that extent the costs will have been incurred again or replicated. No doubt, given the lengthy
nature of the trial, there were substantial costs spent in preparation for the first trial; and to the extent that those earlier
costs were incurred again or replicated, not in any arithmetical way but in substance or in kind, by costs incurred in preparation
for the second trial, the later costs would satisfy the description of "additional costs ... paid ... as a consequence of an order
for ... a new trial". The appellant may therefore be entitled by virtue of his having paid those "additional costs" to an indemnity
for the costs previously incurred, but that indemnity should properly be regarded as extending only to such of those costs previously
incurred as have now been incurred again or replicated. By the same token, to the extent that the earlier costs have no counterpart
in the later costs, they lie outside the ambit of the indemnity afforded under s18(1)(b).
It is thus that I have reached the conclusion that according to the Act as it now stands (and whatever was the position earlier)
the appellant is not entitled to obtain payment under s18(1) of all of his costs of the first trial, but only payment of such of
those costs as the board is now satisfied were, in substance, thrown away when they were replicated by costs incurred as a consequence
of the order for a new trial. It may be that, at least until 1969, s18(1) could have been read in a different way; for until then
it was plainly necessary for a "new trial" to be "had" before "additional costs" became relevant. As the section has stood since
1971, it cannot be said that a "new trial" must be "had" except where the -
proceedings have been rendered abortive, within para(a); but in my opinion the indemnity now afforded under s18(1) does not go beyond
the extent to which costs which were incurred on the first occasion have been replicated (whether in substance or in kind, though
not necessarily in amount) by costs reasonably incurred on the second occasion. That may well mean that the indemnity relates only
to "costs thrown away", but if so there is sufficient justification for that reading of the words used. The construction that I have
put upon the language of s18(1) appears to me to give some symmetry to the section which is otherwise lacking and to afford it a
sensible operation wholly consonant with the purpose of the Act.
Before the board, it was assumed that if s18(1) was called into play by the incurring of additional costs, the appellant was necessarily
then entitled to all of the costs incurred by him in relation to the first trial, which the board found to be in the sum of $1,091,161.90.
In my view, the board misdirected itself in taking that view of the section. As I have explained it, the extent of the indemnity
afforded under s18 depends upon how far the costs which were incurred by the appellant on his first trial had their counterparts
in costs incurred by the appellant after his appeal was allowed and the new trial ordered. Accordingly, I would allow the appeal
in order to set aside the order of the board and remit the matter to the board for it to reconsider the amount which ought to be
paid by way of indemnity under s18(1).
In saying that, I must not be taken to imply that all of the costs incurred by the appellant since the order was made for a new trial
are necessarily to be treated as relevant "additional costs" within the meaning of s18(1). Of the costs incurred after the appeal
was allowed, costs incurred in preparation for the second trial may have to be distinguished from costs incurred in order to obtain
a nolle prosequi or to obtain the permanent stay granted in December in the County Court. Such costs were incurred with a view to
ensuring, if possible, that there should be no new trial and perhaps they therefore fall into a different category from costs incurred
with a view to the appellant's being adequately prepared for the new trial when it commenced. It may be that the difference will
be sufficiently recognised for the purposes of s18 if the board were satisfied that the costs which were incurred with a view to
defeating the re-arraignment of the appellant were not the counterpart of any costs incurred before the appeal was allowed and on
that account could not be ground for a payment of costs previously incurred, but I say no more about it. These things are essentially
matters for the board, should the matter return to it, and I do not intend to express any view about the ultimate outcome.
For the reasons I have given, I would allow the appeal, set aside the order made by the judge at first instance and in lieu order
that the order nisi for review under the
Administrative Law Act
be made absolute, setting aside the order made by the Appeal Costs Board and remitting the matter of the appellant's application
under s18(1)(b) to the board for further hearing and determination according to law.
Callaway JA
The appellant was convicted on indictment in the County Court on 23 October 1991. He appealed to the Full Court on a question of
law against the conviction. On 7 April 1992 the appeal was allowed, the conviction quashed and a new trial ordered. On 17 December
1992 Judge Hassett, the judge appointed to conduct the new trial, ordered that the prosecution of the appellant be permanently stayed.
The Director of Public Prosecutions of the Commonwealth sought judicial review of that order in the Supreme Court, but -
the application was dismissed on 3 May 1993 when it was decided that a nolle prosequi should be entered, as it was on 6 May 1993.
The appellant had not at any stage been re-arraigned. On 6 January 1993 he applied to the Appeal Costs Board for a certificate for
payment of $1,090,161.90, being the costs incurred by him in the County Court and Supreme Court proceedings before the conviction
was quashed. The application was made pursuant to s18(1)(b) of the Appeal Costs Act 1964. The board, whose members are the respondents
to the present appeal, rejected the application on the sole ground that no new trial had been "had" within the meaning of s18. The
board accepted expressly that the costs the subject of the application had been reasonably incurred and implicitly that the appellant
had paid additional costs by reason of the new trial that would have taken place but for the stay. (The implied concession was confirmed,
in substance, in a memorandum lodged by leave on behalf of the respondents after the close of argument on the appeal.) The appellant
sought judicial review of the board's decision, which was refused by a judge of the court on 16 June 1994. This appeal has been brought
against that refusal.
As originally enacted, s18(1) read:
Where after the commencement of this Act -
(a) any civil or criminal proceedings are rendered abortive by the death or protracted illness of the judge, magistrate or justice
before whom the proceedings were had or by disagreement on the part of the jury where the proceedings are with a jury;
(b) an appeal on a question of law against the conviction of a person (in this section referred to as the appellant) convicted on
indictment is upheld and a new trial is ordered; or
(c) the hearing of any civil or criminal proceeding is discontinued and a new trial ordered by the presiding judge, magistrate or
justice for a reason not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default, in the case of civil proceedings, of all or of any
one or more of the parties thereto or their legal practitioners, or, in the case of criminal proceedings, of the accused or his legal
practitioners, and the presiding judge, magistrate or justice grants a certificate (which certificate the presiding judge, magistrate
or justice is hereby authorized to grant) -
(i) in the case of civil proceedings - to any party thereto stating the reasons why the proceedings were discontinued and a new trial
ordered and that the reason was not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default of all or any one or more of the parties
to the proceedings or their legal practitioners; or
(ii) in the case of criminal proceedings - to the accused stating the reason why the proceedings were discontinued and a new trial
ordered and that the reason was not attributable in any way to the act, neglect or default of the accused or his legal practitioners
any party to the civil proceedings or the accused in the criminal proceedings or the appellant, as the case may be, who incurs additional
costs by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive or as a consequence of
the order for a new trial, as the case may be, shall be entitled to be paid from the Fund any costs incurred by him in the proceedings
before they were so rendered abortive or the conviction was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings was so discontinued, as the
case may be.
The subsection was amended on two occasions thereafter so that in 1969, immediately before the commencement of Act No 7792, the concluding
words read: -
... any party to the civil proceedings or the accused in the criminal proceedings or the appellant, as the case may be, who incurs
additional costs or on whose behalf additional costs are incurred by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the
proceedings being so rendered abortive or AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE ORDER FOR A NEW TRIAL, as the case may be, shall be entitled to
be paid from the Fund such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings
before they were so rendered abortive or the conviction was quashed or the hearing of the proceedings was so discontinued, as the
case may be. [Emphasis added.]
The evident purpose of the subsection at that time, so far as it concerned criminal proceedings, was to provide for a measure of
indemnity when additional costs were incurred by or on behalf of the accused by reason of a new trial had as a consequence of one
of the circumstances referred to in para(a), para(b) and para(c). The indemnity was measured by reference not to the costs incurred
by reason of the new trial, or any order for it, but by reference to the incurred costs of previous proceedings. Compare s14C, which
was inserted by Act No 8145. It is implicit in the board's position that a person such as the appellant falls between two stools,
having the benefit neither of that section nor of s18(1).
S4 of Act No 7792 substituted the words "pays or is ordered to pay" for the word "incurs", the words "paid or ordered to be paid"
for the word "incurred" (where first occurring) and the words "as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial" for the words
"as a consequence of the order for a new trial". The Attorney-General (Hansard, 4 March 1969, p3007) explained the purpose of those
amendments as follows: Cl4 gives effect to a recommendation for amendment of S18 to clarify the position where an indemnity certificate
is granted because of proceedings being rendered abortive and a subsequent order made by the court covers not only the costs of the
current proceedings but also those incurred before the hearing became abortive. On the present wording of the section, cases have
arisen where because of the terms of the order the parties have been debarred from making a successful application to the Board for
the costs incurred before the trial became abortive. The clause seeks to remedy this position.
S18(1) was further amended in 1971 by Act No 8145, which added a new para(d), dealing with the incurrence by an accused of expense
by reason of the adjournment of criminal proceedings at the instance of the prosecution. At the same time there was an insertion
of the words "or as a consequence of the adjournment" after the words "new trial" (where last occurring) and the words "or were adjourned"
after the word "abortive" (where last occurring) in the concluding part of the subsection. Other amendments have since been made
by Act No 9019 in 1977 and by Acts Nos 57 of 1989, 83 of 1992 and 31 of 1994. I shall return to the amendments made by Act No 8145,
but the critical question is the meaning s18(1) bore immediately after the coming into force of Act No 7792, for it is on the change
of language effected by that Act that the appellant must ultimately rely.
Immediately after Act No 7792 came into force the concluding words of s18(1) read: any party to the civil proceedings or the accused
in the criminal proceedings or the appellant, as the case may be, who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs or on whose behalf
additional costs are paid or ordered to be paid by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings being
so rendered abortive or AS A CONSEQUENCE OF AN ORDER FOR OR UPON A NEW TRIAL, as the case may be, shall be entitled to be paid from
the Fund such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably -
incurred by him or on his behalf in the proceedings before they were so rendered abortive or the conviction was quashed or the hearing
of the proceedings was so discontinued, as the case may be. [Emphasis added.]
It is clear that, prior to amendment by Act No 7792, the words that are relevant to the present case referred to an appellant "who
incurs additional costs ... by reason of the new trial that is had [a] as a consequence of the proceedings being so rendered abortive
or [b] as a consequence of the order for a new trial". That is the natural reading of the words, which were copied from
Suitors' Fund Act 1951
(NSW). The new trial referred to was that had as a consequence either of the proceedings' being rendered abortive or of the order
for a new trial referred to in s18(1)(b) or s18(1)(c). The mischief sought to be remedied in 1969 is difficult to discern from the
Attorney-General's statement. The amendments, including the troublesome words "as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial",
appear to have been formulated, in part at least, by reference to a misconception that the existing words "as a consequence of the
order for a new trial" were descriptive of additional costs incurred rather than of the new trial had. That is to say, it seems to
have been thought that the subsection spoke of additional costs incurred as a consequence of the order for a new trial. That may
be the explanation for the drafting disaster that ensued.
After the amendment there were at least four possible ways of arranging the critical words:
1. "who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ... by reason of the new trial that is had [a] as a consequence of the proceedings
being so rendered abortive or [b] as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial"
2."who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ... [a] by reason of the new trial that is had as a consequence of the proceedings
being so rendered abortive or [b] as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial"
3."who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ... [a] by reason of the new trial that is had [b] as a consequence of the proceedings
being so rendered abortive or [c] as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial"
4."who pays or is ordered to pay additional costs ... by reason of the new trial that is had [and] [a] as a consequence of the proceedings
being so rendered abortive or [b] as a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial".
Neither Mr Lally QC, who appeared with Mr Caleo for the appellant, nor Mr Gillies QC, who appeared with Mr Masel for the respondents,
contended that the third or fourth possible arrangement represented the true construction of the language. Mr Gillies contended for
the first possible meaning and Mr Lally for the second. The difficulty with the first is that it does not make sense to speak of
"the new trial that is had ... as a consequence of an order ... upon a new trial". The difficulties with the second are not only
that the draftsman has misapprehended the structure of the subsection but also that the relevant consequence of an order of the kind
referred to in [b] would not be the new trial but paying or being ordered to pay additional costs. Previously the order referred
to had nothing to do with incurring additional costs; after the amendment it would be crucial for the applicant to show that the
additional costs were a consequence of an order for or upon a new trial. Moreover the symmetry of the -
original language would be lost: it would be necessary for a new trial to be "had" where an application was made under s18(1)(a)
but not where one was made under s18(1)(b) or s18(1)(c).
Accordingly we are faced with a choice between three unsatisfactory options. The first is to conclude, by reference either to the
Attorney-General's statement or to the difficulties to which I have just adverted, that the draftsman must have failed to effect
Parliament's intention and accordingly that the change from "the order for a new trial" to "an order for or upon a new trial" must
be disregarded lest we do a disservice to the legislature and the community that it represents. I say at once that that course is
not open to us. It would be an inversion of the purposes for which
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
or the rule in Heydon's Case (1584) 3 Co Rep 7A; 76 ER 637, makes it permissible to resort to extrinsic material. The second option
is to attempt to discern for ourselves the mischief in view and to strain the language of the statute to achieve what the draftsman
failed to accomplish. That course is also closed to us by the spirit, if not the letter, of Smith v R
(1994) 181 CLR 339
at 346-7. The third option, which I believe we must adopt, is to give effect to the words as they have stood since the commencement
of Act No 7792, however unsatisfactory they may be. Compare Black-Clawson International Ltd v Papierwerke Waldhof-Aschaffenburg AG
[1975] UKHL 2
[1975] AC 591
at 613 and 645; Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
at 322 and Corporate Affairs Commission of NSW v Yuill (1991)
[1991] HCA 28
172 CLR 319
Accordingly, in my opinion, as the appellant is a person who, in the circumstances referred to in s18(1)(b), has paid "additional
costs ... as a consequence of an order for ... a new trial" albeit that that trial did not take place, he is entitled to be paid
the costs which the board concedes were reasonably incurred by him in the proceedings before the conviction was quashed. When the
learned primary judge made his order those costs would have been paid "from the moneys appropriated by Parliament for the purpose",
but since 7 July 1994 the statutory language has referred to "the moneys available for the purpose". I think that that is the language
that should be used in any declaration made by this court.
That conclusion makes it unnecessary to express any view on two other issues that were debated before us. One was whether the words
"the new trial that is had", which would still be relevant where proceedings are rendered abortive, contemplate that the new trial
be no more than commenced or contemplate that it be carried to a conclusion. An alternative argument was that the words require neither
commencement nor conclusion but mean only the new trial that is or may be had as a consequence of the proceedings being rendered
abortive. I simply observe that those questions could not be resolved without reference to other relevant, or potentially relevant,
provisions in the Act, for example s14(1) and s19(1A). The other issue was whether, if the new trial must be commenced, it can be
treated as having commenced notwithstanding that the appellant was not re-arraigned. Compare R v Symons
[1981] VicRp 33
[1981] VR 297
, s391a of the
Crimes Act 1958
, which was in force at the relevant time, and the provision now contained in s5(2) of the
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
I said that I should return to the amendments made by Act No 8145. Mr Lally relied on them as legislative confirmation that, at least
after 1971, the critical words should be read in the second of the four ways that are set out earlier in this judgment. It will be
recalled that the adjournment of criminal proceedings was dealt with, in part, by the insertion of the words "or as a consequence
adjournment" after the words with which I have been concerned. It was said that the words "as a consequence of an order for or upon
a new trial" were symmetrical with the new words that were introduced. It is true that the 1971 legislation is consistent with my
conclusion, but I am reluctant to use it for the purpose of construing words that were already in the Act and I have not done so.
See, for example, Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxes (SA) v Elder's Trustee and Executor Co Ltd
[1936] HCA 64
(1936) 57 CLR 610
at 625-6 and Khoury v Government Insurance Office of NSW
[1984] HCA 55
(1984) 165 CLR 622
at 639. Compare Hunter Resources Ltd v Melville
[1988] HCA 5
(1988) 164 CLR 234
at 254-5. The amendments made to s18(1) by Act No 8145 appear to have proceeded on an even more serious misapprehension of the existing
statutory language than occurred in 1969. Read literally, s18(1)(d) would entitle the accused to be paid not the expense necessarily
incurred by reason of the adjournment or the additional costs paid or ordered to be paid but all such costs as the board considers
to have been reasonably incurred in the proceedings before they were adjourned. If the literal reading is the true construction,
the provision is in need of amendment. It may very well be thought that a revision of the whole of s18(1) would in any event merit
consideration.
Before parting with this case I should explain briefly why I am unable, with respect, to concur in the conclusions reached by the
other members of the court. First, whilst it is true that a court engaged in construing a statute no longer contents itself with
recording that the legislature has missed the target, no one at the hearing professed to know what the target was at which the 1969
amendments were aimed. Purposive construction is perilous where the intention of the legislature cannot be divined either from the
words of the statute or from extrinsic materials to which it is permissible to refer. The danger is that judicial exegesis will degrade
into curial legislation because, ex hypothesi, the only purpose that can inform it is a purpose determined by the court. Compare
Bermingham v Corrective Services Commission of NSW
(1988) 15 NSWLR 292
at 299-300.
Secondly, however the reference to "additional costs" in s18(1) may be understood, they do no more than trigger the claimant's entitlement
to indemnity. Before the commencement of Act No 7242 the claimant was entitled to be paid "any costs incurred by him in the proceedings".
S4 of that Act amended those words to read "such costs as the Board considers have been reasonably incurred ... in the proceedings".
Even without reference to extrinsic materials, it might be inferred that the purpose of the amendment was simply to give the board
some control over extravagance. That reading is confirmed by reference to the second reading speech ( Hansard, 6 April 1965, pp2954-5).
The words "reasonably incurred" do not, in my view, import a limitation by reference to the additional costs paid or ordered to be
Thirdly, if the claimant's entitlement is limited by reference to such additional costs, that is true not only in a case such as
the present but also in a case where the new trial is begun or carried to completion. It means that the respondents and their predecessors
have for many years authorised the payment of public moneys without the sanction of Parliament. Compare Commonwealth of Australia
[1971] VicRp 100
[1971] VR 825.
Another consequence is that the future administration of the provisions will be much more complicated. I am reluctant to adopt a
construction that has those consequences unless it is plainly compelled by the words of the legislation interpreted in the light
of a discernible purpose. -
In my opinion the appeal should be allowed and the order made on 16 June 1994 set aside. In lieu thereof there should be a declaration
that the appellant was entitled under s18(1)(b) of the Appeal Costs Act 1964 to be paid from the moneys available for the purpose
the sum of $1,090,161.90, being the costs which the Appeal Costs Board considered to have been reasonably incurred by him or on his
behalf in proceedings in the County Court of Victoria and the Supreme Court of Victoria before his conviction was quashed by the
Full Court on 7 April 1992. I would hear counsel on the appropriateness of an order (as the notice of appeal asks) that the respondents
pay that sum to the appellant. I would also hear counsel on the question of costs and, unless the respondents represent the Crown
within the meaning of s17(3), whether an indemnity certificate should be granted.
Appeal allowed; matter remitted to the Appeal Costs Board.
Solicitors for the appellant: Coadys.
Solicitor for the respondent: RC Beazley, Victorian Government Solicitor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter