URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/985.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Payne v Cardinia SC [2025] VCAT 985 (10 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P100/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO.T230589
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic); Cardinia
Planning Scheme; Green Wedge Zone – Schedule 1; Use of the land for a
Daniel Payne & Felicity Payne
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Cardinia Shire Council
SUBJECT LAND
215 Evans Road
LONGWARRY VIC 3816
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
20 August 2025
DATE OF INTERIM ORDER
3 September 2025
DATE OF ORDER
10 November 2025
Payne v Cardinia SC [2025] VCAT 985
application P100/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is
planning permit application T230589 no permit is granted.
Wickramasinghe
APPEARANCES
For Daniel Payne & Felicity Payne
T Hams, town planner of ABAN Planning
For Cardinia Shire Council
D Wong, lawyer of Planology Pty Ltd
INFORMATION
Description of
Use and develop the land for a dwelling and construct a building or carry
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the refusal to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Cardinia Planning Scheme
Zone and overlays
Green Wedge Zone Schedule 1 (‘GWZ1’)
Land Subject to Inundation Overlay (‘LSIO’)
Permit requirements
Clause 35.04-1 – permit required to use land for a dwelling.
Clause 35.04-5 – permit required to construct a building or construct
or carry out works associated to a
Clause 44.04-2 – permit required to construct a building or construct
or carry out works.
Land description
The land is located on the north side of Evans Road, rectangular in shape,
with an area of approximately 18.27 hectares.
An agricultural shed and unpermitted dwelling has been constructed
centrally proximate to the western boundary of the land.
Access is from the south boundary from Evans Road. A holding pen has been
constructed adjacent to the accessway. The pen is used in
conjunction with the
applicant’s cattle cartage business.
To the north is a 47 hectare (‘ha’) site located on the corner
of Murphys Lane and Martin Road, which appears to be used
for grazing.
To the south is 205 Knights Road, Longwarry, an 87ha property that is
occupied by a dwelling and appears to be used for grazing and
horticulture.
To the east is 235 Evans Road, Longwarry, an 18ha property that is occupied
by a dwelling and appears to be used for grazing.
An unmade government road reserve called Murphy’s Lane abuts part of
the west boundary of the subject land;
To the west is:
185 Evans Road, a 20.9ha land holding (comprising four crown parcels) that
is occupied by a dwelling. It appears to be used for horse
husbandry; and
45 Bastin Road, a 20.55ha land holding (comprising six crown parcels) that
is occupied by a dwelling and appears to be used for grazing.
Tribunal inspection
An unaccompanied site inspection was conducted.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
is an application for a review of the Cardinia Shire Council’s
(‘Council’) refusal to grant a permit for the
construction of
buildings and the carrying out of works to be used for a dwelling.
description of the proposal is summarised as follows:
proposed for residential use includes a dwelling, shed, an associated wastewater
envelope and an all-weather driveway. The
remaining area of the site to be used
for agricultural activities.
The proposed
dwelling is located towards the middle of the site and is set back approximately
210 metres from the Evans Road frontage
and approximately 66.0 metres from the
western boundary.
The dwelling has
a total floor area of 210.26 square metres, with a maximum building height of
6.29 metres above ground level.
Access is from
an all-weather gravel driveway from Evans Road.
A Colorbond clad
shed is to be located approximately 10.0 metres east of the proposed dwelling
and will have an area of 171 square
metres. The shed will have a maximum height
of approximately 5.4 metres above ground level comprising a shallow pitched roof
a verandah along the west elevation.
Retrospective
approval for earthworks associated with the existing accessways.
Management Plan (‘FMP’)
is proposed to establish an elite cattle breeding business. The business
proposal centres on embryo transfer and artificial
breeding, where-by high value
elite embryos are implanted into recipient cows. This elite breeding business
will become a significant
local business and contribute considerably to the
local economy.
paddocks per year will be improved to lift production by spraying weeds,
applying lime, shallow soil cultivation and sowing pasture;
number of cows on site is to be increased from 20 to 30; and
Revegetation
with locally indigenous species is proposed to create tree breaks (5-10 metres
in width) for wind protection.
refused the application on grounds that are summarised as follows:
The proposal is
inconsistent with the objectives and strategies of the Planning Policy Framework
and Local Planning Policy Framework
that seek to protect agricultural land and
direct residential development into existing settlement including: clause
Settlement; clause 11.01-1R – Green Wedges –
Metropolitan Melbourne; clause 13.07-1S – Land Use Compatibility;
14.01 – Agriculture; clause 16.01-3S – Rural Residential
Development; clause 21.01 – Cardinia Shire Key
Issues and Strategic
Vision; clause 21.03-4 – Rural Townships; clause 21.03-5 – Rural
Residential and Rural Living Development;
clause 21.04-2 – Agriculture;
clause 22.05 – Western Port Green Wedge Policy and clause 51.02 –
Metropolitan Green
Wedge Land: Core Planning Provisions.
The proposal is
inconsistent with and does not respond to the objectives, policies and decision
guidelines of Clause 22.05 (Western
Port Green Wedge Policy).
The proposal is
inconsistent with and does not respond to the purposes and decision guidelines
of Clause 35.04 (Green Wedge Zone).
The proposal
does not respond to the considerations within Clause 65.01 as it does not
achieve the purposes of the Zone and does not
represent the orderly planning of
AMENDMENT VC283
VC283 to the Cardinia Planning Scheme was gazetted on 2 September 2025.
to the Explanatory Report:
Amendment VC283 to the Victoria Planning Provisions and all planning schemes is
required to update the Planning Policy Framework
to implement Plan for Victoria
(Department of Transport and Planning, 2025). The amendment updates and
introduces policy, removes
references to Plan Melbourne 2017-2050: Metropolitan
Planning Strategy and makes general drafting improvements and clarifications.
were given the opportunity to provide a written submission addressing any
implications Amendment VC283 may have for this proceeding,
should they wish to
parties’ responses state the amendment has not changed the relevant
provisions relied upon that are contained in the Cardinia
Planning Scheme.
Therefore, the parties continue to rely on their written and oral submission to
the Tribunal.
WHAT IS THE PLANNING CONTEXT?
land is located in GWZ1. Relevant purposes of the GWZ1 are as
To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
To provide for the use of land for agriculture.
To recognise, protect and conserve green wedge land for its agricultural,
environmental, historic, landscape, recreational and tourism
opportunities, and
mineral and stone resources.
To encourage use and development that is consistent with sustainable land
management practices.
To encourage sustainable farming activities and provide opportunity for a
variety of productive agricultural uses.
To protect, conserve and enhance the cultural heritage significance and the
character of open rural and scenic non-urban landscapes.
To protect and enhance the biodiversity of the area.
decision guidelines at clause 53.04-6 include:
General issues
The Municipal
Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
Any Regional
Catchment Strategy and associated plan applying to the land.
The capability
of the land to accommodate the proposed use or development. How the use or
development relates to rural land use, rural
diversification, natural resource
management, natural or cultural heritage management, recreation or tourism.
Whether the site
is suitable for the use or development and the compatibility of the proposal
with adjoining land uses.
Whether the use
or development is essential to the health, safety or well-being of the State or
area but is not appropriate to locate
in an urban area because of the effect it
may have on existing or proposed urban areas or the effect that existing or
proposed urban
areas may have on the proposed use or development.
The need to
minimise adverse impacts on the character and appearance of the area or features
of architectural, scientific or cultural
heritage significance, or of natural
scenic beauty.
The potential
for accommodation to be adversely affected by vehicular traffic, noise,
blasting, dust and vibration from an existing
or proposed extractive industry
operation if it is located within 500 metres from the nearest title boundary of
land on which a work
authority has been applied for or granted under the
Resources (Sustainable Development) Act 1990
Rural issues
The maintenance
of agricultural production and the impact on the rural economy. The
environmental capacity of the site to sustain
the rural enterprise.
The need to
prepare an integrated land management plan.
The impact on
the existing and proposed rural infrastructure.
The potential
for the future expansion of the use or development and the impact of this on
adjoining and nearby agriculture and other
The protection
and retention of land for future sustainable agricultural activities.
Environmental issues
The need to
protect and enhance the biodiversity of the area, including the retention of
vegetation and faunal habitat and the need
to revegetate land including riparian
buffers along waterways, gullies, ridgelines, property boundaries and saline
discharge and
recharge area.
How the use or
development relates to sustainable land management and the need to prepare an
integrated land management plan.
The location of
on site effluent disposal areas to minimise impact of nutrient loads on
waterways and native vegetation.
Design and siting issues
The need to
minimise any adverse impacts of siting, design, height, bulk, and colours and
materials to be used, on landscape features,
major roads and vistas.
The location and
design of existing and proposed infrastructure services which minimises the
visual impact on the landscape.
land is affected by a LSIO. Relevant purposes
To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
To identify flood prone land in a riverine or coastal area affected by the 1 in
100 (1 per cent Annual Exceedance Probability) year
flood or any other area
determined by the floodplain management authority.
To ensure that development maintains the free passage and temporary storage of
floodwaters, minimises flood damage, responds to the
flood hazard and local
drainage conditions and will not cause any significant rise in flood level or
flow velocity.
To minimise the potential flood risk to life, health and safety associated with
development.
To reflect a declaration under Division 4 of
Water Act, 1989
To protect water quality and waterways as natural resources by managing urban
stormwater, protecting water supply catchment areas,
and managing saline
discharges to minimise the risks to the environmental quality of water and
groundwater.
To ensure that development maintains or improves river, marine, coastal and
wetland health, waterway protection and floodplain health.
decision guidelines at clause 44.04-8 include:
The Municipal
Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
floodplain development plan.
Any comments
from the relevant floodplain management authority.
The existing use
and development of the land.
Whether the
proposed use or development could be located on flood-free land or land with a
lesser flood hazard outside this overlay.
Alternative
design or flood proofing responses.
susceptibility of the development to flooding and flood damage.
The potential
flood risk to life, health and safety associated with the development. Flood
risk factors to consider include:
The frequency,
duration, extent, depth and velocity of flooding of the site and accessway.
warning time available.
inundation and erosion.
The danger to
the occupants of the development, other floodplain residents and emergency
personnel if the site or accessway is flooded.
The effect of
the development on redirecting or obstructing floodwater, stormwater or drainage
water and the effect of the development
on reducing flood storage and increasing
flood levels and flow velocities.
The effect of
the development on river, marine and coastal health values including wetlands,
natural habitat, stream stability, erosion,
environmental flows, water quality,
estuaries and sites of scientific significance.
matters specified in a schedule to this overlay.
14.01-1S – Protection of agricultural land has an objective to protect the
state’s agricultural base by preserving
productive farmland. Relevant
strategies include:
Identify areas of productive agricultural land, including land for primary
production and intensive agriculture.
Consider state, regional and local, issues and characteristics when assessing
agricultural quality and productivity.
Avoid permanent removal of productive agricultural land from the state's
agricultural base without consideration of the economic
importance of the land
for the agricultural production and processing sectors.
Protect productive farmland that is of strategic significance in the local or
regional context.
Protect productive agricultural land from unplanned loss due to permanent
changes in land use.
Prevent inappropriately dispersed urban activities in rural areas.
Protect strategically important agricultural and primary production land from
incompatible uses.
Limit new housing development in rural areas by:
housing growth into existing settlements.
Discouraging
development of isolated small lots in the rural zones from use for dwellings or
other incompatible uses.
Encouraging
consolidation of existing isolated small lots in rural zones.
Identify areas of productive agricultural land by consulting with
the Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action and using
available information.
In considering a proposal to use, subdivide or develop agricultural land,
consider the:
Desirability and
impacts of removing the land from primary production, given its agricultural
productivity.
Impacts on the
continuation of primary production on adjacent land, with particular regard to
land values and the viability of infrastructure
for such production.
Compatibility
between the proposed or likely development and the existing use of the
surrounding land.
The potential
impacts of land use and development on the spread of plant and animal pests from
areas of known infestation into agricultural
capability.
Avoid the subdivision of productive agricultural land from diminishing the
long-term productive capacity of the land.
Give priority to the re-structure of inappropriate subdivisions where they exist
on productive agricultural land.
Balance the potential off-site effects of a use or development proposal (such as
degradation of soil or water quality and land salinisation)
against the benefits
of the proposal.
14.01-1R – Protection of agricultural land – Metropolitan Melbourne
includes a strategy that seeks to protect agricultural
land in Metropolitan
Melbourne’s green wedges and peri-urban areas to avoid the permanent loss
of agricultural land in those
16.01-3S – Rural Residential Development includes an objective to identify
land suitable for rural residential development.
Relevant strategies
Manage development in rural areas to protect agriculture and avoid inappropriate
rural residential development.
Encourage the consolidation of new housing in existing settlements where
investment in physical and community infrastructure and
services has already
Demonstrate need and identify locations for rural residential development
through a housing and settlement strategy.
Ensure planning for rural residential development avoids or significantly
reduces adverse economic, social and environmental impacts
Maintaining the
long-term sustainable use and management of existing natural resource attributes
in activities including agricultural
production, water, mineral and energy
existing landscape values and environmental qualities such as water quality,
native vegetation, biodiversity and habitat.
Minimising or
avoiding property servicing costs carried by local and state governments.
Maintaining an
adequate buffer distance between rural residential development and animal
production.
Ensure land is not zoned for rural residential development if it will encroach
on high quality productive agricultural land or adversely
impact on waterways or
other natural resources.
Discourage development of small lots in rural zones for residential use or other
incompatible uses.
Encourage consolidation of existing isolated small lots in rural zones.
Ensure land is only zoned for rural residential development where it:
Is located close
to existing towns and urban centres, but not in areas that will be required for
fully serviced urban development.
Can be supplied
with electricity, water and good quality road access.
21.01-5 – Strategic framework plan, sets out the general pattern for land
use and development to respond to the key influences
and issues to achieve the
strategic vision for the municipality. The land is designated as ‘General
Agriculture’ within
the Cardinia Shire Strategic Framework
21.04-2 includes an objective to maintain agriculture as a strong and
sustainable economic activity within the municipality.
Relevant strategies seeks
to protect agricultural land, particularly areas of high quality soils, from the
intrusion of urban uses,
inappropriate development and fragmentation which would
lead to a reduction in agricultural viability, the erosion of the right of
farmers to farm land, and the loss of land from agricultural production.
22.05 – Western Port Green Wedge Policy applies to all land within
Cardinia Shire Council’s portion of the Western
Port Green Wedge (as
identified on Map 1 at Clause 22.05-3) which applies to the subject land. The
Policy basis at clause 22.05-1
amongst other things states:
The Western Port
Green Wedge is home to important assets that have value in their own right and
have a significant role to play in
making Melbourne a great city. A large
proportion of Cardinia’s Western Port Green Wedge has some of the best
agricultural
soil in Melbourne.
There are a
number of rural townships and localities that play an important role, providing
opportunities for non-urban township living
as well as providing a focus for the
local provision of services, schools and employment.
Although these
areas are set aside as non-urban land through the Cardinia Planning Scheme,
green wedges are continually subject to
intense pressures for urban development
and change.
under clause 22.05-3 divides the Western Port Green Wedge into three precincts.
The subject land is located within ‘Precinct
1: Agriculture, horticulture
and soil based food production’. The vision for this precinct is
expressed at Table 1 as
Precinct 1 will be the hub of, agriculture, horticulture and soil-based food
production within the Cardinia Western Port Green Wedge,
taking advantage of its
highly versatile soils, vegetable production (in particular asparagus), dairy
and beef farming, other agricultural
pursuits, potential access to Class A
recycled water and the important role this precinct plays in food security. Land
SUZ1 part of the precinct will be prioritised for soil-based
agricultural and horticultural use and soil based food production with
on the consolidation of lots to support the economic viability of the
agricultural and horticultural industry.
Opportunities for new, innovative or more intensive agriculture and horticulture
and soil based food production will be supported
to ensure that the rich
agricultural potential of the precinct is realised.
It will integrate biodiversity and agricultural outcomes by recognising
ecosystem services which can improve agricultural efficiency.
Opportunities for linking the community with the local agricultural and
horticultural industry will be identified and promoted to
food-based tourism within the precinct.
clause 22.05-3 with respect to Land use the following policy is provided:
Ensure that
green wedge soils and their versatility are recognised as a finite resource and
are protected accordingly.
Maintain and
protect the highly productive agricultural land from incompatible uses including
non-soil based farming.
Provide for the
restructuring of lots in agricultural areas to reduce the impact of old and
inappropriate subdivisions on the economic
agricultural viability of the area.
Minimise the
risk of flooding which impacts on agricultural activities in the Koo Wee Rup
Flood Protection District.
51.02 – Metropolitan Green Wedge Land: Core Planning Provision includes
the following purpose:
To protect metropolitan green wedge land from uses and development that would
diminish its agricultural, environmental, cultural
heritage, conservation,
landscape natural resource or recreation values.
To protect productive agricultural land from incompatible uses and
development.
To ensure that the scale of use is compatible with the non-urban character of
metropolitan green wedge land.
To encourage the location of urban activities in urban areas.
To provide transitional arrangements for permit applications made to the
responsible authority before 19 May 2004.
To provide deeming provisions for metropolitan green wedge land.
use of the subject and for a dwelling is not prohibited under clause 51.02-2,
subject to the following condition:
Must be the only dwelling on the lot. This does not apply to the replacement of
an existing dwelling if the existing dwelling is
removed or altered (so it can
no longer be used as a dwelling) within one month of the occupation of the
replacement dwelling.
WHAT ARE THE KEY ISSUES?
key issue to be considered in this proceeding is whether the dwelling is
acceptable in the GWZ1 having regard to the relevant
provisions of the planning
considered the submissions with regard to the relevant policies and provisions
of the Planning Scheme and assisted by my inspection,
I have determined to
affirm Council’s decision and not grant a permit. My reasons are as
IS THE DWELLING ACCEPTABLE IN THE GWZ1?
applicant submits the proposed dwelling is required to enable the establishment
of an artificial breeding program for elite cattle.
The proposed farming
enterprise is to be conducted in conjunction with an existing cattle cartage
business which operates across
three separate properties. They say:
The use of land
for breeding of elite cattle is a productive use of the land.
The proposed use
and development of land for a dwelling associated with the use of land for
animal production reflects the overarching
purpose of the GWZ1. They say the
proposal represents orderly planning of the area that reflects existing use and
development on
surrounding land located within the GWZ1.
broader context of the site, 16 dwellings have been constructed on lots below
the minimum lot size. Properties surrounding
the subject site are small-scale
hobby farms, beef grazing or runoff blocks for commercial dairy farms where
replacement stock are
grazed, fodder harvested, or dry cows grazed.
directions outlined in the green wedge management plan specifically encourage
non-soil based agricultural uses (e.g. animal
husbandry, beef and dairy farming
etc.) to the land surrounding the Special Use Zone – Schedule 1.
The land is used
for animal production (beef grazing) which is a non-soil based use as defined
under the green wedge management plan.
The applicants
utilise this land as the base of a farming operation which includes two leased
30ha properties which are located further
east near the township of Warragul.
currently supports approximately 20 head of cattle across an area of
approximately 16ha which equals 1.25 cow/calf units
per effective hectare.
The proposed
dwelling will not result in unreasonable loss or fragmentation of productive
agricultural land as the lot already exists
and consolidation is limited due to
the make-up of adjacent parcels of land which have been improved by
The FMP details
the proposed agricultural activity and outlines the improvements to soil
quality, drainage infrastructure and rural
infrastructure.
The FMP has
analysed the conditions of the site and demonstrates the proposed agricultural
activity is commercially viable on the
property. The proposed dwelling will
support the establishment of this business and is compatible with the
agricultural activities
on surrounding land which appears to be mostly used for
extensive agriculture (animal grazing).
applicant in support of the proposal relies on the FMP which states:
A temporary
dwelling exists on site which is to be removed on completion of the proposed
permanent dwelling, should a permit be granted.
currently carries 20 cow/calf units, as well as four sheep and an alpaca. The
farming operation is only concerned with beef
cattle breeding and
Boundary fencing
is permanent and in very good condition.
The productivity
potential of the property can be considered moderate in its current form and is
considered to be operating at 50%
or more of its’ maximum productive
The business
proposal centres on embryo transfer work and artificial breeding. The resulting
income from these animals is considerably
higher than commercial values achieved
by the sale of naturally bred animals.
A shed or area
at the house is required to store and handle the embryos. Embryos are stored in
a liquid nitrogen tank.
An intensive
embryo transfer program requires the practitioner to be present in order for
good results to be obtained through correct
and timely hormonal treatments and
the adequate observation of heat in the cattle.
breeding business will become a significant local business and contribute
considerably to the local economy, returning an
annual net income of up to
$18,000 in its early stages, with an estimated $28,000 being spent on direct
production costs, input costs
and services at local businesses.
enterprise intensifies with pasture improvements and stock numbers lifting, it
is likely that a net return of $26,600 can be
achieved on the property with some
$50,000 being spent on products, services and the like.
A dwelling on
the property is the best means of being able to adequately manage this
enterprise.
submits the key issue in this proceeding relates to the proposed dwelling. They
say the proposal is inconsistent with policies
and provisions discouraging the
use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes in a GWZ.
states an independent review of the FMP was sought from Ms S McGuiness,
agronomist of RMCG. Council submission includes the
following conclusion
provided by Ms McGuiness:
An appropriate
level of security can be achieved through good quality fencing, gate locks and
CCTV cameras. Guardian dogs or alpacas
are effective security measures that
provide 24hour security as they reside with the cattle day and night.
Other than the
calving season, checking cattle every 2 to 3 days is adequate.
Calving in this
situation will be once per year and last around three weeks.
Twice daily
checks (morning and evening) during the calving season are considered best
Dystocia in
cattle is primarily the result of poor nutrition. Good pasture and fodder
management, and appropriate selection of genetic
material can significantly
reduce the risk of problems during calving.
paddock with plenty of shelter adjoining the cattle yards and a treatment shed
will provide the necessary infrastructure
to reduce stress during calving and
for managing cows experiencing difficulty during or after calving.
The estimated
future income of $26,000 per annum represents a ‘hobby-farm’ scale
operation i.e. a farm that is primarily
residential in nature, rather than being
operated for the purpose of generating a profit.
It is my view that the security and welfare risks associated with the proposed
beef enterprise are minor and can be effectively mitigated
without the need for
a continuous presence on the property. It is also my view that the risks and
potential income of $26,000 per
annum does not justify the significant
investment associated with construction of a dwelling.
Tribunals Findings
land is located in a GWZ1 and the relevant purposes include the use of land for
agriculture, the protection and conserve green
wedge land for agriculture and
the opportunity to establish a variety of productive agricultural
Whilst relevant decision
guidelines seek consideration of the maintenance of agricultural production and
the protection and retention
of land for future sustainable agricultural
activities.
relevant objective at clause 11.01-1R seeks to protect green wedge land whilst a
relevant strategy seeks to protect important productive
agricultural areas. In
this context the site is designated to be within a “General Agricultural
Area ‘on the Cardinia
Shire Strategic Framework Plan at clause 21.01-5 and
as having ‘good’ agricultural significance at clause 21.04-2.
‘good;’ is the second highest rating of four ratings within
the hierarchy after ‘high’.
21.04-2 identifies the maintenance and protection of high value and productive
agricultural land from incompatible uses and
inappropriate development as being
a key issue.
22.05-3 divides the area into three precincts. The land is located in Precinct
1: Agriculture, horticulture and soil based
food production.
The vision for Precinct 1 is as
Precinct 1 will be the hub of, agriculture, horticulture and soil-based food
production within the Cardinia Western Port Green Wedge,
taking advantage of its
highly versatile soils, vegetable production (in particular asparagus), dairy
and beef farming, other agricultural
pursuits, potential access to Class A
recycled water and the important role this precinct plays in food security. Land
SUZ1 part of the precinct will be prioritised for soil-based
agricultural and horticultural use and soil based food production with
on the consolidation of lots to support the economic viability of the
agricultural and horticultural industry.
Opportunities for new, innovative or more intensive agriculture and horticulture
and soil-based food production will be supported
to ensure that the rich
agricultural potential of the precinct is realised.
It will integrate biodiversity and agricultural outcomes by recognising
ecosystem services which can improve agricultural efficiency.
Opportunities for linking the community with the local agricultural and
horticultural industry will be identified and promoted to
food-based tourism within the precinct.
the heading ‘Land use’, it is policy at clause 22.05-3 that
proposals should:
Ensure that
green wedge soils and their versatility are recognised as a finite resource and
are protected accordingly.
Maintain and
protect the highly productive agricultural land from incompatible uses including
non-soil based farming.
Provide for the
restructuring of lots in agricultural areas to reduce the impact of old and
inappropriate subdivisions on the economic
agricultural viability of the area.
Minimise the
risk of flooding which impacts on agricultural activities in the Koo Wee Rup
Flood Protection District.
the heading ‘Land use’, it is policy at clause 22.05-3 that
proposals should:
Ensure that
green wedge soils and their versatility are recognised as a finite resource and
are protected accordingly.
Maintain and
protect the highly productive agricultural land from incompatible uses including
non-soil based farming.
Provide for the
restructuring of lots in agricultural areas to reduce the impact of old and
inappropriate subdivisions on the economic
agricultural viability of the area.
Minimise the
risk of flooding which impacts on agricultural activities in the Koo Wee Rup
Flood Protection District.
regard to the above there is significant guidance in the planning scheme that
seeks to manage development and protect land
in the GWZ1 for agricultural
purposes. In this context, I have been persuaded by Council’s submission
that states:
66.1 Policy clearly identifies the Subject Land as forming part of an area that
has some of the best agricultural soil in Melbourne.
The Subject Land is
productive agricultural land through its designation as being of
‘Good’ agricultural significance.
There is no evidence before the
Tribunal to suggest otherwise.
66.2 Land within the Western Port Green Wedge is intended to be protected as a
significant part of the State’s agricultural
base, noting high quality
green wedge oils are a finite resource that should be retained for agricultural
pursuits and protected
from the intrusion of rural-residential living.
66.3 The encroachment of residential activities into the green wedge is
discouraged by directing them into townships and urban areas.
66.4 Precinct 1 is ‘the hub of, agriculture, horticulture and soil-based
food production’ with ‘rich agricultural
potential’.
the above, there must be acceptable justification for the proposed dwelling.
Both Council and the applicant referred me to several
past Tribunal decisions
that I have considered when making my decision.
applicant states that a dwelling is required to establish the embryo transfer
and artificial breeding program.
FMP states the existing farming enterprise conducted by the owners since their
purchase of the site in 2021 is operating at 50%
or more of its’ maximum
productive capacity.
regard to the FMP, it appears there is potential for an increase in productivity
for the current farming enterprise. Whilst
there may be potential to increase
the agricultural productivity of the land, I have not been persuaded the
dwelling is necessary
for the establishment of the proposed farming enterprise.
More specifically, I have not been persuaded there is sufficient nexus
the proposed farming enterprise and dwelling to justify approval of the
unique aspects of the proposed farming enterprise on the land as detailed in the
FMP appear to be the administering of a series
of injections at particular times
to prepare the cows for the embryo transfer, monitor the cows to ascertain the
most appropriate
time for the embryo transfer and the embryo transfer. Whilst
there may be some variation in the optimum time for the embryo transfer
calving there is a commencement of the process that begins with the
administering of the injections.
response to questions from the Tribunal, the applicant stated the calving period
for a cow is either from March to May or September
to November each year and the
gestation period is approximately nine months. They further stated the embryo
are created off site,
transported to the land, stored and implanted by a
regard to the above it is evident there is a documented process for the farming
enterprise. In this context there is certainty
in the activity associated with
the proposed farming enterprise albeit there will be some variation as the
farming enterprise comprises
a biological process.
the process there will be periods of more intense activity associated with the
embryo transfer, monitoring and calving. During
these periods there is likely to
be a greater need for attendance on the land. However, it is noteworthy these
more intense activities
are for limited periods of time.
submission states, that other than the calving season, checking cattle every 2
to 3 days is adequate. They say during
the calving period, twice daily checks
(morning and evening) is considered best practice. They also say, a shelter
including a calving
paddock and a treatment shed, could provide the necessary
infrastructure to enable the farming enterprise.
a permanent presence on site might be convenient, I am not persuaded that a
dwelling on the land is required to conduct the
farming enterprise. Having
regard to the FMP it is evident that the process and schedule of preparing the
cows for embryo transfer
is conducted at specific times and persons involved in
the process will know when they should attend the land and conduct the necessary
monitoring and associated activity. This enables the farming enterprise to be
conducted without the need for a dwelling. Those involved
in the farming
enterprise should be able to attend the land without having to live on it.
lack of a dwelling may be inconvenient during periods of more intense activity
such as monitoring the cows prior to embryo transfer
or during the calving
process. However, inconvenience is not justification for the development and use
of a dwelling on land. There
must be a nexus between the proposed dwelling and
farming enterprise that is beyond mere convenience.
activity associated with the farming enterprise is documented and known as per
the FMP. Therefore, the persons involved in the
farming enterprise will know
when they are required to attend the site albeit there may some variation. They
will have some prior
knowledge of when the activity as detailed in the FMP is
likely to occur. In this context, I am not persuaded there is a demonstrable
need for the dwelling to enable the conduct of the farming enterprise.
with respect to the breeding cycle exclusive of the embryo transfer and calving
period, I have been persuaded by Council
that routine attendance of the land to
conduct welfare checks and provide feed can be managed without the need for a
dwelling that
enables someone to live on the land.
being proximate to the farming enterprise is necessary, I note Council’s
submission that states the township of Longwarry
is less than 4.0 kilometres
from the subject land whilst the township of Bunyip is less than 5.0 kilometres
away. Therefore, there
are other opportunities for procuring a dwelling
proximate to the land that would enable the conduct of the proposed farming
without the need for a dwelling on the subject land.
applicant seeks to justify the proposed dwelling on the basis of there being 16
dwellings proximate to the site that have been
constructed on lots below the
minimum lot size. Council submits many of these dwellings have been constructed
without a planning
permit. I am not persuaded the existence of these dwellings
provides justification for the proposed dwelling in the absence of an
nexus between the proposed farming enterprise and dwelling. With respect to this
matter, I concur with the Tribunal as
quoted in the Councils submission as
applicant referred to other examples of where dwellings on small lots or small
lot house excisions elsewhere in the Cardinia Western
Port Green Wedge have been
approved to demonstrate that the proposal has similar merits for approval.
Approvals for similar forms
of use and development elsewhere may not be
appropriate as a precedent, nor are they necessarily examples of orderly
planning outcomes.
My focus is on determining this matter based on its own
merits and how the proposal responds to the planning scheme and its physical
policy contexts.
FMP provides a financial analysis of the existing and proposed farming
enterprise. With respect to the existing enterprise the
land is said to carry 20
cow/calf units yielding a net return of
$10,290.00.
respect to the proposed farming enterprise the FMP
This elite breeding business will become a significant local business and
contribute considerably to the local economy, returning
an annual net income of
up to $18,000 in its early stages and, with an estimated $28,000 being spent on
direct production costs,
input costs and services at local businesses. As the
enterprise intensifies with pasture improvements and stock numbers lifting,
is likely that a net return of $26,600 can be achieved on the property with some
$50,000 being spent on products, services and
submits the FMP demonstrates the proposed farming enterprise is small scale and
unlikely to be commercially viable. They
The proposal
will more than likely lead to a rural lifestyle outcome, while the applicant
pursues its primary occupational pursuits
associated with the family’s
cattle cartage business.
The estimated
future income of $26,600 per annum represents a ‘hobby-farm’ scale
operation i.e. a farm that is primarily
residential in nature, rather than being
operated for the purpose of generating a profit.
financial analysis demonstrates that the proposed farming enterprise will result
in an increase in the agricultural productivity
of the land. An increase in
productivity is supported by relevant policy.
while there is likely to be an increase in productivity the construction of the
proposed dwelling will remove agricultural
land from productive use. The
proposed dwelling will result in a permanent change to the available
agricultural land in the GWZ.
in the absence of a demonstratable nexus between the proposed dwelling and
farming enterprise the increase in productivity
does not sufficiently justify
the proposed dwelling in the context of the loss of productive agricultural
the reasons given above, the decision of the responsible authority is
Shiran Wickramasinghe
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Plan prepared by JDesign
Group, Sheet 1 of 6, Revision C, dated August 2024.
Plan prepared by JDesign
Group, Sheet 4 of 6, Revision C, dated August 2024.
Plan prepared by JDesign
Group, Sheet 6 of 6, Revision C, dated August 2024.
Farm Management Plan prepared
by M Harms of On Farm Consulting.
Clause 35.04.
Clause 44.04.
Clause 21.01-5, Figure1.
Clause 22.05-3.
Council submission
paragraph 30, pages 8 and 9.
Clause 35.04.
Clause 22.05-3, Map 1:
Cardinia Green Wedge precincts.
Council submission page
Applicant’s
submission paragraph 89, page 23.
Kenny v Cardinia SC
FMP page 11
FMP page 12.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter