URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Optus Networks Pty Ltd v Stonnington City Council [1996] VicRp 63; [1996] 2 VR 209 (28 February 1996)
OPTUS NETWORKS PTY LTD v STONNINGTON CITY COUNCIL
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
BROOKING and HAYNE JJA
28 February 1996
Brooking and Hayne JJA
Last Friday we granted Optus Networks Pty Ltd ("Optus") leave to appeal from the interim enforcement order made by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal on 21 February 1996 restraining Optus from carrying out any further works in the City of Stonnington connected with
installation of an overhead broadband cable network attached to power and telegraph poles. No doubt it was contemplated that the
interim order would operate pending the hearing and determination of the application for an enforcement order under
Planning and Environment Act 1987
. In granting leave to appeal we also stayed the interim order pending determination of the appeal. The application for an enforcement
order made under
is fixed for hearing on 13 March. It is unnecessary to repeat what we said this morning about the procedure adopted in this court,
including the joinder of his Honour Judge Fagan as a party. When we speak of the respondent in these reasons, and when we come to
make an order, we treat the council as the only respondent to the appeal.
The appeal is on a question of law. No point has been taken by the respondent concerning the drafting of the notice of appeal so
far as the requirements of the Rules of Court are concerned. The order under appeal has the benefit of the strong presumption in
its favour which a discretionary judgment attracts. It is, moreover, an order made in the exercise of a discretion in a matter of
practice and procedure, being an order granting an interlocutory injunction, and particular caution is to be exercised in reviewing
the decision.
The interim enforcement order was sought by the Stonnington City Council on the basis that the installation of the cable network
was, and its operation or use would be, unlawful without a planning permit granted under the Stonnington Planning Scheme, for the
administration and enforcement of which the council was the responsible authority under the
Planning and Environment Act
The contention is that the installation of the network is an unlawful development without a permit, since the cables are not "telephone
lines" within the meaning of the exemptions contained in the planning scheme in relation to buildings and works, and that the use
or even (it seems) the mere installation of the network would be an unlawful use without a permit.
Optus says, as to development, that its cables are telephone lines, and that it will not be using land or, if it will, that its use
of the land will be merely ancillary to the use of the roads as roads or, alternatively, that the use is protected as an existing
But Optus raises additional defences. It says that in any event the installation and use of the cables have been taken outside the
operation of the
Planning and Environment Act
and the planning scheme made under it by the Commonwealth
Telecommunications Act 1991
and the Telecommunications (Exempt Activities) Regulations. These legislative provisions are said to oust the State Act and the planning
scheme by virtue of s109 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
. The city denies that the Commonwealth Act and regulations have this effect. In particular, it asserts that the regulations are,
or that reg6 is, ultra vires.
Then there is a dispute about where the balance of convenience lies.
Notice has been given to the Attorneys-General pursuant to s78B of the Judiciary Act. The Attorneys-General of the Commonwealth and
of Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania have responded, intimating that they do not wish to intervene. It may be that a "reasonable
time" has not elapsed since the giving of the notice to the other Attorneys-General. We were, however, satisfied that this case falls
within s78B(5) and that we should proceed to hear and determine the appeal notwithstanding that the remaining Attorneys-General had
not responded. Both sides invited us to adopt this course. -
The appeal being against an interlocutory order, it should be disposed of without saying any more than is necessary about the questions
which will or may have to be decided when the application for a final enforcement order is heard.
The first question is whether Optus has shown that when the tribunal determined to make the interim enforcement order its discretion
miscarried in a way which exhibits error of law. In our opinion, the discretion is shown to have miscarried in this way. The tribunal
has acted upon a wrong principle in the way it has approached the question of the validity of the regulations. By
Telecommunications Act
, "[t]he regulations may provide that specified carriers may engage in specified exempt activities despite specified laws of a State
or Territory". "Exempt activity" and "facility" are defined by
Reg5 specifies exempt activities. These include the construction and maintenance of a facility by a carrier. It is not suggested
that the installation of this cable network is not the construction of a facility. Reg6 is as follows: For the purposes of subs116(1)
of the Act, a carrier may engage in the exempt activities set out in reg5 despite a law of a State or Territory about:
(a) the assessment of the environmental effects of engaging in the exempt activity;
(b) the protection of places or items of significance to Australia's natural or cultural heritage, but not including provisions of
the law that provide for the protection of places or items of significance to the cultural heritage of Aboriginal persons or Torres
Strait Islanders;
(c) town planning;
(d) the planning, design, siting, construction, alteration or removal of a structure;
(e) the powers and functions of a local government body;
(f) the use of land;
(g) tenancy;
(h) the supply of fuel or power, including the supply and distribution of extra low voltage power systems, but not including provisions
of the laws that provide for the supply of electricity at a voltage that exceeds that used for ordinary commercial or domestic requirements.
It was not suggested that the
Planning and Environment Act
or a planning scheme made under it is not a law of a State about town planning within the meaning of reg6. The argument was that
the regulation was ultra vires in that it did not, as required by
, "specify" the laws of a State or Territory. Optus submitted that, the application being interlocutory, the tribunal should have
proceeded upon the basis that reg6 was valid. It referred to Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v The State of South Australia
[1986] HCA 58
(1986) 161 CLR 148
; Davids Holding Pty Ltd v Byrnes
(1987) 71 ALR 251
and La Macchia v Minister for Primary Industries and Energy
(1992) 110 ALR 201.
The first two decisions concern statutes whose validity was challenged on constitutional grounds and the third delegated legislation
alleged to be beyond power. All three decisions concerned the proper approach of courts.
The desirability in general of treating Acts of Parliament and delegated legislation as valid when the question of validity arises
in interlocutory proceedings is even greater when the body is not a court but an administrative tribunal. No doubt, even in interlocutory
proceedings before an administrative tribunal, the tribunal may, in considering the balance of convenience, have regard, in a strong
enough case, to the view it has formed on the question of validity; but it seems to us that in the present case the appropriate course
was to proceed upon the basis for interlocutory purposes that reg6 was valid. -
In the second place, the tribunal seems to us to have erred in relation to the submission of Optus that Div 3 of Pt7 of the
Telecommunications Act
, conferring power to enter land and construct facilities, had, by virtue of
Constitution
, the effect of making the planning scheme inoperative. Senior counsel for Optus, Mr Canavan, submitted that the tribunal had simply
failed to consider this argument but it appears to us - as, indeed, we think he later conceded - that the matter is dealt with in
a brief passage: Second, insofar as the Commonwealth Act itself is relied upon, it seems to me that it would be possible for a carrier
to obey both the Commonwealth and State Acts in obtaining all necessary consents and permits under both regimes. Insofar as the "covering
the field" test may be relied upon, Ex Parte McLean
[1930] HCA 12
(1930) 43 CLR 472
, it does not appear to me that the Commonwealth Act itself shows any intention to cover the field at least in the absence of the
passage of valid regulations under s116(1) achieving that effect. Furthermore, it may be that a planning scheme may not be a "law
of the State" for the purposes of s109.
We have no doubt that the planning scheme constitutes "a law of a State" or, if it does not, that the
Planning and Environment Act
, taking effect through the scheme, constitutes a law of a State for the purposes of
The contrary has not been contended. In addition, the learned president of the tribunal, while referring to the "covering the field"
test, said nothing about direct inconsistency beyond saying that it would be possible to comply with both the Commonwealth and State
Acts by obtaining all necessary consents and permits under both regimes. The omission may be explained by the course of argument
One of the submissions put to us is that, if the planning scheme forbids the installation of the network, then even though the scheme,
like the State law in Colvin v Bradley Brothers Pty Ltd
[1943] HCA 41
(1943) 68 CLR 151
, provides for the grant of permission, it destroys or impinges upon a right conferred by the Commonwealth: cf Clyde Engineering Co
Ltd v Cowburn
[1926] HCA 6
(1926) 37 CLR 466
; Williams v Hursey
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30
at 68-9 per Fullagar J; Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v Wardley
[1980] HCA 8
(1980) 142 CLR 237
; Commercial Radio Coffs Harbour Ltd v Fuller
[1986] HCA 42
(1986) 161 CLR 47
Mr Canavan argued that
did not suggest that Div 3 of Pt7 was ineffective to override town planning laws of the States. Division 3, being confined to acts
done on the land of persons other than the carrier, was, he submitted, narrower than
The effect of
and the code made under it, dealing as it does in very wide terms with matters ordinarily dealt with in town planning schemes, is
an interesting and important question which has not been debated before us save for the most passing reference.
If the respondent was, on the hearing of the application for a final enforcement order, to succeed in establishing its case that
Optus was or would be in breach of the provisions of the planning scheme, it had to succeed on three issues.
The first was whether, leaving aside the question whether the scheme was operative having regard to the
Telecommunications Act
and the regulations, there was or would be, on the proper construction of the scheme, a breach of its provisions. The second was
whether reg6 exempted Optus from compliance with the planning scheme as regards the activities in question. It was not disputed that,
if reg6 was valid, it had this effect as a result of
Constitution
: the question was whether the regulation was valid. The third was whether Div 3 of Pt7 exempted Optus from such compliance. -
Failure on any of these three questions would be fatal to the respondent's (by which we mean the council's) case.
As to the second question, the desirability in general of an administrative tribunal's accepting for interlocutory purposes the validity
of delegated legislation was an important consideration.
The strength of the city's case on these three questions was to be considered together with and as part of the overall assessment
of the balance of convenience: K-Mart Australia Ltd v Stud Park Investments Pty Ltd (unreported, 1994) K-Mart Australia Ltd v Stud
Park Investments Pty Ltd (unreported, Full Court, 14 October 1994).
Planning and Environment Act
expressly requires the tribunal to consider what the effect of not making the interim enforcement order would be. The cables, of
6 millimetre diameter, lashed to wires of 17 millimetre diameter, will hang 600 to 750 millimetres below the existing power lines.
The real complaint is that of interference with visual amenity, and this interference is said essentially to consist in the cables
and supporting wires themselves. Much evidence was directed to whether trees would be cut back in the course of the cabling. There
was no evidence, however, that trees had been mutilated; and, in the course of final addresses to the tribunal, the council conceded
that the probability that damage would occur to trees was low. It was not and could not have been found that there was a substantial
danger of significant damage to trees. The cables could readily be removed and all that would be left after removal would be a 17
millimetre hole in the telegraph poles.
Concern and anxiety felt by ratepayers were relied on; but concern and anxiety going beyond what is reasonably founded on the facts
cannot advance the respondent's case.
does not mention it, the tribunal must - as is accepted - consider what the effect of making the interim order would be. Here, the
evidence was most extensive. We do not summarise it. That evidence showed that the substantial interruption to cabling that would
result from an interim order would occasion substantial losses to Optus and might well occasion it very large losses. The president
having declined to exact from the council an undertaking as to damages, Optus would be left entirely without remedy in the event
that it succeeded on the hearing of the application for a final enforcement order. That is a highly important consideration. It was
fundamental that the tribunal should take whatever course appeared to carry the lower risk of injustice if the tribunal should turn
out to have been "wrong": K-Mart Australia Ltd v Stud Park Investments Pty Ltd (unreported, 1994) K-Mart Australia Ltd v Stud Park
Investments Pty Ltd
In our opinion, the tribunal cannot have applied this principle. The right exercise of the discretion required that the interim order
be refused. Errors of law have been shown. Out of deference to the argument presented by Mr Wright we should add that, in our opinion,
substantial injustice will be done to Optus if the interim order is allowed to stand.
Optus has at all times presented its case on the basis that the cables can easily be removed. Mr Canavan has offered an undertaking
on its behalf that it will not, in resisting the making of the enforcement order sought under
Planning and Environment Act
, rely on any works that it has carried out in the municipality of the City of Stonnington since the grant on 23 February 1996 by
this court of a stay of the interim enforcement order made by the tribunal, being works that would, in the absence of the stay, have
been prohibited by the interim enforcement order. There is no reason to suppose that this undertaking would not -
have been given to the tribunal. The undertaking should now be exacted, but we decline to exact an undertaking which would prevent
Optus from linking the cables to houses in the municipality.
We make an order in accordance with these minutes: The order will recite the undertaking which we have mentioned, given by the appellant
by its counsel, which we take Mr Canavan as now giving on behalf of his client. The minutes will then run:
(1) Appeal allowed with costs (including costs of application for leave to appeal), limited as provided by s71 of the
Planning Appeals Act 1980
(2) Interim enforcement order, by which we mean only the injunction, made by tribunal on 21 February 1996 set aside.
The respondent will have a certificate under s13 of the Appeal Costs Act.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the appellant: Deacons Graham and James.
Solicitors for the respondent: Maddock Lonie and Chisholm.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter