URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kaylene Mexon and Matthew Webster at The BBQ Garden [2025] VicLiqComm 3; (15 May 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Kaylene Mexon and Matthew Webster under
section 153(1)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal
review of a delegate’s decision to refuse to vary renewable limited
licence no. 36156914 for the premises trading
as The BBQ Garden located at 37
and 37A Gladstone Street, Glenrowan.
Commission:
John Larkins, Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Ms Thu-Trang Tran, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
7 April 2025
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of the delegate and
grant the variation of licence no. 36156914 subject to
the conditions set out in
Appendix A.
John Larkins
7 May 2020, Kaylene Mexon and Matthew Webster
(Applicants)
applied to the
Victorian Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
for a renewable limited
2020 Application
) for the premises known as The BBQ Garden
located at 37A Gladstone Street, Glenrowan (
2020 Application was at first instance refused by a delegate of the Commission
before being granted by the Commission during an
internal review process.
Applicants subsequently applied for further variations to their licence at
various dates:
(a) On 4 December 2020, a variation was granted to increase the size of the
licensed area.
(b) On 16 February 2021, a variation was granted to extend the scope of the
licence to authorise the sale of liquor for delivery.
(c) On 17 May 2022, authorisation to supply liquor bearing the ‘Ned
Kelly’ label produced by ‘Top Shelf International’
liquor produced in the Victorian tourism region of High Country which was
already permitted to be supplied on the Premises,
was granted.
Premises operates as a retail store selling local goods and has a restaurant
with takeaway and liquor available for purchase and
consumption
on-premises.
2024 Application
12 July 2024, the Applicants lodged an application to vary the licence trading
hours and supply of liquor range (
2024 Application
Applicants sought to vary the trading hours of the licence to the
For consumption on the licensed premises
Good Friday Between 12pm and 11pm
On any other day Between 10am and 11pm
For Consumption off the licensed premises
On any day other than Good Friday & Christmas Day Between 10am and
Applicants initially sought to remove the ‘Supply of Liquor’
condition limiting the supply of liquor produced within
the Victorian High
Country tourism region and liquor bearing the ‘Ned Kelly’ label
produced by ‘Top Shelf International’.
Applicants amended this application on 14 August 2024 and instead sought to vary
the conditions to authorise the sale of all whiskeys
for on-premises consumption
and maintain the existing limitation for other liquor types.
accordance with section 33(3), a copy of the application was served on the Chief
Commissioner of Police and the local licensing
) on Victoria Police on 1 August 2024. On 26 August 2024, Victoria
Police advised they did not object to the grant of the application.
2 August 2024, the Rural City of Wangaratta (
) informed the
Commission that it did not object to the grant of the application but raised the
following issues:
(a) Uncertainty as to whether a renewable limited licence (
appropriate licence type given that the licensed Premise’s address was
used as a restaurant with packaged liquor sales
on an ongoing basis.
(b) The liquor licence only referred to 37A Gladstone Street however the
restaurant was operating at 37 Gladstone Street which is
on a separate title
14 August 2024, the Applicants also responded to the Council’s comments
and stated they had encountered significant challenges
with the Council
previously therefore they were continuing with their existing licence rather
than a general licence.
14 August 2024, the Applicants provided a scale and scope submission that
summarised that they provide a unique and cultural experience
as the only
licensed premises in their town which heavily relies on tourism. The Applicants
outlined the focus on the customer experience,
modest trading hours, limited
product offering, capacity constraints, compliance and community responsibility.
the same date, the Applicants were advised that the proposed conditions were
reviewed and not considered to be limited in scale
and scope. The Applicants
were invited to make further submissions.
Applicants amended their proposal that they would continue limiting the supply
of liquor to liquor produced in Victorian High
Country bearing the ‘Ned
Kelly’ label, except for whiskey as they intended to create a whiskey bar
for consumption at
the Premises.
Original Application proceeded uncontested.
12 November 2024, an authorised delegate of the Commission (
refused the Original Application on the basis that they did not consider the
proposed variation to be limited in scale and scope
due to the nature of the
business being predominantly a restaurant which is also selling packaged liquor
2024 Decision
13 November 2024, the Applicants responded to the Delegate’s Original
Decision and highlighted the following matters:
(a) The Premises is primarily a retail space, rather than a restaurant that
provides takeaway rather than a full-service restaurant.
(b) The Applicants were willing to reduce the proposed trading hours for
on-premises consumption to 12pm to 11pm daily if needed.
(c) The whiskey bar would provide tangible benefits to the local economy by
promoting regional brands, attracting tourists and creating
opportunities. Further, the whiskey bar is limited in scale and scope as it is
intended solely for on-site consumption
and will be available only in a
specified and designated section of the Premises.
Application for Internal Review
20 November 2024, the Applicants lodged an application for internal review of
the refusal to grant the variation (
Review Application
). By way of the
Review Application, the Applicants sought to vary the trading hours and
authorise the sale of whiskeys for on-premises
consumption.
Applicants responded to the refusal to vary the licence on 20 November 2024 with
the reason for applying for the review as follows:
(a) The proposed amendments aim to enhance community engagement and promote
local tourism without expanding beyond the boutique.
(b) The application to authorise all types of whiskey will have economic
benefits for their community as the only licensed Premises
in the area.
(c) The Applicants consider the scale and scope of the Premises to be reasonably
7 February 2025, the Applicants made an application for a variation of category
of licence to a general licence. No planning permit
was lodged with the Council
as part of this application as the Applicants seek to rely on the assumption
that the planning permit
requirement will be removed by 1 July 2025 and will
render the process unnecessary. This application is currently in progress and
with the licensing division of Liquor Control Victoria. It is not a matter the
Commission takes into account for the purposes of
this internal review.
making this application to vary the category of their licence to a general
licence, the Applicants still sought to continue
with the internal review
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is a reviewable
Applicants are considered an eligible person to apply for review of the Original
Decision, by way of its Review Application, made
pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original Application.
Determination of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested application
is defined as:
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation
of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
Original Application is uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant the Original Application on
certain grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises to which
the application relates are
(b) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
(c) the application has not been made, displayed, or advertised in accordance
with the LCR Act.
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance of vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed
the definition of “amenity” for the purposes of the LCR Act is not
limited by these factors.
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission:
(a) may have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) may make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal
review power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any
decision-making guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are –
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by –
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
34. Further, section 4(2) provides further that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, including
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury
or property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at
the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning the Review
Application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this matter
Limited Licences
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or an RLL. Pursuant to
section 14(1B), an RLL authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times
determined by the Commission and specified on the licence, and it may be renewed
in accordance with the LCR Act.
A limited licence may further be subject to any
conditions determined by the Commission and specified on the licence.
26 provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is
satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the
licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope Requirement
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) The Delegate’s decision record dated 12 November 2024.
(b) The Internal Review Application and accompanying submissions dated 20
November 2024.
(c) The Applicants’ response to the Delegate’s decision dated 13
November 2024.
(d) The Applicants’ submissions dated 30 January 2025.
(e) The Applicants’ application for a variation of category of licence
dated 7 February 2025.
(f) The Applicants’ submissions dated 5 March 2025.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues determined on review
making its decision on review, the Commission must determine the following
central issues:
(a) whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met, and the supply of liquor is
limited enough in nature; and
(b) whether the grant of a RLL would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the Premises are
(c) lastly, whether the grant of a RLL would be conducive to or encourage
or be contrary to the objects of the LCR Act, in particular
the object of harm minimisation.
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must consider the grounds
for refusal set out
in the LCR Act, and the objects of the LCR Act, in
particular harm minimisation, which is the primary
key question to be determined by the Commission is whether the Scale and Scope
Requirement is met, and the supply of liquor is
limited enough in nature and the
RLL is therefore the appropriate licence to be granted.
and Scope Requirement
stated at paragraph 44, the Commission may grant an RLL only if satisfied that
the Scale and Scope Requirement is met — that
is, that the scale and scope
of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission
to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions, the Commission has considered “the nature, location,
duration or frequency
of hours of operation of the licence in question” as
relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
Commission considers that the nature of the variation sought by the Applicants
is limited to liquor produced within the Victorian
tourism region of High
Country and bearing the ‘Ned Kelly’ label, produced by ‘Top
Shelf International’.
The liquor supplied is specific to that area and the
range is sufficiently limited.
Commission also considers that the frequency of hours of operation for the
supply of liquor is limited. On 13 November 2024, the
Applicants also offered to
amend their trading hours from 12pm to 11pm daily.
the Commission considers the duration and range of private functions at the
‘Whiskey Bar’ and the requirement
that such functions are pre-booked
is limited. In particular, the Applicants must keep a register of any past
and/or scheduled pre-booked
function. These functions will not be open to the
public and will be limited to 25 people.
Consequently,
the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is
Commission must also determine whether the variation of the licence would
detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the
area in which the Premises
are located, which may give rise to a ground of refusal under section
Commission notes that the Applicants’ current licence has a condition
regarding amenity and there have been no issues with
amenity in the
Applicants’ previous trading history.
Commission also notes that Victoria Police and the Council did not object to the
Original Application. The Commission did not
receive any objections from the
general public.
on the nature of the Premises and the limited scope of the permit granted by the
Council, the Commission is satisfied that,
on balance, the variation of the RLL
subject to the amenity conditions detailed in Appendix A would not detract from
or be detrimental
to the amenity of the area.
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under section
44(2), the Commission must exercise its discretion
whether or not to grant the
proposed RLL with regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm
minimisation, which is the
primary object.
application may be refused if granting the application would be conducive to or
encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol. Victoria
Police did not raise any
concerns in this regard, nor did the Council.
Commission considers that in all circumstances, given the limitations on the
supply of liquor specifically proposed in Appendix
A, that the risk of harm
would be minimal. The Commission also notes that the requirement for service of
food with the supply of
alcohol also assists in the responsible service of
alcohol and the minimising of the risk of harm.
functions to be hosted at the ‘Whiskey Bar’ (a dedicated section of
the Premises as set out in Appendix A) will
also be limited and not conducive to
harm due to their pre-booked nature and limited patron numbers. These functions
are to showcase
selected whiskeys in a curated nature rather than as a bar.
Further, these functions will not be open to the public and whiskey will
otherwise not be available for purchase to the general public.
to the above reasons, the Commission does not consider that granting an RLL
would be conducive to or encourage harm.
the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied that
adequate controls will exist over the supply
of liquor and that any harm should
be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission considers that the grant of a RLL in
this instance would
not be contrary to the LCR Act’s object concerning
harm minimisation.
Updating the addresses on the licence for the
the issue of the liquor licence only referring to 37A Gladstone Street, the
Commission has determined to update the licence to
note both 37 and 37A
Gladstone Street addresses.
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that, subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A herein, the
variation of the licence is
appropriate in the circumstances.
The preceding 64
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins
(Chair), Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner)
and Ms Thu-Trang Tran
(Commissioner).
Appendix A – Licence No. 36156914 – 37 and 37A
Gladstone Street, Glenrowan
General information
Any reference to the
Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian Liquor Commission, or any
successor statutory office,
body or officer however named, under the
Control Reform Act 1998
) or successor legislation, that has
powers and carries out regulatory functions equivalent to the Victorian Liquor
Commission.
This licence is a renewable
limited licence and subject to the conditions specified in this licence
authorises the licensee to supply
liquor on the licensed premises for
consumption on and off the licensed premises during the trading hours specified
The licensee will not cause or permit undue
detriment to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the
the premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the
trading hours authorised by this licence.
Delivery of Liquor
Liquor must be delivered to a person aged 18 or over. The licensee must
ensure that delivery arrangements include requiring evidence
of age where
appropriate.
Liquor must not be delivered and left at unoccupied premises on
same day the order is received.
Liquor may only be delivered during the
following hours:
- between 10
a.m. and 11 p.m. on any day other than Good Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas Day
- between 12
noon and 11 p.m. on ANZAC Day
- No deliveries
are permitted on Christmas Day or Good Friday
Information required to be displayed on website/s
The following
notice must be prominently displayed on the licensee's website/s:
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
it is an offence;
- To supply
alcohol to a person under the age of 18 years (Penalty exceeds $17,000)
- For a person
under the age of 18 years to purchase or receive liquor (Penalty exceeds $700)
The licensee is required to prominently display the number of
this licence on the website
Orders for Liquor
Orders for the
supply of liquor may be taken at any time on any day.
Internet orders may
only be taken through the following website(s):
www.thebbqgarden.com.au
shop.thebbqgarden.com.au
Supply of Liquor
The supply of liquor is limited
to liquor produced within the Victorian tourism region of High Country and
liquor bearing the 'Ned
Kelly' label, produced by 'Top Shelf International'.
The quantity supplied for off-premises consumption must not exceed more than
2x750ml bottles of wine, 1x750ml bottle of spirits or
12 containers (not more
than 375ml per container) of beer, cider or pre-mixed spirits, or a combination
of 1x750ml bottle of wine
and 6 containers (not more than 375ml per container)
of beer, cider or pre-mixed spirits, per transaction. Whiskey will be available
for on-premises consumption at Pre-booked Functions only as detailed
Patron capacity for the licensed area
Trading hours
Off-premises consumption
Good Friday and
Christmas Day No trade
Monday to Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
On-premises consumption
Good Friday Between 12pm and 11pm
Any Victorian or NSW Public Holiday and
during Victorian and NSW School
Holidays Between 11:30am and 11pm
Any other Friday, Saturday or
Sunday Between 11:30am and 10pm
For consumption on and off the
licensed premises
Where ANZAC Day falls within the trading periods above,
trade in the supply of liquor must not commence before 12 noon and must cease
later than the finishing times specified above.
Pre-booked Functions
The licensee may host pre-booked functions showcasing whiskey selections
during private whiskey paired dinners and industry events
at the licensed
The range of liquor at these pre-booked functions will be limited
to whiskey.
Any function/event must be pre-booked and limited to 25 people
and confined to a dedicated section of the licensed premises (the ‘Whiskey
Bar’) for the exclusive use of persons who booked the function.
licensee must keep a register of any pre-booked function (past and/or scheduled)
which will be available to a member of Victoria
Police or the Liquor Regulator
upon request. The register is to include:
- the date that
any booking was made
- the date that
any function took place
- details as to
who made the booking
- total number
of attendees for the function.
For the avoidance of any doubt, a
pre-booked function under this licence is not a public event, open to and
attended by the general
Availability of Food
Food must be
available for purchase at all times that liquor is being supplied.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
“licensing inspector”, see section 3.
Ibid, section 157(2) to
Ibid, section 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(ii).
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(v
LCR Act, section 3A.
section 3A(2).
Until a legislative amendment in 2018, the following factors were also included
as evidencing detriment to the amenity
of the area: (a) the presence (or
absence) of parking facilities; (b) traffic movement and density; (c) noise
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Direction of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that
harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCRA and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor
licensing decisions (although not to the
exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2)
Ibid, section 157(3).
LCR Act, sections
44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
172D(3). The Commission notes that, in determining this matter, it has also
considered each of the grounds
set out in section 44(2).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
section 26(1).
See decision of
Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-Internal Review)
[2016] VCGLR 19, [61].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (847 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter