URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/983.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fleming v Mornington Peninsula SC [2025] VCAT 983 (5 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P334/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. P18/2434.04
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) - Mornington Peninsula
Planning Scheme – Green Wedge Zone (Schedule 4) - Bush Fire Management
Overlay (Schedule 1) -
Environmental Significance Overlay (Schedule 16) -
Significant Landscape Overlay (Schedule 6) - Use and development of Host farm
– agricultural productivity - new dwelling.
Maree Veronica Fleming
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Laura Anderson, David Trevethan & Others
REFERRAL AUTHORITY
Country Fire Authority
SUBJECT LAND
1210 Boneo Road
CAPE SCHANCK VIC 3939
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
7, 8 & 19 August 2025
DATE OF ORDER
5 November 2025
Fleming v Mornington Peninsula SC [2025] VCAT 983
Amended Plans
to clause 64 of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Vic), the application for an amended permit is amended by
substituting for the permit application plans, the following plans filed
the Tribunal:
by: The Edge Development Group
Drawing numbers:
A1.01, A1.01-1, A1.02 - A1.11 (inclusive)
Issue Date: 17
October 2023
Date: 16 June 2025
Amendment to Grounds
section 127
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Vic), the grounds of refusal of the responsible authority is amended
to delete grounds of refusal #2 relating to the bushfire management
Amended Permit granted
application P334/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is set
planning permit application P18/2434.04 an amended permit is granted and
directed to be issued for the land at 1210 Boneo Road
Cape Schanck VIC 3939 in
accordance with the endorsed plans and the conditions set out in Appendix A.
The amended permit allows:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit is sought
Clause 35.04-1 (GWZ4)
To use the land for a dwelling
To use the land for a host farm
Clause 35.04-5 (GWZ4)
To construct or carry out buildings and works associated with a use in
of Clause 35.04-1
Clause 42.03-2 (SLO6)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works
Clause 42.01-2 (ESO16)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works
Clause 44.06-2 (BMO)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works associated with
accommodation
Cassandra Rea
APPEARANCES
For applicant
D. Robinson, barrister. Instructed by UpCo Pty Ltd.
G. Beever, agriculturalist, Cumbre Consultants.
W. Bromhead, town planner, Ratio Consultants Pty Ltd.
For responsible authority
A. McGuckian, town planner, Journeyman Planning.
For referral authority
No appearance.
For respondent
L. English, solicitor, DSA Law- Lawyers and Consultants.
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
The proposal seeks an amendment to Permit P18/2434 issued on the 26
February 2020.
This permit allows the use and development of a dwelling, earthworks
associated with the reinstating of the existing dam and associated
accordance with the endorsed plans.
The amendment seeks to modify the existing farm operation to include a host
farm, use the existing dwelling for visitor accommodation
associated with the
host farm and construct a new dwelling and biosecurity office.
The new dwelling will be located near the south-western corner of the site
and will be circular in shape and two storeys.
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the failure to grant a permit within the
prescribed time.
Planning scheme
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Zone and overlays
Green Wedge Zone (Schedule 4).
Bush Fire Management Overlay (Schedule 1).
Environmental Significance Overlay (Schedule 16).
Significant Landscape Overlay (Schedule 6).
Permit requirements
Clause 35.04-1: Use of the site as a host farm.
Clause 35.04-1: Use of the site as a dwelling (already allowed by
Clause 35.04-5: Construct buildings and works associated with the host farm
and dwelling.
Clause 35.04-5: Earthworks (already allowed by permit).
Clause 42.03-2: Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
Clause 42.01-2: Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
Clause 44.06-2: Construct a building or construct or carry out works
associated with accommodation.
Key scheme policies and provisions
Clauses 02.01, 02.02, 02.03, 11.01-1S, 11.01-1R, 11.01-1L, 11.03-5S,
12.05-1S, 12.05-2S, 13.02-1S, 14.01-1S, 14.01-1R, 14.01-1L, 14.01-2S,
15.01-2S, 15.01-6S, 16.01-3S, 17.04-1S, 35.04, 42.01, 42.03, 51.02 and
Mornington Peninsula Localised Planning Statement.
Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge Management Plan.
Land description
12.5 hectares.
Tribunal inspection
Accompanied inspection on 2 September 2025 including the site and the
respondent’s sites.
Figure 1: Extract from Proposed Site
Plan A1.02 showing the layout of the site.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
is an application lodged by Maree Veronica Fleming (‘applicant’) to
review the failure by Mornington Peninsula Shire
Council (‘council’)
to determine an application for amendment to an existing permit P18/2434.02
within the prescribed time at 1210 Boneo Road, Cape
Schanck (‘site’).
amendment seeks to modify the existing farm operation to a host farm, re-purpose
the existing dwelling for visitor accommodation
associated with the host farm
and construct a new dwelling. The new dwelling will be located near the
south-western corner of the
site and will be circular in shape and two storeys.
opposes the amendments for the following reasons:
siting of the proposed dwelling, especially when considered cumulatively with
the area occupied by the host farm, is contrary
to the objectives of Clause
35.04-6 (Green Wedge) and Clause 14.01-1S – Protection of Agricultural
Land of the Mornington Peninsula
Shire Planning Scheme as it will fragment the
productive farmland and limit the agricultural capacity of the site.
amendment application does not comply with the requirements of clause 44.06
(Bushfire Management Overlay) of the Morning [sic]
Peninsula Shire [sic]
Planning Scheme and failed to obtain the consent of the determining referral
authority (Country Fire Authority).
farming experience offered is not considered genuine as activities are not
associated with the underlying primary agricultural
activity of the property and
are more linked to rural residential occupation and/or tourism offerings, which
does not accord with
the definition of host farm of Clause 73.03 nor the
purposes of Clause 35.04 (Green Wedge Zone) of the Planning
seeks to withdraw its second ground as the Country Fire Authority has advised
that it consents to the grant of an amended
permit subject to a condition
requiring the endorsement of the Bushfire Management Plan submitted with the
amendment application.
Anderson, David Trevethan & Others (‘respondents’) are nearby
property owners that oppose the proposal for the
following reasons:
proposal should be categorised as two dwellings which are prohibited in the
size of the dwelling is not necessary for the function of managing the property
or the cattle breeding on the site particularly
given that the cattle breeding
has already been established without permanent residents living on the
host farm will not be subsidising farm income.
proposed dwelling is not modest in size and when combined with existing
structures on the site will result in fragmentation and
limit the capacity of
agricultural land.
dwelling will impact on sensitive landscape views and vistas, including that of
the respondent’s site.
considered the submissions and evidence, in the context of the relevant policies
and provisions of the scheme, I have determined
to set aside council’s
decision so that a planning permit will issue. My reasons follow.
WHAT ARE THE KEY ISSUES?
Limit of Discretion
this is an application to amend an existing planning permit, I am only able to
consider the proposed changes to the permit, namely
matters identified in
paragraph 2 above. I do not have the discretion to consider what has already
been approved under the existing
planning permit.
considered all the submissions, evidence and inspected the site and its
locality, I find that the key issues in this proceeding
the proposed host farm use appropriate?
the proposed dwelling impact upon the ongoing use of agricultural land?
the design of the new dwelling appropriate in the landscape or have any
environmental impact?
the proposal appropriate in a Green Wedge Zone?
there any other issues?
Net Community Benefit
arriving at my decision, I have exercised integrated decision-making as required
by clause 71.02-3 of the Mornington Peninsula
Planning Scheme
(‘scheme’), which states:
The Planning Policy Framework operates together with the remainder of the scheme
to deliver integrated decision making. Planning
and responsible authorities
should endeavour to integrate the range of planning policies relevant to the
issues to be determined
and balance conflicting objectives in favour of net
community benefit and sustainable development for the benefit of present and
future generations. However, in bushfire affected areas, planning and
responsible authorities must prioritise the protection of human
life over all
other policy considerations.
IS THE PROPOSED HOST FARM USE APPROPRIATE?
is relevant to understand the definition of host farm under clause 73.03 of the
An agricultural property used to provide accommodation
for persons, away from their normal place of residence, to experience living
land used for agricultural purposes.
real and substantial purpose of the proposed use and development are questioned
by council and the respondents, with a suggestion
that the host farm has been
sought to allow more than one dwelling on the property or to introduce uses
other than agricultural uses
encouraged by the purposes of the Green Wedge Zone
Additionally,
there were submissions from council and the respondents that the host
the agricultural uses on the land;
not be a faithful experience of living on land used for agricultural
introduce host farm animals and activities that do not contribute to the
agricultural purpose of the land; and
not subsidise farm income given the upfront capital costs associated with the
applicant disagrees, and relies upon the evidence of Mr Beever and Mr Bromhead,
which I will refer to as relevant. The applicant
also proffers that the host
farm is a tourism activity which is encouraged by the scheme and promotes
agriculture to the wider community.
Question of real use
was suggested that the proposal to create a host farm resulted in a second
dwelling that otherwise would be prohibited within the
National Trust principle
well-established principle of the Tribunal that proposals must be assessed based
on the merits of the proposal as presented,
not on speculative future changes.
definition of host farm provides a limitation on the type of residency that the
host farm can accommodate through the definition
including ‘
accommodation for persons, away from their normal place of residence’
I am to approve the amendment before me it will result in a scenario where there
are two buildings located on the site that may
appear to visually present as
dwellings and contain the same facilities as a
but the residency of
people within the buildings is required to be different.
clause 64 of the scheme, if land is used for more than one use and one is not
ancillary to the other, each use must comply with
this scheme.
GWZ does not provide any limitations or conditions on a host farm use, unlike
many of the other land uses permissible in the GWZ,
with or without a planning
permit. For example, the GWZ does not specify the host farm use must, or must
not, be located on the
same site as a dwelling.
the submission that the host farm building could accommodate persons associated
with the new dwelling, that is for example used
to accommodate family members or
be a holiday house, I accept the condition suggested by council that requires a
register of the
names and addresses of all guests staying in the host farm
accommodation building.
an amended permit is to issue for the use of the host farm, I find it is
appropriate to include conditions to guide its on-going
use, particularly for
matters that have been instrumental in decision making, including the host farm
management plan.
respect to the condition sought by council regarding the maximum permitted stay
by a guest to seven days, I am not persuaded
that it is necessary to impose a
condition that specifies a timeframe. The definition of host farm is to
‘provide accommodation
for persons away from their normal place of
residence.’
specific guidance is provided in the scheme regarding what it means to be away
from their normal place of residence. It was not
demonstrated to me that any
additional amenity impacts arise from guests staying more than seven days. As
such, I will leave it
to the permit approval of the host farm and its definition
to guide the length of stay.
address concerns raised by council and respondents that it is possible that the
host farm use is not established after the applicant
takes benefit of the
amended permit and the new dwelling is constructed, I will impose a condition
that requires the use of the land
for host farm must commence and be implemented
in accordance with the endorsed host farm management plan and thereafter
to the satisfaction of council.
council and respondents prefer the commencement of the host farm prior to the
construction of the dwelling. I understand that
this goes to submissions put to
me about the real and substantial use of the site. The applicant advises that
if the host farm commences
prior to the construction of the dwelling, it will
result in no dwelling associated with cattle breeding operation which was said
to be a key component established under the original permit.
have merged both views into a condition that will effectively require the
existing dwelling to cease dwelling use upon the occupancy
permit and that the
host farm to be available for booking or commence use within 60 days of the
occupancy permit being issued for
the new dwelling.
parties agree that the host farm cannot be converted back to a dwelling if the
host farm ceases use and the new dwelling is constructed.
However, how to
overcome this issue resulted in different submissions between parties.
suggests that
section 173
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(‘PE Act’) could facilitate an agreement to be entered into that
requires the removal of the host farm accommodation
building or make the
building non-habitable or a permit for a replacement use in the event that the
host farm use ceases.
agree with the position of the applicant that opposes the section 173 agreement
on the basis that the site cannot be further subdivided
and the permit will be
operable into the future, and therefore enforceable if outcomes other than what
is approved occurs.
Impact on agriculture
is the evidence of Mr Beever that the existing farm has been established with
high quality agricultural infrastructure, and I observed
this during my site
inspection.
the hearing, it was also suggested to me that significant improvement to the
site had been undertaken to facilitate the establishment
of the existing cattle
breeding operation. The endorsed farm management plan associated with the
existing planning permit outlines
necessary actions to improve the site
conditions to make it suitable for the cattle breeding operation. Without doing
a full inventory
and collecting evidence, it appears that generally these
actions have been undertaken, save for the planting of the shelter belts.
objectives of the GWZ that are relevant to agricultural activities
To provide for the use of land for agriculture.
To recognise, protect and conserve green wedge land for its agricultural,
environmental, historic, landscape, recreational and tourism
opportunities, and
mineral and stone resources.
To encourage use and development that is consistent with sustainable land
management practices.
To encourage sustainable farming activities and provide opportunity for a
variety of productive agricultural uses.
Beever’s evidence establishes that the host farm will not make any
difference to the cattle breeding operation on the land.
If anything, he says
that ‘the proposed host farm is an important initiative for promoting
agriculture to the wider
community.’
This may be
true, but this is not determinative in my decision. There are many other ways
to educate and promote to the community
the benefits of farming and agriculture.
importantly, I haven’t been persuaded that the host farm will detract from
the genuine and previously established agricultural
activities on the land. I
moreover agree with the applicant that this is a scenario where the two land
uses can co-exist and mutually
support each other. However, it is important to
my decision making that the continued operation of the agricultural activities
in accordance with the amended farm management plan and this will be secured
by a condition.
Realistic experience of agriculture
do not accept suggestions that a host farm is unlikely to show negative elements
of agricultural activities occurring on the land
and therefore cannot meet the
definition of the host farm that requires ‘experience living on land used
for agricultural purposes.’
It is not explicit in the definition that the
experience needs to be both positive and negative. However, the reality is that
operator of a host farm will seek to make it a positive experience for their
paying guests. I accept that there may also be other
activities undertaken on
an agricultural property that may not be suitable to have host farm
participation due to safety, level of
expertise or biosecurity reasons.
Nevertheless, host farm participants will still get an understanding of what it
means living on
an agricultural property.
Host farm animals, activities and facilities
addition to the existing cattle breeding activity already being undertaken on
the site, the proposal includes the keeping and associated
activities of five
alpacas, four ponies, 24 hens, 12 ducks, 12 geese and 12 turkeys (‘host
farm animals’). The dam will
be stocked with silver perch which will
allow catch-and-release activities.
was Mr Beever’s evidence that the host farm animals are not a significant
output for farm productivity, but overall, the
host farm is a ‘plus’
for the agricultural enterprise due to alignment of primary production and it
can operate ancillary
to the cattle breeding operation.
it might be said that agricultural properties may not ordinarily include such a
menage of animals, I find that the host farm
animals adds to the experience of
the host farm without detracting from the established agricultural use.
find that it is not necessary for the applicant to demonstrate that the host
farm animals contribute to economic feasibility as
an agricultural enterprise,
particularly when the host farm animals do not detract from the cattle breeding
operation occurring on
the property.
specific housing to keep the host farm animals has not been included in the
application. If extra buildings and works are necessary
for the host farm
animals, the appropriate approval can be sought. However, I took the
opportunity to confirm with Mr Beever whilst
he was giving evidence that most of
the host farm animals can generally be accommodated using existing buildings or
infrastructure
on the site.
the host farm may offer activities that agricultural property may not always
undertake. It was not demonstrated to me
that these host farm activities would
reduce or impact the agricultural operation currently being undertaken on the
relation to the facilities to be used for the host farm operation including the
dwelling, swimming pool and tennis court, these
already are located on the land
within the domestic zone. No submissions were put to me that the provision of
these structures had
undermined the established agricultural activities on the
Income Dependency
was suggested by council and the respondents that on the basis of the
significant capital cost associated with the new dwelling
nominated on the
planning application form as $4 million that the agricultural enterprise did not
need to rely on the additional
income from the host farm.
Increasingly,
agricultural enterprises supplement their operation by off-farm income sources
and revenue from diversifying activities
on rural properties. It was said in Mr
Beever’s evidence that the revenue in this case would be from the
accommodation aspect
of the host farm, rather than any production from the host
farm animals.
some basic information has been included in the amended application regarding
the gross margin outcomes associated with the
establishment of the cattle
breeding enterprise, I acknowledge that this is not a complete picture of the
economic feasibility of
all activities of the land and the cattle breeding
activities has already commenced.
Ultimately,
it has not been demonstrated to me that the host farm is needed for the survival
of the cattle breeding use, but for other
reasons I am not persuaded that the
host farm will cause harm to the cattle breeding use.
Connection to tourism
is no controversary to recognise that the Mornington Peninsula is a tourism
region. I find that there is a strong alignment
between objectives contained
within the scheme to promote tourism and the proposed use as a host farm.
opportunities are specifically recognised in one of the purposes of the GWZ, as
To recognise, protect and conserve green wedge land for its agricultural,
environmental, historic, landscape, recreational and tourism
opportunities, and
mineral and stone resources.
is consistent with clause 17.04-1S of the scheme that seeks to facilitate
tourism, particularly ones that preserve, are compatible
with and build on the
assets and qualities of surrounding activities and attractions.
Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge Management Plan (‘MPGWMP’) also
includes a vision that recognises eco-tourism and
agri-tourism, in appropriate
locations, including small scale host farms consistent with the rural character
and function of the
Green Wedge.
I find that the host farm use is aligned with tourism use, concurrently I agree
with the applicant’s submission that
a host farm is also aligned with
agricultural use. In fact, this is built into the definition of host farm that
requires host farms
only to be established on agricultural properties. I will
consider the potential impact to agricultural activity separately and
this decision. In summary, I am not persuaded that valued agricultural land
will be lost to a tourism venture.
WILL THE PROPOSED DWELLING IMPACT UPON THE ONGOING USE OF
AGRICULTURAL LAND?
accordance with the Tribunal decision
Brunswick Investment Project Pty Ltd v
Moreland CC
I do not have scope
of discretion to consider the dwelling use, as the dwelling use is already
established in accordance with the
permit issued for the site.
I recognise that the proposal results in a different site for the dwelling and
therefore I must be satisfied that the new
siting of the dwelling is appropriate
having regard, amongst other things, to the decision guidelines of the GWZ
including agricultural
activities.
council and respondents submit that the significant footprint of the new
dwelling and the extension of the driveway will occupy
valuable agricultural
land. The new dwelling will occupy approximately 1681.6m
a subsurface irrigation area of 520m
and will extend the driveway by
proposed paddock area calculations on the proposed site plan show 11.02 hectares
will be available as grazable paddock area and
1.46 hectares as ungrazable
paddock area. The ungrazable paddock area includes the large dam that is an
essential component for
the cattle breeding operation.
council relies upon the Interim Policy for Rural Dwellings (including Bed and
Breakfast Accommodation) dated June 2011 (‘interim
policy’) which
has been adopted to provide direction for use and development of dwellings in
GWZ and Special Use Zones. The
interim policy seeks all built form associated
with any dwelling should be contained within a building envelope of
or 10% of the site area, whichever is the lesser.
interim policy is in addition to specific references in the MPGWMP and policies
contained within the scheme that seeks to protect
agricultural land from
residential pressure and conserve the landscape and biodiversity values.
the exceedance with the interim policy in relation to the size of the domestic
zone, I find that the area occupied by non-agricultural
components of the site
does not compromise the agricultural activities occurring on the site.
is determinative to my decision that the applicant has demonstrated through the
evidence of Mr Beever that the cattle breeding
operation can continue to operate
with the same stocking rate of cattle. The stocking rate has already been
secured by a farm management
plan that says cattle breeding is the
‘highest and most efficient use’ in relation to agricultural
activities. A further
condition of the amended permit can secure the continued
cattle breeding operation.
recognise that there is some reliance upon the driveway curtilage for grazing
which is not ideal, realistic or functional. Mr Beever
said in his oral
evidence that the grazing along the driveway could manage driveway grass.
However, it may result in a hazard for
stock given the driveway use by the
dwelling and host farm visitors.
Beever estimates in his written evidence that the dwelling occupying
is the equivalent to 4.4 Dry Sheep
Equivalent.
If the driveway
curtilage is excluded from calculations, I am satisfied that the stocking rate
for the cows and calf would remain
the same. If anything, the stocking rate of
a couple of the host farm animals may need to be adjusted.
find the fencing around the new dwelling that prevents encroachment of the
domestic use into the paddocks needed for the productive
agriculture is an
important element to prevent domestic creep into the paddocks.
Furthermore,
I am not persuaded that the orientation of the front door facing a paddock
encourages undesirable domestic creep. The
proposal does not include any
pedestrian paths across the paddocks to link the dwelling with the host farm
facilities. I must assess
the proposal before me.
the concerns raised by the council and respondents regarding the size of the
dwelling not being essential for the dwelling’s
purposes to assist in the
management of the cattle grazing or the level of luxuriousness of the dwelling,
the scheme provides no
quantitative standards with regards to the size, quality
or facilities of a dwelling
location. The specific construction cost of the dwelling does not impact how
the new dwelling responds to relevant planning
the extra buildings and works does not change productive agricultural use
undertaken on the site which is secured via the
farm management plan as a
condition of the permit.
submits that something could change in the future where cattle breeding may not
be the highest and most efficient use of the
may be true, but I am not persuaded that land which is also outside of a farming
zone needs to be available for
preference for productive agriculture) now and into the unforeseeable future.
Impact on property values
recognise that there have been decisions of the Tribunal regarding how the
introduction of dwellings on rural sites may be counterproductive
to achieving
agriculture as the construction of dwellings may increase property values that
limits farming operations or may encourage
establishment of lifestyle
properties.
this instance, I do not have the benefit of expert evidence from a property
valuer or economist. The submissions on impact of
property values are on the
general understanding of how town planning approvals may influence upon property
this instance, I am not persuaded that the construction cost of the new dwelling
or the presence of the dwelling on the site will
unreasonably influence the
affordability of this agricultural land as:
site is already improved with a dwelling that includes a tennis court and
swimming pool.
infrastructure that establishes the farming use on the site appears to be high
quality and potentially at the higher price point.
locational, physical and scenic attributes of the site makes it attractive to
explore other allowable uses.
IS THE DESIGN OF THE NEW DWELLING APPROPRIATE IN THE LANDSCAPE
OR HAVE ANY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT?
Significant Landscape Overlay (Schedule 6) (‘SLO6’) applies to the
site and surrounding land. The landscape character
objectives to be achieved
To protect and enhance the visual, natural and cultural
heritage values of classified landscapes.
To protect classified landscapes from visual intrusion resulting from the
inappropriate siting, design or materials of buildings and
To encourage siting, design and landscaping of buildings and works which is
responsive to the landscape values of classified landscapes.
To maintain vegetation as an important element of classified landscapes.
proposed dwelling siting will not have visibility from Boneo Road which is
recognised in the scheme as being a notable tourist
the avoidance of doubt, I walked the Two Bays Walking Trail between Cape Schanck
Lighthouse and the Bushrangers Bay Picnic Area
on Boneo Road, including the
beach at Bushrangers Bay. I could not identify any features of the site or
nearby sites from this publicly
accessible area. This gave me further comfort
that the proposed dwelling, notwithstanding it’s size, will not impact on
landscape from the coast.
with clause 02.03-2 of the scheme, the location and design of the building will
maintain the rural character of land adjoining
main roads and tourist routes,
ensuring the ongoing visual amenity and recreational value of the outlook from
these roads.
respondents, in particular, submit that the proposed dwelling is insensitively
sited and will have an inappropriate visual impact
on landscape values due to
the siting, materiality and scale. Furthermore, the respondents rely on a
previous case of the Tribunal
Margetts v Mornington Peninsula
(‘Margetts’)
with regards to applying more weight to the impact of views from those parts
of the surrounding properties that are more heavily used
adopting the approach in
I have considered the valued views
available from 1230 Boneo Road (respondents) property. This view comprises of
farms with rolling
hills of pastures, dune vegetation, the coast and the
buildings currently located on the site. I am not persuaded that the reduction
in views to the coast is one that would result in the refusal of the
application. I say this for the following reasons:
proposed dwelling does not totally block or eliminate views to the coast;
is space between the host farm accommodation and the new dwelling that allows
the continuation of the views;
sense of spaciousness and landscape is maintained through the generous setbacks
to adjoining properties, estimated in the evidence
of Mr Bromhead to be at least
310 metres.
the change in topography, the view from the other respondent at 1300 Boneo Road
is rolling hills of pasture. While the new
dwelling may be visible from various
vantage points, I am not persuaded that the proposed dwelling will impact the
overall view or
experience from the property to the south. I conclude this on
the basis that the rolling hills will screen the new dwelling from
vantage points and the fact that views to the existing dwelling could not be
said to be intrusive from this property.
am not persuaded that the new dwelling is as low profile as suggested by the
applicant, but conversely agree that the building will
not modify or change the
rural character of the area given its separation from other buildings and
generous setbacks to boundaries.
of low level reflectivity glass and siting of solar panels, as included in the
National Trust comments, have been addressed
in the amended plans.
site is also located within the Environmental Significance Overlay (Schedule 16)
(‘ESO16’) of the scheme, although
it appears that the site has been
used for pastures for a significant amount of time and therefore devoid of any
features that would
make a contribution to biodiversity or habitat linking
it would be ideal for the site to enhance its contribution to the biodiversity
of the area, I am also mindful that the starting
point for the issue of the
original planning permit is the site’s contribution to agriculture. The
farm management plan and
Mr Beever’s evidence indicates that it has
already been necessary for the farm operator to significantly improve land
on the site to establish the cattle breeding on the land.
such, I have not imposed a condition on the amended permit requiring the
applicant to undertake landscaping. In making findings
that the new dwelling
will not be intrusive in the landscape I have not determined that there is a
need to provide landscaping to
soften built form.
acknowledge that the existing approval that has low shrub shelter beds remain on
the site plan which will form part of the approval.
course, the owners of the site may elect to provide landscaping, but should do
so in accordance with clause 53.02-5 of the scheme
so as to meet requirements
relating to bushfire.
evidence was provided that the proposal will cause or exacerbate environmental
issues, particularly those identified at clause
02.03-3 including loss and
degradation of native vegetation, pest plant and animal infestation, lowered
habitat capacity, pollution
of streams and aquifers, erosion and mass wastage of
slopes, and damage to scientific and historic sites.
IS THE PROPOSAL APPROPRIATE IN A GREEN WEDGE ZONE?
02.01 of the scheme recognises that approximately 70% of the Mornington
Peninsula Shire as being ‘rural land within’
the GWZ. It states:
The green wedge planning provisions implement a ‘green break’ to
protect the Peninsula from inappropriate metropolitan
development and protect
areas of environmental, landscape and scenic value.
02.02 of the scheme recognises that the Mornington Peninsula has unique
characteristics, contains townships, is distinct from
Metropolitan Melbourne, a
diverse local economy and has a role to compliment Metropolitan Melbourne.
scheme further recognises that the Mornington Peninsula scenic values of the
green wedge, together with the natural and cultural
values of the green wedge,
should be protected. This includes Mornington Peninsula’s landscapes,
coastlines, seascapes and
rural areas. The vision also seeks to retain the
Mornington Peninsula’s agricultural role with a focus on sustainable
agriculture.
46AE of the PE Act requires councils to prepare a green wedge management plan
and upon the completion of the green wedge management
plan, the council must
give the Minister for Planning a copy of the plan.
a green wedge management plan is something that must be prepared under section
46AE of the PE Act, it does not follow that
the prepared green wedge management
plan must be given the same weight, or more weight, than the relevant planning
scheme in consideration
of a planning application under section 60 of the PE
Act. I say this particularly given that it is not specifically identified as
matter to be considered. Unsurprisingly, there are consistent themes contained
within the MPGWMP and the scheme.
this instance, council has adopted the current MPGWMP in 2018, however
protection of the Mornington Peninsula from pressure for
urban development has
been reflected in planning policy since the mid-1970s.
with the SLO6 and the ESO16, the decision guidelines of the GWZ outlines an
expectation that there will be less intense and
unobtrusive use and
developments.
I have recognised that the proposal will result in two sizeable
‘domestic’ buildings on the land however, I am not
persuaded that
the use and development of the buildings will compromise or hamper the
objectives of the GWZ. I say this as:
site coverage remains low;
uses are used in conjunction with an agricultural activity on the land that
secured by a farm management plan;
host farm is connected to tourism which is recognised as an opportunity in the
proposal will not impact upon the biodiversity of the area.
Furthermore,
the proposal does not result in the further subdivision of the land or lead to
further fragmentation of land.
Ultimately,
I place considerable weight on the fact that agricultural activities established
under the permit is not changing with
the introduction of the host farm use and
new dwelling, and will be controlled by the conditions contained in the planning
WHAT CONDITIONS ARE APPROPRIATE?
am not persuaded that the expiry timeframes for acting upon the amended permit
should be varied beyond those timeframes set out
in the recent changes to the PE
Act that take effect on the 25 November 2025 given the scale of the proposal.
the reasons given above, the decision of the responsible authority is set aside.
An amended permit is granted subject to conditions.
Cassandra Rea
APPENDIX A – PERMIT DESCRIPTION AND CONDITIONS
P18/2434.04
PLANNING SCHEME
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND
1210 Boneo Road
CAPE SCHANCK VIC 3939
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit is sought
Clause 35.04-1 (GWZ4)
To use the land for a dwelling
To use the land for a host farm
Clause 35.04-5 (GWZ4)
To construct or carry out buildings and works associated with a dwelling
use (section 2)
Clause 42.03-2 (SLO6)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works
Clause 42.01-2 (ESO16)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works
Clause 44.06-2 (BMO)
To construct a building or construct or carry out works associated with
accommodation use
CONDITIONS TO APPLY TO THE PERMIT:
Amended plans
the amended developments starts, amended plans to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be submitted to and approved
by the Responsible
Authority. When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of
the permit. The plans must be
drawn to scale with dimensions. The plans must
be generally in accordance with the following plans and documents submitted with
the application -
Sheet numbers
A1.01, A1.01.1, A1.02, A1.03, A1.04, A1.05, A1.06, A1.07, A1.08 & A1.09,
A1.10 and A1.11 (all Project no. 004N &
all with issue date 17 October 2023
and all prepared by The Edge Development Group).
Land Capability
Assessment Report prepared by Civil Test Report No. 1232095-1 Issue 2 dated 16
Management Plan dated 16 May 2024.
Farm Management
Plan Prepared by Meridian Agriculture Dated 16 May 2024 Version: Final.
Management Statement and Bushfire Management Plan prepared by Nexus Planning
Version 1, dated 8 May 2024.
but modified to show:
(a) Removal of the notation ‘in confidence and without prejudice’
from the bottom left of all plans.
(b) The removal, for legibility, of the grazing area cross hatching to the
overall site plan A1.02.
(c) All existing features and buildings on site, such as but not limited to the
tennis court, cattle yards and pagoda to the dam.
(d) The correct location of the fencing around the domestic zone.
(e) A floor area schedule for the host farm accommodation.
(f) The floor area, width and depths, and setbacks of the biosecurity/induction
office to the shed and to the host farm accommodation
(previous dwelling).
(g) The floor areas calculations for lower ground and ground floor in relation
to the replacement dwelling.
(h) A northeast - southwest cross-section through the dwelling and extending to
show the extent, depth and batter angle of fill for
the driveway pad associated
with the replacement dwelling.
(i) The reconciliation of the depth and type of cut and fill shown on plan A1.05
with elevations and cross-section plans.
(j) All elevation plans to include a clearly marked Natural Ground Line
(k) The driveway nominated as gravel.
approved development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without
the prior written consent of the Responsible Authority
(unless otherwise
specified by a condition of this permit, consent is not required for any
buildings or works which do not require
a planning permit under the Mornington
Peninsula Planning Scheme).
Colours and Materials
materials and colours of the exterior finish of the buildings must be in
accordance with the Endorsed Plans unless with the further
permission of the
Responsible Authority.
Farm Management Plan
the use and development approved by this amended permit starts, an amended Farm
Management Plan to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be
submitted to and approved by the Responsible Authority. When approved, the Farm
Management Plan will
be endorsed and will then form part of the permit. The
Farm Management Plan must be generally in accordance with the Farm Management
Plan Prepared by Meridian Agriculture, dated 16 June 2025.
Host Farm Management Plan
the use and development approved by this amended permit starts, an amended Host
Farm Management Plan to the satisfaction of
the Responsible Authority must be
submitted to and approved by the Responsible Authority. When approved, the Host
Farm Management
Plan will be endorsed and will then form part of the permit.
The Host Farm Management Plan must be generally in accordance with
plan dated 23
The amended host farm management plan must outline the
guest and biosecurity registration processes and how remote access to the
will be managed. A register of the names and addresses of all guests
staying in the accommodation building must be kept at all times
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Land Capability Assessment Report
the use and development approved by this amended permit starts, an amended Land
Capability Assessment Report to the satisfaction
of the Responsible Authority
must be submitted to and approved by the Responsible Authority. When approved,
the Land Capability
Assessment Report will be endorsed and will then form part
of the permit. The Land Capability Assessment Report must be generally
accordance with the report prepared by Civil Test, dated 20 June 2025.
Bushfire Management Plan and Bushfire Management Statement
the development starts, the Bushfire Management Plan and Bushfire Management
Statement, prepared by Nexus Planning, Version
1b, dated 23 June 2025 must be
endorsed by the Responsible Authority. Once endorsed the plan must not be
altered unless agreed to
in writing by CFA and the Responsible
to the occupation of the dwelling, a vehicular crossing must be provided to the
standards of the Responsible Authority.
to the occupation of the dwelling, the driveway must be constructed and
thereafter maintained and drained to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Landscaping
disturbed surfaces on the land resulting from the development must be
revegetated, battered and stabilised to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
to occupation of the development (or other time agreed in writing by the
Responsible Authority), the proposed shelter belt as
shown on the endorsed plans
must be planted to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Implementation of the Farm Management Plan
use of the land for host farm must commence and be implemented in accordance
with the endorsed Host Farm Management Plan and thereafter
maintained to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
existing dwelling must cease dwelling use upon the occupancy permit being issued
for the new dwelling and that the host farm to
be available for booking or
commence use within 60 days of the occupancy permit being issued for the new
dwelling to the satisfaction
of the Responsible Authority.
amenity of the area must not be detrimentally affected by the use or
development, through the:
(a) Transport of materials, goods or commodities to or from the land.
(b) Appearance of any buildings, works or materials.
(c) Emission of noise, artificial light, vibration, smell, fumes, dust, waste
water or other waste products.
dust must not be unreasonably discharged beyond the boundaries of the
emitted from the premises must not exceed the recommended levels as set out in
Noise from Industry in Regional Victoria (NIRV;
EPA Publication 1411, 2011) or
as amended.
or external lighting including that of the buildings and car park areas must be
suitably baffled to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority to prevent any
unreasonable effect on adjoining land.
all times, during occupation of the host farm, a representative of the property
must be available for contact by guests of the
Engineering
works for the dam shall be in accordance with sound engineering practice, taking
particular care with foundation preparation and
the selection and compaction of
earthwork material. A contractor experienced in dam construction should be used
to manage construction
of the dam.
layout, size and type of proposed dam as shown on the endorsed plan must not be
altered or modified without the consent of the
Responsible Authority.
disturbed surfaces on the land resulting from the dam must be re-vegetated and
stabilised to the satisfaction of the Responsible
the construction of the dam the contractor must minimise any erosion/siltation
potential to the satisfaction of the Responsible
all times the spillway is to be kept clear of trees, shrubs, and debris and
maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Suitable energy
dissipation measures such as rock beaching must be implemented.
Environmental Health
disposal field must not be located within flood prone area;
disposal field must be located no closer than 30 metres to the proposed
reinstated onsite dam;
sewage and sullage waste from the proposed development must be discharged into
an on-site septic tank system which is approved
by the Environment Protection
Authority, retains all waste within the boundaries of the land, and is installed
in accordance with
Council’s Wastewater Management Policy. This system
must be maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority; and
on the proposed dwelling or dwelling alterations must not commence until a
permit to install the septic tank system is issued
by Council’s
Environmental Health section.
Bushfire Management
bushfire protection measures forming part of this permit or shown on the
endorsed plans, including those relating to construction
standards, defendable
space, water supply and access, must be maintained to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority on a continuing
basis. This condition continues to have
force and effect after the development authorised by this permit has been
to the commencement of use or occupation of the building and works an access
crossover generally in accordance with VicRoads
standard details SD2066 –
Typical Rural Driveway Access to Residential Properties must be constructed and
available for use.
must be maintained in a fit and proper state so as not to compromise the ability
of vehicles to enter and exit the site in
a safe manner or compromise
operational efficiency of the road or public safety (e.g. by spilling gravel
onto the roadway).
must enter and exit the land in a forward direction at all times.
Residential gas reticulated service connection
new dwelling allowed by this permit must not be connected to a reticulated gas
service (within the meaning of clause 53.03 of
the relevant planning scheme).
This condition continues to have force and effect after the development
authorised by this permit
has been completed.
Expiry of the permit
permission for the building and works of the new dwelling will expire if either
one of the following applies:
(a) The building and works have not commenced within three years of the amended
permit date; or
(b) The buildings and works have not been completed within five years of the
amended permit date.
In accordance with
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic), an application may be submitted to the Responsible Authority for an
extension of the periods referred to in this condition.
permission for the use of the site for a Host Farm will expire if it ceases and
not undertaken for a period of 2 years.
– End of conditions –
Section 4(2)(d)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) states a
failure to make a decision is deemed to be a decision to refuse to make the
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Derived from the case
National Trust of Australia (Vic) v Australian Temperance and General Mutual
Life Assurance Society Limited
[1976] VicRp 60
[1976] VR 592
Using the definition of a
dwelling under clause 73.03 including a kitchen sink; food preparation
facilities; a bath or shower; and
a toilet and wash basin.
Page 8 of Agricultural Expert
Witness Statement of Gavin Beever, Cumbre Consultants dated 20 July 2025.
[2021] VCAT 1191.
Based on proposed site plan
and proposed area calculations.
Dry Sheep Equivalent is a
standard unit of measurement used in livestock management to compare the feed
requirements of different
animals and assess land carrying capacity.
Other than what basic
components include a dwelling.
[2022] VCAT 977.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.59 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter