URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/82.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'GC2' and Department of Treasury and Finance (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 82; (25 June 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Department of Treasury and Finance
Decision date:
25 June 2025
Exemptions considered:
Sections 34(1)(a) and 34(1)(b)
'GC2' and Department of Treasury and Finance
(Freedom of
Information)
[2025] VICmr 82
(25 June 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION –
Victorian Funds Management Corporation Act
– investment strategies – investment risks
– quarterly investment report – unreasonable disadvantage
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to documents requested by the Applicant
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request differs from the Agency’s
decision. I am not satisfied all the information refused
by the Agency under
sections 34(1)(a) and 34(1)(b) is exempt from release, and further information
is to be released.
The Schedule of Documents in
sets out my decision in
relation to each document. A marked-up copy of the relevant documents showing
exempt information in accordance
with my decision has been provided to the
Please refer to the end of the decision for information about review rights
through the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
My reasons for decision follow.
Sean Morrison
Information
Commissioner
25 June 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to the following
The most recent
(as per the date of this request) financial statement outlining the composition
of the Victorian Future Fund
The most recent
(as per the date of this request) investment strategy document for the Victorian
Future Fund
The most recent
(as per the date of this request) report outlining the performance of the
Victorian Future Fund
A copy of all
email correspondence, from [date range], between members of the Victorian Funds
Management Corporation Executive Leadership
Team and any of the following
individuals –
title]; and
which contain either of the following key
words in the subject line:
Future Fund
Applicant excluded personal affairs information from the scope of their request,
except for information related to executive officers.
Agency identified two documents falling within the terms of the
Applicant’s request and granted access to both documents
exempting certain information under sections 34(1)(a) and 34(1)(b). The
Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
the review, the Agency advised that it no longer relies on sections 34(1)(a) or
34(1)(b) to exempt content on pages 4 and 6
in Document 1. Accordingly, I have
not considered the application of exemptions to this content in my review and it
is to be released
to the Applicant.
have examined a copy of the documents subject to review and considered relevant
communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
Review of exemptions
Section 34(1)(b) – Business, commercial or financial information
of an undertaking
34(1)(b) provides a document is an exempt document if its disclosure under the
FOI Act would disclose information acquired
by an agency (or a Minister) from a
business, commercial or financial undertaking and:
(a) the information relates to other matters of a business, commercial or
financial nature; and
(b) the disclosure of the information would be likely to expose the undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage.
Was the information acquired from a business, commercial or financial
undertaking?
documents were acquired from the Victorian Funds Management Corporation
), which was established under the
Victorian Funds Management
Corporation Act 1994
the VFMC Act
) to provide investment and
funds management services to Victorian public authorities and the State of
a corporation governed by an independent Board of Directors, I am satisfied the
VFMC is a business, commercial or financial undertaking
for the purposes of
section 34(1)(b).
Does the information relate to matters or a
business, commercial or financial nature?
documents contain information relating to the Victorian Future Fund, which was
established by the then Treasurer of Victoria to
manage the fiscal impact of
assets of the Victorian Future Fund are managed by the VFMC.
documents were provided to the Agency by the VFMC as part of its role in
managing the assets of the Victorian Future Fund.
am satisfied the information in the documents relates to matters of a business,
commercial or financial nature.
Would disclosure of the
information be likely to expose the undertaking unreasonably to
disadvantage?
considering whether disclosure will expose an undertaking to unreasonable
disadvantage, an agency or Minister must, along with
any other relevant
consideration, have regard to the factors set out in section 34(2). These are:
(a) whether the information is generally available to competitors of the
undertaking;
(b) whether the information would be exempt if it were generated by an agency or
a Minister;
(c) whether the information could be disclosed without causing substantial harm
to the competitive position of the undertaking; and
(d) whether there are any considerations in the public interest in favour of
disclosure which outweigh considerations of competitive
disadvantage to the
undertaking, for instance, the public interest in evaluating aspects of
government regulation of corporate practices
or environmental controls.
relevant considerations include whether disclosure would:
(a) give a competitor of the undertaking a competitive financial advantage;
(b) enable that competitor to engage in destructive competition with the
undertaking; or
(c) lead to
unwarranted conclusions about the undertaking's financial affairs and position
that result in commercial and market
consequences.
accept that certain content in the documents is commercially sensitive and that
disclosure may expose the VFMC to unreasonable disadvantage.
Specifically,
content on page 22 and pages 30 to 32 of Document 1, which contain details of
the portfolio characteristics and capital
markets assumptions that form the
basis of the VFMC’s long term projections on expected returns on
investment. Also, certain
content on page 2 of Document 2, which contains
details about the performance of specific investment portfolios.
acknowledge the documents contain other information in relation to the
VFMC’s investment strategies that is not generally
available to its
competitors. However, I consider the majority of this other content to be
relatively high level in nature, rather
than providing specific details about
individual investment portfolios, or about particular organisations or
industries. I also consider
the lapse of time reduces the commercial sensitivity
of the information. As such, I am not satisfied that disclosure of certain
information
would cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the
addition to managing the assets of the Victorian Future Fund on behalf of the
Treasurer of Victoria, I note the VFMC’s Foundation
clients are required
to invest in the VFMC under the Victorian Government’s Centralised
Investment Model. Given the VFMC’s
Foundation clients do not have the
option to invest their assets in competitor organisations, I do not consider
disclosure of high-level
information about the VFMC’s investment
strategies in relation to them would likely cause unreasonable disadvantage to
financial position of the VFMC.
VFMC’s website states that it is an open and transparent public authority
responsible for investing for the benefit of Victorians,
managing funds of more
than $92 billion for Victoria and 32 Victorian public authorities and related
organisations. Given the VFMC
manages a significant proportion of funds on
behalf of public authorities, I consider it to be in the public interest to
certain information about how it manages such investments, where
disclosure would not likely cause unreasonable disadvantage to the
VFMC or its
Accordingly,
I am not satisfied that high level information relating to the VFMC’s
investment strategies is exempt from release
under section 34(1)(b), and further
information is to be released.
decision in relation to the application of section 34(1)(b) is set out in a
marked up copy of the documents provided to the Agency
Section 34(1)(a) – Trade secrets of an
undertaking
34(1)(a) provides a document is an exempt document if its disclosure under the
(a) would disclose information acquired by an agency (or a Minister) from a
business, commercial or financial undertaking; and
(b) the information relates to trade secrets.
are several factors indicating that information may constitute a trade
These include:
(a) the extent to which the information is known outside of the
undertaking’s business;
(b) measures taken by the undertaking to guard the secrecy of the
information;
(c) the value of the information to the undertaking and competitors;
(d) the effort and money spent by the undertaking in developing the information;
(e) the ease or difficulty with which others might acquire or duplicate the
Information
may be a trade secret even if it is not of a technical
Information
is generally not considered to be a trade secret where the processes,
procedures, or methods are well known or widespread
(including in that
industry), could be assumed, or are publicly available.
Agency applied section 34(1)(a) to content on pages 12 and 19 in Document 1, and
page 2 in Document 2.
have decided certain information the agency claimed exempt under section
34(1)(a) is exempt under section 34(1)(b). I have not further
considered whether
section 34(1)(a) applies to that information.
relation to the remainder of the information claimed exempt under section
34(1)(a), I am not satisfied it contains information
in the nature of that
described in paragraph 26 above. It is therefore not exempt under section
Section 25 – Deletion of exempt or irrelevant
information
25 requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant
information and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
Determining
what is ‘practicable’ requires consideration of the effort and
editing involved in making the deletions ‘from
a resources point of
and the effectiveness
of the deletions. Where deletions would render a document meaningless, they are
not ‘practicable’
and release of the document is not required under
section 25.
have considered the effect of deleting exempt information from the documents. In
my view, it is practicable for the Agency to delete
the exempt information,
because it would not require substantial time and effort, and the edited
documents would retain meaning.
the information before me, I am satisfied certain information in the documents
is exempt from release under section 34(1)(b). However,
I am not satisfied the
documents contain trade secrets under section 34(1)(a), nor that high level
information is exempt from release
under section 34(1)(b) where it does not
contain details about specific investment portfolios. Therefore, I have
determined to release
further information in the documents to the Applicant
where I am satisfied it is not exempt from release.
I am satisfied it is practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited copy of
the documents with exempt information deleted
in accordance with section 25,
access is granted in part.
marked-up copy of the documents indicating exempt or irrelevant information in
accordance with my decision has been provided to
Timeframe to seek a review of my decision
either party to this review is not satisfied with my decision, they are entitled
to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if either party applies to VCAT for
a review of my
party review rights
I have determined to release documents that contain information of a business,
financial, commercial nature relating to a business
undertaking, if practicable,
I am required to notify those persons of their right to seek review by VCAT of
my decision within 60
days from the date they are given
this case, I am satisfied it is practicable to notify the relevant third party
of their review rights and confirm they will be
notified of my decision on the
date of decision.
When this decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the third parties’ 60 day review
period expires. If a review application is made to VCAT,
my decision will be
subject to any VCAT determination.
Document No.
Date of document
Document Description
No. of pages
Agency Decision
OVIC Decision
Victorian Future Fund: Investment Risk Management Plan
Released in part
Sections 34(1)(a) and 34(1)(b)
Release in part
Sections 34(1)(b), 25
The document is to be released in accordance with the
marked-up copy provided to the Agency.
Victorian Future Fund Quarterly Investment Report
Released in part
Sections 34(1)(a) and 34(1)(b)
Release in part
Sections 34(1)(b), 25
The document is to be released in accordance with the
marked-up copy provided to the Agency.
Dalla-Riva v Department of
Treasury and Finance
[2007] VCAT 1301
Re Bankers Trust Australia
Ltd v Ministry of Transport
(1989) 2 VAR 33
, 38-9 in relation to the
equivalent provision in the Commonwealth FOI Act;
Re Organon (Aust) Pty Ltd v
Department of Community Services and Health
(1987) 13 ALD 588
relation to the equivalent provision in the Commonwealth FOI Act. These factors
are “merely guides”:
Searle Australia Pty Ltd v Public Interest
Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
Searle Australia Pty
Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
Department of Tourism, Sport and the Commonwealth Games
[2003] VCAT 45
Mickelburough v
Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
The Herald and Weekly
Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier
[2012] VCAT 967
Honeywood v
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
RFJ v Victoria
Police FOI Division
(Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
The Applicant in section
50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Sections 50(3A) and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter