URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1317.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Normcas Investments PL v Whitehorse CC Normcas Investments PL v Whitehorse CC [1998] VICCAT 1317 (23 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/45399
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. WH 9799J
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 23 DECEMBER 1998
P.G. O'LEARY MEMBER
Applicant for Review/
Permit Applicant Normcas Investments Pty Ltd
Responsible Authority Whitehorse City Council
Respondents/Objectors C. Moss and others
NATURE OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(the Act) for a review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
Use land for six double storey dwellings
31-35 Surrey Road, Blackburn North
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Whitehorse Planning Scheme, Residential C Zone
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The proposal does not integrate with the neighbourhood in which it is
located, enhance the area or maintain a reasonable level
of amenity for
neighbours.
2. The proposal is not sensitive to the significance of the site.
3. The size and scale of the proposal is out of character with the area and
will adversely impact on the amenity of the adjoining
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
1. The subject site is a unique site and is well suited to the proposed
development.
2. The proposal has been designed having regard to the provisions of the Good
Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing, the location
of the site and the
character of the area.
3. The proposal will not adversely impact on the amenity of the adjoining
properties.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
On 1 July 1998, the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
"VCAT Act") and Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
Act 1998 came into operation.
The transitional provisions in Section 312 and Clause 9 of Schedule 2 to the
Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
Act apply to
these proceedings.
APPEARANCES
M.J. Traa, Town Planner, represented the responsible authority.
C. Moss, B. Lothian, F. Alsop, G. Alsop, Objectors, represented themselves.
Adrian Atkins, Town Planner, represented the Applicant for Review/Permit
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
1. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr. Atkins formally tabled a revised
site context plan. Mr. Atkins advised that he had become
aware of a possible
inadequacy in the application process and had forwarded a copy of this site
context plan to the Tribunal on 16
December 1998. No objection was raised to
the tabling of the modified site context plan although Mr. Traa advised that
no design response accompanying the site context plan. Mr. Atkins
also tabled a site survey. Pursuant to Section 64 of Schedule
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
, the permission was
granted to substitute the plan forwarded to the Tribunal on 16 December
2. Mr. Atkins also tabled an amending plan. Mr. Atkins explained that the
purpose of the plan and elevation was to show new obscure
glazing in rear
windows. No objection was raised by any party to the tabling of the amending
plan. Pursuant to
of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act
, permission was granted to substitute the
revised plan which had been tabled at the hearing.
PLANNING PROVISIONS AND POLICY
1. The subject site is zoned Residential C (Clause 125 of the Whitehorse
Planning Scheme). In this zone a permit is required to
use land for an
attached house.
2. The purposes of the Residential C Zone are
"* To recognise areas of residential development and encourage the
establishment of educational, recreational, religious and community
compatible with the area and responsive to local community needs.
* To provide the opportunity for a variety of residential densities and
dwelling types.
* To encourage higher residential densities in areas near rail transport
stations and stops, near centres of commercial and community
activity and near
areas shown as district centres on the strategic framework plan, having regard
. the nature of the area, including the amenity and residential
. the capacity of surrounding roads to carry any increase in traffic.
. the capacity of existing essential services.
. whether the development will require improvements to the existing roads or
essential services.
* To ensure that if land is used for a residential building, dual occupancy
or a multi-unit development, adequate provision is made
for daylight, privacy
and landscaping and that the amenity of occupants of adjoining land is not
3. Clause 21 - The Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing is applicable
in the assessment of an application for permit. This
Guide has been introduced
to promote well designed medium density developments that take advantage of
existing services and give
people a wider choice of housing to suit their needs
and budgets. The Guide encourages:
* a variety of dwelling types to suit the diversity of people's needs;
* site-responsive designs for dwellings which are pleasant to live in and do
not impact adversely or unreasonably on neighbours or
the surrounding
environment; and
* innovative contemporary design.
The Guide is divided into requirements for site analysis and design response
and eleven various design elements.
4. Guidelines for approval are contained within Clause 16-2 of the Planning
Scheme. This clause requires the responsible authority
to consider the
following matters before deciding on an application, the conditions of a permit
or approval of a development plan.
"* If appropriate, the matters set out in Section 60 of the Act.
* The State, regional and municipal planning policies.
* The purpose of the zone, reserved land or control.
* Orderly planning of the area.
* Proximity of the land to any reserved land.
* Effect on the amenity of the neighbourhood.
* Any matters required to be considered in the zone, reserve or
5. State and Regional sections of the Whitehorse Planning Scheme contain
planning policies that apply to this application, these
* Clause 3-3A Residential Development - Medium Density Housing
* Clause 14-1 Pattern of Future Metropolitan Development
* Clause 14-2 Housing and Urban Consolidation
6. The responsible authority has prepared a new planning scheme which contains
the Victoria Planning Provisions. Under the new scheme
the site will be
included in a Residential 1 Zone. This is a virtual conversion from the
Residential C Zone. Where a permit is
currently required
for six attached houses under the Residential 1 Zone, a permit will be required
"development"
of six attached houses. This new planning scheme has
been exhibited, submissions have been made to it, a Panel appointed by the
Minister for Planning has heard submissions and has made a report to the
responsible authority. At the time of writing, the responsible
authority had
not adopted the new planning scheme.
7. In addition to the new Whitehorse Planning Scheme, the responsible authority
has completed its Municipal Strategic Statement.
The Municipal Strategic
Statement places a policy context to the consideration of planning matters
included within the new planning
scheme. It includes policy direction for
enhancing residential character (Section 4.2) and accommodating new housing
(Section 4.4).
The Municipal Strategic Statement identifies a number of
strategies for dealing with medium density housing including:
* A requirement to meet the Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing,
* A suggested housing density of one unit per 400 square metres of land
* Compliance with its Urban Character Study 1996 and the Supplementary Study
8. The responsible authority has prepared and adopted its Medium Density
Housing Local Guidelines. Some aspects of these Guidelines
questioned by the Panel appointed by the Minister to examine the new planning
scheme (as mentioned in paragraph 6 above).
Site Location and Context
The subject site has abuttals to both Rialton Avenue and Surrey Road, Blackburn
North. It is an irregular shaped property with frontages
of 30 metres to
Surrey Road and 11.5 metres to Rialton Avenue. Land area is 2220 square metres
. The land falls by about 3.5 metres
from south to north (towards Rialton
Avenue). Vehicle access is theoretically obtained from both Surrey Road and
Rialton Avenue,
however in reality, access to the subject site is from Rialton
Avenue. The subject site is currently vacant and contains some established
native and deciduous trees. The subject site was previously occupied by two
houses which were purchased for the Eastern Freeway
construction project. On
completion of the project the sites have had part of the land subsumed into the
freeway, the remainder
of which has been consolidated and sold. Part of Surrey
Road becomes elevated near the subject site and diagonally opposite future
access to the Eastern Freeway is available from Surrey Road. Rialton Avenue
now terminates at an embankment to the new elevated
section of Surrey Road.
Access to the subject site is provided from the T-head. Housing in Rialton
Avenue and this part of Surrey
Road comprises single and two storey detached
housing with substantial vegetation throughout.
Purpose Sought
The application which is the subject of this application for review comprises
six two storey attached dwellings on the site. Two
dwellings located side by
side are located towards the Rialton Avenue frontage with four dwellings side
by side at the southern end
of the site. Each dwelling contains three
bedrooms, dwellings 1 and 2 located at the Rialton Avenue frontage also
contains separate
rumpus rooms. The dwellings range in size from 163 square
metres to 185 square metres in area. All dwellings are provided with
lock-up garage with access provided via a driveway along the western boundary
of the site. This driveway varies in width
throughout the site. All vehicle
access to the site is to be from Rialton Avenue. Pedestrian access to the
development will be
provided to Surrey Road. Four visitor car spaces are
provided at the Rialton Avenue frontages of the site and in a tandem
configuration
in front of garages of Units 2 and 6.
11. Application No. WH 9799J was lodged with the responsible authority on 26
May 1998. It sought permission to develop six two storey
town houses on the
subject site, a site context plan and a report was also enclosed with the
application. On 12 June 1998 the responsible
authority through delegation to
officers determined to refuse the application on three grounds. The applicant
for permit lodged
an appeal with the then
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(which later become
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal).
The new tribunal directed that notification of the application be undertaken to
adjoining and nearby property owners. In addition,
Vic Roads was also
37 Surrey Road. It is noted the
responsible authority had notified various
residents of its refusal of planning permit application and the reason why it
the application without notifying them.
REASONS FOR ORDER
12. At the hearing, all parties tabled and read their own submissions. I was
provided with revised plans and elevations, survey
plan and photographs
depicting the site. I inspected the site prior to the review hearing. All of
the matters tabled at the hearing
and all documents lodged by objectors have
been considered. In addition, I have examined the plans and elevations,
checked shadow
diagrams and compared the proposal with the Good Design Guide
for Medium-Density Housing, Revision 2, April 1998. Having considered
the matters put before me, I consider the responsible authority's decision was
correct and that the application for review
should be rejected. My reasons are
supplied for the benefit of objectors and the applicant in particular. For
convenience, I will
follow the format under the headings of the Good Design
Guide and address issues accordingly.
Site analysis and design response
The site analysis plan apparently went missing at the responsible authority's
office. There was dispute at the hearing about the
level of detail supplied
and the response from the officer handling the application. Mr. Atkins had
forwarded a revised
"site context plan"
to the Tribunal in response to
issues he detected during his preparation for the review hearing. Whatever the
full reason for the
loss of the site context plan is largely irrelevant.
However this case demonstrates a number of failings in the design process.
What appears to have been submitted was a brief planning report on the proposal
and a context plan. In April 1998, the Good Design
Guide for Medium-Density
Housing was revised to provide greater weight, in a statutory sense, on the
need for better site analysis
and design response in the preparation of medium
density housing. This process is virtually a three tiered process now and
a) preparation of a site context plan,
b) preparation of a design response including an explanation of the of the
design of the development. This includes preparing a
brief report, and
c) information, evaluation and presentation of the development proposal.
Proper documentation and explanation of the design concept would have avoided
some of the issues experienced by Mr. Atkins; an example
of the poor design
response is documenting where glass block windows would be installed at the
review hearing. In an application
like this, documentation should have been
provided about landscape information and an arborist report on the conditions
of existing
trees. I consider this would have assisted any design as it would
have demonstrated or otherwise whether trees on the site could
be maintained
and possibly what lopping was required to ensure that trees were not damaged
during the construction phase. The responsible
authority was criticised for
handling of the application. Instead the site analysis
and the original design context plan should have been rejected by the
responsible
authority. However, this application was lodged shortly after the
revisions to the Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing,
and probably
explains the prompt refusal of the application. Had a proper site context plan
and design response been prepared it
should have identified a number of site
constraints and opportunities, for example:
* Limitation to access from Surrey Road
* Limitation to access to Rialton Avenue
* The necessity to contain all visitor parking on site owing to restricted
parking opportunities in Rialton Avenue and Surrey Road
* The narrow frontage of the site and the odd shape of the property which
limits the positioning of dwellings
* The need to design dwellings around some of the existing trees
* The need to design houses to resist noise from Surrey Road
There was little mention of these issues in the report accompanying the
application. Had a proper site analysis process been undertaken,
pre-application discussion undertaken with Council officers, I consider a more
site responsive design may have evolved.
The proposed density of the development equates to about one unit per 370
square metres of land. The responsible authority's policy
supports a density
of one unit per 400 square metres of land. I do not consider that density per
se is a reason to reject this application.
Rather the site constraints
identified in paragraph 12.1 and principally the odd shape of the property and
the narrow frontage,
are in themselves design limitations. Whether the site
contains six large units or 6 smaller units is of relatively minor importance.
State Government urban consolidation policies encourage multi dwelling units on
a site of this size. However what is of more important
in this instance is how
the development fits within the site itself, integrates reasonably with the
character of the area, and provides
adequate standard of habitation for future
occupants of the subject dwellings.
Infrastructure
I was told during the hearing that most infrastructure facilities can be
provided. I consider garbage collection is an issue. It
insurmountable issue, but it requires the applicant to make inquiries about
suitable garbage collection with the responsible
authority prior to the
application being lodged, that is as part of the design process. It should not
be an afterthought. Given
the access constraints of this site, this should
have been properly explored.
Neighbourhood Character
Mr. Atkins provided an extensive explanation of the neighbourhood character,
and by and large, I agree with him. However I saw no
plans depicting how the
proposed development would fit in with the character of the area. In fact
there were no elevations showing
the relationship of this development to
adjoining properties. The only elevations shown were internal elevations of
the proposed
development. No elevations were shown from Surrey Road or Rialton
Avenue. The design response should have addressed this in both
written and
diagrammatic sense. On this issue it needs to be acknowledge that the
neighbourhood in and around Rialton Avenue is
pleasant with predominantly
single and two storey detached housing. This is not to say that multi-unit
housing is inappropriate
in the area. However it does mean that any new
multi-unit development should respect the character of the area and make a
contribution
to that neighbourhood. There may be an increase in residential
density, but this increase should not be at the expense of the character
Layout and Landscaping
This issue was poorly addressed in the submission and attempts by Mr. Atkins to
cover up for the shortfalls did not convince me that
the development was site
responsive. This is not to be seen as a criticism of Mr. Atkins' submission
Whilst there was some attempt
to retain existing mature native and exotic
trees, no mention was made how tree canopies or existing drip lines to those
trees would
be treated. Whilst there was an attempt to preserve roots by
special treatment of footings, no evidence was called from a landscape
architect or arborist about the condition of the trees and the appropriate
methods to retain these trees. I have grave doubts that
all trees could be
retained in their current condition with the proposed layout of the
development. It seemed that the landscape
plan was an afterthought, rather
than an integral part of the design process. The landscape plan, whilst in
itself competent, seems
to be attempting to alleviate the
"fenced in"
approach to the design. Whilst the developer may desire to sell the project on
the basis of good security, I do not see why some
transparent (security)
fencing with good landscaping along the Surrey Road elevation could not be
incorporated into the design rather
erecting high timber screen fences all
around. Given the site is the gateway to the municipality, I can understand
the responsible
authority's criticism of this design approach. In addition, I
saw no treatment that would assist in attenuating noise, particular
and 3. High fencing may block a view of the driveway to the units when viewed
from the pedestrian/bike path, but there
would still be views into this part of
the site from the elevated section of Surrey Road.
Energy Efficiency
Many rooms have north facing windows, however it seems the design of Units 3, 4
and 5 in particular are to a large extent
"back to front"
number of dining rooms in Units 3, 4, 5 and 6 have good solar access, but the
"family room"
particularly in Units 4 and 5 only have southerly aspects.
In addition, some of the advantages of the solar access to Unit s 4, 5
lot by the placement of garages on the northern side of the private open space
and the rooms with the best solar access.
Building Envelope
Essentially this element could have been better handled in the application.
Whilst shadow diagrams show that most of the site has
little impact on
adjoining properties, Units 3, 4, 5 and 6 tend to overshadow their own
courtyards/service yards/open space areas.
I also have doubts whether the
proposal complies with E6.T9 of the Good Design Guide. However there was no
explanation of this
aspect of the development during the review hearing.
Visual and acoustic privacy
This provision was generally satisfied. The use of
"glass blocks"
to be an overkill treatment to prevent overlooking to adjoining properties.
Better placement of windows probably could have
solved this issue. I also
suspect that placing glass blocks would substantially reduce the outlook from
any of these affected rooms.
Concern was also raised about placement of the
courtyard to Unit 6 in the south-eastern part of the subject site. There is no
to this location on privacy grounds although I have concerns about its
accentuation on the site.
Car parking and Vehicle Access
The quantum car parking for the development is adequate. However I note the
garages dominate the frontages to Units 3, 4, 5 and
6. In addition, car access
width to the garages is only 4.5 metres (by scale). Access to the site from
Rialton Avenue is considered
to be the most appropriate. This will result in
an increase in traffic in Rialton Avenue, but it is well within acceptable
standards. I do have concern about the distance visitors will have to
travel to rear units. This could be better addressed in a
Private and communal open space
The quantum private and communal open space is adequate for the development,
although I consider much of the private open space with
good solar access is
diminished by shading and a closing in effect due to the placement of the
garages to Units 3, 4, 5 and 6.
Site Facilities
These facilities appear to be adequate although plans/elevations do not show
where air conditioning, heating or hot water units will
be located.
Dwelling Entry and Interior
The proposal does not meet the objectives and criteria of Element 11 of the
Good Design Guide. The responsible authority was correct
to refuse the
application on this ground alone. Entry to Unit 1 is located at the south-west
corner of the dwelling, over 30 metres
from the front of the site. The entry
to Unit 2 is in the south-eastern corner via the central driveway. Both of
these units should
have been better identified and facing Rialton Avenue.
Entry to Unit 6 is in the south-west corner of the site. It is tucked away
would be difficult to find by any visitor to the site. In fact entry to Units
3 to 6 (inclusive) is recessed behind garages
with access via the main
driveway. A visitor to the site would find it difficult to find the entries to
these dwellings. There
seems little justification and certainly none was
provided why garages should dominate the entry to Units 3, 4, 5 and 6.
The order of the Tribunal is the Application for Review is rejected and the
responsible authority's decision is upheld. The responsible
authority is
directed not to issue a permit in respect to Application No. WH 9799J.
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/45399
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. WH 9799J
P.G. O'LEARY
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter