URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2022/721.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davis v Department of Transport (Review and Regulation) [2022] VCAT 721 (27 June 2022)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
REVIEW AND REGULATION LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. Z143/2021
Review and Regulation List –
Freedom of Information Act 1982
sections 28, 30(1),
(4) – Ministerial briefing - Cabinet
documents - internal working documents - documents in relation to trade secrets
review of decision by agency to release Ministerial briefing in
part – Ministerial
briefing refers to and contains extracts from Master
Plan and Business Case relating to second stage of planning for South Yarra
Station - purpose of preparation of documents – whether prepared for
purpose of submission for consideration by Cabinet - whether
disclosure would
disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation prepared by
an officer in the course of, or for
the purpose of, the deliberative processes
involved in the functions of agency or Minister or government – whether
would be contrary to the public interest – whether agency
engaged in trade or commerce – whether information of a business,
commercial or financial nature that would if disclosed under the Act be likely
to expose the agency unreasonably to disadvantage
- consideration of public
interest override – decision of agency affirmed.
David Davis
Department of Transport
J Billings, Senior Member
HEARING TYPE
Hearing via video conference
DATE OF HEARING
14 June 2022
DATE OF ORDER
27 June 2022
Davis v Department of Transport (Review and Regulation)
[2022] VCAT
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Senior Member
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr C Pym of counsel
For Respondent
Ms M Olynyk, solicitor
Honourable David Davis MP has applied to VCAT under the
Information Act 1982
the FOI Act
) for review of a decision made by
the respondent, the Department of Transport (
the Department
), to refuse
to grant access to documents.
review now concerns a single document that was identified in the proceeding as
‘Document 1’. Document 1 is a Ministerial
Brief to the Minister for
Transport Infrastructure - BMIN-1-19-368 South Yarra Station Master Plan.
Department contends that access to Document 1 should be denied on the basis that
it is that is exempt under sections 28(1), 30(1)
and 34 of the FOI Act. The
Department further contends that the public override in section 50(4) (which can
apply in the case of
documents that are exempt under sections 30 and 34 but not
28) does not apply.
was a hearing before me on 14 June 2022. Mr Cameron Robinson, the Executive
Director, Network Pipeline and Program, Network
Integration Division at the
Department, gave oral evidence and was cross-examined. Mr Robinson previously
made a witness statement
in September 2021. There were written and oral
submissions on behalf of the parties.
The FOI request and the document now in dispute
Davis made the FOI request on 21 September 2019. The request related to several
Ministerial Briefs to the Minister for Transport
Infrastructure (
) that were identified in the request.
Department did not make a decision within the statutory timeframe and Mr Davis
applied to VCAT on the basis that there had been
a deemed refusal.
Department subsequently made a decision on 3 May 2021. In the decision the
Department identified seven documents within the terms
of the request. By the
date of the hearing Document 1 and one other document remained in dispute.
was confirmed at the hearing that Mr Davis requested that the Tribunal treat his
application as extending to an application for
review of the decision made on 3
May 2021: see section 53(5) of the FOI Act. It was further confirmed that Mr
Davis did not seek
any information for which an exemption under section 33 of
the Act (personal affairs information) has been claimed.
Davis now seeks review only of the decision in relation to Document 1. The
Department has released Document 1 in part to Mr Davis.
The focus of the review
is therefore on redacted parts of the document. I have inspected a version of
the document that makes clear
what are the redacted parts and, for each redacted
part, the provisions of the FOI under which exemption is claimed. Those
are sections 28(1)(b), 28(1)(ba), 28(1)(c), 30(1) and 34(4).
Summary of the evidence
Robinson began working for the Department in October 2018. He has been in his
current role since December 2019. Before then he
acted in the role from January
2019. Mr Robinson leads a team that has responsibility for undertaking project
development. This
includes the preparation of business cases for consideration
by government.
his witness statement, Mr Robinson described Document 1 as a briefing for the
Minister on the South Yarra Station Upgrade Master
the Master Plan
and Business Case (
the Business Case
). He said that he was accountable
for Document 1 in his role as Executive Director.
Robinson explained the context in which the document came into being. There was
funding in the 2017/18 State Budget for a
South Yarra Station Planning
the Planning Study
). The Planning Study was in two parts
– Stage 1 and Stage 2. Stage 1 involved addressing station congestion and
safety issues. That work was subsequently funded and has been
completed. Stage 2 involves an investigation ‘to identify future
and precinct requirements and opportunities, comprising the production of’
the Master Plan and Business Case.
1 concerns an update on Stage 2.
Robinson said that the original funding for the Master Plan and Business Case
was provided in the 2017/18 State Budget. That followed
a Cabinet Submission
for the funding that was considered by a relevant Sub-Committee of Cabinet in
February 2017. The project referred
to in the Master Plan and Business Case is
considered a ‘planning project only’ at this time. The Master Plan
and Business
Case were developed to inform future long-term options and are
‘the subject for future government consideration and decision-making
processes’. Document 1 is a briefing about the Master Plan and Business
Case (executive summaries of which are attached to
the document) which documents
were prepared to go to Cabinet. Document 1 discusses the content and timing of
the Master Plan and
Business Case. An earlier ministerial briefing on the
matter is also attached to Document 1.
Robinson said that the Master Plan and Business case were prepared for the
purpose of a future submission to, and consideration
by, Cabinet. They were
developed to provide future options to government for long-term station and
precinct development and commercial
opportunities for its consideration. A
Committee of Cabinet will consider them, and ‘it will be a matter for
Cabinet on how,
when or whether it may decide to progress any further
work’. Document 1 was prepared to update the Minister on the progress
the Master Plan and Business Case and discloses information from them that
‘will ultimately be submitted to a Committee
of Cabinet’ In
particular, Document 1 discloses information about various options under
consideration and what any future
redevelopment (if undertaken) ‘could
look like’, including information of a commercial nature, such as
on the commercial nature of information in Document 1, Mr Robinson said that the
State is engaged in a number of activities
relating to trade or commerce due to
its role in planning and operating the transport network to maximise the social,
economic and
environmental benefits to the State. He said that the disclosure
of financial estimates, and other business and commercial information,
‘would be likely to prejudice current or future commercial negotiations
carried out by the State, or undermine the State’s
position’. (Mr Robinson illustrated the point by reference to a specific
undisclosed item in Document 1, explaining
that it placed a value on a potential
future transaction. He said that disclosure of that information would be
commercially disadvantageous
to the State. He said that in order to maximise
the value to the public, ‘it is imperative that information of this nature
not be disclosed to future potential purchasers’. He added that the very
indication that the State may be considering options
of the kind mentioned has
the potential to disadvantage it commercially).
Robinson indicated that the government, through Cabinet, had not yet considered
the Master Plan or Business Case. He said that
as such they are subject to
change, and any further development work on the options is currently uncertain,
so the documents remain
confidential. He then described how the documents are
securely stored.
oral evidence, responding to Ms Olynyk, Mr Robinson said in effect that where
Document 1 asked the Minister to note the Business
Case for ‘future Budget
consideration’ that meant it was something that would be considered by
Cabinet. He said that
his evidence that the Master Plan and Business Case were
prepared for the purpose of consideration by Cabinet was based on his knowledge
of the project: Cabinet decided that the work should be funded with the purpose
of the agency going back to Cabinet to seek a (substantive)
decision and future
funding. Further, the briefings refer to the purpose being to follow up with a
funding submission, meaning a
submission to Cabinet. In this context, reference
was made to part of Document 1 that clearly contemplated the requirement for
consideration
and approval by Cabinet.
Robinson stated that the Master Plan and Business Case would not have been
prepared if they were not to have gone to Cabinet.
Cross-examined
by Mr Pym, Mr Robinson agreed that there are ‘multiple reasons’ (not
limited to submission to Cabinet)
why a Government department might have a
business case prepared. He accepted that there were many reasons for the
Business Case
in the present case. (Mr Pym suggested, for instance, that one
reason would be to inform the Department how to proceed). Mr Robinson
however, that the primary purpose of the Business Case was a submission to
Pym referred to a definition of ‘master plan’ that appears on the
website of the Victorian Planning
(He acknowledged that
it is not the Department’s definition). According to the definition, a
master plan is –
a long-term plan that provides a vision and framework for how an area can grow
and develop. These plans provide certainty for community
members and developers
but not limited to land use
and development, transport and parking, building and
urban design, heritage, character, employment and open
Pym put to Mr Robinson in essence that master plans are typically prepared for
the general purposes that the above definition suggests
(as opposed to the
specific purpose of consideration by Cabinet), and that the Master Plan in the
present case was no different.
Robinson accepted that master plans can have many purposes. He did not accept
however that submission to Cabinet was only a small
part of the reason for
preparing the Master Plan in the present instance. He reiterated that the
Master Plan was for the purpose
of submission to Cabinet. He said that one of
the key reasons for saying so was that matters were still at a point where there
options for the Master Plan - rather than the Master Plan being one master
plan for the future (a document that might provide certainty
for the public once
Cabinet had indorsed a particular option, he later explained). Nevertheless, Mr
Robinson did agree that there
were ‘multiple purposes’ for the
Master Plan.
Cross-examined
Department’s interest was in maximising
value for the Victorian public.
re-examination, Mr Robinson confirmed that the Master Plan and Business Case
were prepared for the primary purpose of being put
to Cabinet for consideration
and that they would not have been prepared if they were not to go to Cabinet.
has expressed its intention in the FOI Act that, among other things, the
provisions of the Act shall be interpreted so
as to further the object set out
in section 3(1): see section 3(2). Section 3(1) provides that the objects of
the Act include to
extend as far as possible the right of the community to
access to information in the possession of the Government of Victoria and
bodies constituted under the law of Victoria for certain public purposes by
creating a general right of access to information
limited only by exceptions and
exemptions necessary for the protection of essential public interests and the
private and business
affairs of persons in respect of whom information is
collected and held by agencies.
28 of the FOI Act, headed ‘Cabinet documents’, relevantly provides:
(1) A document is an exempt document if it is—
(a) the official record of any deliberation or decision of the Cabinet;
(b) a document that has been prepared by a Minister or on his or her behalf or
by an agency for the purpose of submission for consideration
by the Cabinet;
(ba) a document prepared for the purpose of briefing a Minister in relation to
issues to be considered by the Cabinet;
(c) a document that is a copy or draft of, or contains extracts from, a
document referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (ba); or
(d) a document the disclosure of which would involve the disclosure of any
deliberation or decision of the Cabinet, other than a
document by which a
decision of the Cabinet was officially published ...
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to a document referred to in a paragraph of
that subsection to the extent that the document contains
purely statistical,
technical or scientific material unless the disclosure of the document would
involve the disclosure of any deliberation
or decision of the Cabinet.
includes a committee or sub-committee of Cabinet: section 28(7).
(b), (ba) and (c) of section 28(1) are the relevant provisions in the present
case. Determining the ‘purpose’
of a document having been prepared
is central to determining whether the document is exempt.
Davis v Major Transport Infrastructure Authority
[2020] VCAT 965
considered section 28(1)(b). In the course of summarising the principles, VCAT
said at [19]-[23]:
The actual use made of a document may be relevant in ascertaining the purpose
for which it was created, but is not decisive of that
It is not necessary to prove that the document was actually submitted to the
Cabinet; nor that Cabinet actually considered the document,
evidence as to the actual use to which the document was put could shed light on
the purpose for which it was created.
A document will only be exempt if the sole purpose or one of the substantial
purposes, or the dominant purpose, or one of a number
of significantly
contributing purposes, for which it was prepared was for it to be submitted to
the Cabinet for consideration.
The purpose of the preparation of the document must be for
for consideration
by the Cabinet and not merely
preparation for the purpose of physically placing the document before the
The Tribunal must be satisfied that the particular document ‘fits
squarely’ into the Cabinet documents exemption. Bearing
in mind the object
of the FOI Act to extend as far as possible the community’s access to
information in the possession of government,
it is not enough for the document
merely to have some connection with Cabinet, or because it has a Cabinet
‘aroma’ about
noted the following about section 28(1)(ba) in
Environment Victoria Inc v
Department of Primary Industries
[2013] VCAT 39
Section 28(1)(ba) is in some ways an extension of the concept of Cabinet
documents contained in Section 28(1)(a), (b), (c) and (d).
It goes beyond
official records of Cabinet decisions, documents prepared for the purpose of
submission for consideration by Cabinet,
or documents which would involve the
disclosure of Cabinet deliberations. It adds to those categories documents
‘for the purpose of briefing a Minister in relation to
issues to be considered by the Cabinet’
. That is, Section 28(1)(ba)
relates to documents which neither were prepared for the purpose of going into
the Cabinet room, nor
record what occurred in the Cabinet room. (Emphasis in
Department of Premier and Cabinet v Newbury
[2021] VCAT 331
considered section 28(1)(ba) and made observations about the breadth of the
exemption. The Tribunal noted, first, that the
document must be prepared for
the purpose of briefing the Minister in relation to issues to be considered by
Cabinet (meaning that
it be a short, accurate summary of the details of a plan
or operation that contains information or advice to be read by, or explained
a Minister); and, secondly, that it is the document’s purpose at the time
of preparation that is relevant, rather than
what may subsequently
30 of the FOI Act, headed ‘Internal working documents’, relevantly
(1) Subject to this section, a document is an exempt document if it is a
document the disclosure of which under this Act—
(a) would disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation
prepared by an officer or Minister, or consultation
or deliberation that has
taken place between officers, Ministers, or an officer and a Minister, in the
course of, or for the purpose
of, the deliberative processes involved in the
functions of an agency or Minister or of the government; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest ...
(3) This section does not apply to a document by reason only of purely factual
material contained in the document.
(in relation to an agency other than a council) is defined in section 5(1) to
include ‘a member of the
agency, a member of the staff of the agency, and
any person employed by or for the agency, whether that person is one to whom the
provisions of the
Public Administration Act 2004
apply or not’.
Coulson v Department of Premier and Cabinet
[2018] VCAT 229
considered the expressions ‘opinion, advice or recommendation’, and
‘deliberative processes’ in
section 30(1).
VCAT referred to
Penhalliuriack v Department of Labour and
where his Honour
Judge Lazarus made these general remarks:
It is sufficiently apparent that the purpose of [section 30(1)] is to protect
the deliberative processes of government and to ensure
that measure of
confidentiality which will enable policy and the like decisions to be taken
after the frankest possible interchange
of views and ideas between officers of
the public service and between them and their Minister, as well as between
members of the
ministry. Such an exemption is very wide indeed ...
in the nature of ‘opinion, advice or recommendation’ may be a matter
in the nature of ‘a personal view’,
‘an opinion recommended or
offered’ or ‘a presentation worthy of
acceptance’.
further noted in
that the ‘deliberative processes’
criterion is very wide - wide enough to include ‘any of the processes of
deliberation
or consideration involved in the functions of an
VCAT referred to
Waterford v Department of Treasury (No.
where the Commonwealth
Administrative Appeals Tribunal said in relation to a similar provision in
Commonwealth legislation that the
deliberative processes of an agency are
‘its thinking processes - the processes of reflection, for example, upon
and expediency of the proposal, a particular decision or a course of
Tucker v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2019] VCAT 2018
P summarised the principles concerning whether disclosure would be contrary to
the public interest under
section 30(1).
They include the following –
regard must be
had to both the nature of the information and nature of the document
sensitive or contentious issues involved in the communication, the more likely
it is that communication should not be disclosed
draft internal
working documents or preliminary advices and opinions are more generally than
not inappropriate for release. This is
particularly so when the final version of
the document has been made public
it is contrary
to the public interest to disclose documents reflecting possibilities considered
but not eventually adopted, as such
disclosure would be likely to lead to
confusion and ill-informed debate
decision-makers
should be judged on their final decisions and their reasons for them, not on
what might have been considered or recommended
by others in preliminary or draft
internal working documents
it is contrary
to the public interest to disclose documents that would have an adverse effect
on the integrity or effectiveness of
decision-making investigative or other
processes; and
public interest
concerns the interest of the public as distinct from the interest of
individuals
of the FOI, headed ‘Documents in relation to trade secrets etc.’,
relevantly provides:
(4) A document is an exempt document if—
(a) it contains—
(i) a trade secret of an agency; or
(ii) in the case of an agency engaged in trade or commerce - information of a
business, commercial or financial nature—
that would if disclosed under this Act be likely to expose the agency
unreasonably to disadvantage ...
50 of the FOI Act, headed ‘Applications for Review by the Tribunal’,
includes sub-section (4) which provides for
what is commonly referred to as
‘the public interest override’:
(4) On the hearing of an application for review the Tribunal shall have, in
addition to any other power, the same powers as an agency
or a Minister in
respect of a request, including power to decide that access should be granted to
an exempt document (not being a
document referred to in section 28,
section 29A, section 31(3), section 31A, or in section 33) where the
Tribunal is of opinion that
the public interest requires that access to the
document should be granted under this Act.
‘public interest override’ does not apply to documents that are
exempt under section 28 but may apply to documents
that are exempt under section
30(1) or section 34(4).
is necessary for the Tribunal to consider the public interest override only if
it is satisfied in respect of the document in dispute
that the exemption claimed
is made out.
interest must require release in the sense that it demands or necessitates
. There is a difference
between what is in the public interest and what is of interest to the
. Abstract policy
considerations such as the desirability of greater transparency in
decision-making are irrelevant in the application
55 provides in effect that the Department has the onus of establishing that a
decision given in respect of the FOI request
was justified or that the Tribunal
should give a decision adverse to the applicant.
Consideration
have inspected Document 1. There are redactions relating to section 33 of the
FOI Act that I do not need to consider.
am satisfied that the redacted parts of Document 1 are exempt. They are –
Page 1: section
28(1)(ba), section 28(1)(c), section 30
section 28(1)(ba), section 28(1)(c), section 30, section 34
Page 4: section
Page 5: section
28(1)(ba), section 28(1)(c), section 30
section 28(1)(ba), section 30
addition): section 28(1)(c)
end of document: section 28(1)(b), section 30, section 34
Mr Robinson agreed with certain propositions that Mr Pym put to him, he
maintained that the ‘primary’ purpose of
the Master Plan and
Business Case being prepared was for them to be put to Cabinet for
consideration, and that the documents would
not have been prepared if they were
not to be put to Cabinet for its consideration. I accept Mr Robinson’s
evidence. The
‘primary’ purpose would be a substantial purpose if
not the dominant purpose, in my view. I therefore find that the
Master Plan and
Business Case are documents within section 28(1)(b).
should indicate that I accept the submission Ms Olynyk made that Mr
Robinson’s evidence makes clear that the Master Plan was
not a master plan
in the sense that Mr Pym referred to in cross-examination. Master plans and
business cases may be prepared for
a range of purposes, as Mr Pym submitted, but
I find that the Master Plan and Business Case in the present case were prepared
the purpose of submission for consideration by Cabinet.
Secretary to the Department of Infrastructure v Asher
In that case Vincent JA approved comments made by Morris P in
Ryan and the Department of Infrastructure
[2004] VCAT 2346
(2002) 22 VAR 226
to the effect
that ‘preliminary or preparatory material’ (not being a draft or
copy) would not fall within section 28(1)(b)
because they would not be documents
prepared for the purpose of submission for consideration by the Cabinet. Mr Pym
submitted that
a business case is a preparatory document, ‘not originally
created for the (sole or dominant) purpose of submission to Cabinet’.
the basis of Mr Robinson’s evidence, I do not consider that the Business
Case (or the Master Plan) constitute ‘preliminary
or preparatory
summary, to the extent that Document 1 contains the Master Plan and Business
Case, it is exempt under section 28(1)(b). I am satisfied,
further, that
Document 1 is a document prepared for the purpose of briefing a Minister in
relation to issues to be considered by
the Cabinet, in the sense discussed in
, such that it is exempt under section 28(1)(ba). (I have noted
that Document 1 includes the earlier Ministerial Brief). And I am
that Document 1 contains extracts from documents referred to in section 28(1)(b)
(the Master Plan and Business Case), such
that it is exempt under section
turn to the exemption claimed under section 30. On the basis of Mr
Robinson’s evidence, and my inspection of the document,
I am satisfied
that Document 1 contains matter in the nature of opinion, advice or
recommendation prepared by an officer in the course
of, or for the purpose of,
the deliberative processes involved in the functions of the agency or Minister
or of the government.
30(1)(a) is therefore satisfied. I now consider section 30(1)(b) - whether
disclosure would be contrary to the public interest.
submissions on behalf of Mr Davis covered general and specific points. In
particular, the objects of the FOI Act were emphasised.
Concerns were expressed
the parties’ respective
capacity to contest the proceeding. I note that
there have been delays. Some of them appear to have been outside the control of
the parties. At the same time, the issues in dispute have narrowed considerably
specifically, it was submitted –
Mr Davis has an
important role in ‘parliamentary accountability’ as Leader of the
Opposition in the Legislative Council
South Yarra
Station is within Mr Davis’ electorate
the development
of the Station precinct has ‘profound effects’ for Mr Davis’
constituents, the surrounding properties,
businesses, visitors, and the economy
of the State
the development
of the project has significant ramifications for Victorian taxpayers
the public has a
right to know about the ‘value-capture options’ that are open to the
government for the future of South
Yarra Station
access to data pertaining to the ‘significant project’ is
‘critical to the democratic function of the
Opposition’
Olynyk pointed out that in considering the public interest test in section
30(1), VCAT has noted that a ‘reasonably proximate
relationship of a
document to the Cabinet process’ may support the section 30 exemption
applying to the document.
have had regard to the nature of the information and the nature of the document.
The document contains sensitive information for
consideration at a very high
level of government. The document has a proximate relationship to the Cabinet
process. Mr Pym submitted
that the Master Plan and Business Care should not be
considered ‘drafts’, but I accept Ms Olynyk’s submission that
the documents have ‘draft status’ in the sense that Cabinet may
never indorse them, and that they are merely options
for consideration, such
that release of Document 1 could cause confusion and undermine the deliberative
process of government.
weighing these matters against the public interest there is in transparency
surrounding government decision-making and the related
points raised on behalf
of Mr Davis, I have concluded that disclosure of Document 1 would be contrary to
the public interest.
turn to the exemption claimed under section 34(4).
claimed on behalf of the Department, Document 1 contains information of a
business, commercial or financial nature that relates
to possible development
options for South Yarra Station, which is property owned by the State
Government. Mr Robinson’s evidence
and the document itself make that
clear. I am further satisfied on the evidence that the Department is engaged in
trade or commerce
with respect to the project on behalf of the State, and it
would be officers of the Department who would engage in any future
negotiations.
I accept the
submission that the Department is therefore likely to be exposed unreasonably to
disadvantage should the information
of a business, commercial or financial
nature be disclosed under the FOI
Ms Olynyk made a
submission to the effect that the Department would be obliged to maximise any
commercial benefits to the taxpayer
when engaging in property dealings and
transactions, and that disclosure of Document 1 would unreasonably disadvantage
the Department
in this regard.
I accept that submission.
have said that Mr Robinson illustrated potential commercial disadvantage by
reference to a specific undisclosed item in Document
1 Having regard to that
item and other relevant information in Document 1, I am satisfied that
disclosure would be commercially
disadvantageous to the State.
Public interest override
noted earlier, the ‘public interest override’ does not apply to
documents that are exempt under section 28. So far
as the exemptions claimed
under section 30(1) and section 34(4) are concerned, I do not consider that the
public interest demands
or necessitates release of Document 1.
have considered relevant competing public interests in the context of section
30. It may be accepted that there would be considerable
public interest in
matters to do with the future of the South Yarra Station precinct. Even if this
could be said to rise to the
level of ‘high threshold public
and even if
disclosure would somehow advance or promote the public interests asserted, I do
not find that the public interests are
so overwhelming as to require
disclosure.
For the reasons given, I conclude that the redacted
parts of Document 1 that I have identified are exempt. Accordingly, I affirm
the decision under review.
Senior Member
The Victorian Planning
Authority is a statutory authority that reports to the Minister for Planning.
https://vpa.vic.gov.au/faq/what-is-a-master-plan-and-how-is-it-proposed-to-be-implemented/
Paragraph numbers and
footnotes omitted. Emphasis in original.
At [14]-[17], [28], [32].
Unreported, County Court of
Victoria, 19 December 1993, cited in
Mildenhall v Department of
, unreported, VCAT, Galvin DP, 13 January 1999, at 12. See Coulson
Halliday v Office of Fair
(Unreported AAT of Victoria, Coghlan PM, 20 July 1995, cited in
[1984] AATA 67
at [22]. See
Waterford v Department of Treasury (No. 2)
[1984] AATA 67
Doyle v Department of Human Services
[2002] VCAT 1768
Secretary to the
Department of Premier and Cabinet v Hulls
[1999] VSCA 117
Secretary to the Department of Justice v Osland
at [92]. See also
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
where Bell J said that the
public interest considerations in favour of disclosure ‘must be so strong
as to convincingly demand
or necessitate release’.
at [92]. See
Herington v
Department of Transport Planning and Local Infrastructure
[2014] VCAT 1026
The Department cited
City Parking Pty Ltd v City of Melbourne
(1996) 10 VAR 170.
In that case
the respondent was held to be an agency engaged in trade or commerce as
landlord, tenant or potential vendor of real
estate: page 185.
Department cited Re
Binnie and ors v Department of Industry, Technology and Resources and anor
(1986) 1 VAR 345
as an instance of a similar outcome.
The Department cited
Gibson v Latrobe City Council
[2008] VCAT 1340
See the judgment of the
High Court of Australia in
Osland v Secretary to the Department of
[2010] HCA 24
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (415 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter