URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/267.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cartledge v The King [2025] VSCA 267 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0024
DAVID CARTLEDGE
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
7 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 267
JUDGMENT APPEALED
[2024] VCC 634 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW – Leave to appeal –
Sentence – Aggravated burglary – Conduct endangering persons –
assault – Attempted rape – Conduct in front of children
– Whether the sentencing judged erred in her findings –
Whether the
sentencing judge erred in her assessment of the prospects of rehabilitation
– Whether the sentencing judge erred
in her application of
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
– Whether the sentence was
manifestly excessive – Application for extension of time for leave to
appeal against sentence
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Crimes Act 1958
Sex Offenders Registration Act
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
(2012) 226 A Crim R 354
Bowden v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 382
(2013) 44 VR 229
Bugmy v The Queen
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
Director of Public Prosecutions v Meyers
[2014] VSCA 314
(2014) 44 VR 486
[2025] VSCA 132
Kumova v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 212
(2012) 37 VR 538
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
Sayer v The Queen
Stefani v The Queen
[2024] VSCA 29
Surtees v The King
[2023] VSCA 42
, considered.
Respondent:
J McColl, Victoria Legal Aid
Respondent:
A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
applicant is seeking leave to appeal against his sentence on the following
(a) The judge erred in sentencing the applicant on
the basis that his emotional state was ‘cold’ during the
(b) The judge erred in taking into account, in relation to charge 2 on the
indictment, that the risk of serious injury or death was
(c) The judge erred in her assessment of the prospects of rehabilitation.
(d) The judge erred in her application of
Sex Offenders
Registration Act 2004
(e) The individual sentences, cumulation orders, total effective sentence and
non-parole period are manifestly excessive.
22 February 2024 and on 22 April 2024 the applicant pleaded guilty to four
charges. On 10 May 2024, the applicant was convicted
and sentenced as
on Indictment
years 2 months
Reckless conduct endangering persons
year 10 months
Sexual assault
(rolled-up charge)
years 8 months
Summary Offences
Effective Sentence:
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 13 years
Non-Parole-Period
9 years 6 months
Relevant Orders:
offender registration for 15 years
application for leave to appeal was filed approximately seven and a half months
out of time. The applicant therefore applies to
this Court for an extension of
time in which to bring an application for leave to appeal against his sentence.
The Court must consider
the length of and reasons for the delay together with
the merits of the proposed appeal.
In support of his application, the applicant relied upon an affidavit sworn by
him and an affidavit sworn by his solicitor. The delay
was sought to be
explained by the applicant’s mental health issues, time associated with
receiving advice, time associated
with obtaining funding for an appeal, and time
associated with securing relevant materials from the trial court.
respondent submitted that while the explanation for the delay in filing is not
entirely satisfactory, the application for extension
of time should be
determined by the merits of the proposed grounds of appeal. I will proceed upon
the basis proposed by the respondent.
For the reasons which follow, I have
concluded the proposed grounds of appeal are without merit. Granting leave for
an extension
of time to bring an application for leave to appeal against
sentence would therefore be futile.
Circumstances of the offending
complainant was aged 40 at the time of the offending. The complainant was
separated from her partner and lived at an address with
her three children, then
aged five, six and nine.
applicant at the time of the offending was aged 40 and lived with his partner
and children, the youngest of which was a baby.
applicant was effectively a stranger to the complainant. On 7 May 2022, the
complainant attended a party where she was introduced
to the applicant and his
wife by a mutual friend, AC. After the party, the complainant, AC, the applicant
and his wife all shared
a taxi. During the taxi ride, the applicant and his wife
had a verbal dispute. The complainant and AC got out at the complainant’s
house. The applicant and his wife continued in the taxi to their home.
message on Facebook Messenger from the applicant
offering an apology for the
argument that took place between him and his wife in the taxi.
that same day, the complainant received another unsolicited message on Facebook
Messenger where the applicant said: ‘How
would you feel if I asked to see
you again? Going to be honest here, I found you very attractive!’. The
complainant declined
the applicant’s offer, and the applicant sent another
message stating, ‘Ok, I accept your decision but just so you know
wife] and I have a don’t ask don’t tell policy so no problems from
28 May 2022, the complainant met AC and told her about the messages she had
received from the applicant.
six months after the applicant first met the complainant, on
18 November 2022 at 9:18pm, the complainant was at home with her
children and heard a knock at the door. The complainant answered it thinking
that it was her ex-partner visiting. When the
complainant opened the door, she
saw the applicant outside staring at her. The applicant said nothing and
attempted to enter the
house. As the applicant attempted to enter the house, the
complainant pushed him back and screamed ‘What are you doing?’.
The applicant said ‘Sorry, wrong house’ and walked away. The
complainant slammed the front door shut and called her friend
AC to tell her
that the applicant had attended her house.
19 December 2022, the applicant was with his partner and children in the
evening. Then at 7:45pm, the applicant left his house
and drove to the
complainant’s house where he arrived at approximately 8pm.
complainant was in her kitchen when she heard one of her children say,
‘Why is daddy here?’. The complainant walked
to the front door to
see the applicant entering her house. The applicant walked towards the
complainant in an angry manner. The complainant,
seeing the applicant in her
house, said ‘get out of my
applicant said to the complainant ‘get upstairs now’. The
complainant said to the applicant that she was not going
upstairs with him and
attempted to get away by walking backwards. As the complainant retreated, the
applicant approached her, struck
her across the face and then pinned her against
the window. Whilst pinning the complainant against the window, the applicant
used one hand and placed it around the complainant’s throat and
started strangling her.1F
keeping the complainant in a stranglehold, the applicant continued to hit the
complainant across the face whilst repeatedly
saying ‘you’re going
to suck my dick’. This offending was in the presence of the
complainant’s children.
complainant’s nine-year-old son, CG, who was witnessing the offending
said, ‘please don’t kill my mum’
and ‘I beg of
you’. Upon seeing CG and hearing his pleas, the applicant released the
complainant’s neck and pushed
CG, causing him to fall over and graze his
The applicant then returned
to strangling the complainant. The applicant was gasping for
applicant then grabbed the complainant by her hair and tried to drag her
upstairs by her hair. The applicant also took this opportunity
to remove the
complainant’s jumper.
to pull the complainant upstairs, the applicant instead dragged the complainant
into the toilet which was opposite the staircase
and pushed her onto the toilet.
in the toilet, the applicant stood in front of the complainant and attempted to
close the door. The complainant blocked the door
from being closed with her leg.
At the complainant’s resistance, the applicant once again started
strangling the complainant
with one hand whilst slapping her across the face
with the other hand.4F
applicant repeatedly said to the complainant ‘you’re going to suck
my dick’. The complainant said, ‘whatever
you put in my mouth I will
bite’. She continued to refuse to comply with the applicant’s
demands. Each time the complainant
refused, the applicant slapped her across the
strangling the complainant,5F
applicant squeezed one of her
He then let go of the
complainant and tried to unbutton his pants. Whilst doing this, the applicant
said, ‘you’re going
to suck my dick’. The complainant
responded, ‘whatever you put in my mouth I will
the applicant was unbuttoning his pants, the complainant kicked the applicant in
the genital region in an attempt to defend herself.
Seemingly unaffected, the
applicant started strangling the complainant again and resumed slapping
this point, the complainant felt like she was going to stop breathing and said,
‘you’re going to kill me’. The
applicant stopped strangling
her and whilst she was bent over coughing, the applicant removed her t-shirt and
bra by pulling them
over her head. The complainant bit and scratched the
applicant and ripped the collar of his t-shirt whilst trying to defend herself
and told her son, CG to get her mobile phone.
buttocks with both hands.9F
returned to the toilet and gave his mother a phone, but it was an old phone
without a SIM card. The complainant repeated her request
to get her phone.
returned with his mother’s working phone and said that his father was
coming to the house.
complainant attempted to call triple zero but could not unlock her phone because
she was shaking so much. The applicant grabbed
one of the complainant’s
and the complainant
was able to move away and leave the toilet through the gap in the door.
applicant departed.
complainant called triple zero and reported what had happened. She told her
children not to open the door unless it was the police.
8:03pm, the complainant’s ex-partner also called the police to report the
footage obtained from a neighbouring property depicts the applicant arriving at
the complainant’s house at approximately
8pm and departing after
approximately five minutes.
bedroom and lay in bed with his partner. The applicant
was sweating and told her
that he had just been for a run. He then got into the shower.
around 8:11pm the police arrived at the complainant’s house and spoke with
her. An ambulance took the complainant to hospital.
The complainant had
sustained approximately 29 injuries as a result of the applicant’s attack,
mainly abrasions, swelling,
tenderness and bruising.
of interview
20 December 2022, the applicant was arrested and participated in a record of
interview with the police.
applicant denied attending the complainant’s house and stated that he had
done nothing wrong. During the interview, the
applicant told the police that he
was trying to keep fit and healthy by walking and running. The applicant said
that on the night
in question he had gone for a walk or run around the block and
described a route that he had taken but declined to draw a map of
applicant’s guilty plea was entered on 23 October 2023 and the first plea
hearing was held on 22 February 2024.
plea hearing was adjourned to 22 April 2024 to enable a Forensicare report to be
obtained. On that day, the plea resumed, and
was completed.
I have said, the sentencing judge sentenced the applicant on 10 May 2024.
Judge’s examination of the objective gravity of the
judge concluded that the offending overall was ‘extremely
serious’.11F
Honour found that the applicant arrived at the complainant’s home
‘in what could only be described as something of
a rage, but coldly and
deliberately set about to, in effect, punish her for some perceived
slight’.12F
found that the offending appears to have been largely driven by anger towards
the complainant. This stemmed from a perception
that he had been rejected by
her, or by a grievance that the complainant had been discussing him with
sentencing judge found that this was a serious example of aggravated burglary
because: the applicant intended to commit an offence
involving a sexual assault
at the time of entry;14F
applicant walked into the home with a sense of entitlement; the offence occurred
later in the evening when the complainant and
her family were totally
unprepared;15F
the complainant
was a vulnerable woman at home with three children and the applicant knew this;
and the applicant showed no regard
for their right to feel safe in their
the end of her reasons, the sentencing judge said of the applicant:
Whilst you were clearly very angry, there is a sinister aspect to the way that
the offending seems to have taken place. You were
cold, callous and you were
determined.17F
sentencing judge took the view that the offence of reckless conduct endangering
a person (the strangulations) was a serious example
of this offence. She found
that ‘in strangling her while striking her, [the applicant] exhibited a
viciousness and an unrestrained
anger that is extremely
concerning’.18F
concluded that ‘the potential to cause serious injury or indeed for this
force applied to the neck to be fatal, is enormous.
It was incredibly
sentencing judge also concluded that the sexual offences were serious examples
of these offences. She noted that the sexual aggression
disturbing.20F
It occurred in
the presence of young children which the sentencing judge found to be
‘brazen’, ‘entitled’,
‘despicable’, and
terrifying’.21F
applicant removed the complainant’s clothing with the children present, or
at least outside the door. His conduct was ‘humiliating
degrading’.22F
applicant was confronted by a nine-year-old child but was ‘not deviated
from [his] objective — which was to punish
and humiliate [the
complainant]’.23F
the applicant assaulted the young child. The sentencing judge found that this
‘is also a serious example of this less
offence’.24F
sentencing judge accepted that the offending was of short duration, and that the
applicant during the offending made ‘no
efforts to conceal [his] identity
nor to hide what [he] had done, and that it was
unsophisticated’.25F
sentencing judge emphasised, however, that it must have felt like an eternity to
the complainant and her children which will
have a long-lasting impact on
sentencing judge said the applicant’s offending ‘bespeaks the total
lack of regard [the applicant] had towards [the
complainant] and her young
family’.27F
The applicant
‘showed absolutely no regard for her right or that of her children to feel
safe in their home’,28F
and ‘appear[ed] to have virtually no empathy’ for how the
complainant or her children felt while she was being
the sentencing judge concluded that the applicant’s moral culpability was
Honour said that it was an ‘understatement’ to say that the
offending had a ‘profound’ impact on the complainant
and her family,
noting that an entire family — including children — had experienced
a ‘terrifying and traumatic
ordeal’.31F
This left them
describing post-traumatic stress, panic, fear, sadness, anxiety, frustration and
anger after having been violated
criminal history
applicant admitted to a prior criminal history concerning a conviction of
recklessly causing injury — relating to a fight
in a pub whilst
intoxicated — for which he was sentenced to a Community Correction Order
(CCO) for a period of 12 months. The
applicant also admitted to other interstate
offences for driving and ‘nuisance’
offences.33F
Judge’s examination of the applicant’s subjective
prepared by two forensic psychiatrists — from Dr Nicholas Owens and
Dr Sophie Reeves (Forensicare) — were tendered
at the plea.
were sought to be enlivened
The report of
Dr Owens revealed that the applicant suffers from PTSD, substance use disorder,
gambling disorder, violent and antisocial
behaviour consistent with the traits
of a personality disorder.34F
However, Dr Owens’ opinion was that the applicant’s actions were not
caused or determined by any
disorder.35F
was not engaged, the sentencing judge took these matters into
account as being relevant to the applicant’s mental
her reasons, the sentencing judge dealt at length with the issues relating to
the applicant’s insight into the offending,
acceptance of responsibility,
remorse, his motivations for the offending and his consequential prospects for
rehabilitation. In this
regard, her Honour exhaustively examined the opinions
contained within the medical reports. These issues are agitated at length under
a number of the proposed grounds of the appeal.
it to say at this point, that the sentencing judge found that the applicant had
shown a lack of insight into the sexual offending,
and limited insight into the
offending conduct generally.37F
He had demonstrated an ‘unpreparedness to accept responsibility for what
he had done’,38F
‘very little
remorse’.39F
She observed
that he denied the sexual offending and minimised his behaviour to the two
psychiatrists.40F
extent, the sentencing judge found that the applicant had also minimised his
behaviour and engaged in victim
blaming.41F
sentencing judge ultimately accepted that it stood to his credit that the
applicant had at least recognised that the strangulations
were inappropriate,
saying to Dr Owens that he was ashamed and disgusted that it got to that
The sentencing judge
also accepted that the applicant had taken steps towards managing his anger and
towards progressing his rehabilitation.
This included proactively undergoing
courses while in custody.43F
Honour concluded, however, that the applicant’s unwillingness to take full
responsibility, as well as his limited insight,
did not bode well for his
prospects of rehabilitation. The sentencing judge finished by saying that she
agreed with the applicant’s
counsel’s concession that ‘it is
difficult to say that [his] prospects of rehabilitation are anything more than
guarded’.44F
relation to the guilty plea, the sentencing judge found that it was ‘of
significant utilitarian
however, that it was a strong prosecution case and ‘the likelihood of
[him] being detected and [his] offending uncovered
was particularly
making of the registration order
sentencing judge found that the applicant posed a real risk to the sexual safety
of one or more persons in the community and made
a registration order pursuant
Sex Offenders Registration Act
I will expand upon
her reasons in this respect in further detail below under ground 4.
Judge’s examination of the applicable sentencing principles
sentencing judge addressed the principles of proportionality and totality
observing that each offence warranted individual punishment,
while acknowledging
that the offending occurred as part of a brief single episode which should be
reflected in a degree of
concurrency.48F
discussing the need to balance various considerations, the sentencing judge
noted the pre-eminence of general deterrence, just
punishment and denunciation
for serious offending of this kind — sexual attacks upon vulnerable women
in their homes.49F
said the applicant’s conduct was ‘reprehensible’ and the court
‘denounces’ his
conduct.50F
sentencing judge also stated that, in the applicant’s case, specific
deterrence and the protection of the community also
had to be given some weight
given his limited
insight.51F
acknowledged that these considerations needed to be balanced ‘as far as
possible’ with the public interest in ensuring
the applicant’s
rehabilitation and reintegration into
society.52F
1: The judge erred in sentencing the applicant on the basis that his emotional
state was ‘cold’ during the offending
Applicant’s
submissions
applicant seeks to impugn the following highlighted remarks of the sentencing
Dr Reeves opines that your level of emotional arousal at the time precluded you
from engaging in rational thinking and, in her words
‘disregarding’
[the complainant’s] children in that moment. In my assessment of your
conduct, it went beyond simply
disregarding her children. [The
complainant’s nine year old son] had asked you to stop. He had begged you.
Yet, once you had
pushed him aside, you
actively persisted in your offending
as was evidenced by the repeated strangulations
Whilst you were clearly
there is a sinister aspect to the way that the offending
seems to have taken place. You were cold, callous and you were
applicant submitted that the reports of Dr Owens and Dr Reeves evidenced that
the applicant was experiencing a number of stressors
at the time, which included
sleep-deprivation, depression, drug related mood instability and disinhibition.
He also had a personality
disorder, which involved features of impulsivity and
emotional volatility.
applicant then relies upon the following passages in the Forensicare Report of
While alcohol or drug intoxication do not seem to have played a direct role in
the offence, it appears that [the applicant] was
experiencing some stressors
that likely negatively impacted him to some degree by virtue of reduced control
of his emotions, impaired
judgement, and increased impulsiveness.
It is concerning that [the applicant] behaved in the violent way he did in the
presence of the complainant’s children. This
perhaps points to the level
of emotional arousal he was experiencing at that time which thus precluded him
from engaging in rational
thinking, and led to him disregarding her children in
that moment.
applicant then submitted in his written case that the fact that he was not
deterred by the presence of the children, or the attempted
intervention of one
of the children, did not as a matter of logic point to ‘coldness’.
Rather his behaviour was, the
applicant contends, explained by the fact that he
was in a state of heated emotional arousal.
applicant further says that, as the sentencing judge’s finding that he was
‘cold’ served to increase the objective
seriousness of the offending
and his moral culpability, it was necessary for the judge to be satisfied of
this matter beyond reasonable
doubt. The evidence did not allow for this, the
applicant contends.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submits that the sentencing judge’s use of the word
‘cold’ did no more than express her Honour’s
assessment of the
applicant’s unyielding determination and persistence to attack and
humiliate the complainant in front of
her children.
respondent submits that being cold and offending as a result of anger and
emotional arousal are not mutually exclusive and that
her Honour’s remarks
are in line with Dr Reeves’ own assessment that his actions
‘reflect a callous indifference
towards the complainant’.
respondent further submits that regardless of the meaning that might be ascribed
to that descriptor, it did not materially bear
on her Honour’s detailed
and careful assessment of the nature and gravity of the applicant’s
analysis of this complaint is framed by several points of reference.
by any objective measure, this offending showed an unrelenting determination to
violate the complainant in pursuit of an objective
to punish and her for a
perceived rejection or
grievance.54F
This design was
pursued in the face of the complainant’s resistance, her children’s
presence and her son’s intervention.
In my view, by using the descriptor
‘cold’, the sentencing judge was seeking to convey that his
behaviour reflected
a callous indifference to the
welfare of the complainant and her children and a want of empathy.
sentencing judge made other remarks which support this interpretation:
You inexplicably left your family home, travelled the reasonably short distance
to the home of a woman you had met once. She was
barely more than a stranger to
you, yet you arrived at her home in
what could only be described
something of a rage, but coldly and deliberately set about to, in effect,
punish her for some perceived
That you behaved so violently towards her in the presence of her young
children, and the simple fact that you were
by having a little
girl and two young boys witness your actions, witness your aggression —
your sexual aggression —
is disturbing
. Even when confronted by her
young son at the age of nine, who bravely sought to help and defend his mother,
not be deviated from your objective
— which was to punish
and humiliate [the
complainant].56F
I have said, by any objective assessment, the characterisation of the offending
in this way was correct.
Dr Reeves’ opinions about the reduction in the applicant’s control
and emotions were heavily qualified. Having expressed
applicant’s violent behaviour in the presence of the children, Dr Reeves
opined that this ‘
perhaps points
’ to the level of emotional
precluding him from engaging in rational thinking. Dr Reeves
also says that the other stressors are likely to have negatively impacted
to some degree
’ by virtue of reduced control. The use of
such cautious language suggests that Dr Reeves’ conclusions were
these views did not prevent Dr Reeves from also expressing the view that:
[The applicant’s] actions reflect a
indifference
towards the [complainant]
and likely problematic attitudes towards women
including hypermasculinity.57F
evidence of Dr Reeves thus allowed for the conclusion that the offending was
the fact that it was committed within the context of
anger and emotional arousal. These concepts are not binary. The sentencing
observations to that effect were entirely consistent with Dr
Reeves’ overall opinion.
the characterisation of the applicant’s offending as cold and callously
indifferent illuminated the applicant’s moral
culpability, subject to the
application of any recognised principles which might moderate culpability such
. The applicant did not seek to enliven
) principles at the plea. He eschewed the
application of
no attack is made upon her Honour’s conclusion that the applicant’s
moral culpability was
the judge’s observation was made having regard to all of the evidence
concerning the offending, not just the pushing of her
son. The conduct bespoke
of a purposeful and rational attack:
(a) His offending was motivated. Dr Reeves gave evidence that the
applicant’s sexual offences appear to have been largely driven
towards the complainant, which stemmed from a perceived rejection or grievance.
He was thus ‘wanting to punish and
humiliate the complainant’. He
engaged in the offending conduct for a reason albeit an appalling one.
(b) Even if this was not a long-considered crime, it is wrong to say that this
offending involved no planning or premeditation. There
was a degree of
forethought. The applicant made a decision to enter the complainant’s home
with the design of immediately confronting,
overpowering and sexually attacking
the complainant.
(c) The applicant perceived that isolating the complainant upstairs would
facilitate his design to sexually assault her. This involved
consideration and
calculation.
(d) Having failed to force the complainant upstairs, he immediately shifted his
efforts to confine her in the toilet. This showed
a capacity to assess his
surroundings and adapt his decision-making.
(e) The applicant’s actions were also responsive to the conduct of the
complainant during the attack. Each time the complainant
refused his sexual
demands, the applicant slapped her across the face and strangled her. This shows
an ongoing deliberate design
to violently subdue the complainant with a view to
making her yield to his sexual demands.
(f) There is then the evidence that shows that the applicant made the decision
to desist in his attack, and depart from her home,
in the face of the
complainant’s significant resistance, and upon learning that the
complainant’s ex-husband had been
telephoned.
the light of the above factors, it was open to the judge to characterise the
offending in the way she did and to measure the applicant’s
culpability accordingly. If this was required to be accepted beyond reasonable
doubt, then in my view the judge was bound to
characterise the offending in this
way. There was no other reasonable view of the evidence.
2: The judge erred in taking into account, in relation to charge 2 on the
indictment, that the risk of serious injury or death
was enormous
Applicant’s
submissions
ground seeks to impugn the characterisation given by the sentencing judge to the
conduct which founded charge 2. The relevant
passage is as follows:
Whilst the offence of reckless conduct endanger persons carries a lesser
penalty than the other conduct, I regard it as a serious
example of this
offence. You continued to apply pressure to [the complainant’s] neck,
whilst you slapped her. You did this
multiple times. She could not breathe. In
strangling her while striking her, you exhibited a viciousness and an
unrestrained anger
that is extremely concerning.
The potential to cause
serious injury or indeed for this force applied to the neck to be fatal, is
was incredibly
applicant makes two complaints about the italicised words.
says there was no basis in the evidence to make a finding that the risk of
serious injury was ‘enormous’.
applicant further submits that the reference to the potential for force applied
to the neck to be
indicated that the judge sentenced the applicant
for the more serious offence of reckless conduct endangering life (for which the
maximum penalty is 10 years’
imprisonment)60F
rather than
reckless conduct endangering persons (for which the maximum penalty is 5
imprisonment).61F
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submits that it is an uncontroversial observation that strangulation
can be fatal and that the risk was indeed, enormous,
in circumstances where the
applicant applied pressure to the complainant’s neck multiple times to the
extent that she could
not breathe.
respondent submits that the sentencing judge ‘well appreciated’ that
the charge on the indictment to which the applicant
was pleading guilty was the
offence of reckless conduct endangering serious injury, carrying a maximum
penalty of 5 years’
imprisonment.
the respondent also points out that, pursuant to
, the definition of ‘serious injury’ also includes an injury
which ‘endangers life’. Her Honour’s reference
to the risk of
serious injury or death by strangulation was an appropriate and proper
observation to make.
endangerment offence is about risk of
risk of harm to which
is directed is ‘serious injury’. The
applicant, by his plea, has accepted that there must have been an appreciable
that the complainant would be ‘seriously injured’ by his
strangulation(s).
Relevantly,
‘serious injury’ means an ‘injury’ (including the
cumulative effect of more than one injury) that
‘endangers life’ or
is ‘substantial and
protracted’.63F
is defined to include unconsciousness, substantial pain, and impairment of
bodily function.64F
Self-evidently, the applicant’s acts of strangulation clearly involved an
impairment of bodily function, namely the impairment
of the complainant’s
capacity to breathe.
definition of ‘serious injury’ under
thus invites an inquiry into whether the applicant’s acts of
strangulation placed the complainant at risk of an injury that
life’ or is ‘substantial and protracted’. It follows that the
question of whether the injury ‘endangers
life’ falls within the
observation by the sentencing judge that there was a potential ‘for this
force applied to the neck to be fatal’ is
consistent with the sentencing
judge merely seeking to express the degree of potential danger of ‘serious
which included placing the complainant at risk of an injury
which ‘endangers life’.
these circumstances, the judge’s observation does not betray a
misunderstanding on her part about which endangerment offence
for which she was
punishing the applicant.
judge made several references to the charge of conduct endangering persons
contrary to
, and to the correct
maximum penalty of 5 years’
imprisonment.65F
applicant’s complaint that there was no basis in the evidence to make a
finding that the risk of ‘serious injury’
was ‘enormous’
is also without substance. As her Honour noted in the impugned passage, the
applicant applied pressure
to the complainant’s neck a number of times,
and the complainant could not
breathe.66F
The complainant was
‘gasping for air’, and she said she felt like she was going to stop
breathing. At one point, she
said to the applicant, ‘You’re going to
kill me’.67F
persistent and repeated strangulations encompassed by this charge as well as the
significant impairment caused to the complainant’s
ability to breathe, it
was at least open to the sentencing judge to quantify the risk of ‘serious
injury’ as being of
that order.
proposed ground is not reasonably arguable.
3: The judge erred in her assessment of the prospects of
rehabilitation
Applicant’s
submissions
the question of the applicant’s prospects, the judge concluded:
[G]iven the findings of Dr Owens, coupled with your lack of insight, your
counsel concedes that it is difficult to say that your
prospects of
rehabilitation are anything more than guarded. I
applicant submits that the assessment of the sentencing judge — that the
applicant’s prospects for rehabilitation
are ‘no better than
guarded’ — was not open and that his prospects of rehabilitation
were at least ‘reasonable’.
is so despite the concession made by defence counsel at the plea that his
prospects could be described as ‘no better than
guarded’. The
applicant acknowledges this Court will not lightly entertain submissions
contrary to those advanced in the court
below, but says this Court should do so
here. The applicant submits that the concession was not one on which the trial
judge should
have relied.
make good his contention, the applicant points to a number of factors.
applicant had no prior convictions for sexual offending or violence against
women. He had complied with a CCO for his only prior
matter, and had not
previously been imprisoned. A prison sentence was likely to have a salutary
effect. The sentencing judge failed
to take this into account.
her assessment of his prospects, the sentencing judge also mischaracterised the
applicant’s attitude towards the strangulations.
The sentencing judge said
that the applicant appeared to boast about his knowledge and ability to kill
another human by strangling.
The judge said this reflects a disturbing lack of
insight into your own
offending.69F
The applicant
submits that it was a mischaracterisation by the sentencing judge to say that
the applicant was ‘boasting’.
The applicant submits he was simply
answering questions, explaining his feelings and was not minimising his conduct
or attributing
blame to the complainant. Whatever he said, it did not reflect
poorly upon his attitude or prospects, the applicant says.
the applicant says that the sentencing judge placed too much emphasis on the
applicant’s failure to acknowledge the sexual
offending. The applicant
argues that an explanation for this is that this issue was difficult for him to
discuss and accept. Further
the applicant says that he had expressed shame and
disgust for his violence. The applicant submits that whilst not comprehensive,
there was some genuine remorse and empathy from the applicant for the
complainant and her son.
the applicant points to the fact that Dr Reeves’ risk assessment for
violent reoffending was broadly described as ‘moderate’,
Owens’ assessment placed this risk as ‘high’. The applicant
complains that the sentencing judge adopted
Dr Owens’ risk assessment
(high) over that of Dr Reeves (moderate) without explanation or justification.
In any event, it is
said that the sentencing judge failed to appreciate the
significance of the limitations on the risk assessments conducted by the
psychiatrists for violent reoffending. Those assessments were directed towards
the risk on release in the short term in the absence
of therapeutic support. The
applicant says they had a limited bearing on an assessment of the
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation
in the longer term.
the applicant made this submission:
[T]he judge erred in giving more weight to the fact that the applicant had
committed sexual offending out of anger than she did
to Dr Reeves’
opinions that the applicant’s sexual offending was not driven by fantasy
or by any deviant sexual interest
and that the physical violence was not driven
by sexually sadistic interests or thoughts, or to Dr Reeves’ assessment
the applicant was ‘a below average risk of sexual reoffending’.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submitted that the reports of Dr Owens and the report of Dr Reeves
provided a sound evidentiary basis for, if not compelled,
her Honour’s
finding that the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation could not be
described as ‘anything more
than guarded’. The limitations of their
assessments were taken into account.
respondent says the sentencing judge had proper regard to the applicant’s
previous criminal history and to the completed
CCO. In light of the nature and
gravity of the offending, the evidence as to the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation, and
the applicant’s lack of insight and remorse (at least
as to the sexual offending), her Honour was entitled to afford the
applicant’s
limited prior criminal history less weight in the assessment
of his prospects of rehabilitation, if indeed her Honour did so.
assessment — that the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation could
not be described as ‘anything more than
guarded’ was justified in
light of the nature and gravity of the offending, the applicant’s lack of
insight, his minimisation
of his conduct, and his continued denial of the sexual
offending and lack of remorse.
Honour did not make a finding as to the applicant ‘boasting’ about
his ‘knowledge and ability to kill another
human by strangling’. She
found that the applicant ‘appeared to boast’ and was entitled to use
this when considering
the applicant’s continued lack of empathy and
minimisation of his conduct.
Honour did not ignore the evidence as to remorse, insight and prospects of
rehabilitation that stood in the applicant’s
favour, including the
evidence that he felt ‘disgusted, embarrassed and ashamed’ of his
violent behaviour and that he
had taken steps towards his reform.
respondent submits, however, that her Honour’s finding that the
applicant’s continued denial of the sexual offending
suggests a total lack
of remorse for much of his conduct and an absence of insight into his behaviour
was readily available on the
evidence. It properly informed, the respondent
contends, her Honour’s conclusion as to the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation.
The respondent points out that less weight will be attributed to
prospects of rehabilitation if there is a lack of genuine
remorse.70F
Honour gave proper consideration to the methodologies employed, and conclusions
expressed, by both Dr Owens and Dr Reeves. The
tenor of the respondent’s
submission was that the sentencing judge did not prefer the risk assessment for
violent reoffending
of Dr Owens (high) over that of Dr Reeves (moderate). She
was informed by the opinions expressed by both experts.
weight was given to the finding that the applicant’s sexual offending
occurred due to his anger rather than fantasy or
deviant sexual interest. The
respondent says that this finding was, plainly, a concerning feature of the
applicant’s conduct,
and was relevant to both the assessment of the nature
and circumstances of the offending and the offender’s prospects of
rehabilitation.
the respondent contends that the concession made by the applicant’s
counsel at the plea about his prospects of rehabilitation
was significant.
is no substance to this proposed ground.
applicant’s case under this ground largely rests upon the evidence —
which the sentencing judge accepted — that
the applicant had taken steps
towards his rehabilitation, which included undertaking courses to manage his
emotions and anger as
well as drug
abstinence,71F
applicant informed Dr Owens that he ‘regretted the
offending’,72F
the applicant had expressed some shame in relation to the strangulation of the
complainant.73F
difficulty for the applicant is that these findings were heavily qualified.
his plea, the applicant continued to deny to both experts that he committed the
sexual offending or that he entered the home
with the intention to sexually
assault the complainant.
spoke with Dr Owens in January 2024. Dr Owens observed that at this time there
was evidence of limitations of insight into his
offending. While the applicant
informed Dr Owens that he ‘regretted the offending’, he denied that
he engaged in a sexual
assault, or that he had any intent to sexually assault
the complainant.
applicant saw Dr Reeves, over two months later, in March 2024. And yet, the
applicant continued to deny sexually offending against
the complainant. He
persisted with his claims that he did not go to the complainant’s home
with the intention of sexually assaulting
Unsurprisingly,
the sentencing judge said:
Most concerning is the fact that you appear to have very little remorse for
your offending. Indeed, although you have pleaded guilty
to these offences, when
discussing the offending with psychiatrists, in large part, you simply could not
accept responsibility for
what you had done. You deny the sexual offending at
all. This suggests a total lack of remorse for much of your conduct whilst
the premises and an absence of insight into your behaviour.
the judge accepted that ‘discussing and accepting responsibility for
abhorrent conduct may initially have been
difficult’,74F
sentencing judge was plainly correct to find that his persistent and repeated
denials over a course of time were matters which
reflected upon her assessment
of his insight, remorse and his rehabilitation prospects.
is true that the applicant did express some shame in relation to the
strangulation of the complainant but even this was greatly
qualified. As the
judge recognised:
Even when you discussed your strangulation of [the complainant], your account
to Dr Owen[s] was that when she grabbed your shirt
you got into a scuffle
which got out of control. This seems to be something of victim blaming. However,
in this regard, you at least
recognised that what you did was inappropriate,
saying that you are ashamed and disgusted that it got to that stage. You also
Dr Owens that you regretted the offending. I accept that you
is also nothing in the complaint that her Honour erred when she said the
applicant was ‘appearing to boast’ about
his knowledge and skills in
the field of strangulation. Having discussed the enormous risks involved in the
strangulations, the sentencing
judge said:
Yet you seem to be dismissive of this, telling Dr Reeves that it was not your
intention to kill her. This reflects a disturbing
lack of insight into your own
offending. You seek to minimise your conduct whilst simultaneously appearing to
boast about your knowledge
and ability to kill another human by strangling. I
will return to this in a
she returned to this topic, the sentencing judge continued:
[Y]ou attempted to minimise it explaining that you had no intention of killing
her, and that your grip on her neck was not strong,
refuting [the
complainant’s] account that she was having trouble breathing.
Concerningly, you told Dr Reeves that you are aware
as to how to kill
someone via certain movements by virtue of your army training, but you did not
engage any of these
movements.77F
this issue was being discussed at the plea hearing her Honour said:
I don’t know if the right word is ‘boasting’ but talking up
his own skills as somebody who has army training,
that he’s aware of how
to kill someone via certain movements, and he didn’t engage in those
movements — as if somehow
that reduces his moral culpability, that he
knows how he could have killed somebody, and he didn’t do that on that
I mean, how is the complainant to know that, first of all?
seems to me that the debate about whether the applicant’s comments to Dr
Reeves constituted boasting or apparent boasting
is somewhat of a red herring.
On any view, the applicant was more concerned to focus upon the harm he could
have done to the complainant
had he tried, rather than upon the gravity of the
assault upon the complainant. It was well open to the judge to infer that this
reflected his ‘disturbing lack of insight’.
was also evidence that he engaged in victim blaming. The sentencing judge gave
an example that the applicant was angry that
the complainant ‘had not
taken ownership of what [the applicant] had perceived was her flirting with
sentencing judge was therefore confronted with the reality that the applicant
had ‘continue[d] to deny [his] wrongdoing,
particularly regarding the
sexual offending, to
professionals’,79F
demonstrated little insight into much of his
offending,80F
had shown limited
remorse, minimised his offending (which he was prepared to acknowledge) and
engaged in victim blaming.
aspects of the applicant’s ‘extremely serious
offending’81F
unexplained. As the sentencing judge said, his decision to leave his family
to the home of a woman he had met
once, who was barely more than a stranger, and to then viciously sexually and
violently attack
inexplicable.82F
The judge noted
that ‘this anger is somewhat perplexing given the very limited contact you
had had with her, and the elapse
the sentencing judge’s concerns about the applicant’s behaviour and
his prospects were not allayed
[d]espite the opinion of Dr Reeves (based on the testing conducted), that you
are a below average risk of sexual re-offending; the
fact that your anger
manifested itself in sexual offending — desire to punish and humiliate the
[complainant], gives rise to
concerns.84F
concerns clearly and logically impacted the sentencing judge’s assessment
of the applicant’s prospects. She said:
The unwillingness to take full responsibility does not bode well for your
prospects of rehabilitation. It reflects a lack of insight
into your sexual
offending, and limited insight into the offending conduct that you are willing
to admit to the experts, and the
gravity of your conduct as a
sentencing judge was correct to conclude that the ‘[applicant’s]
refusal to acknowledge [his] sexual offending strengthens
the overall
risk’ of his
reoffending.86F
is wrong to assert — as the applicant does — that the sentencing
judge favoured Dr Owens’ assessment of his risk
for violence over
that assessment conducted by Dr Reeves, or that she failed to appreciate
the significance of the limitations on
the risk assessments for violent
reoffending. I see no evidence of that.
Owens regarded the risk of violent offending in the next six to 12 months as
‘high’, whereas Dr Reeves considered that
the risk of further
violence (not time limited) was ‘moderate’. Dr Reeves also spoke
physical violence within the context of drug
use and life stressors, including relationship conflict. Suffice it to say,
report was particularly favourable to the applicant. Both supported a
finding that the risk of further violence was real. The sentencing
explicitly took into account what had been said in both reports. In my view, she
ultimately made her own assessment, having
regard to all the
evidence.87F
limitations on the predictive assessments were canvassed in the reports.
Dr Owens filed a supplementary report (dated 17 March
2024) about this in
response to a question raised by the judge. He clarified the relationship
between the applicant’s risk
of reoffending within the next six to 12
months (high), with his longer term risk of violent offending. He spoke of the
the risk assessment for the next six to 12 months (high) was an
indication of the degree of effort required to mitigate that risk.
inferred that the judge took into account these explanations.
last submission made by the applicant is a little unclear.
understand the complaint to essentially be that the sentencing judge did not
give sufficient weight to the opinion of Dr Reeves
that the applicant’s
risk of sexual reoffending is ‘somewhat lower than the average sexual
offender’.88F
applicant seems to be saying that this assessment rests upon Dr Reeves’
related finding that the sexual offending was not
driven by sexually sadistic
interests, thoughts, or fantasies. I take the applicant to say that the import
of Dr Reeves’ opinion
is that the risk of sexual reoffending was thus
modest — or even remote because it was not driven by sexually sadistic
thoughts, or fantasies.
the applicant then appears to complain that, by focussing upon the evidence that
the offending was driven by anger, the
sentencing judge has overlooked the true
import of Dr Reeves’ opinion that the risk of sexual reoffending was small
it was not fantasy driven or driven by deviant sexual
interest.89F
do not agree.
think that the applicant’s argument seeks to characterise Dr Reeves’
assessment as to the applicant’s risk of
sexual reoffending —
‘somewhat lower than the average sexual offender’ — as being
more favourable than it
actually is.
this opinion does not itself imply that the risk of sexually reoffending was
fanciful rather than real. While the risk may
not have been high, Dr Reeves did
not place the applicant at very low or negligible risk or use language of that
this opinion — that the applicant’s risk of sexual reoffending was
somewhat lower than the average sexual offender
— must in any event be
read with the balance of Dr Reeves’ report. Dr Reeves made observations
that the violent sexual
offending in this case was anger driven, and expressed
concerns about the applicant’s poor impulse control, his unmanaged anger
issues, and his attitudes towards women. Dr Reeves said
[The applicant’s] sexual offences appear to be largely driven by anger
towards the [complainant] that stemmed from either
a perceived rejection by her
(i.e., her declining his request to meet up with him, and her telling him to
leave when he attended
her house the night preceding his index offences), and/or
is in response to a perceived slight (e.g., the [complainant] not admitting
flirted with him, her disclosing to her friend that he had propositioned her,
which subsequently caused conflict in his relationship),
and [the applicant]
wanting to punish and humiliate the [complainant] (e.g., by demanding she
perform fellatio upon him). Notwithstanding
the above, I did not form the view
that [the applicant’s] anger is directed solely at females. His history is
suggestive of
pervasive difficulties managing his anger in different contexts,
and a propensity to anger quickly, as well as a pattern of poor
impulse control
and violence in his adolescence and adulthood.
little later, and having rejected the applicant’s claim that he had no
intention of sexually assaulting the complainant in
this case, Dr Reeves gave
this opinion:
[The applicant’s] actions also reflect a callous indifference towards the
[complainant], and likely problematic attitudes
towards women, including
hypermasculinity.
Reeves then went on to talk about her concerns that the applicant behaved in
such a violent way in the presence of the complainant’s
children. I have
examined this under ground 1.
Reeves also expressed the opinion that at the time of the offending the
applicant was experiencing some stressors (including relationship
conflict and
employment difficulties) as well as a background pattern of alcohol and drug
abuse. These likely negatively impacted
him — even indirectly — at
the time. Dr Reeves then expressed some uncertainty about how these will be
managed in the
It has yet to be tested whether [the applicant] can refrain from further drug
and alcohol use when released from prison, despite
his good intentions, and
positive engagement in treatment to date. Given his long history of
polysubstance and alcohol abuse, combined
with his history of coping with
emotions in largely destructive ways, relational difficulties, and limited
social supports, I envisage
that he is likely to need considerable support in
re-establishing himself when released into the community.
sentencing judge considered Dr Reeves’ report, as a whole, before
Despite the opinion of Dr Reeves (based on the testing conducted), that you are
a below average risk of sexual reoffending; the
fact that your anger manifested
itself in sexual offending — desire to punish and humiliate the
[complainant], gives rise to
concerns.90F
the evidential landscape, it was well open to the sentencing judge to hold these
concerns. I accept the respondent’s submission
that proper weight was
given by the sentencing judge to the finding that the applicant’s sexual
offending occurred due to his
anger (rather than fantasy or deviant sexual
interest) and that this was relevant to both the assessment of the nature and
circumstances
of the offending and the offender’s prospects of
rehabilitation.
turn now to the sentencing judge’s conclusion and to the concession by
counsel at the plea hearing. On the question of the
applicant’s prospects,
the judge said:
[G]iven the findings of Dr Owens, coupled with your lack of insight, your
counsel concedes that it is difficult to say that your
prospects of
rehabilitation are anything more than guarded. I
may be that the reference to the findings of Dr Owens is the basis of the
applicant’s contention that the sentencing judge
preferred Dr Owens’
findings over those of Dr Reeves. I do not think that it does. The
concession was made at the first plea
hearing. At that time only the Dr
Owens’ report was available. Hence the concession was made by reference to
the Dr Owens’
report. The concession was not, however, withdrawn at the
second hearing once Dr Reeves’ report became available. In any event,
applicant now seeks to be released from this concession.
my view, the applicant’s concession on the plea was made for good reason.
It was a realistic concession having regard to
the extremely grave nature of
this offending, the applicant’s poorly developed insight, his limited or
non-existent remorse
(especially for the sexual offending), and the fact that
the underlying reasons or motivations for this offending remain substantially
obscure and concerning. These matters reflected poorly on the applicant’s
prospects of rehabilitation. While there were some
differences in the findings
of Dr Owens and Dr Reeves, neither report was anything near wholly promising for
the applicant, and both
justified a guarded assessment about the
applicant’s future.
applicant’s limited criminal history had to be assessed within this
context. Her Honour clearly took his limited criminal
history into account as
well as the fact that he had completed his CCO for his prior
She made explicit
reference to this issue, twice. She outlined his history before she came to deal
with his prospects.93F
sentencing judge then returned to this within the context of specific
deterrence, noting ‘this is not the first time you
have been before the
courts, albeit that your previous offence was of a different
nature’.94F
The argument
that the sentencing judge failed to consider the applicant’s limited prior
criminal history in her assessment
of his prospects of rehabilitation cannot be
maintained. Given the other matters before the sentencing judge, his limited
history could only take him so far.
my view, the judge was clearly correct to harbour serious reservations about the
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation
despite his limited criminal
history. There is no merit to this ground. It is not arguable.
4: The judge erred in her application of
Sex Offenders
Registration Act 2004
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
The court may only make an order under this section if, after taking into
account any matter that it considers appropriate, it is
satisfied, beyond
reasonable doubt, that the person poses a risk to the sexual safety of one or
more persons or of the community.
operation of
was explained by this Court in
Bowden v The
The propositions
which emerge from
have more recently been summarised by this Court
Sayer v The Queen
as follows:
(a) The inquiry whether to make a registration order involves a two-stage
(b) The first question is whether the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the person poses a risk to sexual safety as
(c) For the court to be so satisfied, the risk must be
real rather than fanciful.
(d) The evaluation of risk is directed to the risk upon
the offender’s release into the community, assessed by what is presently
(e) The second question, which only arises if the court
is satisfied that the requisite risk exists, is whether the order should be
in all the relevant circumstances.
(f) The second stage involves balancing the identified
risk, having regard to the purpose of the Act, with the restrictions imposed
the offender’s right to enjoy freedom and autonomy of action.
(g) The balancing exercise
involves considering the magnitude and nature of the risk, including the degree
of likelihood of the risk
eventuating and the gravity of the harm, to be
balanced against the serious consequences for the
offender.96F
sentencing judge dealt with this application in her sentencing reasons. Having
rehearsed the arguments of the parties —
including the need for her to
consider the impact registration will have upon the applicant’s rights to
enjoy freedom and autonomy
— the judge concluded:
Pursuant to
Sex Offenders Registration Act
, the court may only
make an order under this section if, after taking into account any matter that
it considers appropriate, it is
satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
person poses a risk to the sexual safety of one or more persons or of the
The risk must be assessed to be real. It is not necessary to identify
a risk to a particular people or a particular class of people.
I have heard submissions from the prosecution urging me to exercise my
discretion and place you on the register, and also from your
counsel to the
effect that I should not take this step of placing a further restriction on your
right to enjoy freedom and autonomy.
Mr Sturges submits that bearing in mind the
opinion of a professional such as Dr Reeves, when balancing any risk posed, and
registration will have on your rights to freedom, he submits it does
not fall in favour of making such an order. I have had regard
parties’ submissions.
Taking into account the following factors:
(a) the nature and circumstances of your entire conduct that evening and in
particular, the sexual offending and the multiple instances
of strangulation;
(b) the fact that you were motivated by anger towards the complainant and sought
to punish and humiliate her; and that this anger
culminated in not just physical
violence, but sexual violence;
(c) your determination to carry out the offending notwithstanding the presence
of the complainant’s young children, and indeed
efforts by one of them to
(d) your unwillingness to acknowledge (beyond the plea of guilty itself) that
you engaged in any sort of sexual offending; your minimisation
of the acts you
do agree you committed and your inclination to blame the complainant; and
(e) your continued lack of insight into your conduct,
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that you do pose the relevant risk or
will upon your ultimate release, such as to warrant
the making of such an order.
In all of the circumstances, I have determined to make a registration order and
I will discuss with
the parties in a moment, the duration of that order under
the Act.97F
her reasons, the sentencing judge cited the decision of
context of the assessment of risk.
Applicant’s
submissions
applicant submits that any risk the applicant poses upon release did not warrant
sex offender registration.
is submitted that the sentencing judge failed to properly apply the first limb
test. In that regard, he submitted that factors (a) to (c)
identified by the judge (reproduced above at [
]) do not self-evidently point to a
relevant risk at the time of the applicant’s release after a substantial
term of imprisonment.
Moreover, the judge did not take into account the
applicant’s criminal history, Dr Reeves’ opinions regarding the
for the sexual offending, or Dr Reeves’ risk assessment
for sexual reoffending.
addition, the judge did not apply the second limb of the test. The applicant
submitted that the sentencing judge did not consider
the likelihood of the risk
eventuating, identify the gravity of the potential harm, or perform the
balancing exercise required.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent accepted that her Honour’s findings noted at factors
(a)–(c) (reproduced above) do not, of themselves,
necessarily sustain a
finding that the applicant will pose a risk to the sexual safety of one or more
persons or of the community
at the time of his release following a lengthy
period of incarceration. But the respondent says that the considerations at
(d)–(e) (reproduced above) directly sustain such a finding.
any event, all the considerations to which her Honour had regard were relevant
in the exercise of the discretion to make the order.
her Honour did not expressly articulate how the second limb of the
test was satisfied in this part of the reasons, her Honour noted the submissions
made by the applicant as to the requirement to consider
the restriction on the
applicant’s freedom and autonomy. The respondent also says that her
Honour’s assessment of the
likelihood of the risk eventuating, and of the
gravity of the potential harm should it eventuate, is implicit in the whole of
Honour’s reasons in this regard.
respondent contends that her Honour’s findings as to the nature and
circumstances of the offending and the respondent’s
enduring lack of
insight and remorse, together with the evidence as to risk of sexual
reoffending, provided a proper foundation upon
which to exercise the discretion
and make the order.
(first limb of test)
case is a little unusual. It is the fact that the applicant had no prior
convictions for sexual offending and the offending in
this case was one episode.
The finding of risk did not rest upon a history of repeat sexual offending, or
sexual offending against
a multiplicity of complainants.
there were other factors which justified the conclusion that the applicant will
pose a real risk to the sexual safety of one or
more persons or of the community
at the time of his release following a lengthy period of incarceration. Given
the gravity and nature
of this offending, the applicant’s lack of remorse
and meaningful insight into the offending (especially his sexual offending),
victim blaming, and the judge’s well-founded misgivings about his
prospects of rehabilitation, the risk posed by the applicant
must be regarded as
real. It was open to the judge to find this.
applicant relies heavily upon the assessment of Dr Reeves that the
applicant’s propensity for committing further sexual
offences was below
average risk — that is, it is was somewhat lower than the average sexual
offender.98F
are three points I would make about this.
as I have endeavoured to explain above under ground 3 (prospects of
rehabilitation), Dr Reeves’ opinion or language does
not suggest that the
risk that the applicant poses to the sexual safety of the community was
as I have also endeavoured to explain above, the applicant’s argument
seeks to characterise Dr Reeves’ assessment
as to the applicant’s
risk of sexual reoffending as more favourable than it actually is.
Dr Reeves’ assessment was not the only factor which bore upon the question
of risk. While relevant, the judge was required
to distil a range of other
factors, such as the nature and gravity of the offending, his poorly developed
insight, his absence of
any remorse for the sexual offending, his victim
blaming, the violent and anger driven nature of this sexual offending, and the
questions about this offending and his anger. Given the overall state
of the evidence, the risk which the applicant presents to sexual
safety must be
regarded as real. It was open to the judge to so find.
judge made reference to the case of
in her reasons and explicitly
acknowledged that the risk had to be assessed to be
. There is no
reason to think that she misapplied the test regarding the requisite risk.
balancing exercise (second limb of test)
turn now to the second stage of the application of the test under
involves balancing the identified risk, having regard to the purpose of the Act,
with the restrictions imposed on the offender’s
right to enjoy freedom and
autonomy of action.
applicant argues that the sentencing judge did not engage in this balancing
exercise. It is common ground that the judge did not,
in terms, state that she
had done so.
Notwithstanding
this, I think it is clear that the judge did properly address the second limb of
the test of
. In my view:
(a) The sentencing judge did consider the magnitude and nature of the identified
risk to sexual safety, including the degree of likelihood
of the risk
eventuating and the gravity of the harm; and
(b) The sentencing judge did balance this against the serious consequences for
the applicant in terms of loss of freedom and autonomy.
sentencing judge was alive to the need to engage in the balancing process. Both
parties during the plea addressed her on the two-stage
In particular, counsel for the applicant made extensive submissions on the
questions of the loss of freedom and personal autonomy.
In her ruling —
which I have reproduced above — her Honour made explicit reference to the
submissions made on behalf
of the applicant. This included a submission that
‘when balancing any risk posed and the impact registration will have on
rights to freedom, he submits it does not fall in favour of making such an
order’. The sentencing judge went on to say that
she had regard to the
parties’ submissions.
her Honour did not explicitly measure the degree of likelihood of the risk
eventuating and the gravity of the harm, I accept
the respondent’s
submissions that the sentencing judge’s assessments of the likelihood of
the risk eventuating, and the
gravity of the potential harm, are implicit in her
sentencing remarks as a whole.
is clear that the judge considered the degree of the risk of sexually violent
offending happening again. While she did not explicitly
quantify that risk, her
conclusion that the applicant’s prospects were ‘guarded’ (at
best) gives some content to
that assessment. In my view, the sentencing judge
picks up this consideration under factors (d) and (e) (reproduced above).
to the magnitude of the harm, the sentencing judge’s Reasons overall are
replete with findings concerning the extreme nature
of this offending, and the
terrifying and profound harm that it has
In my view, the
sentencing judge picks up this consideration under factors (a), (b) and (c)
(reproduced above). It is plain her Honour
considered the magnitude of harm
involved should this risk eventuate was towards the higher end of the
Honour’s conclusion also implies that she balanced a number of relevant
considerations. As she said, ‘the relevant
risk’ was ‘such as
to warrant the making of such an order’ and ‘in all of the
circumstances, I have determined
to make a registration order’. In my
view, those circumstances could only be a reference to the very matters to which
had just alluded, namely the balancing of the risk posed with the
impact registration would have upon the applicant’s loss
of freedom and
personal autonomy.
read as a whole, it is not reasonably arguable that the sentencing judge failed
to undertake this exercise, or that the discretion
otherwise miscarried. I think
she took in account everything she should, and did not take into account
anything that she should not.
There was a rational basis for her
5: The individual sentences, cumulation orders, total effective sentence and
non-parole period are manifestly excessive
general observations on principle
this Court recently reaffirmed in
Failla v The King
, to succeed on this
ground the applicant must show that the sentence imposed by the judge in the
exercise of his discretion was ‘wholly
outside the range of sentencing
options available’.100F
As this Court has often observed, this is a ‘stringent requirement’,
which is difficult to
satisfy.101F
am not persuaded that it is reasonably arguable that the applicant has satisfied
this stringent requirement.
is apparent that, to make good his case that the sentences imposed were all
manifestly excessive, the applicant relies heavily
upon past sentences imposed
in other cases. While these arguments are legitimate, they have their
limitations. It is useful to mention
as Walker JA observed in
Surtees v The King
It is important at the outset to emphasise that comparable cases are not
precedents, and care must be exercised in how they are
used to assess the
appropriateness of a sentence in a given case. While comparable cases may assist
to reveal a possible pattern
or range of previous sentences, an examination of
comparable cases does not have the consequence that a range or pattern of
as revealed by the cases, is necessarily correct, or that the upper
or lower limits of those sentences are
immutable.102F
as this Court has recognised for many years, it is no part of the sentencing
task, or the assessment of a sentence on appeal,
to embark upon a comparative
analysis of past cases in ‘micro detail’. Such an approach is
‘calculated to introduce
a level of mathematical precision inimical to the
instinctive
synthesis’.103F
as the High Court emphasised in
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym) v The
while current
sentencing practices are a relevant consideration to be taken into account in
the determination of the sentence in
each case, that factor is only one of a
number of matters which must be taken into account in the exercise of the
sentencing discretion
in each particular
these qualifications in mind, I turn to each of the arguments.
burglary (charge 1) (6 years 2 months’ imprisonment)
applicant submitted that there are more serious examples of aggravated burglary
than this one. The applicant emphasises that he
entered the home through the
front door, undisguised, unarmed, and without the use of force or
subterfuge.
this respect, the applicant points to a number of cases where the offenders were
sentenced in the vicinity of 6 years’
imprisonment.106F
These were,
so the applicant contends, more serious than the instant case. He says that his
sentence is at odds with current sentencing
practices as illustrated by these
past sentencing cases.
respondent submits that the cases relied upon by the applicant do not assist
him. The respondent contends that they serve to illustrate
that the range of
penalties imposed for this offence reflects the range of circumstances in which
it can be committed. The respondent
argues that this was an objectively serious
example of a serious offence: the applicant entered the complainant’s
a confrontational manner, as a trespasser with an intent to commit a
sexual assault; there was a degree of forethought; the applicant
was motivated
by a grievance; and the offending occurred against a vulnerable complainant in
front of her children. The import of
the respondent’s written case is that
the sentence was within the permissible range.
my view, the respondent’s submissions must be accepted.
the sentencing judge observed, ‘aggravated burglary involves a serious
violation of the sanctity of the home, and crimes
such as these strike directly
at the heart of people’s sense of security and their capacity to feel safe
in their homes’.107F
enter a residential home as a trespasser with intent to commit a sexual assault
is self-evidently an extremely grave
Moreover, the
applicant entered with a view to confronting and punishing the complainant over
a perceived grievance.109F
there was no ‘forced’ entry, in the sense of a breaking down of a
door or entry gained through a window. The applicant
was unarmed, not disguised,
and entered in the evening in summertime (8pm) rather than in the middle of the
night. A number of the
factors identified in
emphasising factors which are absent tends to obscure the gravity of what the
applicant actually did. He may not have broken down
the door, but the applicant
barged his way into this house, uninvited and unwelcome. He may not have been
armed with a weapon, but
he entered with menace and a steely determinedness to
immediately use brute force and fear to overwhelm and subdue a highly vulnerable
woman. The entry might not have been in the dead of the night, yet it occurred
at a busy and active family time of the evening, when
the risk of significant
confrontation — including with children — was high. It was intended
to be violently and sexually
confrontational and was driven by an outrageous
sense of entitlement. The entry was the commencement of ‘a few minutes of
terror’.111F
sentencing judge was right to regard this as ‘a serious example of
burglary’.112F
anything, this description understates its high gravity. In my view, a term of
imprisonment of 6 years and 2 months was comfortably
within the available range
for such a serious example of this offence, which carries a maximum penalty of
25 years’ imprisonment.
past sentencing cases relied upon by the applicant collectively serve to
illustrate that for serious examples of aggravated burglary
(involving an
intention to sexually assault) a sentence of the order imposed here is
unremarkable. The cases relied upon by the applicant
could be described as
serious instances of this offence because of the use of weapons, pre-planning,
breaches of trusts and forced
entries in the middle of the night. But, for
reasons which I have given, the applicant’s case must also be
characterised as
a serious example of this offence.
in some of those past sentences, the offender in question could call in aid some
powerful mitigatory factors. For example,
imprisonment), the offender received the significant benefit of
The sentences in
— including the aggravated burglary—
were also regarded by the Court of Appeal as being ‘towards the lower end
of the appropriate
range’.113F
(6½ years’ imprisonment), the offender impressed
the judge with his full admissions, his remorse, insight and prospects.
, the offender fell to be sentenced for having entered with an
intention to steal, not to sexually assault.
in a number of those other cases, the applicant could not rely upon any really
influential or compelling factor in mitigation
such as youth and rehabilitation,
. While the applicant had some mitigating
factors in his favour — such as his plea of guilty — his insight,
remorse and
prospects were all problematic. That is especially so in relation to
the sexual offending, which he had never admitted (save for
the plea itself).
Obviously, this was a component of the aggravated burglary, it having been
committed with the intention to sexually
assault the complainant.
my view, the applicant has not shown that there is a reasonable argument that
this aggravated burglary sentence is wholly outside
conduct endangering person (charge 2) (3 years’
imprisonment)
applicant noted that a sentence of 3 years’ imprisonment is 60% of the
maximum penalty (5 years’ imprisonment). He
submits that this is
‘high’ for a person with a limited criminal history and who has
pleaded guilty. It is also, the
applicant argues, at odds with current
sentencing practices. To that end, the applicant refers to a number of past
sentencing cases.114F
the submission to be that these demonstrate that the applicant’s sentence
is not just ‘high’, but manifestly
respondent says that the past sentences relied upon by the applicant demonstrate
that while the sentence of 3 years’ imprisonment
is toward the upper end
of the range of penalties that might reasonably have been imposed, it is not
wholly outside that range as
to constitute error. The respondent says that
sentence is explained by the fact that the applicant strangled the complainant
times in her own home in the presence of children.
accept that, at first blush, after a plea of guilty, a term of imprisonment of 3
years for the offence of reckless conduct endangering
person — which
represents 60% of the maximum penalty — seems high.
course, the applicant must do more than show that the sentence is
He must ultimately
show that the sentence was ‘wholly outside the range of sentencing options
available’.
my view, the magnitude of this offending gives explanation to this sentence.
the reasons I have identified above under ground 2, I agreed with the
judge’s assessment, and the respondent’s submission,
that the risk
of serious injury in this case was substantial. The charge was also put upon the
basis that the applicant strangled
the complainant on some four occasions
throughout the ordeal. That is, he strangled the complainant, released her, and
then strangled
her again, on multiple occasions. This offending went beyond a
momentary or isolated strangulation.
complainant experienced real trouble breathing. There is evidence that the
complainant thought she was going to die, as did her
son. Both pleaded with the
applicant to stop. Once he stopped strangling the complainant for the last time,
the complainant bent
over coughing.
broader circumstances to this offending coloured its gravity; the strangulation
took place in her own home, in the presence of
her children. At different times
he was strangling the complainant with one hand while slapping her, and grabbing
her hair, with
the other hand.
forensic examination revealed neck bruising and abrasions as well petechiae on
the palette of the mouth; all highly suggestive with
neck compression.
number of the previous sentencing cases relied upon by the applicant
) did not involve the level of
repeated strangulation which occurred here — at least not covered by a
single charge and sentence.
the most comparable case was
(21 months’ imprisonment)
where the charge of reckless conduct endangering persons (a rolled-up charge)
comprised multiple
acts — pushing on the complainant’s throat,
pushing a pillow over the complainant’s face, two instances of
strangulation
and placing hands over the complainant’s mouth and nose
restricting her breathing. But unlike the applicant’s case, the
was experiencing a psychotic episode. This resulted in a
reduction in moral culpability and weight to be given to general deterrence
in contrast with the applicant, in a number of the other cases relied upon by
the applicant, the offender could rely upon some
strong personal circumstances
, 21 years) or relative
, 25 years).
of these cases involved a virtual stranger physically attacking the complainant
in her own home in front of children. Only one
of the cases referred to —
— involved offending with the children nearby and, even in
that case, the child was in a different room.
my view, the sentencing judge’s assessment that this was a serious example
of this offence was plainly
correct.116F
It called for
condign punishment.
applicant has not shown that there is a reasonable argument this sentence is
wholly outside the range.
assault (charge 3) (2 years’ imprisonment)
applicant again makes reference to a series of past sentences largely involving
sexual assault by touching breasts in circumstances
of aggravated
burglary.117F
He says they
indicate that the applicant’s sentence on charge 3 is manifestly
respondent replies that the circumstances of the offending do not demonstrate
that the sentence of 2 years’ imprisonment
is wholly outside the range.
These circumstances include: it was a rolled-up charge involving a number of
touchings; it occurred
in the complainant’s home in the presence of her
children; the applicant removed the complainant’s shirt and bra in the
course of the sexual assaults; and the second squeezing of the applicant’s
breast was on bare skin. These each informed the
proper assessment of the
objective seriousness of the conduct.
these unique features, the respondent contends that the authorities to which the
applicant has referred do not demonstrate that
the sentence of 2 years’
imprisonment is wholly outside the range.
my view, the respondent’s arguments must be accepted.
is to be recalled that the applicant fell to be sentenced for a rolled-up charge
of two instances of squeezing the complainant’s
breast and one instance of
stroking the complainant’s back and buttocks.
to the gravity of this offending the sentencing judge said:
Your preparedness to sexually violate [the complainant], even going so far as
to remove her clothing with the children present,
or at least outside the door,
bespeaks the total lack of regard you had towards [the complainant] and her
young family. The sexual
assaults were serious. You were not to be deterred and
your touching of the complainant’s breasts and buttocks was humiliating
and degrading.118F
complaint is made about this characterisation.
cases referred to by the applicant do not assist the applicant. There can be no
doubt that each of the cases involved serious
examples of the offence of sexual
assault, to varying degrees. Indeed, in the cases referred to there were some
chilling aspects
to some of the offending, such as the use of restraints (eg,
) or weapons (eg,
— at the risk of repetition — the instant sexual assault offending
by the applicant was also a serious example:
None of those
past cases involved a sexual assault of a mother in her own home in front of, or
near to, her children.
Those cases did
not involve rolled-up charges of multiple touchings like the offending by the
applicant. Most of the sentences —
which range from 1 year to 3½
years — related to more discrete incidents of contact. For example,
(2 years’ imprisonment) and
imprisonment) involved individual squeezes or pinchings of the breasts.
By contrast with
the applicant, in one of those cases —
offender could call upon some significant factors in mitigation, namely the
principles in
, and the mitigatory consideration of having served a
substantial period of pre-sentence detention during the pandemic.
viewed holistically, these past cases tend to show that a sentence of the order
of 2 years’ imprisonment for the serious
rolled-up offending committed by
the applicant is not out of the ordinary.
rape (charge 4) (5 years 8 months’ imprisonment)
applicant relies on a series of past cases where similar sentences were ordered
to the sentence imposed upon the applicant. The
applicant then submits that in
those cases ‘the attempted rape was much closer to the completed
offence’, that is, where
the act was just short of actual
penetration.120F
This did not
occur in this case, the applicant says. The applicant says that this shows that
a sentence of the order imposed in this
case — where the attempt fell well
short of physical penetration — was out of step with current sentencing
respondent submits that the attempted rape in this case was undoubtedly
‘very serious’, pointing out that it was accompanied
by aggression
and violence, and occurred in the complainant’s home in the presence of
her children. The respondent further
submits that the authorities relied upon by
the applicant — in particular,
demonstrate that the sentence of 5 years and 8 months’ imprisonment is
within the range of penalties that might reasonably
have been imposed for this
my view, there is no merit to this complaint.
sentencing judge said the following about the gravity of the offending:
The sexual offending is very serious. You were unzipping your jeans, demanding
that the complainant perform oral sex on you –
again in front of her
horrified children. It was brazen; and again it suggests you felt a sense of
entitlement. You could do what
you wanted. You could violate a woman who had
rebuffed you, and in full view of her kids. It was cowardly, it was despicable,
utterly terrifying for the children and [the complainant] herself, who had
no idea what you were capable of, and what your ultimate
intention was with
respect to her and her
family.121F
applicant attempts to draw comparisons with other attempted rape sentences
primarily upon the basis of the degree of proximity
to the completed offence.
may be accepted that the proximity of the attempt to the completed offence may
be relevant to an assessment of criminality. But
it can only be one factor. What
made this attempted rape so serious was the contextual setting eloquently
captured by the sentencing
judge’s observations. This included the
applicant’s physical violence (pinning her against the window and then the
repeatedly slapping the complainant’s face, and repeatedly
strangling her), the applicant’s verbal violence (repeatedly
‘you’re going to suck my dick’ while unzipping his jeans), and
the fact that it all took place in front
of her children in her home. The
applicant’s design to commit the completed offence of rape was a
determined and serious one.
Completion was thwarted in large part due to the
significant resistance of the complainant and to her son’s intervention.
harm caused to the complainant remained significant, the applicant’s
moral culpability was still high. In my opinion, this
attempt was properly
characterised as ‘very serious’, despite the fact that the applicant
did not in fact get physically
closer to the completed offence (ie, actual
penetration).
agree with the respondent’s submission that cases like
(5½ years and 4½ years) and
(7 years) — which
both followed pleas of guilty — show that serious examples of attempted
rapes can attract significant
sentences well into the mid-single figures. The
applicant’s case was one such example. In my view, it is not arguable that
a sentence of 5 years and 8 months’ imprisonment for this attempted rape,
in these circumstances, was outside the available
range when regard is also had
to the applicant’s relatively modest mitigating factors.
Cumulation,
total effective sentence and non-parole period
applicant submits that as the offending took place in a single episode lasting
no more than five minutes, substantial concurrency
between the sentences was
required. Despite that, each order for cumulation constituted — the
applicant contends — a
substantial proportion of the corresponding
individual sentence (reckless conduct 61%, sexual assault 29%, attempted rape
applicant argues that where the individual sentences were already
high, these orders for cumulation produced a total effective sentence
manifestly excessive. To make good his point, the applicant relies upon the
total effective sentences imposed in other
cases involving aggravated burglary
and rape or attempted
the applicant submits that the non-parole period — which constitutes
77% of the head sentence — is manifestly excessive,
particularly for
someone who has pleaded guilty, showed some remorse, had a limited criminal
history and made efforts towards rehabilitation.
respondent submits that cumulation must be reflected in this case to acknowledge
the various dimensions of the applicant’s
criminal conduct. Considered in
this light, there is no arguable complaint as to the orders for cumulation in
this case, the respondent
the respondent submits that the total effective sentence is within the range
given the objective gravity of the overall
offending, and the absence of many
factors in mitigation (save for the plea of guilty).
the respondent submits that the non-parole period is unremarkable. The
applicant’s remorse was limited and he continues
to deny the sexual
offending, which properly founded her Honour’s ‘real concerns’
as to the applicant’s prospects
of rehabilitation and the concomitant need
for community protection. The respondent submits that there is no
non-parole period, and the setting of a non-parole period
need only reflect the minimum period justice
requires.123F
my view, the complaints concerning the orders for cumulation, the total
effective sentence and the non-parole period are all without
have already rejected that the individual sentences are manifestly
sentencing judge was alive to the issues of cumulation, proportionality and
totality. She observed that with respect to the aggravated
burglary, the
applicant fell to be sentenced upon the basis his intention and conduct as he
entered the premises, and that his conduct
after entry was the subject of the
remaining charges.124F
to the offending inside the house, the sentencing judge acknowledged that it
‘involves individual and serious conduct; so
each offence warrants
individual punishment’ and ‘there is a need for the sentence to
reflect the individual charges
and the conduct they
comprise’.125F
the other hand, the judge was conscious that ‘the offending occurred as
part of a single episode, and a brief one, and there
should be a degree of
concurrency appropriate to satisfy the principle of
totality’.126F
noted that in an endeavour to impose ‘a total and proportionate
sentence’ she had ‘moderated to a degree the
length of the
individual sentences and the periods of
cumulation’.127F
is to be recalled that the discretion to make orders for cumulation is ‘a
very broad one and should not be unduly circumscribed
by appellate
intervention’.128F
see nothing wrong with the levels of cumulation ordered in this case.
my view, it was open to the sentencing judge to take the view levels of
cumulation of this order were required in order to adequately
reflect the full
breadth and gravity of the offending which occurred inside the home. The
cumulation orders had to denounce the applicant’s
distinct criminality,
and ensure that sufficient punishment carried through to the overall sentencing
highest relative order for cumulation was that which was assigned to the
sentence for reckless conduct endangering persons (61%).
This warrants some
attention. It was a noticeably higher proportion of the corresponding individual
sentence than that ordered on
the sexual assault sentence (29%) and attempted
rape sentence (35%).
is a very likely explanation for this. There was, in substance, an elemental
overlap between the sexual assault and attempted
rape on the one hand and the
aggravated burglary on the other hand. This is because the aggravated burglary
was put upon the basis
that the applicant entered with an intent to sexually
assault. Thus a common feature to each of these offences was the intention
motivation to sexually offend. The criminality embraced by the sentence for
reckless conduct endangering persons was of a different
quality. There was thus
not the same level of overlap as between the offence of reckless conduct
endangering persons and the aggravated
burglary. This justified a greater degree
of cumulation.
higher degree of cumulation directed in relation to the attempted rape sentence
(35%) — relative to the cumulation ordered
for the sexual assault charge
(29%) — can also be explained. The applicant fell to be sentenced as a
serious sexual offender
for the attempted rape offence and thus the presumption
of cumulation
applied.129F
am unpersuaded that it is reasonably arguable that the sentencing discretion
with respect to the orders for cumulation miscarried.
to the total effective sentence, much has already been said about the facts and
gravity of this offending. The judge was correct
to regard the offending as
‘brazen’, ‘cowardly’, ‘despicable’ and
serious’.130F
relation to sexual attacks upon vulnerable women in particular, this Court has
said, ‘in a case such as this, the Court,
by the sentences imposed by it,
has a duty to express its denunciation of such offending in clear
terms’.131F
deterrence, denunciation and just punishment were all prominent considerations
in this sentencing synthesis, as the sentencing
judge recognised.
the sentencing judge’s serious reservations concerning the
applicant’s lack of insight, as well as the applicant’s
only guarded
prospects of rehabilitation, the considerations of specific deterrence and
community protection also had to be given
weight in this sentencing exercise.
The judge correctly acknowledged this.
cases relied upon by the applicant in relation to his complaint about the total
effective sentence provide limited guidance. The
total effective sentences in
those cases — which will necessarily vary — are a product of the
totality of the offending
and the idiosyncratic orders for cumulation in each
case. For example, none of those past cases referred to involved multiple
strangulations
(and the offence of reckless conduct endangering persons), or
offending in full view of children.
turn to the complaint about the non-parole period.
the High Court132F
have examined on
many occasions the principles concerning the fixing of a non-parole period. In
essence, and for present purposes,
those principles are as follows.
benefit of the non-parole period is for the purpose of the offender’s
rehabilitation. Release on parole ‘is a concession
made when the Parole
Board decides that the benefits accruing by way of rehabilitation and the
recognition of mitigating factors
outweigh the danger to the community of
relaxing the requirement of
imprisonment’.134F
follows that the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation will be an
important factor in fixing the non-parole period. Those
prospects will affect
what is required by way of specific deterrence and protection of the
the nature of the offence does not assume quite the same level of prominence as
it does in relation to the fixing of the head
it will still
be relevant because ‘a more serious offence will warrant a greater minimum
term due to its deterrent effect upon
others’.135F
non-parole period ‘must also reflect the objective gravity of the offence
so that the non-parole period should constitute
the minimum period of
imprisonment that justice requires the prisoner to
serve’.136F
is no ‘usual’ non-parole period for any offence or category of
offence or set or fixed formula. Non-parole periods
of between 60% and 75% of a
head sentence of less than 10 years may be relatively common, as a matter of
observation’.137F
However, the authorities make clear that this range ‘ceases to be of much
guidance where the head sentence is in the order
of 10 years’ imprisonment
or more’.138F
is true that it has been said that a non-parole period that is 75% of the head
sentence or more ‘may invite appellate scrutiny’,
especially in the
absence of an
explanation.139F
force of this proposition will diminish as the head sentence rises beyond 10
years’ imprisonment.
considered in the light of these principles, it is clear that the contention
that the non-parole period in this case is manifestly
excessive is
unsustainable.
applicant was sentenced to a head sentence of 10 years and 8 months’
imprisonment. Self-evidently, it exceeds 10 years.
While a non-parole period
which constitutes 77% of a head sentence of less than 10 years might be said to
be relatively high, the
same cannot be said where the head sentence comfortably
exceeds 10 years. On its face, the non-parole period here does not bespeak
any event, if it is proportionally high, there is an apparent explanation for
this. The sentencing judge justifiably held some
significant reservations about
the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation. This would have been an
influential matter in the
determination of the length of the non-parole period.
It was well open to the sentencing judge to consider that a non-parole period
this order was necessary in order to properly fulfill the sentencing
considerations of specific deterrence and protection of the
community. The
gravity of this offending, and the need to fulfill the requirements of general
deterrence and denunciation, further
explain this non-parole period.
my view, it is not reasonably arguable that the fixing of this non-parole period
reveals that the sentencing discretion had miscarried.
application for an extension of time in which to bring an application for leave
to appeal against his sentence is refused. I do
this because the proposed
grounds of appeal are without merit.
Madafferi v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 302
Charge 1, Aggravated
Charge 2 (part) Reckless
Conduct Endangering Persons.
Summary Charge 1, Unlawful
Charge 2 (part) Reckless
Conduct Endangering Persons.
Charge 2 (part) Reckless
Conduct Endangering Persons.
Charge 2 (part) Reckless
Conduct Endangering Persons.
Charge 3 (part of rolled-up
charge) Sexual Assault.
Charge 4 Attempted Rape. All
the physical acts of violence (with the exception of those acts constituting
Charge 2) formed part of
this charge.
Charge 2 (part) Reckless
Conduct Endangering Persons.
Charge 3 (part of rolled-up
charge) Sexual Assault.
Charge 3 (part of rolled-up
charge) Sexual Assault.
Reasons, [79].
Reasons, [81].
Reasons, [87], [115].
Reasons, [88].
Reasons, [89].
Reasons, [86].
Reasons, [106].
Reasons, [95].
Reasons, [95].
Reasons, [84].
Reasons, [90].
Reasons, [93].
Reasons, [84].
Reasons, [96].
Reasons, [79].
Reasons, [80].
Reasons, [93].
Reasons, [86].
Reasons, [107].
Reasons, [129].
Reasons, [43].
Reasons, [53].
Reasons, [76].
Reasons, [113].
Reasons, [76].
Reasons, [109].
Reasons, [99].
Reasons, [97].
Reasons, [95], [98],
Reasons, [100], [104].
Reasons, [100].
[109]–[111].
[109]–[111].
Reasons, [77].
Reasons, [78].
[126]–[128].
[124]–[125].
Reasons, [129]–[133],
Reasons, [131].
[132]–[134].
Reasons, [130].
Reasons, [106] (emphasis
Reasons, [81].
Reasons, [81] (emphasis
Reasons, [84] (emphasis
Reasons, [116] (emphasis
Reasons, [129].
Reasons, [95].
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
NOM v DPP & Ors
[2012] VSCA 198
, [59] (Redlich, Harper JJA an Curtain AJA) referring to
R v Abdul-Rasool
[2008] VSCA 13
(2008) 18 VR 586
, 596, [41] (Redlich JA, with
Chernov JA and King AJA agreeing);
[1990] VicRp 55
[1990] VR 641 (Young
Crockett and Nathan JJ).
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
Reasons, [1].
Reasons, [95].
Reasons, [20].
Reasons, [111].
Reasons, [95].
Barbaro v The
[2012] VSCA 288
(2012) 226 A Crim R 354
, [39]–[40].
Reasons, [111].
Reasons, [100].
Reasons, [100].
Reasons, [101].
Reasons, [100].
Reasons, [95].
Reasons, [107].
Reasons, [104].
Reasons, [103].
Reasons, [95].
Reasons, [79].
Reasons, [81].
Reasons, [118].
Reasons, [120].
Reasons, [109].
Reasons, [114].
[113]–[117].
Reasons, [117].
Reasons, [118].
Reasons, [120].
Reasons, [111].
One charge of recklessly
causing injury.
Reasons, [53].
Reasons, [134].
Bowden v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 382
(2013) 44 VR 229
, 236-9, [30]–[42] (Redlich and Coghlan JJA and Dixon
v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 177
, [92] (Whelan and McLeish JJA).
[121]–[123].
Reasons, [117].
Reasons, [80].
Failla v The King
[2025] VSCA 132
, [39] (Emerton P and Boyce JA);
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
, 671–2, [15] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
[1999] HCA 29.
[2025] VSCA 132
, [39] (Emerton P and Boyce JA);
Clarkson v The
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, 384, [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and
Harper JJA);
[2011] VSCA 157.
Surtees v The King
[2023] VSCA 42
[2010] VSCA 332
(2010) 30 VR 610
, [32]–[33] (Ashley, Redlich and Harper JJA).
Dalgliesh (a
pseudonym) v The Queen
(2017) 262 CLR 428
[2017] HCA 41.
Dalgliesh (a
pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
, 434, [5]–[9] (Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Keane JJ) and 453–4, [82] (Gageler and Gordon JJ).
The applicant refers to
DPP v Drake
[2019] VSCA 293
[2015] VSCA 11
(2015) 45 VR 168
[2015] VSCA 283
DPP v Bulduk
[2017] VCC 324.
Reasons, [86].
Salvaggio v The
[2022] VSCA 88
, [102] (Maxwell P, Kyrou and Niall JJA)
Reasons, [86].
DPP v Meyers
[2014] VSCA 314
(2014) 44 VR 486
, 498, [47]–[49] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Osborn JJA);
[2014] VSCA 314
Reasons, [80].
Reasons, [89].
DPP v Drake
The applicant refers to
Shams (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] VSCA 260
DPP v Sheppard (a
[2021] VCC 1587
[2021] VCC 759
DPP v Croucher
[2021] VCC 305
DPP v Corlett
[2022] VCC 839
DPP v Blackney
[2024] VCC 1462
DPP v Gapes
[2023] VCC 858.
Brown v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 204
, [48] (Maxwell P and Sifris JA).
Reasons, [95].
The applicant refers to
DPP v Tuite
[2019] VSC 159
[2022] VCC 224
DPP v Pedley (a
[2024] VCC 1202
[2020] VSCA 161.
Reasons, [93].
accused received sentences of 3 years’ and 3½ years’
imprisonment following a trial for offences constituted
by fondling and rubbing
the complainant’s breasts and pinching her nipples.
The applicant refers to
[2020] VSCA 46
DPP v MacArthur
[2019] VSCA 71
De Haas v The King
[2024] VSCA 141
[2000] VSCA 108
DPP v Tuite
[2019] VSC 159.
Reasons, [90].
The applicant refers to
Principally relying upon
Wallace v R
[2012] VSCA 114
(2012) 35 VR 520.
Reasons, [124].
Reasons, [124].
Reasons, [124].
Reasons, [125].
Nguyen v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 184
, [40] (Priest JA and Kidd AJA).
[126]–[127].
Reasons, [79], [90].
DPP v MacArthur
[2019] VSCA 71
, [69]; Reasons, [133].
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571, 532 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
For example,
[2024] VSCA 29
, [42]–[43] (McLeish, Walker and
Taylor JJA);
v The Queen
[2024] VSCA 316
[53]–[55] (McLeish, Boyce and Orr JJA);
Mush v The Queen
, [102] (Maxwell P and Kaye JA);
Kumova v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 212
, 544, [19] (Nettle JA, Redlich and Osborn JJA agreeing at 545,
Romero v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
[25]–[27] (Redlich JA, Buchanan JA agreeing at 494, [28], Mandie JA
agreeing at 494, [29]).
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571, 532 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571, 532 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
Kumova v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 212
(2012) 37 VR 538
, 544, [27] (Nettle JA, Redlich and Osborn JJA agreeing at
545, [25]).
Stefani v The
[2024] VSCA 29
, [42]–[43] (McLeish, Walker and Taylor JJA).
Romero v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
, 493–4, [25]–[27] (Redlich JA, Buchanan JA
agreeing at 494, [28], Mandie JA agreeing at 494, [29]);
Kumova v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 212
(2012) 37 VR 538
, 544, [19] (Nettle JA, Redlich and Osborn JJA agreeing at
545, [25]);
Stefani v The Queen
[2024] VSCA 29
, [42]–[43] (McLeish,
Walker and Taylor JJA);
v The Queen
[2024] VSCA 316
[53]–[55] (McLeish, Boyce and Orr JJA).
Romero v The
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
, 493, [25] (Redlich JA, Buchanan JA agreeing at [28],
Mandie JA agreeing at [29]).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter