URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Select Market Pty Ltd at Select Market [2024] VicLiqComm 14; (17 October 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter regarding an internal review application made by Select Market
Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
to a decision of a delegate to refuse to grant an application for a packaged
liquor licence for the premises known as Select Market,
located at Unit 1, 250
Flinders Street, Melbourne
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Milad Shahbazi on behalf of the Applicant
Mr Ben Schier, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 17 April 2024
Date of Decision: 17 October 2024
Date of Reasons: 17 October 2024
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
delegate and refuse to grant the application
Original Application
14 August 2023, Milad Shahbazi, sole director for Select Market Pty Ltd
) applied to the Victorian Liquor Commission
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a packaged liquor
Original Application
) for the premises located at Unit 1, 250
Flinders Street, Melbourne (
Premises corners Flinders Street and Degraves Street and is situated directly
opposite Flinders Street Station. The location is
exposed to high passing foot
surrounding areas comprise a mix of commercial and residential premises with
several licensed premises in the immediate area.
Applicant trades at the Premises as a tobacconist while also selling limited
amounts of snack food.
way of the Original Application, the Applicant sought a packaged liquor licence
for the following purpose:
...the purpose for which the liquor
license is sought is [sic] offer customers our additional convenience by
providing them with a
selection of alcoholic beverages.
Applicant proposed the following trading
Monday to Saturday Between 9am
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
ANZAC Day Between 9am and 11pm
accordance with section 33(1), a delegate of the Commission (
served a copy of the Original Application on the Chief Commissioner of Police
and the Licensing Inspector
Victoria Police
) on 24 August
. On 5 September 2023, Victoria Police advised
that they did not object to the Original Application.
accordance with section 33(2), the Delegate served a copy of the Original
Application on the City of Melbourne (
) on 24 August 2023. On 18
August 2023, the Applicant provided the Delegate with a letter from the Council
dated 18 August 2023, in
which the Council informed the Applicant that in
accordance with the Melbourne Planning Scheme, no planning permit was required
use the Premises as a ‘retail premises’, which would include a
‘supermarket’ for the sale of
On 29 September 2023, the
Council responded to the Commission with the same information, advising that it
therefore did not object
to the Original Application.
24 August 2023, the Delegate requested that the Applicant make further
submissions regarding the nature of its business, chiefly
regarding its
‘predominant activity’ carried out on the Premises.
the LCR Act, the predominant activity carried out on the licensed premises for a
packaged liquor licence is the sale by retail
of liquor for consumption off the
Additionally, the LCR Act
prohibits certain categories of premises from being licensed, relevantly
including ‘premises that,
in the opinion of the Commission, are used
primarily as a milk bar, convenience store or mixed
‘Convenience
store’ is defined in section 3(1) of the LCR Act as:
bar, mixed business or other premises of not more than 240 square metres on
which food, drinks and other convenience goods
Delegate noted that the Original Application included a proposed red line plan
evidencing premises of 43.7 square metres which
included areas labelled as
‘grocery shelves’.
24 September 2023, the Applicant informed the Delegate that the predominant
activity carried out on the Premises was to be the
retail supply of liquor for
consumption off the Premises. Relevantly, the Applicant stated:
After running this business for more than a year, we noticed a
significant number of our customers would prefer to buy their liquore
along with other provided products such as tobacco items. This would benefit our
business and our customers mutually.
Applicant also described the five stock lines contributing to its weekly sales
Tobacco products: Electronic Cigarettes, Cigarette and
Cigar Accessories
Snacks, Sealed Beverages, Pipe and Cigar Cleaners,
Tobacco Blending and Flavoring [sic].
Applicant lodged an amended red line plan, which included additional shelves
labelled ‘grocery shelves’ stationed
within the proposed licensed
area. A cashier was also positioned in the amended red line plan against a wall
on the Degraves Street
side of the Premises, including a label next to the
cashier machine area labelled ‘cashier window’.
14 November 2023, the Delegate requested that the Applicant provide photographs
of the Premises for better clarity of the layout
and nature of the
Premises’ proposed use. The Delegate also sought more information as to
where patrons would be entering the
Premises and whether the ‘cashier
window’ (as depicted on the amended red line plan) meant that the
Applicant proposed
patrons be supplied liquor when outside of the Premises.
14 November 2023, the Applicant informed the Delegate that it intended to supply
to patrons via a sliding window that would open
for supply to the public on
Degraves Street.
further correspondence in support of the Original Application, the Applicant
informed the Delegate on 15 November 2023 that it
was ‘reluctant to use
the main door to serve customers’, citing ‘incidents involving
disruptive behaviour, particularly
from intoxicated individuals, and an increase
in thefts within the store’ (and therefore the Applicant wanted to supply
patrons through the cashier window).
Delegate’s decision
Original Application was determined as an uncontested
application
pursuant to section
44(1) and considered on the grounds provided in section 44(2).
21 December 2023, a Delegate refused the Original Application (
). The Delegate advised that the proposed area for supply of liquor
meant that the Applicant would be unable to satisfy the:
requirement under section 9 of the Act that a Packaged Liquor
Licence authorises the licensee to supply liquor
on the licensed premises
in sealed containers, bottles, or cans for consumption off the licensed
. (Emphasis not added).
is noted that section 9 relates to on-premises licences, not packaged liquor
licences. Nonetheless, the quote above is found in
section 11(1) and so it is
reasonably presumed that the Delegate’s intention was to quote section
11(1) in it refusing the
Original Application on grounds that it was not made in
accordance with the LCR Act.
Further, the Delegate stated that the Applicant’s proposal to supply to
patrons when patrons would be located outside of the
Premises would result in
the Applicant failing to meet the predominant activity requirement in section
11(3)(aa), which requires
supply to customers to occur on the licensed
Delegate also cited concerns that the Original Application would be conducive to
or, encourage harm
and so to grant
it would not be in keeping with the LCR Act object contained in section
The Delegate noted that
the Applicant had stated that it was ‘already facing challenges from
disruptive and intoxicated individuals’
and therefore considered that the
proposed layout of the Premises would ‘encourage public drinking’.
As such, the Delegate
was of the view that granting the Original Application
presented a risk of secondary supply to
and intoxicated
so was not in keeping
with community expectations, nor in the interests of public safety.
Application for Internal Review
11 January 2024, the Applicant lodged an application for internal review of the
Original Decision (
Review Application
The Applicant provided the following reasons in support of the Review
Application:
We have accommodated the required conditions
according to the reasoning we received from the officer in the structure and
The adjusted red-plans [sic] and the response to all the concerns
Applicant lodged a further amended red line plan, in which it proposed that the
cashier window would be removed so that supply
would occur on the Premises. The
Applicant also informed the Commission:
CCTV would be
installed at the entrance to the Premises and at the points of sale to
particularly assist with detecting minors or
intoxicated individuals;
liquor stock
would only be accessible to staff;
primary stock holdings
’ would be for ‘targeting [sic]
the patron purchasing wine to consume with lunch or dinner bookings in the
surrounding
all products
that could be perceived to target minors would be removed from the Premises,
with stock instead being limited to ‘offerings
to [sic] supporting
products to be sold with alcohol, i.e. specific mixer (soft drinks) crisps
(potato chips) instead of minor target
food products’; and
visibility of
stock offered for sale on the Premises would be limited from outside the
Premises by the installation of tinted
Legislation and the Commission’s
The Commission’s internal review
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is a reviewable
decision. The Applicant is considered an eligible person to apply for review of
that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original
Application.
Determination of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was uncontested,
as no objections were
an application is an uncontested application, pursuant to
section 44(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must
grant or refuse to grant an uncontested application at any time after the expiry
period for objection under Division 5 (or that period as extended under
section 174).
Section 44(2)
empowers the Commission to refuse to grant the Review Application on various
grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
(b) the application has not been made, displayed or advertised in accordance
with the LCR Act.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) requires the Commission, in exercising its internal review power to have
regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
section 4(2) provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of a contested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 47(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission, with
reference to the objects of the LCR
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
47(3) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant, make any enquiries it considers appropriate
and give the Applicant a
reasonable opportunity to be heard. Accordingly in this matter, the Applicant
was given reasonable opportunity
to be heard in both being invited to give
evidence on oath and make submissions before the Commission.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Packaged liquor licences
to section 11(1), a packaged liquor licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises in sealed containers,
bottles or cans
during ordinary trading hours for consumption off the licensed
Section 3(1)
defines the “ordinary trading hours” of a packaged liquor licence to
mean: between 9am and 11pm on each day,
other than Sunday, Good Friday, ANZAC
Day or Christmas Day; between 10am and 11pm on Sunday; and between 12 noon
and 11pm on ANZAC
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) Delegate’s Reasons dated 21 December 2023;
(b) Review Application received on 11 January 2024;
(c) a report entitled, ‘Data Report’, prepared by Liquor Control
Victoria, dated 26 March 2024;
(d) National Health and Medical Research Council,
Australian Guidelines to
Reduce Health Risks from Drinking Alcohol
(e) submissions from the Applicant, dated 15 April 2024; and
(f) further submission from the Applicant, dated 24 April 2024.
Other material
Ministerial guidelines
Assessment of the Cumulative Impact of Licensed Premises
decision-making guideline titled “Assessment of the Cumulative Impact of
Licensed Premises” dated 7 June
relevantly states that it
is the policy of the Victorian Government that the Commission may assess the
contribution of a new licensed
premises to the cumulative
of a concentration of
licensed premises in an area. The Commission has had regard to that guideline
and is satisfied that in light
of the evidence before it, the guideline has no
substantial impact in deciding whether to grant the Applicant a packaged liquor
the Commission has had regard to that guideline, for the reasons discussed at
paragraphs 86 and 91 below, the Commission has
not decided to grant or refuse
the Review Application based on the cumulative impact of a concentration of
licensed premises in the
area of the Premises.
Packaged liquor
decision-making guidelines
Commission did not consider the Decision-Making Guidelines relating to the grant
of licences for the sale of packaged liquor as
applicable to this application
given the proposed trading hours are not outside ordinary trading
Preliminary
Commission held a virtual preliminary meeting with the Applicant on 26 March
2024, which involved discussions on administrative
matters regarding the conduct
of an internal review hearing and additional material as sought by the
Commission.
Shahbazi appeared on behalf of the Applicant at the preliminary meeting.
directions were then made on 3 April 2024. Relevantly, the Commission required
the Applicant to make submissions regarding:
products that the Applicant proposed to sell at the Premises;
identification
of any risks of harm that might arise from the misuse and abuse of alcohol
associated with the supply of liquor at
the Premises and how the Applicant
proposed to minimise those risks;
the Applicant proposed to include any visual demarcation of the proposed
licensed and unlicensed areas at the Premises; and
other material that the Applicant wished to rely
Site visit, 10 April 2024
Commissioners attended the Premises in the company of Mr Shahbazi and viewed the
immediate surrounds on 10 April 2024.
Commissioners observed that the Premises was directly across the road from
Flinders Street Railway Station and within 140 metres
of the intersection of
Flinders Street and Elizabeth Street. This major ‘T’ intersection is
where the entry and exit
points are for train passengers and a major crossing
for both commuters and pedestrians.
the site visit, the Commissioners requested that the Applicant lodge submissions
to provide an overview of Mr Shahbazi’s
professional background and
industry experience.
Written submission, 15 April 2024
Applicant lodged a written submission on 15 April 2024, in which Mr Shahbazi
stated on behalf of the company (in summary):
signage will be installed on the windows to the Premises;
Premises will include two points-of-sale, both stationed in the single area
labelled ‘cashier’ on the red-line plan.
One will be specifically
for liquor sales and the other one for non-liquor sales. Each point-of-sale area
will be 2.5 metres long,
with the intention of providing cashiers ‘clear
visibility of customers’ faces’; and
products to be sold on the Premises will be liquid beverages, cigarettes and
select items such as chips and gums that align with
the regulations of a liquor
licence. Only packaged alcohol will be sold on the Premises in accordance with
licensing rules.
to the written submission of 15 April 2024 was a document prepared by Mr
Shahbazi describing both his, and his business partner’s,
professional
experience. The document highlighted both individuals as having completed a
responsible service of alcohol program and
so purportedly had ‘a keen
understanding of the importance of responsible alcohol service and the potential
impact of alcohol
consumption on individuals and the community’ and would
prioritise ‘the wellbeing of patrons and take proactive measures
a safe and enjoyable environment’. Neither individual was stated as having
previously held a liquor licence, nor
previously employed in contexts that
involved interaction with liquor regulation.
hearing was held in relation to the Review Application on 17 April 2024
Shahbazi appeared on behalf of the Applicant.
oath, Mr Shahbazi described an incident that purportedly occurred around the
Premises on 25 March 2024 that involved somebody breaking
windows and then
coming inside to rob
Mr Shahbazi
expanded on this point later in the Hearing about the Premises, stating that
every day he has persons bothering his
asked if he considered such incidents to present a risk of harm, Mr Shahbazi
responded that in his 2.5 years’ experience
trading at the
Applicant’s nearby Southbank shop, he maintained an expectation that it
was ‘going to be risky in the
Elaborating
on the risk and prevalence of criminal disturbance he had observed in the
immediate area surrounding the Premises, Mr
Shahbazi noted that Victoria Police
employ a ‘special team’ responsible for responding to incidents
relating to ‘crime
in Elizabeth and
Mr Shahbazi
explained that given the nature and prevalence of incidents in the area
immediately surrounding the Premises, he has
been advised by Victoria Police,
when calling police members to respond to an incident, to request referral to
this specific internal
team for a priority
relation to the latest amended red line plan, Mr Shahbazi stated that the
entrance to the Premises would remain on Flinders Street,
that the Premises
would include separate points of sale for non-liquor items at the entrance, and
that there would be a liquor-only
point of sale at the rear of the
Additionally,
Mr Shahbazi proposed that in the licensed area of the Premises, shutters would
be installed on the display offering
liquor, which would automatically be
activated ‘so at 10:30pm it will be shut from the ceiling to the
Shahbazi confirmed that liquor on display would only be accessible to staff and
be provided to patrons once they were positively
identified.
Mr Shahbazi also
stated that the same approach would be taken for managing interactions with
intoxicated patrons on the Premises,
stating ‘we pass the RSA, we go
through the courses, we know how to manage the things. We know the rules... We
cannot sell
it to the customer... We say to them, we cannot do sale
Further, Mr
Shahbazi said that he had only observed one instance of public drinking nearby
the Premises, opining that he considered
a majority of current public disorder
was the result of drug-use, rather than
Shahbazi was asked to provide further detail in relation to the
Applicant’s proposition about realigning its business proposal
a more limited selection of liquor to patrons seeking to buy limited liquor for
BYO usage at nearby restaurants. He responded:
So, in Degraves
Street, as you know it’s a very old street. It’s full of
restaurants. And when we opened the shop, so
that’s where the idea has
come from... when we opened the shop, as a tobacconist, which is two and a half
years ago, too many
respectful people, they come as to use the alcohol... So,
you know, when you open one business, you have to see the markets, what
want from you. So they’re asking us, do you sell
He clarified that he had merely assumed that the requests from patrons he
consulted with were for BYO-use at nearby
restaurants.
Shahbazi was asked to provide clarification with respect to the classification
of the Premises in light of the requirements of
the LCR Act relating to the
predominant activity condition on packaged liquor licences in section 11(3) and
the prohibition in section
22(1)(c) on licensing convenience stores. He stated
that, ‘we’re going to sell lighter, cigarettes, gummies,
While Mr Shahbazi
could not provide detail as to what lines of liquor were proposed to be stocked
at the Premises, nor in what quantities
precisely, he stated that it was
proposed the value of the stock stored on the Premises would be worth in the
vicinity of ‘20,000
asked whether he was aware of any particular obligations the Applicant would
have as a packaged liquor licensee, Mr Shahbazi
could not name any. When
prompted to recall the RSA training he had completed on 12 May 2023 to aid
himself in answering the question,
Mr Shahbazi responded, ‘if you do
something wrong, risk for your business, big fines, you’ve got a point for
your licence.
If you lose the point, never get licensed again
Mr Shahbazi gave evidence that, (in summary):
Applicant did not propose to sell
he was unsure of a precise limit for supply, the Applicant did not propose to
sell more than two cases of beer per customer,
however, he would ‘have to
see the market’;
Applicant was willing to accept trading hours more limited than those provided
for as ‘ordinary trading hours’ under
the LCR Act or proposed in the
Original Application.
Commission wishes to acknowledge the frank and cooperative manner in which Mr
Shabazi had approached the Hearing.
Written submission, 24 April
response to a request by the Commission on 17 April 2024 for an itemised list of
the non-liquor products proposed to be sold on
the Premises, the Licensee
provided on 24 April 2024, the following list, which contained (in
juices and soft drinks ‘to accompany alcoholic beverages’;
foods ‘which pair well with alcoholic drinks’;
non-alcoholic
drinks such as iced tea, bottled water, sports drinks etc.;
products ‘such as cigarettes and cigars, tobacco pouches and cases,
lighters/gas lights, grinders, filters and tips,
rolling papers, tobacco pipes,
nicotine pouches, ashtrays’;
‘such as glassware, bottle openers, cocktail shakers and ice
items ‘such as gift baskets, wine accessories, novelty items and gift
certificates’;
charging accessories.
Issues for determination on
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application, the key
issues are:
whether the Commission considers it should grant or refuse the Original
Application given the grounds for refusal set out in the
LCR Act, and the
objects of the LCR Act, in particular harm minimisation, which is the primary
object; and
whether the Commission is satisfied that the predominant activity requirement in
section 11 is met.
of these issues will be addressed in turn.
Reasons for decision
Whether the Commission considers it should grant or refuse the Original
Application given the grounds for refusal set out in the LCR
Act and the objects
of the LCR Act, in particular harm minimisation
application may be refused if granting it would be conducive to or encourage
In addition, the
Commission must exercise its discretion whether or not to grant a licence with
regard to the objects of the LCR
Act, particularly the primary object of harm
minimisation.
definition of “harm” in section 3(1) is set out above. The
Commission notes that it means harm arising from the misuse
or abuse of alcohol,
and expressly includes (but is not confined to) various forms of such harm as
set out in paragraphs (a) to (c)
of the definition of “harm”.
one sense, as a matter of logic, it could be said that any grant of a new
packaged liquor licence involves a level of inherent
risk given the increased
opportunity for off-premises consumption. But that would defeat the purpose of
the Commission’s power
to grant such a
the Commission considers it must inquire as to whether the object of harm
minimisation would be poorly served because of
the particular local, social,
demographic and geographic
circumstances.
This requires
forming a baseline understanding of the particular local circumstances affecting
the application (including density
of packaged liquor outlets and the existing
degree of alcohol-related harm). ‘Locality evidence’ on the social,
demographic
or geographical circumstances of the application, is considerably
relevant to this task.
Commission must consider whether any baseline harm will be increased if the
application is granted and whether any proposed remediation
measures will
substantially reduce the harm.
Information available
Information on the demographic and socio-economic profile of the
surrounding area
Commission engaged Liquor Control Victoria (
) to provide information
on SEIFA index measures of advantages and disadvantages (
Demographic and
Economic Profile Report
regarding the local government area that the
Premises is situated in. In seeking the Demographic and Economic Profile Report,
Commission sought a high level, objective summary of potentially relevant
statistics that it could consider as locality
in assessing the
relevant harms that might arise from the misuse and abuse of alcohol in the
context of the licence sought by the
Review Application.
Demographic and Economic Profile Report was prepared on 26 March 2024.
is an easily accessed and broadly adopted measure of social and economic
disadvantage in Australia. SEIFA ranks areas in Australia
according to relative
socio-economic advantage and disadvantage. The data is based on census data such
as income, education, employment,
occupation, housing and family structure for
summarising the socio-economic characteristics of an area.
orders areas in a given report from a lowest, to highest score. The lowest 1%
area in a given report is assigned a percentile
number of 1 and so on, with the
highest 1% area in a report given a percentile of 100. A percentile of 1,
therefore represents the
most disadvantage relative to the other percentile
Commission notes that the immediate area in which the Premises is situated ranks
9 on the state percentile ranking on the SEIFA
index relative socio-economic
disadvantage, which indicates significant
disadvantage.
information in the Demographic and Economic Profile Report with respect to the
socio-economic character of the study area in the
report showed:
is a higher proportion of unemployed people in the study area compared to the
Melbourne Greater Capital City Statistical Area
higher proportion of households in the study area earn less than the Melbourne
is a greater proportion of one parent families in the study area than the
Melbourne GCCSA.
based on the information in the Demographic and Economic Profile Report, the
Commission notes that the population in the
study area for the site where the
Premises exists experience significantly high levels of socio-economic
disadvantage.
Information
was also contained in the Demographic and Economic Profile Report in relation to
alcohol related harms. The report noted
that the rate of alcohol-related
(intoxication) ambulance attendances per 100,000 of the population for the
Melbourne local government
) was significantly higher than the
rates seen elsewhere for the same attendances in metropolitan Melbourne and
Victoria, generally.
As of 2021 (the most recent data available), the data
evidenced 1110.8 attendances per 100,000 people, as compared to 289.5 per
in metropolitan Melbourne and 312.4 per 100,000 in Victoria,
It should be noted
that attendances in Melbourne’s LGA increased from 2020 to 2021, whilst
attendances in metropolitan Melbourne
and Victoria showed a decrease in the same
period. The data available was similar with respect to the rate of ambulance
for alcohol intoxication in combination with other substances in the
same period. As of 2021, the data evidenced 1371.7 per 100,000,
as compared to
359.7 per 100,000 in metropolitan Melbourne and 387.8 per 100,000 in Victoria,
Again, attendances in
the Melbourne LGA increased from 2020 to 2021, whilst attendances in
metropolitan Melbourne and Victoria, generally,
showed a decrease in the same
Additionally,
the Demographic and Economic Profile Report contained data in relation to the
rate of criminal incidents per 100,000
of the population in the Melbourne LGA,
compared against the average in Victoria, generally. The Commission notes that
the Melbourne
LGA in the year ending September 2023 had a rate of 14908.7
incidents per 100,000, almost triple the average Victorian rate of 5536
Theft, assault,
breaches of orders, property damage and burglary accounted for 75% of the
Melbourne LGA figure, with theft accounting
for 39% of recorded incidents.
Demographic and Economic Profile Report was provided to the Applicant on 3 April
2024. The Applicant was advised that it was open
to the Commission to consider
material in the report and so invited submissions from the Applicant in response
to the report.
Applicant’s evidence
Commission notes Mr Shahbazi’s general evidence given at the Hearing. The
following evidence of Mr Shahbazi was consistent
with information contained in
the Demographic and Economic Profile Report:
(a) he was reluctant to use the main door of the Premises to serve customers and
wanted to supply to patrons through the cashier
(b) there have been a number of incidents at the Premises involving disruptive
behaviour, particularly from intoxicated
individuals;
(c) there has been an increase in thefts within the
(d) every day, he has persons bothering his
specifically, Mr Shahbazi indicated:
(a) he has formed a view that he needed to establish physical barriers to
protect his staff to prevent assaults and ensure their
(b) he has formed this view from his observations that the area is of high risk
and there is a lot of drugs in the area and risks
(c) he has formed the view that he needed to isolate potential customers from
having direct access to alcohol, should the licence
Commission is satisfied that the information available, including the evidence
of the Applicant, that there is an appreciable
risk that anti-social behaviour
and harm to vulnerable persons or groups would increase if the application was
approved. This warrants
a conservative, precautionary approach in this
particular set of circumstances.
Specifically,
the Commission has concluded that overall, granting the application would be
conducive to or encourage the misuse of
alcohol. This is driven by a combination
of various factors, including:
high volumes of pedestrian traffic in the immediate area of the Premises and
relevantly a frequency of anti-social behaviour
from individuals (including
crime and alcohol-related injury), as confirmed by the Applicant;
risk of harm being increased for a packaged liquor licence when compared to
other types of licences because the predominant purpose
of a packaged liquor
licence is for liquor to be consumed off the premises;
information
contained in comprehensive evaluations of scientific evidence such as the
National Health and Medical Research Council’s
publication,
Australian Guidelines to Reduce Health Risks from Drinking
, identifying a clear correlation between socio-economic disadvantage
and the misuse and abuse of
(iii) above, the information contained in the Demographic and Economic Profile
Report showing that the area that the Premises
is situated in a significantly
low socio-economic
Applicant has only proposed substantial harm mitigation measures inside the
Premises. The Commission is not satisfied that these
mitigation measures will
substantially mitigate the risk of harm externally. Indeed, given the nature of
the area it is difficult
to identify measures which could be undertaken by the
licensee so as to mitigate the palpable risk of an increase in harm should
licence be granted.
Commission considers that to grant the Review Application would be inconsistent
with the fundamental object of minimising harm
as outlined in sections 4(1)(a)
addition, the Commission considers that granting the Review Application would
not facilitate the responsible development of a diversity
of licensed facilities
to reflect community expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in
section 4(1)(b). The Premises appear
similar to those of other premises in the
Melbourne Central Business District. There are ten packaged liquor licensed
premises within
500 metres of the Premises, of which five are trading within 260
metres of the Premises.
the same grounds, the Commission considers that granting the Review Application
in light of the combination of factors outlines
above would not necessarily
contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensing and live
music industries in satisfaction
of the object outlined in section
Other matters
noted above, under the LCR Act, the predominant activity carried out on the
licensed premises for a packaged liquor licence is
the sale by retail of liquor
for consumption off the
Additionally, the LCR
Act prohibits certain categories of premises from being licensed, relevantly
including ‘premises that,
in the opinion of the Commission, are used
primarily as a convenience store within the meaning of section
the Commission has concluded that the grant would, on balance, facilitate a
greater risk of alcohol-related harm to the community,
it has not been necessary
for the Commission to make findings about whether the predominant activity
requirement in section 11 is
met or if the Premises is a convenience store
within the meaning of section 3.
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is not satisfied that granting the
Original Application the subject of the Review
Application is appropriate in the
current circumstances.
Commission has therefore determined to refuse to grant the Review Application
and affirm the Original Decision.
while there has undoubtedly been delay in the delivery of this decision and
reasons, the Commission has wanted to ensure
a consistent approach is adopted
insofar as is reasonably possible with a number of packaged liquor licence
applications before the
Commission at, or about, the same time as this
application.
The preceding 96 paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair, Mr James
O’Halloran,
Deputy Chair, and Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
‘licensing inspector’, see section 3(1).
Melbourne Planning Scheme; sch
2 cl 37.04; cl 52.27.
LCR Act section 11(3)(aa).
Ibid section 22(1)(c).
Ibid section 3(1), see
uncontested application
Ibid, section 44(2)(b)(v).
Ibid, section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Section 4(1)(a)
(1) The objects of this Act are—
contribute to minimising
i. providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
ii. ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of
contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community life; and
iii. restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
iv. encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community.
Ibid, constituting an
offence under section 119(1).
Ibid, constituting an
offence under section 108(4)(a).
LCR Act sections 157(2) to
(5) further prescribe the manner in which the Commission is to undertake
internal reviews.
Ibid, sections 44, 49 and
Ibid, sections 44 and
Ibid, section 3(1), see
uncontested application’
Ibid, section
44(2)(b)(ii).
section 44(2)(b)(v).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
Ibid, section 157(3).
A packaged liquor licence
may also authorise the licensee to trade at other times if so determined by the
Commission and specified
in the licence: LCR Act,
section 11(1)(b)–(d).
guideline was issued by the then Minister under the
Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
(Vic). This Act was renamed the
Victorian Gambling and Casino Control Commission Act 2011
(Vic) by the
Casino and Gambling Legislation Amendment Act 2021
(Vic) with effect from
1 January 2022.
guideline states that “
Cumulative Impact
refers to the impacts
arising from a concentration of licensed premises in a defined area. Evidence
has identified that cumulative
impact is associated with a range of positive and
negative effects, depending on the physical and environmental setting, the mix
of premises, and their operating
conditions.”
Section 172U(3)(b) requires the Commission, when performing functions or
exercising powers under the LCR Act, to have regard to any
decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 172U(4). A decision-making
guideline that was in effect immediately
before 1 July 2022 in relation to the
regulation of liquor remains in effect on and after that day as if it had been
issued under
section 172U(4)..See LCR Act, Schedule 8, clause 5.
The decision-making
guideline titled
“Grant of Licence for the Sale of Packaged
dated 7 June 2012 was issued by the then Minister for Consumer
Affairs and Minister responsible for administering the LCR Act.
Transcript 17 April 2024,
page 6, lines 14 to 17; 22 to 23.
Ibid, page 16, lines 15 to
Ibid, page 6, line 36.
Ibid, page 29, lines 23 to
Ibid, page 7, lines 12 to
Ibid, page 9, lines 1 to 5;
page 10, lines 43 to 44. Note section 3(1)(c) of the LCR Act which provides that
ordinary trading hours
in relation to a packaged liquor licence are until no
later than 11pm.
Ibid, page 11, lines 20 to
Ibid, page 16, lines 40 to
41; page 17, lines 18 to 20.
Ibid, page 18, line 42, to
page 19, line 27.
Ibid, page 18, lines 3 to
Ibid, page 18, lines 36 to
Ibid, page 22, lines 21 to
Ibid, page 36, line 21 to
page 37, line 1.
Ibid, page 26, lines 9 to
Ibid, page 27, line 6.
Ibid, page 31, lines 28 to
Ibid, page 32, line 42 to
page 33, line 31.
section 44(2)(b)(ii).
LCR Act, sections 4
and 172D(3).
Black Lula Evangeline
& Cooke Brian v Liquor Licensing Victoria & Green Dragon Pty Ltd
[2000] VCAT 459.
Kordister Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 325
, 39 VR 92 at
Kordister Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
Kordister v Director of
Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
and Liquor Licensing Victoria
[2000] VCAT 459
(2000) 17 VAR
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2005] VCAT 323
‘particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances...’
Australian Bureau of
Statistics, 2021, Index relative socio-economic disadvantage,
www.abs.gov.au.
Report entitled, ‘Data
Report’, prepared by Liquor Control Victoria, dated 26 March 2024, page
Ibid, page 6.
Ibid, page 9.
Ibid, page 13 – See
also Turning Point, 2012 to 2021, AODstats: Victorian alcohol and drugs
statistics,
www.aodstats.org.au
accessed: 20/3/2024.
Crime Statistics Agency,
2014 to 2023, Criminal Incidents, www.crimestaistics.vic.gov.au.
LCR Act section 172D(2); the
Commission is entitled to inform itself, in the manner it sees fit, as to its
functions and the operation
of the LCR Act.
Above n 25, page 4, line 19
to page 5, line 2.
Applicant’s
information to the Delegate, 15 November 2023, Transcript 17 April 2024, page
16, lines 15 to 16; page 7, lines
Above n 59, page 5, line 34
to page 6, line 8; page 16, line 15.
Above n 60.
Above n 59, page 7, line 44
to page 8, line 3.
Ibid, page 18, lines 42 to
45; page 27, line 8 to page 29, line 42.
Ibid, page 6, lines 32 to
41; see paragraphs 54 to 65 above.
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Australian Guidelines to Reduce Health Risks from Drinking
(2020), page 61: “
In Australia, the disease and injury
burden from alcohol use is skewed towards people in the lowest socioeconomic
groups. In 2011,
the greatest amount of burden was experienced by those in the
lowest socioeconomic group...while the lowest burden was experienced
by those in
the highest socioeconomic group.”
Report entitled, ‘Data
Report’, prepared by Liquor Control Victoria, dated 26 March 2024, page
LCR Act section 11(3)(aa).
See paragraph 10 above.
Ibid section 22(1)(c).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter