URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cassar Corporation Pty Ltd at Mortadeli premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 32 (15 October 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by Cassar Corporation Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal
review of a decision to refuse to grant an application for a renewable limited
licence for the premises located at Shop
8, 4-6 Gilbert Street, Torquay, trading
as Mortadeli.
Commission:
Deirdre O’Donnell,
Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Hearing: 15 October 2021
Date of Decision: 15 October 2021
Date of Reasons: 15 November 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for a renewable
licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Deirdre O’Donnell
The Original Application
25 June 2021, Cassar Corporation Pty Ltd (
the Applicant
) applied to the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
the Commission
for the grant of a renewable limited licence (
the Original Application
at the premises trading as Mortadeli, located at Shop 8, 4-6 Gilbert Street,
the Premises
Applicant leases the Premises where it operates a sandwich shop and delicatessen
with a Mediterranean food theme. The Premises
serving area;
kitchen area; and
open courtyard.
internal space of the Premises comprises of one room with an overall size of 40
square metres, with half of that space designated
for the kitchen. Up to 10
seats are available for customers to dine inside, and another 11 seats are
available for customers to dine
in the rear courtyard.
Applicant sought a renewable limited licence in order to supply liquor on the
Premises for consumption on and off the Premises
between the hours of 10 am to 7
pm, Sunday, 12 noon to 7 pm, Good Friday and ANZAC Day, and 9 am to 7 pm, on any
other day. The Applicant
proposed to supply beer, wine, and pre-mixed
spirts/cocktails.
with the Original Application was a plan of the proposed licensed area (
Red Line Plan
), which incorporates the entire Premises. Also included with
the Original Application were certificates of completion by the sole
director of
the Applicant, Mr Jake Cassar, in relation to New Entrant
and a Responsible Service
of Alcohol (
Further, the Applicant provided a declaration of the right to occupy the
Premises, a questionnaire completed by Mr Cassar,
and a current and historical
company extract.
accordance with
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
a copy of the Original
Application was served on the Chief Commissioner of Police and the Licensing
Inspector (together,
Victoria Police
), and the Surf Coast Shire (
) on 25 June 2021.
25 June 2021, a delegate of the Commission (
) wrote to the
Applicant requesting information in relation to the nature of the
Applicant’s business and the liquor proposed
to be supplied under the
licence. Further, on 28 June 2021, the Delegate requested information in
relation to the scale and scope
of the liquor proposed to be supplied.
response to the Delegate’s requests for information, the Applicant
submitted (in summary):
business is a small sandwich shop which offers tea, coffee and other cold
drinks. There is also a small deli with pre-packaged,
sealed and refrigerated
items such as ham, sausages, lasagne, and other small meals, as well as
sandwiches for takeaway;
hoped that customers will order an alcoholic drink for consumption on the
Premises with their food or a small amount for take-away
with their pre-packed
meals or sandwiches;
will likely be locals or tourists attending for lunch or snacks, as well as
those seeking to purchase food and/or drinks
for take-away; and
proposed liquor available will be beer and wines, with a limited amount being
kept on the Premises due to a small storage space.
10 August 2021, the Delegate refused the Original Application (
the Original
). In summary, she was of the view that she could not be satisfied
from the Applicant’s submissions that the scale and scope
of the liquor
proposed to be supplied was sufficiently limited to satisfy essential
requirements under section 26.
Application for Internal
7 September 2021, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the Original
Decision and requested to supply no more than one
line of each of red wine,
white wine, sparkling wine, beer and premixed spirits with a limit of two
glasses or cans, per customer,
per sitting at the Premises, with no liquor
supplied for off-premises consumption (
Application
proposed trading hours for supply of liquor would be reduced to midday to 7pm on
All liquor would be
supplied with food.
22 September 2021, a copy of the Review Application was served on Victoria
Police and the Council. Both responded to the Commission
on 23 September 2021,
and advised that they did not object to the grant of the Review Application.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Application is a
reviewable decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for the
review of that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant to section
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
b. sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision
that the Commission on review considers appropriate.
the LCR Act, an application for a renewable limited licence may be contested or
uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested
application is defined
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or
relocation of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division
for that objection (or that period as extended under section
Original Application is uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must either:
the application, and if so, determine whether to do so subject to
to grant the
application
the internal review power
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in exercising its internal
review function, to have regard to the objects of the LCR Act and any
decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 5 of the VCGLR
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) and provide
The objects of this Act are—
) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) of the LCR Act further provides that:
It is the intention of
Parliament that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty
conferred or imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard
to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any matter the
Commission considers relevant, make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the application.
section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit
on the grant of an application.
44(2)(b) of the LCR Act empowers the Commission to refuse to grant the Review
Application on various grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the Premises to which
the application relates are situated; or
(b) the granting of the application would be
conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol.
Commission considers that while the grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2)
of the LCR Act are relevant considerations, the
determination of an
uncontested application is ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1) and
section 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission, with reference to the
objects of the LCR Act.
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable limited
. Pursuant to section
14(1B) of the LCR Act, a renewable limited licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor at the times determined
by the Commission and specified on the
licence, and it may be renewed in accordance with the LCR Act. A limited licence
may further
be subject to any conditions determined by the Commission and
specified on the licence.
26(1) of the LCR Act provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence
only if it is satisfied that the scale and scope
of the supply of liquor the
subject of the licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope
Requirement
Conduct of an Inquiry
34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling legislation or
liquor legislation, the Commission may conduct
any inquiry in any manner it
considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the
VCGLR Act provides that
the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
before the Commission
Commission on review had before it and considered all the materials before the
Commission on review also received and considered the following
and Reasons for Decision of the Delegate for the Original Application, dated 10
August 2021;
Application received by the Commission, dated 7 September 2021; and
communications from the Applicant in respect to reduced trading hours for the
supply of liquor as specified in paragraph 11
above, dated 28 September 2021 and
19 October 2021.
On-the-Papers determination
of the Review Application
28 September 2021, the Commission informed the Applicant that it was possible to
determine the Review Application ‘on the
papers’, without a hearing
or an appearance by the Applicant. On the same day, the Applicant’s sole
director, Mr Cassar,
wrote to the Commission to state his preference for the
Commission to determine the Review Application ‘on the papers’.
15 October 2021, the Commission convened to determine the Review Application
‘on the papers’.
Reasons for decision on
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision and in turn
grant or refuse the renewable limited licence that
is the subject of the Review
Application, the Commission must consider:
the Commission is satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply of liquor the
subject of the proposed licence is limited
the Review Application should be granted or refused, having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act and, in particular, harm
minimisation, which is the
primary object.
of these issues is discussed in turn.
Limited in scale and scope
14 provides that a renewable limited licence “
authorises the licensee
to supply liquor at the times determined by the Commission and specified in the
.” However, unlike other categories of licence, limited
licences are subject to the additional restriction found at section
the Commission may only grant a limited licence if satisfied “
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission
to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions the Commission has considered “
the nature, location,
duration or frequency of the hours of operation of a licence in question”
as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement
this Review Application, the proposed supply of liquor for which the proposed
licence is sought is clearly different from that
which was before the Delegate.
In particular, the following additional restrictions were proposed by the
range of liquor supplied would be restricted to one line of each of red wine,
white wine, sparkling wine, beer and premixed spirits
(the Original Application
did not contain this proposed restriction);
supply of liquor would be limited to midday to 7pm on any day (in the Original
Application, the Applicant had first requested
the supply of liquor between the
hours of 9 am and 7 pm every day of the
This was later amended to
10 am to 7 pm, Sunday, 12 noon to 7 pm, Good Friday and ANZAC Day, and 9 am to 7
pm, on any other day);
supply of liquor would be for on-premises consumption only (in the Original
Application, the Applicant requested the supply of
liquor for both on-premises
consumption and off-premises consumption); and
supply of liquor would be limited to no more than two glasses or cans, per
customer, per sitting at the Premises (in the Original
Application, the
Applicant’s request had included up to one whole bottle of wine per
customer or two bottles/cans of beer or
pre-packaged cocktails).
this instance, the Commission accepts that the supply of liquor would be
sufficiently restricted given the limitations proposed
in the Review
Application, including a limited range and quantity of liquor to be supplied.
Commission also notes that the hours of supply proposed by the Review
Application are more limited than the ordinary trading hours
defined at section
3(1) and the liquor would only be served in conjunction with
While this alone is not a
significant limitation for the purpose of the Scale and Scope Requirement, this
may be considered cumulatively
with the limitations referred to in paragraph 35
above. What is a significantly greater limitation compared with that contained
the Original Application is the removal of the request to supply liquor for
consumption off the Premises.
into account the size and nature of the Premises, and subject to the limitations
as referred to in paragraph 35 being imposed
as conditions on the proposed
licence, the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is
Discretion to grant or refuse the Review Application
Commission has a discretion under section 44(1) to grant or refuse the Review
Application. In exercising this discretion, the
Commission must have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm minimisation, which is the primary
Commission may also refuse to grant the Review Application on the basis of any
of the matters listed in section 44(2)(a) and (b),
which relevantly include that
the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the misuse
and abuse of alcohol.
Misuse and abuse of alcohol
previously stated, the Review Application proposes to supply no more than one
line of each of red wine, white wine, sparkling wine,
beer and premixed spirits
with a limit of two glasses or cans, per customer, per sitting at the Premises,
with the consumption of
food. The food includes freshly made sandwiches and
other small meals.
Commission considers that in all circumstances, given the restrictions on the
supply of liquor specifically proposed by the Review
Application and the limited
trading hours, capacity, and other restrictions, that the risk of misuse and
abuse of alcohol would be
minimal. The Commission further notes that the
requirement for service of food with the supply of alcohol also assists in the
responsible
service of alcohol and the minimising of the risk of harm.
Applicant submitted as part of its Review Application that the supply liquor
would be to simply fit the Mediterranean food theme
of the Premises, in which
food is paired with wine. In this instance, the Commission accepts from the
Review Application that the
proposed supply of liquor is an ancillary aspect of
the Applicant’s primary business of a sandwich shop and delicatessen.
Commission also notes that the Applicant’s sole director, Mr Cassar, has
already completed the RSA program and New Entrant
a combination of the above reasons, the Commission does not consider the
potential for the misuse and abuse of alcohol as a ground
to refuse to grant the
Review Application.
Whether to exercise discretion to grant or refuse the Review
Application having regard to the objects of the LCR Act
Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets the Scale and Scope
Requirement, and the Commission is satisfied that
there are no grounds for
refusal under section 44(2), having regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
Importantly,
with the imposition of the conditions in Appendix One, the Commission is
satisfied that adequate controls will exist
over the supply and consumption of
liquor at the Premises and that any risk of harm will be minimised.
the Commission considers that granting the licence would facilitate the
development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community
expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in section 4(1)(b).
Relevantly, the Commission notes from
the Applicant’s submissions that
there are no other venues with a Mediterranean food theme currently operating
like the Premises
within Torquay.
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to set
aside the decision of the Delegate and, in substitution,
grant a renewable
limited licence subject to conditions set out in Appendix A.
The preceding 49 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons
for Decision of Ms Deirdre O’Donnell (Deputy Chair), Ms Danielle
Huntersmith (Commissioner) and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
This licence is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
supply liquor for consumption on the licensed premises
during the trading hours
specified below.
Supply of liquor
Liquor must only be supplied for consumption on the premises with food.
The supply of liquor shall be limited to no more than one line of red wine,
one line of white wine, one line of sparkling wine, one
line of beer and one
line of premixed spirits.
The quantity of liquor to be served must not exceed two glass containers or
open cans, not exceeding 425 ml in volume each, per customer,
per sitting.
Responsible service of alcohol
At all times, staff selling, offering or serving liquor are to have completed
an approved Responsible Service of Alcohol training
course within the preceding
three years.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the
area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the
licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised under
this licence.
Trading hours for the supply of liquor
On any day – between 12 noon and 7 pm.
The New Entrant Training was
completed on 3 June 2021.
The RSA program was completed
on 31 May 2021.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
By way of the Review
Application, the Applicant had amended the Original Application to be considered
The Applicant confirmed the
reduced trading hours for the proposed supply of liquor in email communications
dated 28 September 2021
and 19 October 2021.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44 and
VCGLR Act, section 9(3) and
(4). Pursuant to section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act, the Commission has had regard to
the Decision-Making
Guidelines relating to the assessment of the cumulative
impact of licensed premises, dated 7 June 2012, and the Decision-Making
relating to the grant of licences for the sale of packaged liquor,
dated 7 June 2012. The Commission is satisfied as to the matters
set out in the
Decision-Making Guidelines relating to the assessment of the cumulative impact
of licensed premises, particularly
as granting the Original Application with
conditions would result in new licensed premises with a relatively small
capacity and relatively
restricted trading hours. The Commission did not
consider the Decision-Making Guidelines relating to the grant of licences for
sale of packaged liquor as relevant to the Original Application given the
amendments made to the Original Application by way of the
Review Application to
remove all requests to supply liquor for consumption off the Premises.
See further
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section 44(4).
LCR Act, section 14(1).
Section 26(1)
The Commission notes that in
determining this matter, it has also considered each of the grounds set out in
section 44(2).
See decision of Fynix Pty
Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-internal review) [2016]
VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016)
Original Application,
received 25 June 2021.
Applicant’s additional
submissions on trading hours for the proposed supply of liquor, dated 28 June
The Commission even notes
that the proposed hours of supply of liquor on Good Friday and ANZAC Day are
more limited than the ordinary
trading hours for those days as defined at
section 3(1).
See further Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing [20121 VSCA 325, which confirms that harm
minimisation is the primary
regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor licensing decisions (although not to the
of the other objects).
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter