URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/93.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Cook [1996] VicRp 93; [1996] 2 VR 658 (21 February 1996)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, CALLAWAY JA AND HAMPEL AJA
21 February 1996
Winneke P, Callaway JA and Hampel AJA
We are indebted to counsel for the assistance given to us in this matter, which has been complicated to some -
degree by the application of legislation which was not referred to the learned sentencing judge during the course of his sentencing
disposition.
Before turning to matters which are relevant to the sentence, we ought to say that it was conceded before us this morning that, for
reasons that will become clear during the remarks that we make, his Honour's sentencing disposition has been, through no fault of
his, infected by error. As a consequence of that and concessions made in respect of it, we have granted leave to appeal against sentence
and heard the appeal this morning.
It is desirable to give a short summary of the facts which form the background to the appeal. The applicant, Cook, is a man of 43
years of age. On 21 October 1990, in the City of Bendigo in the State of Victoria, he engaged in a piece of driving which can only
be regarded as quite deplorable. As a consequence of that he was taken into custody and charged with the offence of culpable driving
causing death, which was the offence for which he was ultimately sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three years by the learned
judge in the County Court at Bendigo in November 1994.
Cook, as his Honour was informed, has an appalling record for offences concerning dishonesty, and also offences involving the illegal
and improper use of motor cars. It appears from reference to his record that he has a capacity to imbibe alcohol to excess and also
has a capacity to ingest drugs at times when he should not be doing so, and as a consequence places innocent members of the public
This disposition was manifest on 21 October 1990, when he engaged in the conduct which has led to the sentence with which we are
concerned. On that day he had consumed a large amount of liquor, including an entire bottle of Cointreau and was in a condition which
rendered him totally unsuited to drive a vehicle. He none the less got into his vehicle and commenced to drive it. In the course
of driving it he crashed through the fence of a house in Eaglehawk, in the environs of Bendigo; he ignored the entreaties of the
occupier of that house to stop; he continued to drive his car, rammed into the back of a car being driven by another innocent citizen
of the City of Bendigo and left her in a state of shock; he then went through a "give way" sign at a busy intersection. The street
in which he was driving intersected with the highway that ran on the outskirts of Bendigo. The inevitable happened: he ran into a
small car driven by the victim of his crime and caused that car to fly through the air. The driver of it suffered terrible injuries
from which he died later that day.
No doubt Cook has suffered remorse as a consequence of what he did. He expressed profound regret for his conduct during the course
of his interview with the police. But, as his Honour pointed out, the result of his wholly irresponsible conduct was the loss of
a young life.
At the time when Cook committed these offences and was arrested for them, he was on parole for offences of dishonesty for which he
had been committed to prison in 1989. As a consequence of the events that we have described he was regarded as being in breach of
his parole and was again taken into custody to serve out the remainder of the sentence from which he had been paroled. Following
that, he moved to Western Australia, where it appears his girlfriend had gone, bearing his child. By going to Western Australia he
was effectively absconding from the bail, on which he had been remanded to appear at the County Court in Bendigo in 1991 to face
his trial or plea in respect of the culpable driving count. -
Although warrants were issued for his arrest, he was not found until some years later in Western Australia, at which time he was
undergoing sentence for various crimes which he had committed in that State. It appears that on 23 July 1993 in Western Australia
he had received a total sentence of five years for sexual penetration and deprivation of liberty, and on 26 August 1993 he had received
a total term of some 19 months for stealing and entering with intent. Although those sentences were imposed by two different courts
on two different occasions, the sentences were ordered to be served cumulatively on each other, so that effectively Cook was the
subject of orders to serve total sentences of six years and seven months dating from 23 July 1993. Pursuant to the relevant legislation
in Western Australia, the courts had directed that he not be eligible for parole on any of those sentences.
The facts that we are about to recite were facts which were relevant to his Honour's sentencing disposition when he came to deal
with Cook for the culpable driving charge, but in respect of which he was not informed. Whilst he was undergoing sentence in Western
Australia pursuant to the sentences to which we have referred, in September 1994 there was an application made by the Attorney-General
for the State of Victoria pursuant to the
Prisoners (Interstate Transfer) Act 1983
(Vic) for the transfer of Cook from custody in Western Australia to this State for the purpose of having him tried for the culpable
driving offence with which he had been charged arising out of the events of 21 October 1990.
The transfer which was effected pursuant to that application had certain administrative ramifications. Cook was transferred from
Western Australia to Victoria on that date. As a consequence of that transfer he pleaded guilty at the County Court in Bendigo in
November 1994 to the culpable driving charge. His Honour was aware of the fact that Cook was undergoing sentences in Western Australia
of the type to which we have referred, but was not informed of the effects which the imposition of those sentences and the transfer
pursuant to the aforesaid legislation would or might have on the sentencing task that his Honour faced in November 1994. That is
unfortunate, because the combined effect of the Western Australian legislation and the Victorian legislation had an impact upon the
custodial sentences that Cook was already undergoing and would continue to undergo. It seems that his Honour acted on the view that,
when he imposed his sentence in respect of the culpable driving, Cook would be returned to serve out his sentence for the Western
Australian offences and then would serve whatever time his Honour was imposing upon him for the culpable driving offence. In fact
the effect of the legislation is that, when a request is made for the transfer of a person already undergoing sentence in another
State, and the prisoner is then transferred pursuant to the request, the sentence which is being served pursuant to the interstate
order becomes notionally a sentence of a Victorian court and the sentence is then served in Victorian custody.
However, the effect of the Act, as Mr Grace has pointed out to us, is that, whereas in Western Australia the prisoner would get the
benefit of remissions amounting to one-third of the total head sentence imposed upon him, once he is transferred to Victoria pursuant
to the legislation he only gets the benefit of remissions up until the point of transfer. He loses the benefit of remissions that
would have been obtained had the sentence continued to be served in Western Australia. The practical effect is that the translated
sentence was effectively increased in Cook's case by a total of some two years and five months. -
The submission which Mr Grace made to us was that his client ought to be no worse off as a consequence of the orders, requests and
directions that were made and which resulted in his transfer from Western Australia to Victoria. Mr Grace contended that in fact
his client was substantially worse off because his Honour had proceeded to sentence Cook in respect of the culpable driving offence
on a misapprehension of the true facts.
It is clear, when one looks at his Honour's sentencing remarks, that his Honour took the view that Cook was due to be released pursuant
to the Western Australian offences in September 1997. The effect of the removal of the prisoner from Western Australia to Victoria,
and the loss of the benefit of remissions which that transfer effected, meant that his Western Australian sentence would not be completed
until, at the very earliest, February 2000. Mr Grace put it to us that therefore his Honour ought to have sentenced Cook on the basis
that he should be given credit for the full effect of the "lost" remissions which his transfer into this State had brought about.
His Honour sentenced Cook on the culpable driving charge to three years' imprisonment. No criticism is made of the head sentence
that his Honour imposed. His Honour ordered that a minimum period of two years be served by Cook before becoming eligible for parole
and directed that the whole of that sentence be served cumulatively upon the sentence already being undergone. If Cook were given
the benefit of the remissions that he otherwise would have obtained in Western Australia pursuant to the sentences there and his
Honour's sentence were to be served in its entirety cumulative upon that sentence, he would not be released until September 2000.
A non-parole period could not be fixed in respect of the Western Australian sentence because the Western Australian courts have directed
that there is to be no parole in relation to what have become the translated sentences. No Victorian court is entitled to modify
that express direction of the Western Australian court, or, indeed, to alter its effect. We refer to
Prisoners (Interstate Transfer) Act
of 1983. Because we believe that that is the clear effect of that section, we need not stay to consider the true meaning of
of the same Act.
The earliest release date consistent with the Western Australian sentences would be February 2000. It was submitted that his Honour's
sentence should be made wholly concurrent with the sentences being undergone by Cook at the present time because he was losing the
benefit of the non-parole period fixed by his Honour.
Mr Castle, representing the director before us, responded to that by saying that such an order would not reflect the gravity of the
culpable driving offence with which his Honour was dealing, and that in order to reflect such gravity a measure of cumulation should
be ordered. It was conceded that, having regard to the circumstances which we have sought to describe in these reasons, the maximum
cumulation that could be ordered to achieve the effect of his Honour's sentences, consistently with the principles already stated,
is the period of seven months.
We accept Mr Castle's submission that the sentence which we shall now have to impose should reflect such cumulation.
In accordance with the reasons already given, we make the following formal orders: The application for leave to appeal against sentence
is granted, for the reasons already stated. The appeal is allowed. The sentence below is quashed and in lieu thereof we direct that
the applicant be sentenced to a term of three years' imprisonment in respect of the count charging culpable driving causing death.
direct that seven months of that sentence be served cumulatively upon the translated sentences already being served by the applicant.
We direct, pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, that the applicant not be eligible for parole in respect of the sentence that we have imposed. We make that direction because of
the provisions of
Prisoners (Interstate Transfer) Act 1983
of Western Australia.
We re-affirm his Honour's sentences and orders imposed and made pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
in relation to disqualification from obtaining a licence for a period of 10 years. That will date from 24 November 1994. We also
confirm his Honour's sentence passed pursuant to
Road Safety Act 1986
, being a fine of $500 for exceeding the prescribed blood alcohol level.
We order that any application by the Crown for an extension of time within which to file notice of appeal be dismissed.
Application for leave to appeal granted and appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the applicant: Stary and George.
Solicitor for the respondent: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter