URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UMB [2024] VMHT 27 (10 December 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT 027
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Regional mental health service
Mode of hearing:
Online video
Tribunal members:
Robert Daly (Legal Member)
David Baron (Psychiatrist Member)
Sarah Muling (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Patient support person
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Myra Bigger
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal revoked your
temporary treatment order.
This statement of reasons:
the hearing your legal representative requested a written explanation of the
Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your
treating team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you were on a
temporary treatment order due to end on 17/11/2024. The Tribunal had to have a
before the temporary treatment order expired to decide whether or not to
make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – You spoke to the Tribunal about wanting to determine your own
treatment in consultation with your GP.
restriction – You asked to be supported to be a voluntary patient.
decision making – you do not want to receive any medication because you
don't accept you have a mental illness.
The Tribunal must also give
proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory
treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under the
Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you do not
agree that you
have a mental illness or need treatment for a mental illness.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Information provided at the hearing.
Your lawyer Myra said the focus of her submissions would be on the first
criterion (a) which is whether you have a mental illness.
Myra told the
Tribunal that you received treatment from your GP for depression and panic
attacks 20 years ago, but you have not required
treatment since.
said the treating team noted that you have symptoms of aggression and paranoia
but that your family says this behaviour has been
long standing and it is your
personality. Myra submitted that the evidence provided by the treating team
indicates you may have
a personality disorder not a mental illness as defined
under the Act.
Myra said that you are currently prevented from living in
your home because you are subjected to a court intervention order due to
family violence towards your wife and that you will remain in hospital until you
are able to return home or find suitable
accommodation.
Myra noted that
under the Act a person is not to be considered as having a mental illness by
reason only of the following behaviour
or experience/s:
that the person
engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards of acceptable
that the person
engages in illegal conduct;
that the person
engages in anti-social behaviour;
that the person
is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
that the person
is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress
that the allegations regarding family violence leading to the admission to
hospital do not demonstrate that you have mental
illness. Further, Myra
submitted that many of the symptoms described in the treating team’s
report are based on information
provided to the treating team by your family.
Myra submitted that your response to forced treatment detailed in the report,
distrust, suspicion, agitation and aggression towards the treating
team has to be considered in its context, notably that you were
distressed about
being forced by police and the treating team to attend and remain in hospital
and forced to have medication that
you did not agree was needed.
told us you don't understand why you were brought into hospital by the police.
You said there was a “slight” domestic
situation with your wife
which you can sort out. You said you do not have any psychiatric problem, and
the treating team wrongly
claim you have a mental illness which you strongly
object to because there is no sign of it. You denied that you had any worries
before your admission to hospital. You agreed you have had ongoing issues
regarding your cousin trying to sell a property overseas
which has been
distressing, but you denied that this was the cause of you needing hospital
You said you will stay in hospital if you are a voluntary
patient because you don't have any accommodation due to the intervention
However, you said you will only remain in hospital so that you have a bed to
sleep in, but you will not accept any anti-psychotic
medication. You said when
you are able to leave hospital you will seek help from your GP who you trust and
will accept treatment
if your GP thinks it is necessary.
provided by the treating team states that you were brought into the emergency
department of the hospital by the ambulance
and police because you had attempted
to strangle your wife, and you were very upset about your cousin selling a home
in another country.
On application by the police, the Magistrates Court made an
intervention order in October which prohibits you from living with your
having contact with your wife until further order of the court.
admission to the psychiatric unit the report indicates that you became very
angry and threatening and required seclusion and
chemical restraint due to your
aggression towards the treating team. The report also indicates that you
presented as confused, suspicious
and paranoid towards the treating team and the
need for treatment in hospital.
The report indicates that your son
reported that you have been aggressive towards him and your wife for a long
period of time but
that it recently worsened resulting in the physical assault
of your wife and the need for an intervention order. The report asserts
without treatment there is a risk you may become homeless if you are unable to
Dr LM, who did not attend the hearing had
questioned whether you have a mental illness or whether you have a personality
He said your son reported that you have always been controlling. Also,
Dr LM stated that Kelly, who has known you for 10 years reported
you have always
been obsessed about your rights to land in another country and that you have
also been verbally abusive towards your
wife and son. Dr LM reported there was
no indication of psychotic symptoms and queried whether the psychiatric unit is
environment for you or whether it is too restrictive if you have a
personality disorder.
AP disputed Dr LM’s opinion because he said
it was based on a brief period of observation and treatment in his capacity as a
relief Doctor. He said whilst this is your first admission to a psychiatric
unit, he believes you have an undiagnosed delusional
disorder. He said you were
highly agitated, aggressive and suspicious towards the treating team upon
admission to hospital, refused
any treatment and required four-point restraint.
AP said your wife reported that after your initial discharge from the emergency
department you attended your home and asked your wife to allow access despite
the intervention order because you were concerned that
the treating team were
trying to poison you.
AP said he is concerned if you are a voluntary
patient, you will leave hospital and return home again in breach of the
intervention
order. Also, SP said he has tried to support you to find
alternative temporary accommodation including a supported residential service
while there is an intervention order in place, but you refused his support
stating you had your own social worker who can help you.
Tribunal’s decision
In applying the legal criteria, the
Tribunal must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
The Tribunal
did not agree that you had mental illness as defined by the Act. The Tribunal
must be satisfied to a comfortable degree
and based on cogent and compelling
evidence that you experience symptoms of a mental illness. The legal definition
of mental illness
has two parts. First, mental illness is ‘a medical
condition that is characterised by a significant disturbance of thought,
perception or memory’ (section 4(1) of the Act). The second consideration
involves characteristics that are excluded
from the definition of mental illness
in section 4(2) of the Act. A person is not considered to have a mental illness
by reason only
of possessing certain characteristics.
In reaching its decision the Tribunal had regard to the following:
there was an
absence of cogent and current information about the presence of symptoms of
mental illness
that you dispute
the collateral information relied on by the treating team to support the
contention that you experience disturbance
of thought and mood and
reasonable alternative explanation including that you engaged in antisocial
behaviour and family conflict.
Given the importance of the
decision and its potential impact on you, the Tribunal cannot be satisfied based
on the written evidence
placed before the Tribunal (including the report and
progress notes) that you have a mental illness; nor was that information
during the hearing.
While there is clear evidence you were
experiencing a disturbance in your mood upon admission to the hospital,
including aggressiveness
and irritability we found this occurred in the context
of a highly volatile, stressful situation. You had been forcibly taken to
hospital after allegedly seriously assaulting your wife. Further whilst there
is some evidence that you were suspicious towards
the team which indicated a
disturbance in your thinking such as paranoia, the Tribunal also takes account
of the context in which
you were brought to hospital for ongoing compulsory
treatment. Whilst we do not dismiss the collateral evidence that you attended
your home stating you were being poisoned, the Tribunal was not satisfied there
was clear and cogent evidence of a significant disturbance
in your thinking,
mood, perception or memory, which meant that the Tribunal could not be satisfied
that you experience symptoms of
mental illness.
On balance, the Tribunal
was not satisfied that you had mental illness to the required legal standard. As
this criterion was not met,
we did not consider the other criteria.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that you did not have
a mental illness the Tribunal had to revoke your Treatment Order.
determination: 15-11-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Robert Daly
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 10 December 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (547 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter