URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1594.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pallak Pty Ltd v Stoneypint Pty Ltd [2025] VCC 1594 (6 November 2025)
THE COUNTY COURT OF
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. Cl-23-05465
PALLAK PTY LTD (ACN 613 628
087) as trustee of COUANGALT FAMILY TRUST
Plaintiff/Defendant
by counterclaim
STONEYPINT PTY LTD (ACN 164 486 926) as trustee
of STONEYPINT TRUST
Defendant/Plaintiff by
counterclaim
Her Honour Judge A Ryan
DATE OF HEARING
2, 3, 4 June 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
6 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Pallak Pty Ltd v Stoneypint Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1594
REASONS FOR
Subject: CONTRACT - RECEIVERSHIP
Catchwords: Claim for specific performance - whether the parties intended to
enter into a legally binding contract by signing an
exit agreement to sell a
half share of a property held in partnership – relevance of post signature
conduct – whether
damages be an appropriate remedy – should the
partnership be wound up and a receiver appointed
Legislation Cited:
Sale of Land Act
Cases Cited:
5G Networks Limited v Centralnic Limited
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
Bauklham Hills Private
Hospital Pty Ltd v JR Securities Pty Ltd & Ors
[1986] 40 NSWLR 622
Edge Development Group Pty Ltd v Jack Road Investments Pty Ltd
[2018] VSC 326
Pinegro Products Pty Ltd v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] VSC 453
Steller Vision Operations Pty Ltd v Hills Health
Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 102
Patel v Segun Investment Holdings Pty
[2023] VSCA 238
Molonglo Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Cahill
[2018] VSCA 147
Niesmann v Collingridge
[1921] HCA 19
(1921) 29 CLR 177
Nurisvan Investment Ltd v Anyoption Holdings Limited
[2017] VSCA 141
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr L Virgona
G & M Lawyers
For the Defendant
Mr H L Redd SC with
Arslan Lawyers
Mr A F Solomon-Bridge
Table of Contents
HER HONOUR:
(1) Overview and
late 2018, the parties entered into a partnership to develop a property located
at 36 Rockwell Way, Ravenhall (‘
the property
’). The parties
own the property as tenants in common. In around November 2022, the plaintiff
decided to leave the partnership
and agreed to sell its half share in the
property to the defendant. The defendant drew up a handwritten document
record their agreement, which the parties then signed.
main issue for determination is whether the parties intended the exit agreement
to be a legally binding contract. The plaintiff
claims the exit agreement is
merely an unenforceable agreement to agree. For its part, the defendant contends
the agreement is a
legally binding contract. If it is binding, the defendant
seeks an order for specific performance. If not, the plaintiff seeks orders
the partnership conducted by the parties be wound up and a receiver appointed.
The defendant opposes the appointment of a receiver.
the reasons that follow, I find the exit agreement is a legally binding
contract. I accept and prefer the defendant’s submission
document fell within the second category identified in
In the circumstances,
the defendant is entitled to an order for specific performance of the exit
agreement. I was not persuaded the
appointment of a receiver is
around early 2006, Mr Leonidas Konstantinidis
Konstantindis
’), the plaintiff’s sole director, and
Mr Shai Schildkraut (‘
Schildkraut
’), the defendant’s
sole director, first met at a building site in Tullamarine. They subsequently
developed a close friendship,
which included meeting each other’s
families. Both men have considerable experience in the building industry. They
doing a building project together at some stage. Schildkraut became a
registered builder in 2016.
5 September 2018, Schildkraut received an email from Knight Frank Australia
alerting him to commercial development opportunities,
including the development
of the property. Schildkraut pitched to Konstantinidis the idea of buying and
developing as partners (through
their company vehicles) the property, to
construct and then lease warehouses with a good return of income. Konstantinidis
said “Let’s
do it, I trust you to do it
Konstantinidis
and Schildkraut met at Schildkraut’s offices, where they agreed they would
carry on in partnership the business
of purchasing and developing the property
partnership agreement
’). The terms of the oral partnership
agreement were that the parties would contribute equally to the costs and
expenses of
the partnership, and would acquire, hold and develop the property
jointly and equally for profit.
was also agreed that Schildkraut would be primarily responsible for the building
and construction of the property, including the
proposed 16 commercial
warehouses on the property. Schildkraut would not charge the usual builder
margin to the partnership, typically
20 per cent. Schildkraut saw it as a
long-term income stream once the warehouses had been built and were rented out.
He had discussions
with Konstantinidis to this effect prior to purchase of the
property. The defendant claims the parties also agreed they would let
warehouses constructed on the property and divide the rental returns equally
between them. The plaintiff disputes they agreed
upon renting the units and
sharing the income.
was no written partnership agreement created in the dealings between the two
men. Their discussions were mainly oral. Occasionally,
Schildkraut would email
Konstantinidis’ daughter, Effie, as a contact point.
10 September 2018, Schildkraut signed a contract of sale for the property with a
purchase price of $1,472,580. The parties contributed
equally to the deposit.
4 October 2018, Lowe Lipmann, accountants, registered the partnership for GST
and an ABN.
26 October 2018, Schildkraut opened a Westpac bank account to deal with
partnership income and expenses. Each partner contributed
$450,000 towards the
project. A loan was taken out by the partnership from Westpac in the sum of
$735,000 to pay the balance payable
under the contract of sale. The parties
subsequently deposited equal amounts to the partnership bank account to pay for
construction
costs and outgoings. Payments from the bank account had to be
jointly approved by the parties.
partnership’s business name, ‘Rockfield Business Park’, was
registered on 13 November 2018.
16 November 2018, settlement of the property occurred. The parties became
registered proprietors of the property of two equal undivided
shares as tenants
26 June 2019, planning approval to construct 16 warehouses was obtained. The
stage 1 building permit was granted on 20 December
2019. In 2020, after
obtaining building and planning permits, Schildkraut commenced the building and
development of the property.
stage 2 building permit for construction of the remainder of the warehouses was
issued on 16 November 2020 (and later amended
on 20 October 2022), with
Schildkraut named as builder.
various conversations from about August 2022, Konstantinidis told Schildkraut he
wanted to leave the partnership. On the defendant’s
version of events,
Konstantinidis was concerned about the economy, including rising interest rates.
Although not accepting the state
of the economy and interest rates were
motivating factors, Konstantinidis agreed he wanted to leave the partnership as
he was suffering
from ill-health and was concerned about leaving debts to his
parties discussed a few options. This included Schildkraut putting to
Konstantinidis that he (Konstantinidis) should sell one
of his other properties,
although Konstantinidis did not wish to do so. Konstantinidis also suggested
selling units to third parties
and for Schildkraut to buy one of them to
maintain majority control, but Schildkraut was not interested in selling to
third parties
because that meant his builder’s warranty would become more
exposed. Konstantinidis suggested that he sell his share in the
property to
another business partner but Schildkraut would not agree to this. Ultimately, it
became clear to both of them that the
defendant would have to buy the
plaintiff’s share. The parties agreed to meet at Schildkraut’s Port
Melbourne offices
where they could “sit down together, work out a price
and finish it off”.
11 November 2022, Konstantinidis and Schildkraut met at Schildkraut’s
offices to finalise the plaintiff’s exit from
the partnership. The meeting
lasted for about one and a half hours to two hours.
Konstantinidis
agreed the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the price which Schildkraut
would pay for the plaintiff’s interest
in the property. After some
discussions about price, they settled on the figure of $4 million. Schildkraut
handwrote the exit agreement,
a two-page document, during the course of their
discussions. He read out the terms of the document to see if Konstantinidis
to change anything or if he had missed anything. According to him,
Konstantinidis said “No, it’s okay, I’ll sign”.
Schildkraut then gave him the document and both he and Konstantinidis signed it.
Konstantinidis gave evidence he could not read the
document as he did not have
his glasses with him at the meeting. He denies Schildkraut read out the terms of
the document to him
but accepts he signed it and the price agreed upon was $4
to Schildkraut, the arrangement was that Konstantinidis, as vendor, would take
the written contract away so that his solicitor
could prepare a proper contract
of sale. Schildkraut got his son to come into the office and to take a photocopy
of the handwritten
agreement which was then given to
Konstantinidis.
exit agreement reads as follows:
AGREEMENT (HOA)
STONEYPINT P/L AND PALAK [sic] P/L
AS THE TWO ENTITIES OWNES [sic] 36 ROCKFIELD WAY RAVENHALL IN 50/50
PARTNERSHIP AND PALAK [sic] WANT TO EXIT THE PARTNERSHIP, IT WAS
AGREED THAT
STONEYPINT WILL BUY PALAK’S [sic] SHARE.
AGREED PRICE $4,000,000 – (FOUR MILLION DOLLARS) + GST.
PALAK [sic]
& STONEYPINT WILL COMPLETE THE PROJECT AS PARTNERS.
PAYMENT TERMS.
- ON SIGNING THE CONTRAT [sic] OF SALE, STONEYPINT WILL PAY
PALAK [sic] $200,000 + GST
- 30 DAYS AFTER OCCUPANCY PERMIT, NOT LATER THAN
28.02.23 STONEYPINT WILL PAY PALAK [sic] $1,800,000 + GST
- $2,000,000 WILL
BE PAID IN 12 MONTHS AFTER THE $1,800,000 DEPOSIT PAID AND NO LATER THAN
28.02.24, TO BE CLEAR NO INTEREST TO BE
PAID FOR THE TERMS
STONEYPINT AGREE
TO RELEASE THE DEPOSIT TO PALAK [sic] AT PAYMEN [sic].
- PALAK [sic] WILL ALLOW STONEYPINT FULL CONTROL ON THE PROPERTY FROM DAY
CONTRACT OF SALE SIGNED. STONEYPINT WILL BE RESPONSIBLE
TO ALL OUTGOINGS AND
ENTITLE [sic] TO ALL INCOM [sic] RELATED TO THE PROPERTY FORM [sic] DAY OF
SIGNING THE CONTRACT OF SALE.
- TO BE CLEAR, ALL TRANSACTION BETWEEN PARTIES WILL BE COVERED WIT [sic] TAX
INVOICES ON OR BEFORE PAYMENT.
one and a half hours after signing the exit agreement, Konstantinidis read the
document at home. He said he immediately telephoned
Schildkraut. Konstantinidis
told Schildkraut that “This document has a lot of thorns in it, it has a
lot of errors”.
In response,
Schildkraut purportedly laughed and said “don’t
after which the call
Schildkraut
denies Konstantinidis called him on 11 November 2022 following their meeting. He
said the next time he and Konstantinidis
discussed the exit agreement was
approximately three weeks later. Konstantinidis visited Schildkraut’s
offices and said he
wanted to return to the partnership. Schildkraut responded
by insisting on performance of the exit agreement and asking Konstantinidis
provide the contract of sale for the plaintiff’s interest in the
Konstantinidis denies
this conversation occurred.
22 February 2023, the partnership leased one of the units with the rental income
being paid into the partnership bank account at
Westpac. The parties agree these
funds remain in the bank account and have not been distributed.
12 May 2023, the defendant’s solicitors sent a letter to the plaintiff.
The letter set out the background facts relating
to the partnership. Reference
was then made to the exit agreement which the solicitors said “was
intended to be binding.”
The letter noted that a proposal by the plaintiff
in early 2023 to sell his 8 units in the property was not agreed by the
The property should be dealt with as a whole “as noted in the
Heads of Agreement.”
letter then referred to a breach of the partnership agreement because the
plaintiff had refused to sign any documents approving
the rental of the units on
the property. It was said the defendant is keen on continuing with the
partnership agreement and would
consent to a sale of the units in the property
or the property as a whole. In terms of moving forward, the defendant’s
requested confirmation from the plaintiff that he do all things
required under the partnership agreement. Upon receipt of this conformation,
defendant required the parties to enter into a written partnership agreement to
govern the rental of the units and distribution
of revenue from the leased
units. The partnership agreement “will also include an exit clause which
will include a buyout of
your shares in the partnership on the same price as
that contained in the Heads of Agreement.” In the event that the
confirmation
sought was not provided, the solicitors gave notice that their
client would have no choice but to escalate the matter further, including
not limited to “enforcing the Heads of Agreement by seeking specific
performance of the same and any loss and damage suffered
by it in the
appropriate Court......”
plaintiff’s solicitors responded on 14 June
They disputed the terms of
the partnership agreement alleged by the defendant’s solicitors. The
plaintiff’s solicitors
confirmed that the plaintiff intended to dissolve
the partnership. However, the exit agreement did not record what was discussed
at the 11 November 2022 meeting. The plaintiff did not accept that the terms of
the exit agreement as drawn by the defendant were
correct. Given the ongoing
dispute, the plaintiff’s solicitors noted it appeared appropriate that the
partnership be dissolved.
The plaintiff’s solicitors said it was a matter
for the defendant as to whether it wished to enforce the exit agreement but
pointed out that various steps had not taken place. Consequently, even if it was
valid, it had been repudiated by the defendant which
was accepted by the
plaintiff in seeking to sell eight of the 16 factory units.
defendant’s solicitors replied on 14 July
They reiterated the terms
of the partnership agreement and said the plaintiff had repudiated this
agreement by seeking to dissolve
the partnership. The defendant reserved its
rights as to whether it accepted the plaintiff’s repudiation. The
defendant’s
solicitors disputed the allegation made that their client had
repudiated the exit agreement and set out various reasons why that
proposition
was incorrect. The defendant’s solicitors then put forward an open offer
to resolve the dispute amicably. The offer
was that the parties would affirm the
partnership agreement and the heads of agreement relating to the sale of the
plaintiff’s
share with an amended timetable. Alternatively, there be an
independent valuation made of the plaintiff’s share of the partnership
the defendant would have a right of first refusal to buy the plaintiff’s
share, less a deduction of $2 million of costs
that would have been incurred if
the parties had engaged a third party builder to undertake the development on an
arms-length basis.
July 2023, Konstantinidis stopped authorising payments from the
partnership’s Westpac bank account to pay for the completion
development. Konstantinidis accepted in evidence that he also told Schildkraut
he was not allowed to pay out anything from
the partnership bank account because
the partnership did not exist anymore. The development remains incomplete.
1 August 2023, the plaintiff served the defendant with a notice purporting to
dissolve the partnership.
proceeding was commenced by writ on 5 October
(3) Pleadings
plaintiff’s claim is straightforward. By its statement of claim dated 5
October 2023, the plaintiff alleges the partnership
was dissolved on 1 August
2023 upon giving a notice of dissolution to the defendant. The defendant has
refused to accept the plaintiff’s
notice and has carried on the business
of the partnership without accounting to the plaintiff for the plaintiff’s
the partnership. The relief sought includes orders that the partnership
be wound up and a receiver appointed.
its defence dated 10 November 2023, the defendant claims the exit agreement
provided for the dissolution of the partnership and
winding up of its affairs.
It pleads the terms of the exit agreement were as follows:
(a) the partnership would be immediately dissolved and its affairs wound up,
subject to the terms of the exit agreement;
(b) Stoneypint would pay $4,000,000 plus GST for Pallak’s share in the
partnership on the following terms:
(i) $200,000 plus GST upon the signing of the contract of sale for the
(ii) $1,800,000 plus GST 30 days after the certificates of occupancy for the
warehouses constructed on the property had been issued,
not later than 28
February 2023;
(iii) $2,000,000 plus GST 12 months after the second payment had been made, not
later than 28 February 2024;
(c) Pallak would prepare and execute a formal contract for the sale of its
interest in the property to Stoneypint (‘
contract of
in accordance with the terms agreed in the exit
(d) Pallak would allow Stoneypint full control of the property from the day the
contract of sale was signed;
(e) Stoneypint would be responsible for all outgoings and entitled to all income
related to the property from the day of signing
the contract of sale;
(f) tax invoices would be raised by Pallak on or before each instalment payment
of the purchase price by Stoneypint; and
(g) Pallak and Stoneypint would each cooperate with the other and do all such
things as are necessary on its part to enable the other
party to have the
benefit of the exit agreement;
counterclaim, the defendant alleges the plaintiff has wrongfully and in breach
of the exit agreement:
(a) denied the validity of the exit agreement;
(b) failed and/or refused to prepare and execute a formal contract for the sale
of its interest in the property to Stoneypint in
accordance with the terms
alleged in the exit agreement;
(c) failed and/or refused to raise tax invoices to facilitate the payment of the
agreed purchase price by Stoneypint for Pallak’s
interest in the
(d) failed and/or refused to cooperate and do all such things as are necessary
on its part to enable Stoneypint to have the benefit
of the exit agreement.
defendant seeks an order for specific performance of the exit agreement,
alternatively, damages.
its amended reply and defence to counterclaim dated 3 June 2025, the plaintiff
claims the exit agreement is not an enforceable
agreement. The plaintiff denies
the exit agreement contained the express terms alleged by the defendant.
Alternatively,
if the Court finds the exit agreement is enforceable, the plaintiff
(a) the exit agreement does not correctly record the matters
orally negotiated between the parties on 11 November 2022, including,
limitation, that:
(i) the defendant would make an immediate payment to the plaintiff of $200,000,
not $200,000 on signing the contract of sale as recorded;
(ii) the parties proposed that the defendant would make a further payment to
the plaintiff of $1,800,000 upon signing the contract
of sale; and
(iii) the balance of $2,000,000 was to be paid within 12 months of the date
of the contract of sale with interest, not without interest
as purportedly
recorded in the exit agreement.
is then pleaded that Schildkraut made two representations. The first being that
Schildkraut told Konstantinidis the exit agreement
accurately reflected the
discussions between them in circumstances where the latter did not have his
glasses with him. The second
representation alleged is that Schildkraut told
Konstantinidis the agreement was of no effect when he apparently laughed and
“don’t worry” on 11 November 2022, after the exit
agreement had been signed. These representations were relied
upon for claims
under section 18 of the
Australian Consumer Law
’) and or breach of fiduciary duty. In oral closing
submissions, counsel for the plaintiff informed the Court that these claims
no longer pressed.
and in the alternative, the plaintiff pleads:
(a) it was a term of the exit agreement that prior to any sale of the
plaintiff’s interest, the plaintiff and defendant would
complete the
project as partners (‘
completion term
(b) the defendant is in breach of the completion term because it has failed and
refused to complete the project by failing to sign
and progress an application
for subdivision and contribute to construction and public insurance.
(4) Witnesses
Konstantinidis
and Schildkraut gave evidence. Their accounts of events differed in some
respects as identified above. Such differences
may well be explained by the
accepted fallibility of human memory and the tendency to remember matters on
terms that best suit the
party concerned.
was asked to make an adverse credit finding against Konstantinidis on the basis
that some of his answers beggared belief. Having
observed him, I was not
persuaded that he was deliberately giving untruthful evidence but he was
somewhat dogmatic and argumentative
at times. He himself conceded that his
memory was poor. To the extent that it is necessary to resolve a conflict in the
given by the two men, I would prefer the account given by Schildkraut
as he had a better recall of the events in question and was
principles relating to the construction of contracts are well-settled. They were
recently summarised by the Court of Appeal in
5G Networks Limited v
Centralnic Limited
In brief, a commercial contract is to be construed
objectively, by reference to its text, context, and commercial purpose.
Ordinarily,
the relevant context is confined to the contract itself, and any
other contract or document referred to in the text of the contract.
In addition,
recourse may be had to surrounding circumstances known to the parties to
identify the commercial purpose of the contract,
or to assist in determining the
proper construction where there is a constructional choice to be made. The
contract should be construed
so as to avoid making it commercial nonsense or
working commercial inconvenience by asking what a reasonable businessperson
have understood its terms to mean. (
citations omitted
person’s intention to be legally bound by a contract is to be determined
objectively and not by reference to uncommunicated
subjective motives or
intentions of the parties. Intention is manifested by the subject matter of the
contract, the parties’
status to it, their relationship with each other
and other surrounding
circumstances.
Edge Development Group Pty Ltd v Jack
Road Investments Pty Ltd
Riordan J set out some matters which courts have considered relevant in
determining whether parties intended to be contractually
bound, namely:
(a) Where the disputed agreement is in writing, the words used by the parties
must be the strongest indicator of whether the parties
intended to be legally
bound. If, on proper construction of the document, it is sufficiently clear
that the parties were content
to be bound immediately, then the matter is
resolved irrespective of the subject matter, magnitude or complexity of the
transaction
or whether the parties contemplated a further contract in
substitution for the first contract.
(b) Whether the informal agreement is expressed to be ‘subject to
contract’ or the absence of such words.
(c) The presence of the parties’ signatures on a document said to contain
the terms of the agreement suggests an intention
to form binding relations;
though the effect of the signature cannot, of itself, give rise to a binding
agreement if the terms of
the signed document do not otherwise support the
characterisation of the agreement as binding.
(d) The detail of the terms, to which the parties descended in the informal
agreement, may indicate whether the parties did or did
not intend to be
immediately bound. As was stated by Powell JA in
Liquorland (Australia) Pty
Ltd v GYG Holdings Pty Ltd
In carrying out the task of determining ... what was the relevant intention
of the parties, a court may have regard, not only to
the matters upon which the
parties have reached their consensus, but also to the areas in respect of which
they have failed to reach
any consensus.
(e) An informal agreement which deals with a transaction of great magnitude or
complexity ‘may suggest that the informal agreement
was not intended to
constitute a binding contract’.
(f) The established or common practice with respect to agreements of the type in
question may indicate that the parties did not intend
to be finally bound until
the completion of a formal contract. An example of such a practice is with
respect to the sale of real
(g) The fact that the parties did not use solicitors for the informal agreement
but proposed to do so for the formal contract, may
be a factor indicating that
the parties did not intend to be bound by the informal agreement.
With respect to the effect of post agreement communications, the courts have
considered that such communications may be relevant to
the following:
(a) Admissions by conduct of the existence or non-existence of a legally binding
(b) Throwing light upon the meaning of the language in the informal agreement
for the purpose of determining whether the language
expresses an intention to
enter or not enter contractual relations.
(c) Whether and to what extent there were uncompleted negotiations between the
parties; and the significance of the uncompleted issues.
parties also referred to the well-known categories described by the High Court
Masters v Cameron
stated by Dixon CJ, McTiernan and Kitto JJ at paragraph 9:
parties who have been in negotiation reach agreement upon terms of a contractual
nature and also agree that the matter of their
negotiation shall be dealt with
by a formal contract, the case may belong to any of three classes. It may be one
in which the parties
have reached finality in arranging all the terms of their
bargain and intend to be immediately bound to the performance of those
but at the same time propose to have the terms restated in a form which will be
fuller or more precise but not different in
effect. Or, secondly, it may be a
case in which the parties have completely agreed upon all the terms of their
bargain and intend
no departure from or addition to that which their agreed
terms express or imply, but nevertheless have made performance of one or
the terms conditional upon the execution of a formal document. Or, thirdly, the
case may be one in which the intention of
the parties is not to make a concluded
bargain at all, unless and until they execute a formal contract.
has since been recognised judicially that there is also a fourth
This was referred to
by McLelland J in
Bauklham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd v JR Securities Pty
Honour said:
... there is in reality a fourth class of case
additional to the three mentioned in
Masters v Cameron
as recognised by
Knox CJ and Ridge J and Dixon
Sinclair Scott & Co v Naughton
[1929] HCA 34
[1929] HCA 34
at 317 namely ‘one in which the parties were content to be bound
immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed
upon whilst
expecting to make a further contract and substitution for the first contract
containing, by consent, additional terms’.
Their Honours referred to the
speech of Lord Lorbun in
Love & Stewart
Instone & Co
(1917) 33 TLR 475
at 476, where his Lordship said that: ‘It was quite
lawful to make a bargain containing certain terms with which one was content
with dealing with what one regarded as essentials, and at the same time to say
that one would have a formal document drawn up with
the full expectation that
one would by consent insert in it a number of further terms. If that were the
intention of the parties,
then a bargain had been made, nonetheless that both
parties felt quite sure that the formal document could comprise more than was
contained in the preliminary bargain’.
“agreement” which falls under the first, second or fourth category
is an immediately binding contract, whereas the
third category is not.
a recent decision of Croft J in
Pinegro Products Pty Ltd v Paper Australia
observed after referring to the
Masters v Cameron
categories:
The authorities indicate that these categories are
not to be applied strictly, and the Court is to determine the objective
of the parties. This objective intent is ascertained having regard to
the language and conduct of the parties, and requires consideration
this would objectively convey in all the circumstances
Rossi Recycling Pty Ltd v Buckland Valley Pty Ltd & Anor,
Connock J emphasised that the words used by the parties, where the alleged
agreement is in writing, are the strongest indicators of
the parties’
intention to be immediately
Honour referred to the following passage from
Steller Vision Operations Pty
Ltd v Hills Health Solutions Pty Ltd,
a decision of the NSW Court of
The existence of matters of importance on which the parties
have not reached consensus in their informal agreement will render it
likely that they intended immediately to be bound before the execution of a
formal document. That the terms have not been fully
or well stated is material
to whether a contract has been made. The more important the term, the less
likely it is that the parties
will have left it over for future decision, but
there is no legal obstacle which prevents the parties agreeing to be bound now
deferring important
J concluded:
What is clear from these authorities, and numerous
others, is that the assessment of the parties’ intent is to be drawn from
the language employed; the particularity and specificity of the
‘agreement’; the importance of the terms ‘agreed’
and any leftover or additional terms to be subsequently dealt
parties helpfully referred the Court to a number of decisions dealing with
similar issues to those raised in this proceeding.
Whilst it can be accepted
that each case turns on its own facts, these cases provide useful guidance on
the approach to be undertaken.
In particular, the parties relied upon
Segun Investment Holdings Pty Ltd
Molonglo Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Cahill & Anor
Collingridge
Nurisvan Investment Ltd v Anyoption Holdings Limited
parties agreed upon the following key issues for
determination.
Is there a legally enforceable exit agreement, and if so, what
are its terms?
in particular, does the exit agreement contain:
(i) a term requiring Pallak to prepare and
execute a formal contract for the sale of its interest to Stoneypint;
(ii) the “Completion
Defendant’s submissions
defendant contends the exit agreement has a number of features which compel a
conclusion that the parties intended to enter into
a binding legal contract for
the sale of the plaintiff’s share in the property to the defendant.
the exit agreement contains all the terms that would be essential to the
constitution of agreement for the sale of land: the
parties to the agreement;
the property; the price; the manner in which the contract price was to be paid;
and the settlement date
of the contract at purchase. Although not conclusive,
the presence of these terms is an important consideration as it was in the
. There are no matters of significance that have been left
the document contains a recital noting that the parties are in a 50/50
partnership and that the plaintiff wishes to exit
the partnership, which
provides the context for the matters then agreed. The use of a recital followed
by the language that “
it was agreed
that ...” and
price $4 million” indicates the parties had concluded
a bargain and had intended to be bound by it.
the use of the heading “Payment Terms” and the language “to be
clear no interest to be paid for the terms”
is indicative of a concluded
bargain. If the exit agreement was not intended to be binding, why would the
parties have addressed
the question of interest on payment in it?
there is no language in the document indicating it is not binding. The reference
to the contract of sale is only to fix
the point in time for payment and was
not, as was the case in
pre-condition to it being a legally binding agreement. There was no suggestion
that the terms of that contract would be at large
or the subject of a further
round of negotiations.
the fact that the parties signed the document is itself indicative of its
intention to constitute a binding
This is in the
context where the parties have conducted their partnership almost exclusively
orally, there had been no written partnership
agreement and no written building
contract with Schildkraut, yet the parties saw fit to reduce the terms of the
exit agreement to
writing which indicates a significant level of relative
formality attending the transaction.
fact that the preparation and execution of contract of sale does not, of itself,
preclude a conclusion that the exit agreement
constitutes a legally binding
contract. The argument put forward by the plaintiff that neither party is
subject to any obligation
nor gains any rights until a formal contract is
executed proceeds on a false assumption. The defendant contends there was an
obligation in the exit agreement on the plaintiff, as the vendor, to
prepare and execute the contract of sale. Alternatively, there
was an implied
obligation on the parties to join in bringing the formal contract into existence
and to carry it into
the contract that was held to be binding contained no more than
the identity of the parties, the property, the price, the date of
instalments and the balance of the price and interest rate. The defendant
submitted the exit agreement contains all these
things, plus a recital and
additional matters, including details as to GST, the treatment of outgoings
prior to the settlement and
the release of deposit monies on payment.
Therefore, the defendant argues the exit agreement falls within the second, or
Masters v Cameron
defendant says nothing can be placed on the fact that there is no s32
vendor’s statement. In
the court was not troubled by the
absence of a vendor’s statement. The lack of any vendor’s statement
is not relevant
here where the purchaser and vendor are former partners in
relation to the property itself and each is intimate with it. The defendant
already received a s32 statement barely four years before when making the
original purchase of the property.
a sub-issue under Issue 1, there is a debate as to whether the exit agreement
contains a term requiring the plaintiff to prepare
and execute a formal contract
for the sale of its interests to the defendant. In
Masters v Cameron
court considered that in the second category of cases there is a binding
contract obliging the parties to join in bringing the
formal contract into
existence and then carrying it into execution.
the court found that where the parties make the signing of a
contract a term of their bargain, there is no difficulty in decreeing
performance of the agreement and compelling the performance of a stipulation of
the agreement necessary to its carrying
out and due completion.
, the written contract did not expressly state who was to
prepare the contract of sale, but the Court of Appeal said that an order
specific performance of an agreement for the sale of land can provide that, as a
first step, the parties execute a formal contract
incorporating the mutually
agreed terms. Therefore, the defendant submits that whether there is an express
or implied term obliging
the plaintiff to prepare a contract of sale is an arid
debate. At the very least, there is an implication that the parties will sign
contract in accordance with the terms of the exit agreement and specific
performance can be ordered to that
second sub-issue under Issue 1 is whether the exit agreement contains the
so-called “completion term”. This refers
to the term whereby it is
stated the parties would complete the project as partners. However, according to
the defendant, this term
does not make that a condition precedent to the
parties’ performance of the obligations in the exit agreement. Such a term
is not necessary for any business efficacy. The express terms of the contract
were that the contract of sale was to be prepared and
executed, notwithstanding
there remained some outstanding work on the project. Therefore, the exit
agreement did not contain the
completion term as alleged by the
Plaintiff’s submissions
plaintiff argues the terms of the exit agreement do not support a finding that
the parties ever intended the document to be legally
binding. A number of
matters are relied upon in support of that submission.
the expressions used in the document are expressed in the future tense and are
not couched in terms of offer and acceptance.
Rather, the highest the expression
used is that Stoneypint “will buy” Pallak’s interest in the
property at some
time in the future.
there are no mandatory requirements which crystalise upon the execution of the
exit agreement. No money is payable by Stoneypint
as the putative purchaser
until such time as a contract of sale is executed. The exit agreement contains
no express term requiring
either party to even prepare a contract of sale, much
less require such preparation within a specific timeframe.
and relatedly, the parties’ respective rights and obligations do not
change at all upon the execution of the exit agreement
but rather expressly
stated as only being altered upon the signing of a contract of sale. In light of
the text, the court should
find there is no objective manifestation to enter a
binding agreement. Nor can it be said that the surrounding circumstances cause
that position to change in any meaningful way. Konstantinidis had accepted the
purpose of the meeting was to work out the price,
as he wanted to leave the
partnership agreement. He knew the best way for that to happen was for
Schildkraut to purchase his share.
plaintiff submitted there was nothing unusual about that and it can be expected
that any vendor who entered into a heads of agreement
was at least in part
desirous of selling that property. The reason for the meeting was the need to
agree a price so that the parties
“could start from
somewhere”.
was no express term that Pallak, as vendor had to provide a contract of sale.
Nor was there any need to imply such a term –
the defendant could always
have done so.
plaintiff argues the exit agreement falls within the third
category as there was no intention from either side that the exit
agreement was to be binding. There was an agreed price but that
was as far as it
went – it was an unenforceable agreement to agree.
plaintiff also relies heavily upon the defendant’s subsequent conduct
which it argues constitutes an admission against interest
and therefore, can be
relied upon on the question of whether there was an intention to be
Four matters were
identified, namely:
(a) the letter of 12 May 2023 from Ascot Solicitors to Konstantinidis;
(b) the letter of 14 July 2023 from Ascot Solicitors to Comlaw;
(c) the offer made by Schildkraut in the week or weeks immediately after the
November meeting to effectively “swap properties”;
(d) the failure by Schildkraut to ever press Konstantinidis for the production
of a contract of sale to give effect to what Schildkraut
says was a binding
obligation on the part of the vendor to give effect to the terms of the exit
viewed in isolation or together, each of the four matters referred to above
provide sufficient support for the position that
the parties did not intend to
be legally bound by the exit agreement.
letter of 12 May 2023 assumed that the partnership agreement was still on foot
and had been breached by the plaintiff.
letter of 14 July 2023 contained a threat to sue for breach of the partnership
agreement which could not sit with the suggestion
that the exit agreement was
binding. It was inconsistent or in direct contradiction that the latter was
plaintiff accepted the offer to swap was not as clear cut an admission as the
statements contained in the two letters relied
response to the question of admissions against interest, the defendant contended
the letters did not say the exit agreement was
not binding – quite the
opposite. The discussions about a swap of properties was made in the context of
trying to reach a
commercial solution to the dispute, as was the case with the
letters sent by the defendant’s solicitors.
Consideration
the relevant legal principles, the question of intention to enter into a
binding contract is to be determined objectively
from the text of the document,
construed in the context of the surrounding circumstances in which each of the
parties signed.
a matter of construction, I find the exit agreement did create an immediately
binding agreement for the sale of the plaintiff’s
share in the property to
the defendant. In my view, a reasonable business person construing the text of
the exit agreement in the
circumstances in which it came into being would have
believed the parties did intend to create binding relations. My reasons for
reaching this conclusion are as follows.
the exit agreement uses the past tense. In what the parties said was the recital
or preamble, the words used were “it
was agreed”. The plaintiff then
relied on the words “will pay” in support of a construction that a
future tense
was used. However, these words come after the words it was agreed.
In my view, the words “it was agreed” clearly support
a construction
that an agreement had already been made. Similarly, the price was referred to as
“agreed”, being past
all the essential terms for the purchase of a property were agreed upon, being
the parties, the identity of the property,
the price, the amount of deposit
payable, the times for payment of the subsequent amounts due and a cut-off date
for the final payment
in settlement. The fact that these important and
significant terms were included lends itself to the conclusion that the parties
intended to be bound. There are no terms of significance which have been left
out. Although not necessarily determinative, there
is no “subject to
execution of contract” clause in the exit agreement, unlike in
The exit agreement does not contain any wording to suggest that it was
not legally binding or that the contract of sale would be subject
negotiation. The mere fact that the exit agreement contemplated a further
contract of sale for the property does not of
itself preclude a construction
that the exit agreement is a legally binding
the fact that there was to be no interest payable showed the parties had turned
their minds to what would be the position
would be down the track when the
payments fell due.
the payments to be made were to be the subject of tax invoices on or before
payment. This requirement indicates that the
parties had turned their minds to
the need for a formal documentary record, which is consistent with an intention
to be bound.
some weight should be placed on the fact that the parties saw the need to reduce
their agreement to writing when their prior
dealings relating to the
establishment and running of the partnership were all oral.
is true that the exit agreement imposes no express term to the effect that the
plaintiff was required to prepare a contract of
sale. However, the absence of
such a term does not mean the contract is not binding. As was the case in
Masters v Cameron
, the court held the parties were under an implied
obligation to carry out the terms of the agreement, which would include the
preparation
of a contract of sale. The same obligation applies here. Having
regard to all these matters, I find that the exit agreement is one
which falls
within the second
Masters v Cameron
for context, the relevant context is that the plaintiff wished to leave the
partnership and sell its share in the property to the
defendant. There is no
dispute about this being the case, other than the plaintiff saying it is
consistent with this being an agreement
In my view, a reasonable
business person would regard the purpose of the exit agreement was to finalise
the exit of the plaintiff
from the partnership, being a commercially rational
plaintiff’s contention that subsequent conduct by the defendant
demonstrated a lack of intention to be contractually bound
was not made out in
the evidence. I was not persuaded that the matters relied upon by the plaintiff
amounted to admissions against
interest on the part of the defendant.
so called “swap” evidence relied upon by the plaintiff was not
particularly compelling. I accept the defendant’s
submission that the
offer to swap another property was made in the context when the parties were
already in dispute and the defendant
was trying to reach a commercial
resolution. Given these circumstances, I was not persuaded the offer to swap
properties amounts
to post contractual conduct which is admissible to show a
lack of intention to be bound, contrary to the case advanced by the plaintiff.
plaintiff relied upon two letters sent by the defendant’s solicitors in
May and July 2023. The May letter specifically said
that the exit agreement was
intended to be binding. The letter did say that the defendant wished to continue
with the partnership
agreement on certain conditions, including a written
partnership agreement that would include a buyout of the plaintiff’s share
on the same price as in the exit agreement. It was foreshadowed that if the
plaintiff did not agree to the defendant’s requests,
the defendant would
commence proceedings to seek specific performance of the exit agreement. The
July letter noted, among other things,
that the exit agreement was intended to
be the arrangement for the parties to terminate the partnership. Whilst the
letters put
forward commercial alternatives as a means to resolve the dispute
that had arisen, both letters contain statements which are consistent
defendant treating the exit agreement as being binding.
I am not persuaded that the contents of the two letters, when each is read as a
whole, amounts to conduct which demonstrates
the defendant did not intend to be
bound by the exit agreement. Consequently, I find that the plaintiff’s
reliance upon these
two letters is misplaced as they do not support a finding
that the defendant did not intend to be contractually bound – quite
final act relied upon was the alleged failure on the part of Schildkraut to ask
Konstantinidis for a contract of sale of land.
Schildkraut gave evidence that he
asked Konstantinidis for a copy contract some three weeks after the exit
agreement was signed.
This conversation was disputed by Konstantinidis who said
it did not happen. I prefer and accept Schildkraut’s evidence that
ask for a copy contract on that occasion. Thereafter, he did not pursue it any
further as Konstantinidis had refused to go
through with the sale and the
parties were in dispute. It can hardly be said this state of affairs amounted to
an admission against
interest on the part of Schildkraut to the effect that he
did not intend to be contractually bound by the exit agreement.
plaintiff had pleaded in its amended reply that if the court were to find the
exit agreement was binding, some of its terms were
at variance with what was
said to have been agreed on 11 November 2022. This issue largely fell away at
trial due to a lack of evidence
first variance alleged was that the defendant had agreed to make an immediate
payment of $200,000 and not on signing the contract
of sale. The second variance
was that the defendant would pay $1,800,000 on signing a contract of sale. The
third was the last payment
due of $2,000,000 would attract interest, not without
interest as stated in the exit agreement. The defendant noted that none of
matters were put to Schildkraut in cross-examination. Konstantinidis gave no
evidence about the second and third claimed variances.
In paragraph 62 of the
defendant’s closing submissions, reference is made to the somewhat
inconclusive evidence given by Konstantinidis
Additionally, there was no evidence from Konstantinidis that he ever sought
payment of this sum after he
had signed the agreement. Overall, I am not
persuaded that the term recorded in the exit agreement about the payment of
upon signing of the contract of sale is an error and should be varied.
final matter to note is that the plaintiff did not contend the exit agreement
was unenforceable because a s32 statement under
Sale of Land Act
had not been provided. Counsel for the plaintiff said that he had not pressed
issue as this was not a vendor/purchaser of sale – it was
effectively a tenant in common buying out a
The defendant dealt
with this aspect in paragraphs 21 – 24 in its written closing submissions,
noting that in
, the absence of a
statement is not fatal in
and of itself. Although mentioned in submissions, the court was not asked to
determine any issue relating
to the requirement, if any, to provide a
there is a legally enforceable exit agreement:
(a) was it agreed, alternatively,
represented by Stoneypint, that the exit agreement would not be
of this issue turns on whether there was a statement by Schildkraut to
Konstantinidis that Konstantinidis did not have
to worry about the exit
agreement. Schildkraut could not recall saying such a thing to
Konstantinidis
the reasons given earlier regarding the evidence from the two men, I accept and
prefer Schildkraut’s account that he did
not say those words to
Konstantinidis and find that this representation was not made by him. Even if he
had, it could hardly be said
that such a statement could give rise to any
enforceable rights such as abandonment. It was simply pleaded that by reason of
alleged statement the exit agreement came to an
(b) if the answer to 2(a) is
“no”, is Pallak otherwise entitled to an order that:
(i) the exit agreement is void ab initio by
reason of contraventions of
of the ACL?; and or
(ii) that the exit agreement is rescinded
for breach of the alleged “Fiduciary duties”?
2(b) has fallen away given the concession made by counsel for the plaintiff
during final oral submissions that the ACL and breach
of fiduciary duties claims
were no longer pressed.
exit agreement remains on foot and includes the completion term, has Stoneypint
breached the completion term and/or has
Pallak prevented the partnership from
completing the project?
a plain reading of the exit agreement, it does not state, as alleged by the
plaintiff, that the contract of sale is subject to
the completion of the
project. Nor can such a term be implied in my view. I find the exit agreement
did not contain the so called
completion term pleaded by the plaintiff with the
result that any breach of this alleged term by the defendant does not fall for
consideration.
remaining question under this issue is whether the plaintiff prevented the
partnership from completing the project. Konstantinidis
refused to authorise
payment from the partnership bank which required joint approval. Payments were
made by electronic transfer although
Schildkraut accepted he may have been able
to sign cheques himself but that was not the way the business was conducted.
the stalemate between the parties the project is still not completed.
The rental income from the only unit rented so far is in the
partnership account
and cannot be distributed according to Konstantinidis, because the partnership
no longer exists. The evidence
led showed that the completion of the project had
stalled because of Konstantinidis’
(d) if the exit agreement
remains on foot, has Pallak breached the exit agreement?
2(d) raises the issue of whether the plaintiff has breached the exit agreement.
The defendant says that the plaintiff is
in breach because it had continued to
deny the validity of the exit agreement. The plaintiff is still required to
execute a formal
contract of sale and to raise tax invoices to facilitate
payment of the agreed purchase price.
found the exit agreement is legally binding, then it follows that the plaintiff
is and remains in breach of the terms as identified
above by the
Issue 3: Should there be
an order for specific performance of the exit agreement?
defendant seeks an order for specific performance. Schildkraut gave evidence
that the defendant is ready, willing and able to
complete the exit agreement.
The defendant says this order should be made in circumstances where damages
would not be an adequate
remedy. The property in question is unique and the
defendant is already a half owner. It is usually the case that where real
is involved, an order for damages will not be an adequate
The plaintiff contends
that damages would be an adequate remedy. I disagree for the reasons advanced by
the defendant – namely,
that the property is a unique commercial
development of which the defendant is already a half owner.
plaintiff argued the defendant was not entitled to an order for specific
performance because the defendant breached the terms
of the exit agreement by
not complying with the completion term. As has already been seen, I have
rejected the plaintiff’s
submission that the exit agreement contained the
so called completion term.
39 of the plaintiff’s opening submission stated that the alleged breach
was demonstrated by the defendant not signing
documents for the purposes of the
subdivision. The defendant pointed out there was no evidence that subdivision
was a contractually
agreed aspect of the project. All the evidence pointed the
That submission is
correct. Consequently, the plaintiff has not established there was any
disentitling breach on the part of the
other grounds or discretionary factors that might militate against an order for
specific performance of the exit agreement being
made were raised by the
plaintiff. That being so, I am satisfied that the defendant is entitled to the
order sought.
Issue 4: Was the
partnership dissolved on 11 November 2022 or 1 August 2023?
defendant’s case is that the partnership was dissolved on 11 November 2022
on execution of the exit agreement. The property
is the main asset of the
partnership and once it went to the defendant, the partnership effectively came
to an end according to the
defendant. Consequently, the plaintiff’s
purported notice of dissolution dated 1 August 2023 is ineffectual because the
partnership
had already been dissolved.
is no express term in the exit agreement to the effect the partnership is
dissolved upon signing the agreement. In fact, it
was a term of the exit
agreement that the parties would complete the project as partners. After the
contract of sale was signed,
the defendant was to have full control of the
property and would be responsible for all outgoings and be entitled to all the
related to the property. The practical effect would be that once the
contract of sale was signed, then the plaintiff’s involvement
project would cease in keeping with the terms of the exit agreement. Had the
plaintiff complied with its contractual obligations,
the partnership would have
come to an end once the contract of sale was signed.
follows then that the notice of dissolution served by the plaintiff in 1 August
2023 was otiose. Had the plaintiff complied with
its contractual obligations,
then the partnership would have already ended under the terms of the exit
agreement once the contract
of sale was
Issue 5: Should there be an
order that the affairs of the partnership be wound up and that a receiver be
defendant submits that by the exit agreement, the partnership regulated its
winding up through the defendant’s purchase
of the plaintiff’s
interest in the property. If the court were to order specific performance of the
sale of the plaintiff’s
share in the property, then the partnership would
have no valuable assets. Consequently, the appointment of a receiver would be
disproportionate
and inappropriate.
is no evidence of any misappropriation of the partnership property or other
conduct which endanger partnership assets. Whatever
the outcome of the
court’s decision relating to the sale of the property, it is not suggested
that the parties will be unable
to effect an orderly winding up of the
partnership by agreement, without being burdened by the costs and disruption of
a receiver.
The appointment of a receiver would be wholly premature according to
the defendant.
I agree. It seems
to me that the parties (the directors of which are very experienced commercial
businessmen), should be capable
of winding up their affairs without the need for
external assistance and incurring the costs associated with the appointment of a
receiver. In the event that the parties could not agree on the process for
winding up, then the issue of the appointment of a receiver
could be revisited
at a later stage.
find that the exit agreement is a legally binding contract. The defendant
remains willing and able to perform its side of the exit
agreement. An order for
specific performance should be made in circumstances where damages would not be
an adequate remedy.
will order that the plaintiff’s claim be dismissed and there be judgment
for the defendant on its counterclaim. Unless the
parties wish to propose
otherwise, costs should follow the event.
will hear from the parties regarding the forms of orders to be made consequent
upon these reasons, including costs.
Certificate
I certify that these 32 pages are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Her Honour Judge A Ryan delivered on 6 November 2025.
Dated: 6 November
Associate to Her
Honour Judge A Ryan
”) 447 (the words “exit agreement” do not
appear in the handwritten agreement but
was the description adopted by the parties)
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
Masters v Cameron
”) 35-38; 107
T44, L25-27
T52-8, T129
T55, L28-31
T115, L28-31
T138, L22-T139, L11
Ibid 658-660
Ibid 725-728
[2025] VSCA 253
v Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc
[2002] HCA 8
(2002) 209 CLR 95
, [45]-[47] (upheld by the Court of Appeal in
The Edge Development
Group Pty Ltd v Jack Road Investments Pty Ltd
[2019] VSCA 91)
Edge Development Group Pty Ltd v Jack Road Investments Pty Ltd
[1986] 40 NSWLR 622
Pinegro Products Pty Ltd
v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] VSC 453
Ibid, [77]-[78], citing
Molonglo Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Cahill
[2018] VSCA 147
Radovanovic
NSWCA 129, [22];
Pavlovic v Universal Music Australia
[2015] NSWCA 313
(2015) 90 NSWLR 605
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community
[2002] HCA 8
(2002) 209 CLR 95
Rossi Recycling Pty Ltd v Buckland
Valley Pty Ltd & Anor
[2022] VSC 467
Pinegro Products Pty Ltd
v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] VSC 453
, [79] quoting
Operations Pty Ltd v Hills Health Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 102
Pinegro Products Pty Ltd
v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] VSC 453
[2023] VSCA 238
[2018] VSCA 147
[1921] HCA 19
(1921) 29 CLR 177
[2017] VSCA 141
Masters v Cameron
Stoneypint otherwise relies
on paragraph 16 of its opening submissions dated 29 May 2025
[110]-[111]
T18, L17-22
Masters v Cameron
T167, L20-29
T178, L16-31, T179,
See paragraph 92 of the
defendant’s closing submissions and the authorities relied upon
Paragraph 94 of the
defendant’s closing submissions and the transcript references
See paragraphs 96 and 97 of
the defendant’s closing submissions and the authorities relied
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (426 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter