URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CLFD Nominees Pty Ltd at Neighbourhood [2025] VicLiqComm 1; (6 May 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by CLFD Nominees Pty Ltd made on 28 January
section 153(1)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
internal review of a delegate’s decision to refuse an application for a
renewable limited licence, for the premises
trading as Neighbourhood, located at
82 Sutton Street, Warragul.
Commission:
John Larkins, Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Ms Thu-Trang Tran, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
31 March 2025
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the delegate and in substitution, grant another licence instead namely,
temporary limited licence subject to the conditions as set out in Appendix
John Larkins
Application
27 February 2024, CLFD Nominees Pty Ltd (
) applied to the
Victorian Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
for a renewable limited
) in respect to premises located at 82 Sutton Street,
Warragul, trading as Neighbourhood (
Original Application
are four directors of the Applicant, the main contact for the application is
noted as director, Declan Flannery. The four directors
of the Applicant are also
owners and operators of other licensed venues.
Applicant was initially represented by Martin Towey of LGS Legal at the time the
Original Application was made.
Neighbourhood
) primarily operates as a cafe serving breakfast and lunch
items. The Applicant does not currently hold any liquor licence.
Applicant applied to the Commission for a RLL to permit the sale of liquor in
open containers for on-premises consumption.
the Original Application, the trading hours sought included Monday to Thursday,
but this was amended via email correspondence from
the Applicant on 25 March
2024 to reflect the following:
Friday, Saturday, Public
holidays: Between 10am and 11pm
Anzac Day and Good Friday: Between 12pm and 11pm
Sunday: Between 10am and 6pm
maximum patron capacity specified in the application is 75 (50 inside, 25
supply of liquor is proposed to be limited to no more than 15 lines of liquor
constituting 3 beers, 9 wines, and 3 premixed drinks
or cocktails.
accordance with section 33, a copy of the Original Application was served on the
Chief Commissioner of Police and the local licensing
) and the Baw Baw Shire Council (
) on 20 August 2024. On
13 September 2024, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it did not
object to the grant of the application.
Baw Baw Shire Council objected to the grant of a RLL on 20 September 2024.
The Council objected on the basis that the RLL would
be exempt from a planning
permit. The Council objected to the issuance of the RLL as they did not consider
it the appropriate licence
for a premises operating primarily as a food and
drink premises.
24 October 2024, the Council advised they did
object to the issuance
of the RLL however continued to question the appropriateness of the RLL over a
restaurant and cafe licence
which would require a planning permit.
Applicant provided scale and scope submissions on 30 September 2024, which
included the following:
(a) In summary, a RLL was applied for over a restaurant and cafe licence due to
the time factor being significant in the local shire
dealing with planning
applications and the planning permit application being costly when the offering
of liquor is so minimal that
that it may not be worth the effort.
(b) The Applicant referred to two other limited licences, No. 36169771 trading
as Clocks at Flinders Street Station and No. 36021232
trading as Caulfield
Racecourse. The Applicant submitted that the proposed trading hours were less
than these two licences.
(c) There would be a limited range of alcohol with food available for purchase
at all times that liquor is being supplied, noting
that patrons may be supplied
liquor without food.
17 January 2025, an authorised delegate of the Commission (
assessed the Original Application and refused it (
Original Decision
Delegate considered section 26(1) of the LCR Act which requires the limited
licence to be limited in scale and scope. The Delegate
did not consider a cafe
for 75 people, operating 44 hours a week (more on public holidays), selling 15
lines of liquor to people
who may not be having meals, to be limited in scope.
The Delegate also flagged that the other licences the Applicant referred to
not appropriately relevant.
Delegate was of the view that the Original Application was not sufficiently
limited and should not be granted for the Applicant
to circumvent the planning
process. The Delegate suggested a more appropriate licence is a restaurant and
cafe licence to authorise
the Applicant to supply liquor for consumption on the
Application for Internal Review
28 January 2025, the Applicant filed an application with the Commission for an
internal review of the Original Decision (
Review Application
) to refuse
to grant the RLL in accordance with section 153 of the LCR Act.
the Review Application, the Applicant sought to have the Delegate’s
decision set aside and the Commission grant the application
for a RLL for the
21 February 2025, the Commission invited the Applicant to make any further
submissions in respect to the trading hours and proposed
licence conditions.
26 February 2025, the Applicant advised that the Premises is currently open for
trade at least 69 hours a week and they seek to
only be licensed to supply
liquor for approximately 37 hours of these, therefore the Applicant argued that
the conditions were sufficiently
limited. The Applicant advised they are seeking
to open for night trade and events such as ‘dinner & wine
and occasional private functions.
Applicant sought to change the proposed trading hours for service of liquor to
the following:
Thursday Between 11am and 4pm
Friday and Saturday Between 11am and 11pm
Sunday Between 10am and 6pm
Public Holidays Between 10am and 6pm
3 March 2025, the Commission advised the Applicant that it will hold a hearing
on 20 March 2025 and invited the Applicant to put
forth any further submissions
or relevant material. The Commission raised that the trading hours sought did
not differ significantly
from those trading under a restaurant and cafe licence.
Commission noted that, as of 4 March 2025, Mr Towey advised he was no longer
acting on the Applicant’s behalf.
Commission also requested that the Applicant provide a video tour of the
Premises showing the entire premises and entry points,
explaining how the area
would be used with reference to the red line plan and an overview of the
external premises and neighbouring
buildings and streets.
hearing was held at the Commission on 20 March 2025 in relation to the Review
Application (
Declan Flannery, a director of the Applicant, gave oral evidence in support of
the Review Application.
the Hearing, Mr Flannery gave evidence to the Commission to the effect that:
(a) The Applicant’s directors operate and own multiple licensed venues in
Warragul that are very busy on the weekends. To encourage
staff to stay in
Warragul to work at these other venues, the Applicant opened the Premises to
provide work throughout the weekdays
when the other venues were quiet. The
Applicant employs over 80 employees throughout the venues.
(b) The Premises was not receiving enough revenue through the sale of food alone
so the Applicant decided to apply for the liquor
licence in order to bring in
another revenue stream. The Applicant would also like to expand to night-time
trade and open for private
functions which they have received requests for.
(c) Currently, the coffee-only takeaway service makes up 40% of their business.
(d) There is a wide demographic of customers at the venue including mothers
following school drop off or pick up on the weekdays,
and youth and senior
customers on the weekends.
(e) The Premises would like to broaden their theme of an Italian eatery and
provide both Australian and Italian wines.
(f) The Premises was newly renovated in January 2024 and officially opened in
March 2024 with new flooring and acoustic cushions
on the ceiling.
(g) The Premises currently plays background music when trading.
(h) Mr Flannery stated that he is aware of all the neighbours in the area
surrounding the Premises and he does not intend to operate
in any way that
disturbs their amenity.
Commission considered there may be a need for the Council and residents to have
a further opportunity to provide their feedback
trading hours and music at the Premises.
Commission raised with Mr Flannery the possible suitability of a temporary
limited licence rather than a RLL.
The temporary licence is normally considered lower risk than a RLL as it is for
a fixed period and cannot be renewed. The Commission
invited the Applicant to
rearticulate his minimum position for the next 12 months for a potential
temporary limited licence. The
temporary licence may assist the Applicant to
determine what permanent licence may be most appropriate in the long term.
Commission set out non-negotiable licence conditions including that food must be
available for purchase with liquor, any music
(including during functions)
remains at background level, and that the number of functions do not exceed more
than 15 per year.
Applicant’s Submissions dated 24
accordance with the Commission’s request, the Applicant made the following
submissions in relation to a potential temporary
limited licence:
(a) Trading hours
Friday Between 4pm and 10pm
Saturday Between 12pm and 10pm
Sunday Between 12pm and 3pm
Public Holidays Between 12pm and 3pm
Eve of Public Holidays Between 6pm and 10pm
(b) A limit of 10 pre-booked private functions per year to be held between 6pm
and 10pm and between October and March.
(c) Only background music will be played with nothing above background noise
(d) Range of liquor limited to 5 lines of wine, 3 lines of beer/cider, 2 lines
of cocktails/prebatched mixed drinks. An extra unit
for sparkling wine at
pre-booked functions only was also re quested.
Applicant also provided further information about the directors of the Applicant
which indicated their extensive hospitality background.
Mr Flannery’s
experience constituted 30 years of experience and currently overseeing other
licensed venues such as being a
director of other licensed premises trading as
Bank Hotel Warragul, Commercial Hotel, Neighbourhood Cafe and Newborough Hotel.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is
a reviewable decision.
Applicant is considered an eligible person to apply for review of the Original
Decision, by way of its Review Application, made
pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original Application.
Determination of an uncontested
application
the LCR Act, an application for a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested application
is defined as:
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation
of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
Original Application is uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant the Original Application on
certain grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises to which
the application relates are
(b) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
(c) the application has not been made, displayed, or advertised in accordance
with the LCR Act.
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance of vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed
the definition of “amenity” for the purposes of the LCR Act is not
limited by these factors.
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission:
(a) may have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) may make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal
review power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any
decision-making guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) as follows:
The objects of this Act are –
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by –
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
44. Further, section 4(2) provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol.
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including—
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at
the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning the Review
Application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this matter
Limited Licences
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a RLL. Pursuant to
section 14(1B), a RLL authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times
determined by the Commission and specified on the licence, and it may be renewed
in accordance with the LCR Act.
A limited licence may further be subject to any
conditions determined by the Commission and specified on the licence.
26 provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is
satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the
licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope Requirement
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) the Original Decision and Reasons of the Delegate dated 17 January 2025;
(b) the Review Application dated 28 January 2025; and
(c) email from Declan Flannery dated 26 February 2025; and
(d) video tour of the Premises dated 11 March 2025.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
making its decision on review, the Commission must determine the following
central issues:
(a) firstly, whether there is a more appropriate alternative licence category
over the RLL and whether the Scale and Scope Requirement
(b) whether the grant of a licence would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the Premises are
(c) lastly, whether the grant of a licence would be conducive to or encourage
harm or be contrary to the objects of the LCR Act,
particularly the object of
harm minimisation.
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must consider the grounds
for refusal set out
in the LCR Act, and the objects of the LCR Act, in
particular harm minimisation, which is the primary
key question to be determined by the Commission is whether the Scale and Scope
Requirement is met, and the supply of liquor is
limited enough in nature and the
RLL is the appropriate licence to be granted.
Alternative licence and Scale and Scope Requirement
Commission has power under section 158(2) to grant a different licence than that
originally applied for where the Original Decision
was a refusal to grant a
liquor licence which is the case in this proceeding.
14 provides that a limited licence “authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times determined by the Commission
and specified in the
licence”. However, unlike other categories of licences, limited licences
are subject to the additional
restriction found at section 26 in that the
Commission may only grant a limited licence if satisfied the Scale and Scope
Requirement
are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission
to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions, the Commission has considered “the nature, location,
duration or frequency
of hours of operation of the licence in question” as
relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
Applicant indicated that they originally applied for the RLL on the basis that
they wanted to gauge whether the supply of liquor
would be worth the time and
cost of a more permanent licence at a later date. Subsequently, the Delegate
refused the application
in the Original Decision.
the Hearing, the Commission engaged in a discussion with the Applicant regarding
the potential suitability of an alternative licence
category. In summary, the
Applicant gave evidence to the effect that:
(a) The premises would only sit a maximum of 75 patrons, 50 inside and 25
(b) The liquor supplied at the premises would consist of wine, beer and premixed
drinks/cocktails. Other spirits outside of cocktails
would not be served.
(c) There would be no liquor for sale for off-premises consumption, nor would it
be taking any orders for liquor takeaway.
(d) There would always be food available for order.
Commission considers that the supply described above sought by the Applicant is
limited in scale and scope. In particular, the
Commission notes that the hours
of supply are more limited than any ordinary trading hours as defined at section
3(1) or as sought
in the Original Application, and that food will be available
at all times when liquor is available for supply.
what is now sought and will be permitted is a relatively modest and restricted
licence operation. The Applicant and Premises
will be, in effect, on a form of
probation for the period of the temporary licence assuming that it is intended
to apply for a permanent
and potentially expanded licence in the future. The
Applicant indicated in their submissions that they were not certain whether
will be popular amongst patrons. A temporary licence provides the
Applicant with a 12-month period to determine if and what supply
of liquor is
appropriate for the business needs. This also provides an additional safeguard
against any irresponsible conduct of
the temporary licence and an opportunity
for those involved to demonstrate their competence in the operation of the
licence at the
Premises over that period.
Consequently,
the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is
Commission must also determine whether the grant of a temporary limited liquor
licence would detract from or be detrimental to
the amenity of the area in which
the Premises are located, which may give rise to a ground of refusal under
section 44(2).
Commission Chair visited the premises and the area on 28
March 2025.
This confirmed not only the quality of the cafe as built but also the potential
amenity impacts on what is otherwise a
relatively pristine residential area,
should the cafe be operated in any way irresponsibly. The latter factor also
assists to justify
a cautious ‘crawl before you walk’ approach to
the introduction of a liquor licence to the area, with the grant of a
licence that is temporary and subject to conditions in Appendix A.
the Commission notes the Applicant’s evidence that the Premises would not
have loud music and at no times in ordinary
trading hours or during private
functions would the music exceed a background level. There would be no live
music at the Premises.
Furthermore,
the external maximum patron capacity is strictly 25 patrons to minimise noise
travelling to the nearby residences and
the Applicant has no intention to extend
the external space or expand the Premises.
Commission notes that Victoria Police did not object to the Original Application
and the Council’s original objection, which
was later withdrawn, did not
relate to amenity. The Commission did not receive any objections from the
general public.
on the nature of the Premises and the limited scope of the permit granted by the
Council, the Commission is satisfied that,
on balance, the grant of a temporary
limited licence subject to the amenity conditions detailed in Appendix A would
not detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity of the
application may be refused if granting the application would be conducive to or
encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol. Victoria
Police did not raise any
concerns in this regard, nor did the Council.
Commission considers that in all circumstances, given the limitations on the
supply of liquor specifically proposed in Appendix
A, that the risk of harm
would be minimal. The Commission also notes that the requirement for service of
food with the supply of
alcohol also assists in the responsible service of
alcohol and the minimising of the risk of harm.
Commission further notes that the Applicant has completed the RSA program and
has substantial experience in operating and managing
other licensed venues.
to the above reasons, the Commission does not consider that granting a temporary
limited licence would be conducive to or encourage
of the LCR Act
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under
section 44(2), the Commission must exercise its discretion
whether or not
to grant the proposed temporary limited licence by the Commission with regard to
the objects of the LCR Act, particularly
harm minimisation, which is the primary
the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied that
adequate controls will exist over the supply
of liquor and that any harm should
be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission considers that the grant of a
temporary limited licence
in this instance would not be contrary to the LCR
Act’s object concerning harm minimisation.
the Commission considers that granting the temporary limited licence would
facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed
facilities reflecting
community expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in section
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to set
aside the decision of the Delegate and to exercise
its discretion under section
158(2) to grant a temporary limited licence subject to the conditions set out in
Appendix A.
The preceding 78 paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Chair), Mr James O’Halloran
Chair) and Ms Thu-Trang Tran
(Commissioner).
General information
Any reference to the
Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian Liquor Commission, or any
successor statutory office,
body or officer however named, under the Liquor
Control Reform Act 1998 (LCR Act) or successor legislation, that has powers and
out regulatory functions equivalent to the Victorian Liquor
Commission.
This licence is a temporary limited licence
and authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licenced premises for
consumption
on the licenced premises during the trading hours specified below.
Noise and Amenity
licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the area to
arise out of, or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the licence
relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised by this
The licensee must not permit at any time the playing of any live or recorded
music on the premises at higher than background music
level as defined in
section 9A(5) of the LCR Act.
Supply of liquor
The supply of liquor shall be limited to no more
than 5 lines of wines, 3 lines of beer, and 2 lines of prebatched cocktails.
Sparkling wine may be provided for private pre-booked functions only.
Liquor may not be removed from the licenced premises.
Provision of food
Food must be available for purchase at all times
that liquor is being supplied.
Events and Functions
Up to 10 private pre-booked functions may be
held at the premises per calendar year.
Private functions will be held
between 6pm and 10pm, from October to March.
The supply of liquor for
private functions is limited to beer, wine, soft drinks, and sparkling wine as
specified above.
The licensee will keep a register of scheduled events that
will be made available for viewing by a member of Victoria Police or the
Regulator upon request.
Maximum Patron Capacity
Internal 50 patrons
External 25
Overall maximum 75 patrons
Period of licence
This licence has effect and continues in force from 31 March 2025 until 31
March 2026, during the trading hours specified below.
Friday Between 4pm and 10pm
Saturday Between 12pm and 10pm
Sunday Between 12pm and 3pm
Public Holiday Between 12pm and 3pm
Eve of a Public Holiday Between 6pm and 10pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
“licensing inspector”, see section 3.
As to the scale and scope
requirement for a RLL, see [
Discussed below from paragraph
LCR Act, section 157(2) to (5)
Ibid, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(ii).
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(v).
LCR Act, section 3A.
3A(2). Until a legislative amendment in 2018, the following factors were also
included as evidencing detriment to the amenity
of the area: (a) the presence
(or absence) of parking facilities; (b) traffic movement and density; (c) noise
section 3A(3).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Direction of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that
harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCRA and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor
licensing decisions (although not to the
exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2)
Ibid, section 157(3).
LCR Act, sections
44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
172D(3). The Commission notes that, in determining this matter, it has also
considered each of the grounds
set out in section 44(2).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
See decision of Fynix Pty
Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2016]
VCGLR 19, [61].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (883 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter