URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
East Gippsland C172egip (PSA) [2025] PPV 40 (22 August 2025)
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C172egip
Paynesville Structure Plan
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
22 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C172egip
Paynesville Structure Plan
August 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair Shannon Davies, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Australian Height Datum
East Gippsland Shire Council
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Development Plan Overlay
East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority
Friends of Gippsland Lakes, Parks and Reserves Inc
Full time equivalent
General Residential Zone
Housing and Settlement Strategy
East Gippsland Housing and Settlement Strategy (2023)
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
East Gippsland Planning Scheme
Preliminary Site Inspection
Significant Landscape Overlay
Transport Assessment (2024)
Traffic Impact Assessment (SALT Engineering, 2024)
Note: A number following the zone or overlay code refers to its schedule
Amendment summary
The Amendment
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C172egip
Common name
Paynesville Structure Plan
Brief description
Seeks to implement the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan
Subject land
All land identified in the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (see
Planning Authority
East Gippsland Shire Council
Authorisation
9 September 2024, with conditions
25 November 2024 to 31 January 2025
Submissions
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair) and Shannon Davies
Supported by
Georgia Thomas and Sarah Vojinovic
Directions Hearing
By video, 26 May 2025
Panel Hearing
- East Gippsland
Shire Council Offices, Bairnsdale and online video,
24 June 2025
Panels Victoria, Melbourne and online video,
25, 26, 27 and 30 June, 1, 2 and
3 July 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 23 June 2025
Parties to the Hearing
- East Gippsland
Shire Council represented by Kellinde Chester
- Friends of
Gippsland Lakes, Parks and Reserves Inc represented by David Nicastro
- Paynesville
Cemetery represented by Geoffrey Medley
- Paynesville
Armstrong 2 Pty Ltd represented by Stephanie Mann of Counsel, instructed by
Andrea Towson of Gadens who called expert
evidence on:
- conservation
and ecology from Aaron Harvey of Biosis
- planning from
Robert Milner of Milner Planning Advisory
- traffic from
Jason Walsh of Traffix
- drainage from
Robert Swan of HARC
- TLC Unlimited
Pty Ltd and CCW Properties (Vic) Pty Ltd represented by Nick Sutton of Norton
Rose Fulbright Australia, who called
expert evidence on:
- planning from
Mark Woodland of Echelon Planning
- economics from
Brian Haratsis of Macroplan
- traffic from
Leigh Furness of Traffix Group
- contamination
from Jared Ewers of Ewers Environmental Consulting
East Gippsland PSA C172egip [2025] PPV
Date of this report
22 August 2025
Executive summary
Paynesville is in the
East Gippsland Shire about 13 kilometres southeast of Bairnsdale and about 240
kilometres east of Melbourne’s
Central City. It is a lakeside town with a
town centre at its extreme eastern end and a settlement area that is surrounded
Gippsland Lakes for a significant portion of its boundary.
Paynesville is one of East Gippsland’s fastest growing towns and will
account for more than 10 per cent of the 11,000 dwellings
sought by the East
Gippsland housing target in
Plan for Victoria
. The East Gippsland
Planning Scheme (Planning Scheme) and East Gippsland Housing and Settlement
Strategy (2023) identify Paynesville
for future residential growth.
With 3,636 people in 2021, Paynesville’s population is expected to
increase to 6,250 people by 2041. This equates to needing
1,025 dwellings to
accommodate its future population.
Planning for Paynesville’s urban growth has had a long history. East
Gippsland Shire Council (Council) started preparing the
Paynesville Growth Area
Structure Plan (Structure Plan) in 2013. The Structure Plan was informed by
technical background reports
such as traffic, hydrology and social
infrastructure prepared in 2015-16 and reviewed in 2023 for currency.
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C172egip (the Amendment) seeks to
implement the Structure Plan through the Planning Scheme.
Specifically, it
proposes among other things, to:
update the local
policy for Paynesville and the Paynesville Framework Plan
rezone 5 and 95
Grandview Road, 1325 Paynesville Road and part of 1255 Paynesville Road from
Farming Zone to a new General Residential
Zone Schedule 3
apply a new
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 to guide development in the Paynesville
Growth Area to the same land being rezoned
in the Paynesville Growth Area
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 from part of 1255 and 1325 Paynesville
Environmental Audit Overlay to 95 Grandview Road and 1255 Paynesville Road
reference the
Structure Plan as a Background Document.
Council exhibited the
Amendment from 25 November 2024 to 31 January 2025 and received 84 submissions.
Key issues raised in submissions
strategic issues
– currency of technical and background documents, local planning policy
and strategic justification
approach – settlement break and tourism area, future activity centre,
integration and development planning, stormwater
and drainage
environmental
matters – climate change and coastal sea level rise, potentially
contaminated land, flora and fauna, significant
road network and
infrastructure – road capacity and safety, infrastructure and service
capacity, open space, infrastructure
funding and social infrastructure
other issues
– applying the Development Plan Overlay, social housing and amendment
The Panel conducted one Hearing for both Amendment
C171egip (Eagle Point Structure Plan) and Amendment C172egip (Paynesville
The Panel has considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits,
submissions,
evidence and other information presented to it during the Hearing.
Strategic issues
The Structure Plan and its background reports are sufficiently accurate and relevant enough to strategically support the Amendment.
Local planning policy
It is appropriate to revise the Paynesville content in Clause 11.01-1L-02 to:
the intent of the first strategy regarding lots sizes and housing types by
explaining it seeks a variety of lot sizes and
housing types to meet community
policy guideline that has been superseded by the East Gippsland Housing and
Settlement Strategy
It is not appropriate to include the remaining requested changes because they seek to change State standard provisions, and they do
not align with good policy drafting.
Strategic justification
For the reasons set out in this report, the Amendment:
is supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded and strategically justified
should proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as discussed in the following chapters.
Settlement approach
Settlement break and tourism area
The Amendment establishes a clear and justified western edge to the Paynesville Growth Area by limiting residential development to
no further west than Grandview Road.
Designating the northern foreshore at 229 Bay Road as future public open space will result in an appropriate edge to the settlement
It is appropriate and strategically justified identify a tourism opportunity site at the township entrance through a policy-based
approach that provides flexibility for future proposals. This will avoid prematurely rezoning the land before a suitable zone is
determined.
Activity centre
The size and zone of the activity centre should not be shown in the Structure Plan or introduced through the Amendment because further
work is needed to determine both.
The relevant strategy in Clause 11.01-1L-02 should be revised to:
consistent with the clearer wording in the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10
requirement regarding the Town Centre’s ‘primary
specifically
refer to the Paynesville Town Centre consistent with Clause
11.03-1L-02.
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 should recognise the proposed centre as a ‘neighbourhood activity centre’ to reflect
its ultimate function.
Stormwater and drainage
The Amendment has appropriately considered stormwater and drainage associated with future growth.
Land below 2.8 metres Australian Height Datum should:
be prohibited
from having sensitive development such as buildings and access roads, consistent
with Ministerial Direction 13
be enabled to
have passive systems such as stormwater treatment wetlands that do not risk
negative environmental or safety outcomes.
The Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately considered open space provision. Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 is
a suitable framework to guide the detailed design, location, and delivery of a connected and functional open space network through
future development stages.
It is appropriate and justified to include 229 Bay Road, Paynesville into the mapped extent of the Development Plan Overlay Schedule
Environmental
Climate change and
coastal sea level rise
The Amendment has appropriately considered the risks associated with sea
level rise and climate change in accordance with relevant
State policy.
It is appropriate to apply the 2.8-metre Australian Height Datum (AHD)
contour as a strategic threshold for excluding residential
development, as it is
supported by recognised modelling and reflects a precautionary, policy-aligned
Coastal sea level rise mapping has been applied consistently, and the zoning
maps (Final version) will ensure the 2.8-metre AHD contour
is appropriately
reflected in the Amendment.
Potentially contaminated land
The contamination risk has been appropriately assessed through site-specific
investigations, supported by expert evidence and a review
accredited by the
Environment Protection Authority. Therefore, it is not appropriate or justified
to apply the Environmental Audit
Overlay to 95 Grandview Road and 1255
Paynesville Road.
Flora and fauna
The Amendment would have benefited from considering flora and fauna and
biodiversity more comprehensively. However, the planning
provisions proposed in
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (Final version) are appropriate and
justified based on expert evidence
presented at the Hearing.
Significant landscapes
It is appropriate and justified for the Amendment to delete Significant
Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 from 5 and 95 Grandview Road
and 1325 and
Paynesville Road, Paynesville subject to Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10 including requirements to respond to this land’s
sensitive interface
with Lake King.
Road network and infrastructure capacity
Road network capacity and safety
The Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately considered the
capacity of the existing and future road network to accommodate
development-related traffic volumes.
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 provides a suitable framework to guide
the detailed design, staging, and delivery of road upgrades,
intersection
treatments and active transport connections through the future development of
the growth area.
The Structure Plan and the Amendment have:
appropriately
considered infrastructure capacity by relying on existing regional services and
enhancing connectivity
have adopted
sound and orderly planning for social infrastructure provision in the context of
Paynesville’s growth area role
within the broader settlement
The Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (Final version)
infrastructure funding requirements are appropriate for identifying, delivering
and coordinating future infrastructure.
Other issues
It is appropriate for the Amendment to apply the Development Plan Overlay, even though third-party notice and review will be exempt
in most future circumstances.
It may be appropriate to include provisions for social or affordable housing through Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10, however
there is insufficient information or work to recommend such a change through the Amendment.
General Residential Zone Schedule 3 should not include a decision guideline seeking a permit application to be generally in accordance
with the Structure Plan.
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 and the Structure Plan would benefit from drafting changes that clarify intent and improve their
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set
out in this Report, the Panel recommends that Council:
Ensure retail and commercial activities located outside the Paynesville
Town Centre do not adversely affect its primary role.
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Amendment seeks to implement the
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (2016
and updated 2023)
(Structure Plan) into the East Gippsland Planning Scheme
(Planning Scheme) by revising the Planning Policy Framework relating to
Paynesville, rezoning land, applying relevant overlay provisions and referencing
the Structure Plan into the Planning Scheme as a
background document.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
update the local
policy for Paynesville and the Paynesville Framework Plan at Clause 11.01-1L-02
(Growth Area Towns)
General Residential Zone Schedule 3 (GRZ3) to guide development across the
Paynesville Growth Area (see
rezone 5 and 95
Grandview Road, 1325 and part of 1255 Paynesville Road, Paynesville from Farming
Zone to GRZ3
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (DPO10) to guide development in the
Paynesville Growth Area
apply the DPO10
to the same land being rezoned in the Paynesville Growth Area
Environmental Audit Overlay to 95 Grandview Road and 1255 Paynesville Road,
Paynesville to ensure appropriate investigation
of potentially contaminated
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 (SLO2) from part of 1255 and 1325
Paynesville Road, Paynesville
apply the Public
Acquisition Overlay 3 (road acquisition) to
Waterview Road, Eagle Point
to facilitate intersection improvements
amend the Clause
72.08 (Background Documents) Schedule to reference the Structure Plan as a
background document
amend the Clause
74.02 (Further Strategic Work) Schedule to reference work to implement the
Structure Plan.
(ii) The subject land and context
The Amendment applies to land in Paynesville shown
within the purple outline in
Paynesville is in the East Gippsland Shire about 13 kilometres southeast of
Bairnsdale and about 240 kilometres east of Melbourne’s
Central City. It
is a lakeside town with its town centre at its most extreme eastern end and a
settlement area that is surrounded
by the Gippsland Lakes for a significant
portion of its boundary. With 3,636 people in 2021, Paynesville’s
population is expected
to increase to 6,250 people by 2041. This equates to
needing 1,025 dwellings to accommodate its future population.
Specifically, the Amendment applies to:
95 Grandview
Road, Paynesville (Lot 1 & 2, TP810124)
5 Grandview
Road, Paynesville (Lot 1 & 2, TP842185 and 140A, PP2042)
1255 Paynesville
Road, Paynesville (Lot 1, PS318977)
1325 Paynesville
Road, Paynesville (Lot 3, SP307152)
25 Waterview
Road, Eagle Point (Lot A,
Subject land
Note: Subject land shown in purple outline
Source: Structure Plan (Figure
2: Paynesville Growth Area – Preferred Urban Structure)
1.2 Background
Chronology of events
Council started preparing the Structure Plan
Council reviewed and revised the Structure Plan after consulting with the
Council revised and adopted the Structure Plan
Council updated the Structure Plan
Council resolved to seek authorisation from the Minister for Planning to
exhibit the Amendment
Minister for Planning authorised the Amendment subject to conditions
Amendment exhibition started
Amendment exhibition ended
1.3 Procedural issues
The week before the
Hearing started, TLC Unlimited raised the issues of commercial and retail demand
and land supply which were not
raised in its original submission or in any other
submission.
As these issues were not referred to the Panel by Council, the Panel wrote to
parties on 20 June 2025
the nature of the procedural issue and asking parties for a response.
TLC Unlimited responded on 23 June 2025 where it
matters of commercial and retail demand and land supply with Council in a
further submission dated 28 March 2025
Council did not
include this submission when referring the Amendment material to the
Council responded on the same
to confirm that it had
inadvertently not referred the further submission to the Panel. It referred it
to the Panel through its response.
On 23 June 2025, the Panel wrote to parties to confirm it had accepted the
submission.
1.4 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions related to:
strategic issues
– currency of technical and background documents, local planning policy
and strategic justification
approach – settlement break and tourism area, future activity centre,
integration and development planning, stormwater
and drainage
environmental
matters – climate change and coastal sea level rise, potentially
contaminated land, flora and fauna, significant
road network and
infrastructure – road capacity and safety, infrastructure and service
capacity, open space, infrastructure
funding and social infrastructure
other issues
– applying the DPO, social housing and amendment drafting.
Panel conducted one Hearing for both Amendments C171egip (Eagle Point Structure
Plan) and C172egip (Paynesville Structure Plan).
The two Amendments have
interrelated issues associated with the town separation between Eagle Point and
Paynesville.
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community
benefit and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated
decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel has considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits,
submissions,
evidence and other information presented to it during the Hearing. It has
reviewed a large volume of information and
has had to be selective in referring
to the more relevant or determinative information in the Report. All
submissions and other
documents have been considered by the Panel in reaching
its conclusions, regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Environmental
Road network and
infrastructure
1.5 Amendment versions
The Panel directed
Council to circulate a Version 1 of the Amendment documentation before the
Hearing started, and a final version
after its closing submission. Council
circulated:
documents (Version 1) – Document 61
documents (Final version) – Documents 153 to 166.
Parties were
given the opportunity to provide written comments on the Final version following
the close of the Hearing. One party
elected to do so – Document 151.
The Panel has had regard to all comments on the Final version when preparing
its recommended version.
1.6 Limitations
The Panel has considered
the following issues raised in submissions:
amenity and
interface issues such as dust, noise and compliance during subdivision
construction
consultation and public notice
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
related matters.
(i) Council submission
Council submission:
Amenity and interface issues during subdivision construction
This requirement
is unnecessary in the Amendment because off-site and interface issues will be
considered and controlled when assessing
future planning permit
applications.
A Construction
Management Plan is typically required by the permit for subdivisions to reduce
disruption to neighbouring residents
and the environment during
construction.
Amendment community consultation and public
Exhibition was
conducted for 10 weeks and in accordance with the PE Act and Council’s
consultation processes, even though it
was in December and January (holiday
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
considered, if required, when preparing the detailed technical reports required
(ii) Panel response
The Panel has considered submissions related to
issues outlined above and agrees with Council’s submission. The Panel
Amenity and
interface issues –
The Amendment does not propose any subdivision or
construction, so associated amenity and interface issues are beyond its
community consultation and public notice
– The PE Act does not
prohibit public exhibition during December and January. Nonetheless, Council
exhibited the Amendment
for more than twice the minimum time requirement and
received 84 submissions.
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
separate federal legislation that is triggered by specific development proposals
rather than the Amendment which seeks to
implement strategic planning
recommendations.
These issues are not discussed further in this
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
02.03-1 (Settlement and housing), Clause 02.03-3 (Environmental risks and
amenity), Clause 02.03-5 (Built environment and
heritage), Clause 02.03-6
(Economic development)
Planning Policy Framework
11.01-1S (Settlement), 11.01-1R (Settlement – Gippsland), 11.02-1S (Supply
of urban land), 11.02-2S (Structure planning),
11.03-2S (Growth areas)
12.01-1S (Protection of biodiversity), 12.02-1S (Protection of the marine and
coastal environment), 12.02- 2S (Marine and
coastal crown land), 12.03-1S (River
and riparian corridors, waterways, lakes, wetlands and billabongs), 12.05-1L
(Environmentally
sensitive areas)
- Clauses 13.01
(Climate change impacts), 13.02-1S (Bushfire planning)
- Clause 15.01
(Built environment)
- Clause 16.01
(Residential development)
- Clause 19
(Infrastructure)
Other planning strategies, policies and plans
- Gippsland
Regional Growth Plan 2025-2025
- East Gippsland
Housing and Settlement Strategy (2023) proposed to be introduced through East
Gippsland Amendment C169egip
Planning scheme provisions
Residential Zone
- Development
Plan Overlay
- Environmental
Audit Overlay
Planning scheme amendments
- East Gippsland
Amendments C159egip, 165egip, C169egip, C170egip and C171egip
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 1 (Potentially Contaminated Land)
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction 13 (Managing Coastal Hazards)
- Ministerial
Direction 15 (The Planning Scheme Amendment Process)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 23: Applying the Incorporated Plan Overlay and Development Plan
Practice Note 30: Potentially Contaminated Land
Practice Note 36: Implementing a Coastal Settlement Boundary
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines
Practice Note 53: Managing coastal hazard and the coastal impacts of climate
Practice Note 91: Using the Residential Zones
2.2 Technical and background reports
(i) The issue
issue is whether the technical and background reports that informed the
Structure Plan and Amendment are appropriate.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan was informed by:
Paynesville
Growth Area Issues and Options Paper (The Right Man, October 2015)
Paynesville
Growth Area Consultation Report (The Right Man, October 2015)
Social Impact
Assessment Report (East Gippsland Shire Council, February 2016)
Hydrological Analysis (Water Technology, March 2016)
Traffic Impact
Assessment Report (SALT, June 2016).
In addition to the Structure
Plan, the Amendment was informed by:
Planning Report (Euca Planning, March 2019, updated June 2024)
Cultural Heritage Desktop Assessment, Unearthed Heritage, May
Further work was commissioned by a landowner who engaged
experts to undertake the following peer reviews and updated studies:
Peer review of
Bushfire Planning Report (XWB Consulting, June 2024)
Infrastructure Plan Report (Polis Planning, July 2023)
Preliminary Site
Investigation (Ewers Environmental Consulting, April 2024)
Hydrological
Model Review (Water Technology, May 2024)
Engineering Assessment (SALT, November 2024).
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
The Structure
Plan and associated background and technical reports are outdated and do not
address current legislative requirements.
appropriate to defer preparation of detailed technical reports as a requirement
of a future development plan or planning
permit application.
Part B submission:
The Structure
Plan and associated technical reports:
- were adopted
in 2016 so they were reviewed in 2023 to ensure the veracity of these documents
to provide robust strategic justification
for the Amendment
- provide an
appropriate strategic framework to implement DPO10.
The 2023 review
- found that the
findings of the reports were still accurate and valid
- resulted in
revisions to documents to ensure the Amendment was consistent with the latest
Australian Bureau of Statistics data to
reflect the current planning policy
environment
include changes that alter the intent of the Structure Plan’s
recommendations.
(iv) Discussion
The degree to which age determines the accuracy of
the Structure Plan and background reports depends on, among other factors, the
rate of population and development change. As seven years had passed since the
Structure Plan was adopted, Council is commended
for reviewing the Structure
Plan and background reports to ensure they continue to be accurate and relevant
enough to be implemented.
The Panel is satisfied that these documents form an
appropriate base to support the Amendment.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
Structure Plan and its background reports are sufficiently accurate and relevant
enough to strategically support
the Amendment.
2.3 Local planning policy
(i) The issue
issue is whether the local planning policy changes proposed by the Amendment are
appropriate.
(ii) Submissions
Submissions requested the following local policy
Clause 11.01-1S
‘sustainability’.
Clause 11.01-1R
and increased tourist numbers
The Gippsland
Regional Growth Plan should identify smaller areas – the silt jetties and
the grey box species in Eagle Point.
Clause 11.01-1L-02
Amend the first
strategy from
“Provide a spacious residential character with a variety
of lot sizes and housing types to meet community needs”
“Provide a variety of lot sizes and housing types to meet community
“Policy Guideline – Paynesville: Encouraging a variety of lot
sizes in new subdivisions on greenfield sites, with an average
gross lot yield
of 8-10 lots per hectare.”
Paynesville Framework Plan the same as the Paynesville Structure Plan?
‘activity centre’.
a distinctive visual transition into Paynesville by establishing expansive green
edge abutting entry roads while maintaining
vistas to the Gippsland
sounds like an oxymoron and is
Council submission:
The requested
wording for the first Clause 11.01-1L-02 strategy provides clearer policy
intent, and is agreed.
guideline can be deleted because it is superseded by the East Gippsland Housing
and Settlement Strategy (2024).
It did not agree
with the remaining planning policy change requests.
The rules for
writing a planning scheme provision (Practitioners Guide to Victoria’s
Planning Schemes – Department of
transport and Planning, 2024)
A provision must not conflict with or duplicate other
legislation, instruments or planning scheme provisions.
Clause 11.01-1L-02 (Final version):
revised the
first strategy to
“Provide a variety of lot sizes and housing types to
meet community needs.”
deleted the
policy guideline seeking an average gross lot yield of 8-10 lots per
(iii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council’s response to
the requested policy changes. The requested changes to the first strategy of
11.01-1L-02
clarify what is intended rather than associating housing types and
style with the Paynesville character. Deleting the policy guidelines
Paynesville can align with the most current direction set out in Housing and
Settlement Strategy.
PE Act section 25(3) prohibits a panel from recommending an amendment be
adopted with changes to any State standard provision in the
Planning Scheme.
The Panel cannot recommend changes to Clauses with ‘S’ and
‘R’ because they are State standard
provisions.
Consistent with Council’s response, the Panel does not agree with the
remaining requested changes to local policy because they
do not reflect good
policy drafting sought by the Practitioner’s Guide or are beyond the scope
for Eagle Point.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
is appropriate to revise the Paynesville content in Clause 11.01-1L-02 to:
- clarify the
intent of the first strategy regarding lots sizes and housing types by
explaining it seeks a variety of lot sizes and
housing types to meet community
- delete the
policy guideline that has been superseded by the East Gippsland Housing and
Settlement Strategy (2023).
is not appropriate to include the remaining requested changes because they seek
to change State standard provisions and they do
not align with good policy
The Panel recommends:
Clause 11.01-1L-02 to:
a) replace the first strategy for Paynesville
“Provide a variety of lot sizes and housing types to meet
community needs.”
b) delete the policy guideline for
Paynesville.
2.4 Strategic justification
(i) Submissions
submission:
The Amendment
seeks to implement the Structure Plan through the Planning Scheme by rezoning
land and making informed and justified
changes to policy and planning provisions
related to Paynesville.
The Amendment
has adequate strategic justification.
One submission requested the
Amendment be abandoned for reasons unrelated to its strategic justification.
These issues are considered
later in this report.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel has found the Structure Plan and its
background reports are sufficiently accurate and relevant to strategically
the Amendment. No submission requested the Amendment be abandoned
because of insufficient strategic justification.
The Amendment seeks to provide more housing for the future Paynesville
community within a contained settlement area, which responds
to environmental
issues, particularly those associated with the Gippsland Lakes. The Amendments
is supported by key policy objectives
in the Planning Scheme identified in
The Amendment has comprehensively considered the potential impacts of
expanding Paynesville in a westerly direction and has sought
to manage them
through a planning framework including GRZ3 and DPO10. The Amendment has an
evident underlying strategic thread which
seeks to balance the need for more
housing while appropriately managing potential impact to the Gippsland
On balance, the Amendment will deliver net community benefit and sustainable
development as required by Clause 71.02-3.
(iii) Conclusions and recommendation
For the reasons set out
in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
well founded and strategically justified
proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
The Panel recommends that
the East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C172egip as exhibited with changes
outlined in this report.
3 Settlement approach
3.1 Settlement break and tourism area
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether the
approach to the settlement break is appropriate and justified.
identifying the future tourism area has a clear strategic basis and an
appropriate planning response.
(ii) Background
Generally, the Structure Plan seeks to:
landscape break west of Grandview Road to maintain the identity of both
Paynesville and Eagle Point (see
support tourism
development in a strategically located but currently unzoned site, indicating a
Future Tourism
Preferred Urban Structure Plan extract relating to
Future Tourism Area
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 2 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The Structure Plan states:
Entry to Paynesville at the Grandview Road intersection will strongly
reinforce a transition from rural and lake vistas and arrival
in a spacious
lakeside urban parkland environment.
Generous open space linkages and pedestrian/cycle corridors will provide
convenient off- road access into the existing town and to
connect with public
foreshores. The Lake King foreshore will be managed and protected as an
important environmental and public open
space asset.
Open spaces will create green corridors supporting natural drainage and
provide off-road connections for cyclists and pedestrians,
retaining as much
native vegetation as possible and enhanced with new plantings.
The growth area will provide for a range of residential lot sizes and options
for a diverse and inclusive community, aged care and
visitor accommodation and
other land uses to meet social and economic needs for Paynesville.
3.1.2 Urban Land Use
Objective O4
To provide the opportunity for high-quality tourism and eco-tourism
facilities through the allocation of suitable land within a Comprehensive
Development Zone (or similar), with guidelines for design, use and scale of
facilities.
Requirement R5
Tourism development and/or visitor accommodation on the site shown as
‘Future tourist accommodation precinct subject to further
investigation’ must be subject to a comprehensive development plan
outlining design criteria and demonstrating:
A scale and
design of development to reflect the semi-rural lakeside setting;
Retention of
views from surrounding public roads;
landscaping themes; and
Integration with
public streets and walking paths.
The Amendment proposes to change
planning policy related to the Future Tourism Area but does not propose any
other changes which directly
affect that land.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions including Friends of Gippsland Lakes,
Parks and Reserves Inc (FoGL):
There is a lack
of a defined and durable western edge to Paynesville.
There should be
no sprawling residential expansion towards the rural interface and
development should be spatially contained to preserve township identity and
local environmental values.
There should be
a functional termination of urban development at the activity centre and
retention of open or rural land to the west
to maintain landscape character and
township identity.
Tourism has a
potential role in the Paynesville economy, but it should not undermine
environmental values or reduce the clear urban
Any tourism
development should be carefully located and designed to avoid foreshore or
sensitive rural land
East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority
(EGCMA) and DEECA submissions:
Supported the
retention of part of Bay Road as future open space with the intended non-urban
interface on the northern extent.
There is a need
to consider environmental and biodiversity constraints when finalising the
location and extent of infrastructure development
(above 2.8 metres
Mr Milner’s expert evidence:
The separation
of settlements is planning policy outlined in existing strategies at Clauses
11.01-1L and 11.01-1L-02.
The separation
between Paynesville and Eagle Point is expected within the Paynesville Growth
Area, but there is no measure as to where
or how much land is to be provided to
satisfy the policy expectation of separation.
The proposed
tourism area at the entrance to the township
aspirational
and speculative”
... to single out and
essentially ‘reserve’ a large site for a use and development concept
with no proponent, proposal,
composition or time frame and commit to a
different, later, zoning, is not in the community’s best interest or the
planning and development of this part of the growth area.
undermine orderly planning by sterilising land without certainty that tourism
investment would occur, effectively placing
a hold on the land with no mechanism
for activation.
A more flexible
approach is required to:
- not apply a
new zone now, but indicate a ‘preferred locality’ for major tourism
development in the Framework Plan using
a generalised symbol or hatch (without
fixed boundaries)
- rezone all
land to GRZ3 or alternatively, rely on the cadastral boundary between 1255 and
1325 Paynesville Road to be the western
limit of the residential zone where many
tourism uses are not prohibited, and support such proposals through local policy
planning permit process
- ensure any
future tourism development proposal is supported by policy but not landlocked by
over-zoning or premature reservation.
submission:
‘settlement break’ is not specifically applied in relation to the
Paynesville Growth Area (unlike Amendment C171egip
for Eagle Point).
The Framework
Plan in the exhibited Clause 11.01-1L-02 and the Structure Plan confine
residential development to the Structure Plan
boundary, with the preferred urban
form generally directed east of Grandview Road.
The Framework
Plan delineates a defined growth area, with foreshore and rural land outside the
rezoning area, retaining their non-urban
This approach
provides a clear and contained urban edge to the west, consistent with orderly
planning principles, while allowing flexibility
for the urban growth
rationale for not rezoning the ‘tourism land’ now:
- Currently,
there is no proponent or detailed proposal for the tourism use.
- The Farming
Zone can accommodate some tourism with a planning permit.
The designation
indicates long-term strategic support without committing to a zone that may
prove to be inappropriate.
The GRZ and
DPO10 are inappropriate for the tourism land at this stage.
The Amendment
therefore treats the Future Tourism Area as a policy-identified future
opportunity rather than a rezoned or development-ready
(iv) Discussion
The exhibited Structure Plan and Framework Plan
confine residential development to the structure plan boundary, with the
urban form generally directed east of Grandview Road. Land to the
north and west, including the foreshore and rural interface, remains
outside the
proposed residential zone. The Panel accepts this approach provides clear and
contained growth edge consistent with
orderly planning principles, while
allowing for the integration of a future local activity centre.
Submissions from FoGL and the EGCMA reinforced the importance of maintaining
a durable urban edge in this location to prevent incremental
expansion into the
rural interface and to preserve the township’s identity and landscape
values. While the Amendment does
not adopt the terminology of a
‘settlement break’, the combination of zoning, the Framework Plan
and overlay provisions
achieves a functional containment of the urban area,
consistent with the policy intent for settlement separation in the Gippsland
Lakes corridor.
While the Amendment does not formally address the settlement break between
Paynesville and Eagle Point, the concurrent East Gippsland
Amendment C171egip
seeks to secure such a break by retaining open, non-urban land between the two
townships. This ‘break’
should be reinforced through Amendment
C172egip by limiting the western extent of residential development to no further
identified boundary along Grandview Road. This would:
logical and readily identifiable edge to the urban form, complements the
settlement break intent of C171egip
ensure that
Paynesville retains a defined and coherent edge.
Part of the
settlement edge within the Paynesville Growth Area, specifically the northern
section known as 229 Bay Road adjoining
lower-lying land (predominantly below 2.8 metres AHD) that would extend the
publicly accessible foreshore area
offers views to
prominent slopes and elevated landforms and from the lake.
landscape features are a distinctive element of Paynesville’s visual
identity, both from the water and from key foreshore
vantage points. The Panel
supports Council’s proposal to identify this land as future public open
space, to be transferred
into public ownership through future subdivision and
development process. This outcome will protect landscape and ecological values,
maintain continuous public access to the lake edge, and provide a natural and
visually open transition between the urban area and
the water’s edge.
This northern foreshore section is both an ecologically important asset and a
visual component of the broader
settlement break, reinforcing environmental
stewardship and the legibility of the township boundary.
Regarding the Future Tourism Area identified at the township entrance,
Council’s approach is to identify strategic support for
tourism without
rezoning the land at this stage. This reflects the absence of a current
proponent, a defined proposal, or agreed
delivery timing. The Farming Zone
already provides for some forms of tourism development subject to permit and the
Framework Plan
notation offers a clear policy signal to support such proposals
when viable.
The Panel acknowledges Mr Milner’s evidence, which cautioned against
‘reserving’ a large site for an uncommitted
use and described the
current approach as “
aspirational and speculative
recommendation for a more flexible, policy-led identification, potentially using
a generalised symbol on the Framework
Plan and relying on the residential zone
has merit in principle. However, on balance, a policy approach would enable the
be rezoned when proposal details are known. Prematurely committing to a
zone may result in inappropriately reserving the site or
requiring a future
planning scheme amendment for another rezoning.
Overall, the approach to the Amendment:
defines and
contains the western extent of the Paynesville Growth Area by limiting
residential zoning to no further west than Grandview
Road, supported by the
Framework Plan, zoning and DPO10 design provisions
secures the
northern foreshore at Bay Road as future public open space, protecting the Lake
King interface and maintaining its landscape,
ecological and visual values
identifies a
strategically located tourism opportunity in policy terms, allowing flexibility
for future proposals while avoiding premature
rezoning or inappropriate
reservation of the land in advance of demonstrated feasibility
Panel considers this approach achieves an appropriate balance between
accommodating urban growth, protecting environmental and
landscape values, and
enabling long-term economic opportunities, consistent with the principles of
orderly and proper planning.
(v) Conclusions
Panel concludes:
Amendment establishes a clear and justified western edge to the Paynesville
Growth Area by limiting residential development to
no further west than
Grandview Road.
Designating
the northern foreshore at 229 Bay Road as future public open space will result
in an appropriate edge to the settlement
is appropriate and strategically justified identify the Future Tourism Area at
the township entrance through a policy-based approach
that provides flexibility
for future proposals without sterilising or prematurely rezoning the
3.2 Activity centre
(i) The issue
issue is whether the size and zone of the activity centre shown in the Structure
Plan should be introduced through the Amendment.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan states:
Figure 3: Annotated Preferred Urban Structure Plan
The area will accommodate a Local Activity Centre fronting Paynesville Road
and may include a service station and complementary retail
services that will
not detract from the core commercial precinct.
3.1.2 Urban Land Use
Objective O2
To accommodate medium density residential development, aged care and
retirement accommodation and a Local Activity Centre in locations
with the Preferred Urban Structure.
Requirement R6
Development of the Local Activity Centre must:
Consider the
local retail needs and not adversely affect the primary role of the existing
Paynesville Activity Centre;
Provide access
from a service road set back from Paynesville Road by a minimum 15 metre
landscape buffer; and
Be separated and
screened from surrounding residential development to prevent impacts on
residential amenity.
DPO10 (Exhibited version) includes the
following requirements for a development plan:
Identify the location and preferred land uses of a Local Activity Centre
generally in accordance with Diagram 1 and the Retail Economic
Assessment.
Retail Economic Assessment
A Retail Economic Assessment which must be prepared by a suitably qualified
professional to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
The assessment
must determine the size of the future local activity centre and include suitable
land uses. Proposed use and development
within the local activity centre must
not adversely affect the primary role of the existing Paynesville Activity
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Haratsis’ expert evidence:
A neighbourhood
centre at 5 and 95 Grandview Road:
- is supportable
and required by the current and future population
- would likely
provide important economic benefits to the region, and the impact on surrounding
retailers is within acceptable competitive
ranges and unlikely to threaten their
- will align
with relevant planning policies and strategies, specifically regarding the
expansion of Paynesville west and providing
retail and non-retail uses which
will increase amenity to local residents and tourists to the area
- will pose very
little risk to Paynesville because the Paynesville region will continue to
perform well through the strong performance
of Paynesville retail (relatively
low vacancies, future growth potential from residential
development).
31.9 per cent of
primary sector residents are over 70 years, which is:
- significantly
above the same cohort for non-metropolitan Victoria (11.9 per cent)
- expected to
increase as more retirement living becomes available in the wider
Older residents
have constrained movement so this cohort requires full-line supermarket
convenience near their residence.
The provision
rate of both supermarket and centre-based retail floorspace in Paynesville is
deemed insufficient.
The proposed
activity centre is estimated to raise this rate to a more acceptable level.
A significant
share of Paynesville residents currently travel to Bairnsdale for their
supermarket shopping needs.
Grandview Road could support a supermarket-based centre comprising up to 6,162
square metres of retail floorspace by 2027
comprising:
- up to 4,216
square metres of floorspace for food, liquor and groceries
- 668 square
metres of food-catering facilities such as cafes and restaurants
- 1,278 square
metres of non-food shop floorspace
non-retail provision.
Having regard to
current policies, schemes and plans, supportable floorspace, requirements of the
older local population and supermarket
visitation patterns, it is recommended
the activity centre comprise (gross leasable floorspace):
- Retail: 4,400
square metres and non-retail shops: 150 square metres
centre: 1,000 square metres
- Gym/well-being:
500 square metres
- Childcare:
2,000 square metres
station: 300 square metres.
Based on an
activity centre with 4,400 square metres of retail gross leasable area, it is
- Paynesville
supermarkets (within trade area) will be impacted by 9.8 per cent
- centres and
supermarkets collectively beyond the trade area will be impacted by 7.3 per cent
including 11.2 per cent for Bairnsdale
supermarkets.
Ordinarily,
- 0 to 5 per
cent are considered minor/insignificant
- 5 to 10 per
cent are considered moderate
- 10 to 15 per
cent are considered significant
- under 15 per
cent are considered within the acceptable bounds of competition and unlikely to
threaten viability
- greater than
15 per cent are considered a risk to the competitive provider.
The estimated
trading impacts on the surrounding area are:
- well within
the reasonable bounds of competition and are unlikely to threaten their
- reflect the
estimated and projected undersupply of retail floorspace in the area relative to
household retail expenditure.
The proposed
activity centre and associated residential development will result in economic
benefits including:
- construction
output – total $2.60 billion
- construction
employment – total 6,176 full-time-equivalent (FTE) jobs
- operational
employment – 218 FTE direct and 68 FTE indirect jobs
- ongoing output
– $40.2 million direct and $66.7 million ongoing
- various wider
qualitative benefits.
centre should be identified as a Neighbourhood Activity Centre rather than a
Local Activity Centre.
Mr Haratsis’ expert evidence regarding
the DPO10 Retail Economic Assessment requirement:
is unnecessarily
restrictive and may be interpreted as there should be no impact of the
Paynesville Activity Centre
redrafted to replace the relevant words with
“not unreasonably affect
the existing Paynesville Activity Centre”
Woodland’s expert evidence:
GRZ is not the
right zone to facilitate a new activity centre, and it is difficult to apply the
Commercial Zone because the precise
size of the centre is not known.
MUZ is the most
appropriate zone, given the ultimate location and size of the activity centre
are not resolved in the Structure Plan
at this point.
Orderly planning
and development of the land requires an appropriate zone to use it for an
activity centre with the need for future
Applying the MUZ
to a larger area on the subject land may address the zoning issue, as it is a
residential-based zone that provides
a flexible range of retail and commercial
TLC Unlimited and CCW Properties submission:
The Amendment
should zone the proposed activity centre as MUZ in the size and location shown
, when considering the
expert views of Mr Haratsis and Mr Woodland.
The activity
centre is likely to ultimately include:
composition of uses envisaged by Mr Haratsis
- appropriate
landscape and urban design outcomes
bicycle parking, loading activities and an internal road network
- opportunities
for housing
TLC Unlimited and CCW Properties requested MUZ
Source: Document 127
Council submission:
Council has
previously supported MUZ for the future activity centre.
The work done by
Mr Haratsis and Mr Woodland regarding the proposed activity centre is welcome,
however premature in the context of
the Amendment.
Council always
intended to have a commercial centre in the growth area that did not adversely
affect the primary activity centre.
versions of the Structure Plan and the Amendment contemplated the MUZ but
Council has some reservations about the proposed
activity centre size of 4.5
determined the proposed size might be overstated because of seasonality, the
lack of control over commercial rents and the
absence of a robust assessment of
vacant undeveloped commercial land.
Council agreed
with Mr Woodland that the development plan process can bed down the uses for the
MUZ and that the community has been
well consulted on the proposal for an
activity centre within the Structure Plan area.
Clause 11.01-1L-02
(Final version) revised the relevant strategy for Paynesville to:
Ensure retail and commercial activities located outside the activity centre
do not adversely affect the viability of the activity
DPO10 (Final version) replaced ‘local activity centre’ with
‘neighbourhood activity centre’.
(iv) Discussion
The 2016 Structure Plan identified a small MUZ area
along Paynesville Road at 5 and 95 Grandview Road with a note ‘Potential
new service centre site’. The exhibited Structure Plan replaced the MUZ
area with a symbol and note ‘Future local activity
centre'. Council has
previously supported MUZ for the activity centre. These matters are not
The issue is whether the 4.5 hectares of MUZ proposed by TLC Unlimited and
CCW Properties is strategically justified and should be
introduced through the
Amendment. The Panel has considered Mr Haratsis’ economic assessment to
understand:
what sort and
size of activity centre can locate at 5 and 95 Grandview Road without negatively
impacting the primary role of the existing
Paynesville Town Centre, as sought by
policy, the Structure Plan and DPO10
whether this can
inform how much MUZ land is needed to support such a centre.
Haratsis’ evidence provides a sound economic assessment to help better
understand the gross leasable floorspace area the
activity centre may be able to
support from 2027. What drew the Panel’s attention is that he considered
the future activity
centre could support 6,162 square metres of retail
floorspace. However, his economic impact assessment was based on 4,400 square
metres of retail floorspace after considering policies and plans including those
Town Centre.
DPO10 requires the Retail Economic Assessment to ensure use and development
in the future activity centre that does not
“adversely affect the
primary role of the existing Paynesville Activity Centre”
. The Panel
agrees with this requirement.
It is not the role of planning to ensure that a new activity centre does not
negatively impact an individual shop in an existing activity
centre. However,
from a policy perspective, it is important to understand whether establishing a
future activity centre would impact
the viability of the existing retail anchor
such as the supermarket in the existing Paynesville Town Centre. Such an impact
affect the viability of surrounding shops. Such an outcome could
undermine the primary role of the existing Paynesville Town Centre
within East
Gippsland retail hierarchy.
Having said that, the Panel agrees with Mr Haratsis that the DPO10
requirement for the Retail Economic Assessment should not be interpreted
impact on the existing activity centre. The exhibited requirement clearly
refers to not adversely affecting ‘the primary
role’ of the existing
centre rather than impacting the centre itself. In contrast, a strategy
proposed in Clause 11.01-1L-02
(Final version) seeks to “
Ensure retail
and commercial activities located outside the activity centre do not adversely
affect the viability of the activity
The Panel considers
this wording has two issues:
Any trade in the
new activity centre will negatively affect, to some degree, the existing
activity centre’s viability by taking
away some of its trade.
The strategy
refers to the ‘activity centre’ so when there are two activity
centres in Paynesville, it will be unclear
which one the strategy refers
Clause 11.01-1L-02 should be consistent with the clearer wording
in the DPO10 requirement regarding the centre’s ‘primary
and to specifically refer to the Paynesville Town Centre consistent with Clause
11.03-1L-02.
The Panel has not commented on the retail composition or function of the
activity centre to avoid prejudicing any future strategic
planning process.
It would have been ideal to apply the MUZ through the Amendment. However,
the Panel agrees with Council that further work needs to
be done to resolve
issues associated with the centre to help inform the ultimate size and location
of the MUZ. Without this work,
the surrounding GRZ as proposed by the Amendment
should apply to the subject land. In this instance, it is considered orderly
to rezone the land with an interim zone until there is further
information to better inform the ultimate zone. This approach is
throughout Victoria including growth areas where land rezoned to Urban Growth
Zone is later rezoned to the applied zone after
the final alignment is
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
size and zone of the activity centre should not be shown in the Structure Plan
or introduced through the Amendment because further
work is needed to determine
relevant strategy in Clause 11.01-1L-02 should be revised to:
- be consistent
with the clearer wording in the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 requirement
regarding the Town Centre’s
‘primary role’
- specifically
refer to the Paynesville Town Centre consistent with Clause
11.03-1L-02.
Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 10 should recognise the proposed centre as a
‘neighbourhood activity centre’ to reflect
its ultimate
The Panel recommends:
Amend Clause 11.01-1L-02 to revise the
relevant Paynesville strategy to:
Ensure retail
and commercial activities located outside the Paynesville Town Centre do not
adversely affect its primary role.
Amend Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10, as shown in
, to replace
‘local activity centre’ with ‘neighbourhood activity
centre’ in Clause 4.0.
3.3 Stormwater and drainage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment has appropriately considered stormwater and
drainage associated with future growth.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan identifies approximately 227
hectares of land for future residential development in Paynesville, adjoining
Lake King foreshore.
The Amendment is accompanied by a Surface Water Management Strategy
(initially prepared in 2016 and updated in 2024). DPO10 requires
development to respond to drainage needs at the catchment scale.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
There is concern
below the 2.8 metres AHD contour,
given future risks of coastal inundation
and sea level rise.
DPO10 should be
clearer regarding drainage staging, catchment boundaries and developer
responsibilities for drainage infrastructure.
The 2024 Water
Technology update to the original 2016 Surface Water Management Strategy does
not reflect the most recent hazard modelling
or sea level rise projections.
There should be
a more adaptive and risk-based approach to stormwater planning that can respond
to future climate conditions, including
compound flood events.
Shared drainage
infrastructure delivery needs to be coordinated across multiple landowners to
ensure effective integration and equitable
cost distribution.
no development below 2.8 m AHD
” in Structure Plan
Figure 3 should be revised to clarify that passive drainage infrastructure such
as wetlands may still be
appropriate.
planning for drainage infrastructure may result in flooding impacts on adjacent
land or failure to protect the Lake King
expert evidence:
The Paynesville
Growth Area is suitable for drainage servicing, with appropriate natural fall
and separation into three sub-catchments
(north, west, east).
appropriate to site stormwater treatment infrastructure below 2.8 metres
AHD, noting this is supported by the Structure
Plan and DPO10.
development plans should be enabled in DPO10 to allow drainage to be planned and
delivered on a catchment-by-catchment basis,
rather than requiring a single
precinct-wide plan.
Wetlands and
retarding basins can be appropriately designed to manage stormwater quantity and
quality without increasing flood risk
or compromising foreshore values.
Detailed design
and approval of any interim or partial works should be assessed by Council
during the development plan approval stage.
Mr Bishop’s expert
The Surface
Water Management Strategy prepared by Water Technology is based on current
industry practice, including use of Australian
Rainfall and Runoff 2019
standards and Model for Urban Stormwater Improvement Conceptualisation modelling
to assess treatment performance.
The 2.8-metre
AHD contour represents a reasonable benchmark for avoiding habitable buildings
and sensitive land uses.
stormwater infrastructure, such as wetlands or retarding basins, may be
appropriately located below 2.8-metre AHD contour
compromise public safety
- are not relied
upon for access during flood events, and
- are designed
to remain functional under future sea level rise conditions.
Supported the
conceptual location and sizing of wetlands and drainage assets proposed in the
2024 Water Technology modelling, subject
to detailed design at the development
plan stage.
The hydrologic
modelling is suitable to support the strategic planning stage, however more
detailed site-specific analysis (such as
flood storage volumes, invert levels,
tailwater conditions) would be required at the subdivision or drainage design
assets located in or next to the foreshore reserve should be designed with
careful attention to erosion potential, hydraulic
connectivity and ecological
There is no
hydrologic or flooding reason that preclude the Amendment from proceeding,
subject to refinement and implementation of
the drainage strategy through the
DPO10 and its Public Infrastructure Plan processes.
The strategic
planning for stormwater infrastructure across the Paynesville Growth Area has
been appropriately informed by contemporary
hydrological modelling and reflects
best practice in integrated catchment planning.
Ministerial
Direction 13 (Managing coastal hazards) can be interpreted as ‘significant
infrastructure’ should not be placed
below 2.8 metres AHD.
The stormwater
strategy aligns with the Structure Plan catchment layout.
DPO10 has been
structured to facilitate delivery of infrastructure in a staged and coordinated
manner, consistent with natural drainage
Infrastructure
located below 2.8 metres AHD must be approached with caution.
Decisions on
infrastructure locations should be informed by site-specific risk assessments at
the development planning and development
approval stages.
DPO10 is the
primary tool through which stormwater management obligations will be secured,
including the preparation of a Public Infrastructure
Plan that outlines how
drainage, flood mitigation and water quality objectives will be achieved across
multiple ownerships.
It is important
to protect the environmental values of Lake King, particularly in the design and
location of wetlands and drainage
reserves near the foreshore, and Council will
assess these matters carefully during the development plan approval
implementing DPO10 requirements and appropriate oversight through future
approvals, the Amendment provides a sound framework
for managing stormwater and
drainage in a way that supports growth while addressing long-term environmental
(iv) Discussion
A critical issue raised in the Amendment is whether
stormwater and drainage associated with this future growth have been
appropriately
planned for. Given the proximity to environmentally sensitive
coastal areas, effective stormwater management must address both urban
impacts and long-term risks related to sea level rise and inundation.
The Panel is satisfied the Amendment is supported by a contemporary and
technically robust approach to stormwater and drainage planning.
The strategic
work underpinning the Amendment, particularly the updated 2024 Water Technology
modelling, adopts current Australian
Rainfall and Runoff 2019 standards and
applies best practice in water sensitive urban design. The Paynesville Growth
Area is divided
into three defined catchments, and the proposed drainage
strategy aligns with these natural drainage patterns through a series of
wetlands, retarding basins and biofiltration systems.
The main contention is whether it is appropriate to locate certain drainage
infrastructure below the 2.8-metre AHD contour, given
its function as a coastal
hazard benchmark. Nobody is seeking to enable development such as buildings or
road infrastructure below
this elevation. Council is appropriately seeking to
align the Amendment with Ministerial Direction 13. This direction requires
explanation on how the Amendment responds to five considerations rather than
expressly seeking to prohibit certain infrastructure
from locating below 2.8
metres AHD.
The question is whether there is an opportunity to locate passive drainage
assets such as wetlands and basins below 2.8 metres
AHD. Both Mr Swan and
Mr Bishop consider this is possible, provided they are designed to remain
functional under future sea level
rise conditions, do not compromise public
safety, and are not relied upon for emergency access.
The Panel accepts the evidence of Mr Swan and Ms Bishop that there may be an
opportunity to locate certain infrastructure below 2.8 metres
AHD subject
to achieving outcomes that do not risk negative environmental or safety
outcomes. This includes passive systems (such
as stormwater treatment wetlands)
but excludes sensitive development (such as buildings and access roads). This
does not mean that
passive systems will be suitable in such locations in all
instances. The suitability of infrastructure at or below this level should
determined on a case-by-case basis, informed by site-specific analysis and
coastal hazard considerations at the development plan
or development planning
approval stage.
The Panel does agree with submissions that the Amendment has not sufficiently
responded to future climate conditions, including changing
flood behaviour,
cumulative rainfall effects and compound coastal events. While the stormwater
strategy provides a high-level framework
suitable for structure planning, DPO10
requires preparation of detailed drainage design, supported by a Public
Infrastructure Plan,
before development can occur. These documents must respond
to contemporary standards and any updated hazard information at the time
approval. The flexible DPO10 provisions and Council’s ongoing statutory
role through the development approvals and engineering
works process, provide
appropriate mechanisms to ensure infrastructure can respond to changing
circumstances over time.
The coordination of shared drainage infrastructure across fragmented
landholdings was another issue raised in submissions. The Panel
agrees that
equitable delivery of such assets is essential to support orderly development.
The DPO10 requirement for a Public Infrastructure
Plan and Council’s
indication that multiple development plans may be accepted based on catchment
boundaries, is an appropriate
response. These tools can secure infrastructure
sequencing, cost-sharing and functional integration.
The interface between drainage infrastructure and the Lake King foreshore was
identified as an area of sensitivity. The Panel recognises
the environmental
values of the Gippsland Lakes and the importance of protecting riparian and
estuarine systems. Where drainage
assets are located near or in the foreshore
reserve, careful design and assessment will be required to meet biodiversity,
control and water quality outcomes. These matters can be further
addressed through conditions at the development plan or planning
For reasons set out above, the Panel considers the Amendment has
appropriately addressed stormwater and drainage considerations.
The strategic
framework is sound, and the DPO10 provisions are sufficiently flexible and
directive to deliver drainage infrastructure
that is environmentally
responsible, coordinated and adaptable to future conditions.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
Amendment has appropriately considered stormwater and drainage associated with
future growth.
below 2.8 metres Australian Height Datum should:
- be prohibited
from having sensitive development such as buildings and access roads, consistent
with Ministerial Direction 13
- be enabled to
have passive systems such as stormwater treatment wetlands that do not risk
negative environmental or safety
The Panel recommends:
Amend the Paynesville Structure Plan to
replace the relevant label in Figure 3 with ‘no development below 2.8
metres AHD other
than passive infrastructure subject to not risking negative
environmental or safety outcomes’.
3.4 Open space
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately
considered open space provision.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
The Structure
Plan and DPO10 do not adequately define the proposed open space network
including the location, type and quality of
open space.
Land below the
2.8-metre AHD contour should not be relied on to meet open space requirements
because of flood risk, limited recreational
function and poor
accessibility.
Constrained or
hazard-prone land should not be used as public open space.
The revised
Structure Plan appears to reduce earlier commitments to linear open space
corridors and green links that provided connectivity
to the foreshore and
throughout the precinct.
There should be
greater certainty regarding delivery, including implementation mechanisms, land
acquisition and equitable access to
open space across all stages of
development.
unrealistic to identify open space on private land, particularly north of Bay
Road, without a clear acquisition strategy.
Accessible,
walkable and well-connected open space are important.
There should be
integrated pedestrian and cycling links, shade and passive recreational
infrastructure.
Mr Milner’s expert evidence:
Supported the
DPO10 mapping extent including 229 Bay Road.
The intent to
protect land north of Bay Road for conservation and open space purposes is
The assumption
that private land will be transferred to public ownership without compensation
is inequitable.
The 2.8-metre
AHD contour should not be used to define open space because recent survey data
shows this boundary is closer to Bay
Road than originally mapped, potentially
reducing the amount of usable open space.
The Framework
Plan should clarify the amount and location of open space south of Bay Road in
light of these changes.
2.8-metre AHD contour appropriately informs development constraints, it does not
in itself justify or determine open space
provision, and should be more clearly
linked to the DPO10 open space
requirements.
Mr Woodland’s expert evidence:
DPO10 includes
clear objectives to deliver high quality public realm, open space and community
facilities, and an integrated and connected
movement network that links
residential areas to the foreshore reserves and surrounding township.
Planning Scheme
Clause 11.01-1L-02 (Growth Area Towns – Paynesville):
- promotes a
residential and business centre focused on boating, tourism, healthy living and
access to walking and riding trails,
as well as passive and active
- reinforces the
importance of a well-designed and accessible open space network.
Supported the
Amendment’s intent to provide a distinct separation between Paynesville
and Eagle Point, which incorporates extensive
open space areas and expansive
green edges abutting entry roads to maintain a strong landscape transition and
views to the Gippsland
provisions and broader framework planning reflect a policy-consistent approach
to providing open space, as reinforced through
environmental overlays and
subdivision requirements which will guide the ultimate delivery of accessible
and functional public open
space across the precinct.
submission:
The Structure
Plan establishes open space, landscape values, recreation and walkability as
central themes, reflecting their importance
to the future character and
liveability of the Paynesville Growth Area.
The Structure
Plan’s Preferred Urban Structure and Framework Plan identify landscape
corridors intended to accommodate shared
walking tracks and support
neighbourhood connectivity.
Amendment does not prescribe detailed alignments, DPO10 includes specific
requirements for the design and construction of
connected pedestrian and cycling
networks throughout the precinct.
DPO10 recognises
the significance of the Gippsland Lakes foreshore and elevates the importance of
connection to and enjoyment of public
land adjacent to Lake King.
areas, including those below the 2.8-metre AHD contour, are to be refined
through the development plan process, and where
appropriate, incorporated into
the open space network as part of a coordinated approach to foreshore
protection, passive recreation,
and ecological outcomes.
(iii) Discussion
Concerns regarding the location, usability, and
delivery of open space in the Paynesville Growth Area are not uncommon in the
stages of strategic planning and structure planning processes,
particularly in coastal settings where development interfaces with
ecologically
and visually sensitive landscapes.
The Panel supports Mr Milner’s recommendation and Council’s
proposal to include 229 Bay Road, Paynesville within the mapped
extent of the
DPO10 because it forms part of the foreshore. This approach will ensure the
foreshore interface and open space can
appropriately integrate with the future
stages of the development.
The Panel is satisfied that the proposed planning framework, particularly
DPO10, provides an appropriate and robust mechanism to guide
the detailed design
and delivery of open space in subsequent stages of development. DPO10
establishes clear objectives and performance
expectations for connectivity,
public realm integration, and foreshore interface outcomes and allows for the
refinement of open space
locations through the development plan process. This
is when site-specific constraints and opportunities can be properly
The changes facilitated by landowners and Council through the Panel process,
now ensures that the Amendment appropriately recognises
land below the 2.8-metre
AHD contour as land constrained for development. While not all this land may
ultimately form usable open
space, its inclusion in the overall landscape
strategy contributes to broader environmental, visual and recreational
objectives.
The relationship between this land, the Foreshore Improvement and
Management Plan required by DPO10, and future subdivision design
will need to be
carefully considered during development planning, but the strategic direction is
sufficiently framed at this stage.
The open space provision, as included in the Structure Plan and DPO10,
responds to relevant policy in the Planning Scheme. Particularly
it promotes a
connected, accessible and liveable coastal settlement. The future integration
of shared paths, landscape corridors,
and links to the Gippsland Lakes foreshore
reflects sound planning principles and offers a clear pathway to achieving
high-quality
public realm outcomes.
Accordingly, the Panel considers the Amendment has appropriately addressed
open space planning at the strategic level, and that further
detail will be
appropriately resolved when implementing DPO10 and through the subdivision
approval processes.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately considered open space
Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 10 is a suitable framework to guide the detailed design,
location and delivery of a connected and
functional open space network through
future development stages.
appropriate and justified to include 229 Bay Road, Paynesville into the mapped
extent of the Development Plan Overlay Schedule
recommends:
Extend Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 to
apply to 229 Bay Road, Paynesville.
4 Environmental matters
4.1 Climate change and coastal sea level rise
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether the
Amendment has appropriately considered sea level rise and climate change
whether coastal
sea level rise mapping appropriately reflects the 2.8-metre AHD
(ii) Submissions
Submissions:
adequately to sea level rise and climate change, relies on outdated hazard
mapping and does not sufficiently consider long-term
risks from storm surge,
erosion and coastal processes
- should adopt a
more precautionary and adaptive planning framework, with mechanisms for regular
review and adjustment of development
setbacks and hazard buffers as sea level
rise projections evolve
incorporate the Marine and Coastal Policy 2020 and Ministerial Direction 13,
particularly in relation to long-term hazard
avoidance, public land protection
and ecosystem resilience.
Coastal hazard
modelling should be updated to reflect recent data and improved methodologies,
including compound flood scenarios and
probabilistic assessments aligned with
current climate science.
The 2.8-metre
AHD contour should not be relied on as a fixed coastal hazard line, as it is a
static and insufficient benchmark derived
from modelling that only extends to
2040 and fails to reflect contemporary best practice.
SLO2 should be
retained along foreshore areas to:
environmental and scenic values are maintained
- provide a
further planning safeguard in the context of rising sea
FoGL submission:
The 2.8-metre
AHD contour should not be relied on because it is based on outdated and
inadequate hazard modelling and does not meet
current best practice standards or
state policy expectations.
The Gippsland
Lakes Coastal Hazard Assessment (2014) was limited in scope, stopped at 2040
scenarios and did not include detailed
modelling for erosion, compound flood
events or higher-end sea level rise scenarios.
There should be
a precautionary approach that incorporates updated climate projections,
probabilistic sea level rise models, and planning
mechanisms that enable
adaptation over time.
There are risks
of ‘coastal squeeze’ where public foreshore land could be lost to
erosion and inundation if inadequate
buffers are maintained, thereby
compromising Ramsar wetlands and public access.
Amendment’s treatment of climate risk does not to meet the principles of
Marine and Coastal Act 2018
and that rezoning should be deferred
until more robust and current hazard modelling is completed.
The Amendment
should retain stronger foreshore protections, including extended buffers,
retention of SLO2 and incorporation of performance-based
criteria to respond to
long-term climate impacts.
EGCMA submission:
Supported the
use of the 2.8-metre AHD contour to exclude residential development.
Endorses the
Structure Plan requirements that land below 2.8 metres AHD be included in
foreshore reserve, not zoned GRZ3 or
subject to future urban development.
The Amendment
incorrectly identifies some low-lying land as GRZ3.
The Structure
Plan and flood risk policy should be revised to correctly align GRZ3.
planning needs to reflect long-term flood risk and climate change
resilience.
Council submission:
The Amendment
adopts a strategic approach consistent with the Victorian Planning Policy
Framework including Clause 13.01-1S (Climate
Change Impacts) and Clause 12.02
(Coastal Areas).
The Structure
Plan prohibits residential development below the 2.8-metre AHD line and that
this benchmark is reflected in the strategic
framework plan, DPO10 and other
planning provisions proposed by the Amendment.
In response to
EGCMA’s submission, Council revised zoning maps to ensure GRZ3 did not
apply to land below the 2.8-metre AHD
contour, reaffirming the Amendment’s
intention to apply the 2.8-metre AHD contour as a development exclusion
The revised
mapping reflects Council’s precautionary approach and satisfies
EGCMA’s recommendation that flood-prone land
be retained in open space or
public ownership.
The 2.8-metre
AHD contour provides a consistent and conservative benchmark for strategic
planning purposes, while acknowledging that
site-specific design responses will
be required at the development stage.
DPO10 is the
appropriate mechanism for assessing future development, including the
requirement for Public Infrastructure Plans, erosion
and drainage strategies and
foreshore protection measures.
remapped zoning boundaries and DPO10 requirements, the Amendment provides a
robust and policy-aligned framework for managing
future coastal hazard risk
while enabling growth in a sustainable and planned manner.
(iii) Discussion
Climate change and sea level rise are critical
strategic considerations for future land use planning in the Paynesville Growth
Applying the 2.8-metre AHD contour as the threshold for urban development
is consistent with relevant State planning policy, including
Clause 13.01-1S and
Ministerial Direction 13, and reflects a risk-based approach aligned with
existing guidance.
The Panel acknowledges concern about the adequacy of the underlying hazard
modelling, particularly the sea level rise scenarios.
It disagrees with
criticisms that the strategic work was not based on recent data or that it
lacked probabilistic or compound event
modelling. The Amendment is underpinned
by coastal hazard assessments and stormwater modelling, including those relied
on in expert
evidence, that:
are based on
recognised modelling practices appropriate to the strategic planning stage
reflect accepted
methodologies for estimating future coastal
inundation.
Council’s approach to apply the 2.8-metre AHD
contour derived from a 1 per cent Annual Exceedance Probability event plus
of sea level rise to 2100 is an established planning benchmark
and remains a reasonable basis for defining the development boundary.
(Final version), revised in response to agency feedback, has ensured GRZ3 does
not apply to land below this threshold. The
Panel supports this correction as
an appropriate response to policy and submission concerns.
DPO10 provides an adequate framework for addressing residual risks through
site-specific responses at the development planning or
development approval
stages. This includes the consideration of drainage, foreshore interface
treatments and infrastructure design
that is responsive to long-term
environmental change.
For reasons set out above, the Panel considers the Amendment:
proportionate and justified response to sea level rise risk
appropriately applied the 2.8-metre AHD contour as part of a precautionary
strategic framework.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
Amendment has appropriately considered the risks associated with sea level rise
and climate change in accordance with relevant
State policy.
is appropriate to apply the 2.8-metre AHD contour as a strategic threshold for
excluding residential development, as it is supported
by recognised modelling
and reflects a precautionary, policy-aligned approach.
sea level rise mapping has been applied consistently, and the zoning maps (Final
version) will ensure the 2.8-metre AHD contour
is appropriately reflected in the
The Panel recommends:
Realign General Residential Zone Schedule 3 to
exclude land below 2.8 metres Australian Height Datum.
4.2 Potentially contaminated land
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay to
95 Grandview Road and 1255 Paynesville Road, Paynesville.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
appropriate to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay to land in the Paynesville
Growth Area, particularly where environmental
assessments had not identified
significant contamination.
Environmental Audit Overlay should be applied based on the outcomes of
site-specific assessments, consistent with Ministerial
Direction 1
Potentially Contaminated Land
) and Planning Practice Note 30.
Environmental Audit Overlay should be removed from 95 Grandview Road because a
Preliminary Site Investigation (PSI) demonstrated
the land was suitable for
sensitive uses without the need for an environmental audit.
There would be
unnecessary development constraints and costs if the Environmental Audit Overlay
was applied without substantiated
Mr Ewer’s expert
A recent PSI and
targeted soil sampling undertaken in 2025 confirmed no evidence of significant
contamination at 95 Grandview Road.
investigation:
- included 13
hand-auger locations and laboratory analysis of surface and subsurface
- found all
analytical results were below Health Investigation Levels and ecological
screening thresholds
- concluded
there were no source–pathway–receptor linkages and that the
contamination risk was low.
The Environment
Protection Authority accredited auditor who reviewed the PSI had determined:
environmental audit was not required
- a Preliminary
Risk Screen Assessment would be sufficient for the purposes of Ministerial
Direction 1.
Regarding 1255
Paynesville Road:
assessments had identified fuel-contaminated soils
- the site had
undergone remediation and validation sampling
- while earlier
assessments had supported applying the Environmental Audit Overlay, updated
investigations no longer supported its
application.
Council submission:
The Amendment
complies with Ministerial Direction 1, noting the rezoning from Farming Zone to
General Residential Zone introduces
the potential for sensitive uses and
requires appropriate consideration of contamination risk.
Environmental Audit Overlay was initially applied to 95 Grandview Road and 1255
Paynesville Road based on preliminary advice from
the EPA, which recommended a
Preliminary Risk Screen Assessment for the former and an environmental audit for
the latter.
After reviewing
further environmental assessments and updated expert evidence, Council no longer
sought to apply the Environmental
Audit Overlay.
- contamination
risk is low and that Ministerial Direction 1 is satisfied through the technical
work completed to date
- the findings
of the PSI and the advice of the EPA-accredited auditor, concluding that the
Amendment adequately addresses potential
contamination risk without relying on
the Environmental Audit Overlay.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel has considered the issue of whether it is
appropriate to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay to land in the Paynesville
Growth Area, having regard to the strategic context of the Amendment, the nature
of the rezoning, the expert evidence and the relevant
statutory guidance
including Ministerial Direction 1 and Planning Practice Note 30.
Council initially applied the Environmental Audit Overlay in a precautionary
manner to two sites where sensitive uses are proposed
– 95 Grandview Road
and 1255 Paynesville Road. This approach was consistent with the early advice
from the Environment Protection
Authority, which triggered a further
environmental assessment.
This position evolved as more detailed site-specific investigations were
completed by Mr Ewers’ evidence is comprehensive, and
the methodology
applied to the PSI and subsequent assessments appear consistent with best
practice in environmental risk evaluation.
The involvement of an Environment
Protection Authority accredited auditor further reinforces the robustness of the
It is acknowledged the environmental expert’s conclusion based on the
work undertaken was that no further work or audit is required
for either 95
Grandview Road or 1255 Paynesville Road. Council’s reviewed position
following this further technical input
and no longer seeking to apply the
Environmental Audit Overlay through the Amendment reflects a sound and
responsive approach to
risk-based planning.
The Panel is also mindful of the potential implications of unnecessarily
applying the Environmental Audit Overlay to low-risk land.
The overlay carries
a significant process and cost for landowners, and its application must be
justified by a clear and documented
contamination risk. In this case, no such
risk exists.
The Panel accepts that removing the Environmental Audit Overlay from the two
sites is appropriate and consistent with Ministerial
Direction 1. The Amendment
satisfactorily addresses contamination risk without the needs for planning
provisions to manage this
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
contamination risk has been appropriately assessed through site-specific
investigations, supported by expert evidence and Environment
Authority accredited review.
is not appropriate or justified to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay to 95
Grandview Road and 1255 Paynesville Road.
The Panel recommends:
Delete the Environmental Audit Overlay from 95
Grandview Road and 1255 Paynesville Road, Paynesville.
4.3 Flora and fauna
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment has appropriately considered flora and fauna and
biodiversity.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
(DEECA) submission:
The Amendment
has not included a strategic assessment of biodiversity values within the
Paynesville Growth Area, including identification
of high-value vegetation and
habitat areas.
The exhibited
Amendment does not apply the avoid–minimise–offset hierarchy
outlined in the
Guidelines for the removal, destruction or lopping of native
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2017) which
should be considered at the strategic planning stage.
ecological investigations are recommended to assess whether the level of risk to
biodiversity is appropriate and capable of
being managed or mitigated.
The Paynesville
Growth Area includes mapped Ecological Vegetation Classes (EVCs), including
Plains Grassy Woodland and Plains Grassy
Forest, which require consideration for
protection and incorporation into future land use planning.
kangaroo populations within and next to the Growth Area that may require active
management.
Management Plan should be prepared to ensure appropriate responses to potential
human–wildlife conflict, habitat
displacement or welfare concerns during
and after development.
Did not oppose
the Amendment but requested that biodiversity risks be assessed and addressed
during the Amendment process rather than
deferred to later development
Supported the
2.8-metre AHD threshold for managing coastal inundation risk and excluding
low-lying land from residential development,
and the future rezoning of land
below 2.8-metre AHD to a Public Conservation and Resource Zone, subject to land
transfer to a public
land manager.
Submissions:
The Amendment
has not adequately considered the biodiversity values of the Paynesville Growth
Area, particularly the Lake King foreshore
which contains sensitive vegetation
and forms part of the Gippsland Lakes Ramsar site.
The exhibited
material did not incorporate a comprehensive ecological assessment to inform
land use planning and development layouts.
provisions should explicitly identify and protect areas of ecological
sensitivity.
Removing SLO2
would reduce protection for coastal and foreshore vegetation communities.
There should be
‘stronger’ biodiversity planning provisions, larger buffer zones to
the Lake King foreshore, and implementation
of an adaptive Foreshore Improvement
and Management Plan to mitigate ecological impacts.
Harvey’s expert evidence:
Most of the land
proposed for residential development is of low ecological value, being
historically cleared or used for grazing,
but that the Lake King foreshore
supports significant coastal vegetation types including Estuarine Wetland,
Coastal Saltmarsh and
Estuarine Swamp Scrub.
The Foreshore
Improvement and Management Plan requirements in the DPO10 should be strengthened
to include:
defined biodiversity objectives and targets
- monitoring and
adaptive management mechanisms
- measures to
mitigate impacts of stormwater infrastructure on migratory shorebird
Management Plan should be required as part of the Development Plan process
through DPO10.
Large scattered
trees be retained in open space where possible.
Subject to the
above measures, the Amendment and development can proceed without unacceptable
impacts to flora and fauna values.
Council submission:
The Amendment
appropriately responds to biodiversity values and complies with the Planning
Policy Framework, including Clauses 12.01-1S
and 12.02-1S.
It accepted Mr
Harvey’s recommendations and agreed to update the DPO10 requirements
- incorporate a
strengthened Foreshore Improvement and Management Plan that includes
biodiversity targets, monitoring and specific
reference to EPBC-listed
- include a
requirement for a Kangaroo Management Plan
- encourage the
integration of significant native vegetation into subdivision
appropriate to remove SLO2 given the application of DPO10 and the strategic
direction of the Structure Plan.
Environmental
values would be protected through the implementation of DPO10 and further
ecological assessment at the development stage.
The Amendment
provides a sound strategic framework to protect biodiversity values while
facilitating orderly urban growth.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges that biodiversity
protection, particularly along the Lake King foreshore and wetland interface, is
a key issue
raised in submissions and addressed in ecological expert evidence.
Ecological values were not a primary input into the early stages
structure planning process, and the absence of a comprehensive assessment at
that stage limited the opportunity to proactively
identify and plan around
sensitive vegetation and habitat areas. This represents a weakness when
preparing the Structure Plan.
Nevertheless, the ecological expert evidence presented demonstrates that most
land identified for residential development is of low
ecological sensitivity,
while areas of higher biodiversity value are concentrated along the foreshore,
where risks can be managed
with appropriate controls and planning tools. The
Panel agrees that these higher sensitivity areas warrant more detailed
investigation
and careful management before development starts.
The Panel agrees with how Council and DPO10 (Final version) responded to the
ecological evidence and agency submissions. The proposed
changes, including the
strengthened Foreshore Improvement and Management Plan requirement, biodiversity
monitoring and adaptive management,
and Kangaroo Management Plan requirement,
are a meaningful step towards better integrating ecological considerations into
planning and implementation.
To ensure these matters are effectively carried through to development
outcomes, DPO10 should explicitly require updated, site-specific
studies before any development plan is approved, and ensure that ecological
values are embedded in subdivision design
and land management decisions. The
Kangaroo Management Plan requirement reflects the transitional nature of the
land and the likely
presence of displaced fauna.
Subject to the revisions outlined above, the Amendment provides a framework
capable of supporting both biodiversity protection and
the orderly development
of the growth area.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendations
Amendment would have benefited from considering flora and fauna and biodiversity
more comprehensively.
planning provisions proposed in Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (Final
version) are appropriate and justified based on expert
evidence presented at the
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10, as shown in
a) require in Clause 3.0, a permit to comply with
the approved Kangaroo Management Plan
b) require in Clause 4.0, a Kangaroo Management
Plan to be prepared and approved as part of the Development Plan.
4.4 Significant landscapes
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate and justified for the Amendment to delete
Grandview Road, Paynesville
1325 and part of
1255 Paynesville Road, Paynesville.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions
The Amendment
has not adequately justified the proposal to remove SLO2 from 5 and 95 Grandview
Road, and 1325 and part of 1255 Paynesville
SLO2 plays a key
role in recognising and protecting the landscape values of the Gippsland Lakes
region, particularly within the coastal
hinterland of Paynesville, including
ridgelines, vegetated escarpments and views to Lake King.
SLO2 provides
important guidance on built form siting, scale, and vegetation retention and
that its removal may lead to the erosion
of scenic vistas and character
SLO2 remains
relevant despite the land’s designation for urban growth, and that its
deletion should only proceed if supported
by a detailed landscape assessment and
replaced with equivalent or stronger policy and overlay provisions.
There is an
absence of alternative tools to manage visual and environmental values, such as
localised design provisions or visual
impact assessment requirements.
SLO2 should
remain until more detailed subdivision planning and design guidelines are
embedded in the Planning Scheme.
concern about the loss of adaptive coastal landscape planning, and removing SLO2
is inconsistent with the precautionary
principles in the Marine and Coastal
Policy 2020 and Planning Policy Framework Clauses 12.05-2S, 13.01-1S.
It is uncertain
how landscape protection objectives would be achieved through the Amendment,
particularly without binding streetscape
or interface provisions in
Mr Milner’s expert evidence:
Paynesville
landscape setting is noted, but the SLO2 blanket application does not correspond
to actual character sensitivity on the
affected sites.
The proposed
GRZ3, together with the design intent expressed in the Structure Plan and future
development plan required by DPO10,
would allow appropriate landscape
integration and built form outcomes without the need for SLO2.
Rather than
SLO2, three-dimensional building envelopes may be used to manage built form
outcomes to provide greater certainty around
building height, form and siting in
sensitive areas, particularly along key interfaces such as Paynesville
Three-dimensional
embedded into DPO10 or a future Design and Development Overlay to ensure
consistent and measurable controls across the
growth area
- could function
as a substitute for the more generic SLO2 provisions, providing a clear spatial
framework that balances housing delivery
with the protection of landscape
character and amenity
- would assist
with interface transitions, including where new development abuts existing
low-scale housing or open landscape edges.
Site-responsive
design tools, when implemented at the Development Plan stage, would provide more
tailored and effective outcomes than
the blanket-applied SLO2.
There should be
appropriate streetscape and interface design along Paynesville Road to reinforce
the landscape character.
Council submission:
strategically justified to remove SLO2 given the subject land has been
identified for urban development and given there is no
landscape feature
warranting continued protection.
evidence of Mr Milner is supported including his recommendation for
three-dimensional building envelopes.
Key landscape
objectives would be addressed through DPO10, which is to be revised to include
relevant landscape, design and interface
provisions.
SLO2 is a legacy
control with limited contemporary justification in this context, and its removal
will enable streamlined, coordinated
development aligned with the Structure
The Amendment
achieves an appropriate balance between landscape protection and housing
Deleting SLO2
will not compromise the visual or environmental values of the Gippsland Lakes
(iii) Discussion
The Amendment proposes
to remove SLO2 from land in Paynesville, consistent with the strategic intent to
facilitate urban development.
This land includes visually prominent slopes and
elevated landforms along the Paynesville escarpment that provide expansive views
to and from Lake King. These landscape features contribute directly to the
values that SLO2 was originally intended to protect.
SLO2 was applied through a regional-scale landscape assessment that applied a
uniform 500-metre buffer from the Gippsland Lakes shoreline
site-specific analysis. While there is criticism about its broad application,
in this instance, SLO2 captures sensitive
landscapes. Despite this, no formal
visual impact assessment or comparative landscape evaluation has been prepared
to verify whether
the land continues to meet the threshold of a
‘significant landscape’ in Planning Scheme Clause 12.05.
The SLO2 objectives seek to avoid visually prominent development and retain
native vegetation. These remain relevant to the subject
land’s topography
and landscape setting. Rezoning the land to GRZ3 and removing SLO2 will enable
prominent development and
the opportunity to remove native vegetation.
This represents a policy tension between an identified significant landscape
and identified growth area which raises the following
development be enabled on a sensitive landscape which enables views to and from
Lake King that are currently protected through
Will there be a
net community benefit when weighing up new housing in Paynesville against the
loss of part of a significant landscape
sought to be protected?
Should DPO10
include requirements to retain some of the outcomes sought to be achieved
through SLO2?
To help answers these questions, it is important to
understand the relationship between Paynesville and Eagle Point. SLO2 currently
applies to an area that spans across Eagle Point and Paynesville. Collectively,
Amendments C171egip and C172egip do not seek to
remove this landscape area.
Rather, they propose to:
remove it from
land in Paynesville that has been long recognised as a growth area
expand the SLO2
in Eagle Point and recede the Eagle Point settlement boundary to reinforce the
importance of that part of the significant
earlier, SLO2 was applied based on a regional-based formula rather than
site-specific analysis that may have resulted in
a reduced identified landscape
area. Based on expert evidence, the Panel considers it is appropriate to remove
SLO2 from the Paynesville
Growth Area subject to further DPO10 requirements that
seek to protect some of the essence of the SLO2 objectives. This part of
Paynesville has a more sensitive interface with Lake King that requires a more
nuanced planning response. This includes applying
three-dimensional building
DPO10 (Final version) includes provisions requiring site-responsive design
and three-dimensional building envelopes. These tools
are important for
managing built form outcomes, particularly along visually sensitive edges.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to remove SLO2, as exhibited, if DPO10
three-dimensional
building envelopes on subdivided lots
vegetation to be
retained where appropriate along key site perimeters
appropriate
landscape and streetscape interface treatments.
While these
requirements do not replicate the broader strategic and environmental objectives
of SLO2, they provide a pragmatic alternative
to enabling urban growth while
considering the land’s sensitive interface with Lake King.
(iv) Conclusion and recommendations
The Panel concludes it
is appropriate and justified for the Amendment to delete Significant Landscape
Overlay Schedule 2 from 5 and
95 Grandview Road and 1325 and part of 1255
Paynesville Road, Paynesville subject to Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10 including
requirements to respond to this land’s sensitive interface
with Lake King.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10, as shown in
a) add in Clause 1.0 a new objective that seeks
to facilitate development that responds to the interface of the growth area and
b) require in Clause 3.0, a permit to include
conditions that require:
three-dimensional
building envelopes on lots created near Lake King
below the northernmost 19-metre Australian Height Datum contour to reflect the
Development Plan’s design guidelines
in Clause 4.0, design guidelines that are supported by a view sharing analysis
to inform the future three-dimensional building
envelopes as part of the
Development Plan.
5 Road network and infrastructure capacity
5.1 Road network capacity and safety
(i) The issue
issue is whether there will be sufficient capacity in the road network to
accommodate future traffic volume.
(ii) Background
Traffic and access planning for the Paynesville
Growth Area has been informed by two technical assessments prepared by SALT
Engineering
– a Traffic Impact Assessment (2016) and an updated Transport
Engineering Assessment (2024). These reports evaluate the capacity
existing and future road network to accommodate projected traffic volumes
arising from the full development of the growth
The Transport Assessment (2024) identifies the intersection of Paynesville
Road, Grandview Road and Waterview Road as the only location
capacity-driven infrastructure upgrade (a roundabout) is required. This work,
alongside internal connector roads and active
transport links, is intended to be
delivered through the Shared Infrastructure Contributions Plan required by
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
insufficient capacity in the existing road network to accommodate increased
traffic volumes due to residential development.
The Traffic
Impact Assessment (originally 2016):
- is not current
or accurate
traffic generation assumptions, with reference to the car-dependent nature of
the proposed development.
The proposed new
intersections, particularly the roundabout at Grandview Road / Waterview Road /
Paynesville Road:
negatively impact the surrounds
- may not be
delivered in a timely manner to ensure safety and traffic
functionality.
Issues related
to the operation and safety of Newlands Drive, as well as footpath and active
transport connectivity.
There are safety
and accessibility issues associated with access to the Paynesville Cemetery,
located east of the growth area.
Existing traffic
conditions, particularly at King Street and Main Road, are already problematic
during peak times.
The absence of
continuous footpaths will negatively affect pedestrian safety, particularly for
elderly and mobility-impaired residents.
Mr Walsh’s expert
The Transport
Assessment (2024) is robust and appropriate for structure planning.
There is no
traffic-related reason why the Amendment should not be approved.
Development
plans should be prepared in parts, rather than a single unified plan, from a
traffic engineering perspective.
projects such as shared paths and intersection upgrades (King Street/Main Road
and Ashley Street/Main Road):
essential to the success of the Structure Plan
- should not be
required by any shared infrastructure contribution mechanism.
No new roads are
required to be included under any shared infrastructure contribution
Mr Furness’s expert evidence:
The Traffic
Impact Assessment (2024) includes reasonable underlying assumptions and
The road network
has sufficient capacity to accommodate projected traffic volumes that will be
enabled by Amendments C172egip (Paynesville)
and C171egip (Eagle Point).
The Paynesville
Road / Grandview Road / Waterview Road roundabout is the only intersection
upgrade warranted by development generated
under the Amendment.
Infrastructure Plan should exclude other roundabouts (such as King Street,
Ashley Street) given the lack of nexus between
them and the Structure Plan
Paynesville Road
does not need to be widened.
Grandview Road
should be classified as a collector road rather than an arterial with frontage
The shared path
network is generally supported but certain paths (such as along Main Road and
north of Paynesville Road) lack sufficient
development nexus and should be
excluded from the Public Infrastructure Plan.
The design of
internal roads and cross-sections is support, noting they will be consistent
with the Infrastructure Design Manual and
Planning Scheme Clause 56.06.
Future traffic
volumes can be accommodated without negative impacts, and critical intersections
will operate at a high level of service
post-development.
There is no
traffic engineering reason for the Amendment not to proceed, subject to
recommended adjustments to the shared infrastructure
mechanism or public
infrastructure plan.
Council submission:
The Structure
Plan recognises the importance of a safe, legible and connected transport
network to support the functional integration
and orderly development of the
Paynesville Growth Area.
The Structure
Plan’s Preferred Urban Structure and Framework Plan establish a clear road
hierarchy that includes internal connector
roads and logical access points to
Paynesville Road, supported by a network of local streets and pedestrian links
to encourage permeability
and efficient movement.
Submissions
raise concerns regarding the safety of the existing and proposed road and
movement networks and the impact of traffic
volumes associated with future
development of the Paynesville Growth Area.
The Transport
Assessment (2024):
- builds on the
earlier 2016 report
- informed the
Structure Plan and the Amendment
- provides a
contemporary evaluation of road network performance, capacity and upgrade
The Traffic
Impact Assessment (2024) concludes the Structure Plan area will generate a peak
traffic volume that can be accommodated
within the existing Paynesville road
network based on a conservative trip generation rate of 7 movements from a
dwelling each day
(noting this is more than double the observed local
DPO10 reflects
the Traffic Impact Assessment (2024) findings, which includes specific
requirements for preparing the Public Infrastructure
Infrastructure Plan must demonstrate how the road network will deliver high
levels of connectivity and address:
- upgrades to
existing roads and intersections
- provision of
new roads and intersections
- defined access
points to the primary road network
pedestrian crossings or refuges
- delivery of
pedestrian and cycling corridors throughout the precinct.
Applying DPO10
requirements are implemented at the development plan stage
- infrastructure
is delivered in a coordinated and equitable manner across
landholdings.
Improving the
road and movement network will:
- assist with
distributing traffic volumes across multiple access points
- support safer
and more resilient access arrangements during emergency events.
Paynesville Road
forms part of the declared arterial road network and is zoned Transport Zone
Schedule 2, under the management of
the Department of Transport and
Speed limits on
Paynesville Road are currently under review by the Department of Transport and
The Amendment
provides an appropriate strategic and statutory framework to support future
traffic volumes and access needs subject
- delivering the
intersection at Paynesville Road / Grandview Road / Waterview Road
- implementing
the movement network described in DPO10.
(iv) Discussion
The issue to be resolved is whether the existing
and proposed road network will have sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic
when the Paynesville Growth Area is fully developed. The Panel has had
regard to the background technical assessments prepared by
SALT Engineering,
including the Traffic Impact Assessments (2016 and 2024). The latter adopts a
conservative trip generation rate
of seven vehicle movements for a dwelling each
day and concludes that the projected traffic volumes can be accommodated within
existing road network, subject to the delivery of a single intersection
The Panel agree with Mr Walsh and Mr Furness that:
the road network
in its current and future form can adequately support future traffic
the Paynesville
Road/Grandview Road/Waterview Road intersection is the only location where a
capacity-driven upgrade is required
other external
intersection upgrades or shared paths beyond the Paynesville Growth Area should
be excluded from the infrastructure
contribution framework because there is
insufficient nexus to development on the Amendment land.
Paynesville Road/Grandview Road/Waterview Road intersection upgrade is already
proposed to be delivered by applying the Public
Acquisition Overlay and through
the Public Infrastructure Plan mechanism in DPO10.
DPO10 appropriately requires a Public Infrastructure Plan to coordinate the
delivery of new and upgraded roads, intersection treatments
and pedestrian and
cycling infrastructure across multiple landholdings. The Panel is satisfied
that this mechanism enables the planning
and delivery of key components of the
movement network in a logical and staged manner, while ensuring connectivity and
safety objectives
are achieved.
The Panel agrees with Council that the safety of existing intersections, the
operation of Newlands Drive, and the absence of continuous
footpaths can be
appropriately considered and addressed through the detailed infrastructure
planning process facilitated by DPO10.
The Panel considers the safety and accessibility of the right-hand turn into
the Paynesville Cemetery warrants further consideration
at the development plan
stage. This is when:
intersection treatments or turning movements can be properly assessed in the
context of future road conditions and traffic
alternate access
and integration with the adjacent urban growth area may be considered, though
this will require careful consultation
with the appropriate
stakeholders.
Mr Furness’s recommendation to classify
Grandview Road as a collector rather than an arterial road primarily relates to
infrastructure design detail and does not affect the strategic justification
for the road network or the overall development framework.
The Panel is satisfied that the road network has adequate capacity to
accommodate the future traffic volumes associated with the growth
area and that
appropriate mechanisms are in place to ensure the timely and coordinated
delivery of required upgrades.
(v) Conclusions
Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately considered the capacity of
the existing and future road network to accommodate
development-related traffic
Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 10 provides a suitable framework to guide the detailed
design, staging, and delivery of road upgrades,
intersection treatments and
active transport connections through the future development of the growth
5.2 Infrastructure capacity
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately
considered infrastructure capacity including social infrastructure.
(ii) Background
Council prepared a Social Infrastructure Assessment
Report as part of the background work informing the Structure Plan. The
identified that existing facilities in Paynesville and nearby
Bairnsdale (approximately 14 kilometres away) are generally sufficient
accommodate the projected needs of the Paynesville Growth Area.
The Structure Plan:
finds it is
unnecessary to duplicate major social infrastructure within the growth area
targeted approach to social infrastructure planning
optimising the use of existing services and facilities in the surrounding
prioritises
improved connectivity between new residential neighbourhoods and existing
community infrastructure
seeks to deliver
new infrastructure in a staged and cost-effective manner, based on demonstrated
need, where required.
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
insufficient infrastructure capacity such as for drainage, sewerage and water to
support the future population.
Existing social
infrastructure, particularly health and education services, is inadequate to
support further residential development.
There is limited
capacity within key regional facilities, including Bairnsdale Regional Health
Service, which is already under pressure
from the current population.
facilities in Bairnsdale or other regional centres may exacerbate existing
service gaps and accessibility issues for Paynesville
Urban growth
should not proceed unless accompanied by clear commitments to upgrade essential
infrastructure, including schools, hospitals,
emergency services and
There may be
inequitable access to services, especially for ageing populations, young
families and residents without private transport.
development should incorporate universal access design so that neighbourhoods
foster walkability and social connection.
There are no
staged infrastructure delivery and developer contributions for community and
social infrastructure.
Increased demand
will risk general practitioners, allied health, aged care and community
services, particularly without a defined
public infrastructure
Council submission:
community infrastructure in Paynesville and Bairnsdale can adequately
accommodate the anticipated needs of Paynesville’s
projected population so
major facilities do not need to be duplicated in the Paynesville Growth
The Structure
- appropriately
prioritises connectivity between new residential areas and existing
- particularly
focuses on establishing strong physical connections through walking and cycling
paths and public transport links to
schools, medical services, children’s
services and community meeting places in Paynesville and
Bairnsdale.
The Structure
Plan’s approach is more sustainable, efficient and consistent with
integrated community planning principles.
Development
contributions should be directed towards enhancing existing community
infrastructure rather than delivering new standalone
facilities in the growth
Development
contributions could appropriately support the delivery of shared infrastructure,
- transport
- pedestrian and
cycling infrastructure to improve access to key services.
(iv) Discussion
Council’s strategic approach to social
infrastructure planning is based on the continued use and enhancement of
existing regional
services, particularly those in Bairnsdale, supported by
strengthened physical and functional connections between new growth areas
established facilities. This approach aligns with integrated settlement
planning principles and reflects the regional policy
framework, which recognises
Bairnsdale as the principal service centre for the municipality.
The Structure Plan and the Amendment give appropriate emphasis to ensuring
new residential areas are well connected to existing infrastructure
Opportunities to improve pedestrian, cycling and public transport linkages have
been identified and embedded in the planning
framework. These provisions are
consistent with contemporary planning policy objectives relating to
neighbourhood design, accessibility
and social inclusion.
While the exhibited Amendment did not include a detailed assessment of
potable water and sewerage capacity, the Structure Plan and
Council documents
assumed that reticulated infrastructure is available, with final servicing
arrangements to be confirmed and costed
through the development plans and
detailed planning processes. The Panel finds this approach acceptable,
this level of
resolution is appropriate at the structure planning stage
more detailed
infrastructure design and delivery planning will be undertaken through future
planning approvals.
Regarding the timing and delivery of social
infrastructure, the Panel agrees with Council that leveraging existing regional
and township-based
services, combined with integrated transport and movement
planning, represents a logical and efficient approach to servicing growth.
Panel supports the strategic direction to prioritise improved access and shared
use of community facilities over unnecessary
duplication of services in new
neighbourhoods, particularly where access can be facilitated through active and
public transport.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes the
Structure Plan and the Amendment have:
appropriately
considered social infrastructure capacity by relying on existing regional
services and enhancing connectivity
sound and orderly planning for social infrastructure provision in the context of
Paynesville Growth Area’s role within
the broader settlement
5.3 Infrastructure funding
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed DPO10 shared infrastructure contribution
requirements are the appropriate mechanism for funding
infrastructure.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
General submissions:
The proposed
DPO10 lacks a clearly defined and transparent framework for funding and
delivering shared infrastructure.
infrastructure (such as drainage, roads, and active transport links) may not be
delivered in a timely or coordinated manner
without a formal Development
Contributions Plan or Shared Infrastructure Contributions Plan.
structured contributions mechanism, there is a risk the cost of infrastructure
provision may be shifted to Council or the
broader community.
infrastructure responsibilities be equitably shared and monitored, particularly
in scenarios involving multiple landowners
and staged development?
Development
contributions should include funding for both physical and social
infrastructure, such as community centres, recreational
facilities and
Environmental
and community groups, including FoGL, considered infrastructure related to
coastal management (such as stormwater systems
and erosion control) may be
underfunded or overlooked.
Long-term public
maintenance obligations, particularly in hazard-prone coastal areas may not be
adequately planned or funded.
There should be
greater clarity, accountability, and a whole-of-community approach to
infrastructure planning to ensure that new development
does not result in
inequitable outcomes or service gaps.
Precinct landowner
submissions:
Infrastructure
funding responsibilities should be transparently shared and reflect each
landholding’s proportional demand, rather
than rely on site-specific works
or unplanned negotiations.
DPO10 lacks
clarity and enforceability in how infrastructure contributions are to be
calculated, collected and shared.
Development
could proceed without an agreed, equitable mechanism that apportions the cost of
shared infrastructure between different
landholdings.
Without a formal
and structured contributions plan (such as a Development Contributions Plan or
Shared Infrastructure Contributions
Plan), infrastructure delivery will be
fragmented, delayed or unfairly cross-subsidised.
There should be
a staged, precinct-based approach to infrastructure contributions, ensuring
logical development sequencing and avoiding
early developers being burdened with
front-loaded infrastructure costs.
Infrastructure
items perceived to be offsite or unrelated to the development precinct (such as
intersection upgrades at Main Road
or shared paths beyond the growth area)
should not be included and be funded by Council.
DPO10 should be
redrafted to include clearer guidance on:
infrastructure items will be prioritised
- the expected
process and timing for preparing a contributions plan or strategy
- how Council
will coordinate between multiple landowners with varying development
timeframes.
Mr Walsh’s expert evidence:
Supported DPO10
requiring the preparation of a Shared Infrastructure Contributions Plan subject
to a refined scope.
infrastructure funding should:
- be limited to
necessary and proportionate items
- exclude items
which provide broader community benefit or are located outside the structure
Specifically,
the following items should be removed:
- Construction
of public transport infrastructure beyond basic bus stops on Paynesville
- Construction
of new internal connector/local roads, which he considered standard subdivision
infrastructure and not appropriate
for the Infrastructure Contributions
- Roundabouts at
Main Road/Ashley Street and Main Road/King Street, which were not justified by
traffic volume or safety data and
should instead be Council-funded if
Mr Furness’ expert evidence:
Supported the
principle of a Shared Infrastructure Contributions Plan to coordinate the
delivery of essential infrastructure, particularly
for drainage, roads and open
space, within the DPO10 area.
infrastructure costs would need to be shared among landowners and agreed that a
mechanism such as a section 173 agreement was
an appropriate tool to secure
contributions (noted this mechanism was outside his area of expertise).
infrastructure items are inappropriate to include in the Infrastructure
Contributions Plan because they do not have a sufficient
nexus to the
development of the subject land.
Inappropriate
items area:
- The proposed
roundabouts at Main Road/King Street and Main Road/Ashley Street.
- Shared paths
beyond the structure plan area, particularly on Paynesville Road.
argued, provided broader regional benefit and should be funded by Council, not
landowners.
The scope of
infrastructure in the Infrastructure Contributions Plan should be limited to
works that are:
required to enable the development of the land
- reasonably
attributable to development within DPO10
- clearly linked
to the outcomes sought in the Structure Plan.
Supported DPO10
(Version 1), noting it was more aligned with proper practice, narrowed the scope
of shared infrastructure
and addressed earlier concerns about
Mr Milner’s expert evidence:
appropriate, in the absence of a Development Contributions Plan, provided it is
implemented with clear expectations for coordinated
infrastructure
Supported DPO10
allowing either a single or multiple Development Plans, provided those plans
demonstrate integrated infrastructure
coordination and cost-sharing.
Implementation
may fail if landowners do not agree on shared contributions, especially over a
long development timeframe.
Mr Woodland’s expert evidence:
The DPO is a
legitimate tool to coordinate the planning and staging of development, but not
as a substitute for a Development Contributions
The PE Act sets
out specific processes for implementing Development Contributions Plans
including exhibition, infrastructure itemisation and cost apportionment, which
cannot be replicated through a DPO alone.
Supported DPO10
provisions that identify and require infrastructure directly attributable to the
development of the land to which
the overlay applies – includes local
roads, drainage works and pedestrian or cycling links that are integral to
subdividing
or using that land.
DPO10 should not
apply funding responsibilities for broader or offsite infrastructure (such as
regional road upgrades or shared path
networks beyond the structure plan area)
as they do not have a sufficient nexus to the affected land.
Supported DPO10
allowing for a staged approach to development planning
across multiple
landholdings and including infrastructure delivery obligations that are
proportionate and development-linked
provided they are clearly
identified and appropriately implemented.
Council submission:
- provides an
appropriate and flexible planning framework to coordinate infrastructure
delivery across multiple landholdings
- ensures that
subdivision and development cannot proceed until an approved development plan,
supported by an infrastructure delivery
strategy, is in place.
The Structure
Plan enables:
- development
contributions to be directed towards shared infrastructure, including roads,
drainage and transport links, while avoiding
unnecessary duplication.
- infrastructure
to be delivered in a staged manner, subject to appropriate coordination and
agreement among landowners and developers.
Contributions
are expected to be resolved through agreements or permit conditions tied to
subdivision approvals and will align with
the scale and timing of
development.
This approach
consistent with standard planning practice in regional growth areas and avoids a
complex or costly formal Infrastructure
Contributions Plan mechanism.
DPO10 (Final
version) includes changes in response to submissions and expert
(iii) Discussion
Considerable time at the Hearing was spent on
refining DPO10 to better implement and facilitate coordinated infrastructure
particularly in the context of multiple landholdings and staged
development. The Hearing process provided a valuable opportunity
for detailed
discussion and resolution of issues that emerged from submissions, including the
nature, scope and method of infrastructure
contributions.
The Panel aired its concern during the Hearing about the proposed mechanism
intending to imitate a development contributions plans
or infrastructure
contributions plan. It is well established that a DPO is not intended to
function as a substitute for a Development
Contributions Plan. The PE Act
provides a specific legislative framework for preparing and applying Development
Contributions Plans,
including formal exhibition, itemisation and justification
of infrastructure, and equitable apportionment of costs. These statutory
requirements cannot be replicated through a DPO, and the Panel does not consider
it appropriate for DPO10 to be used as a mechanism
to apply broader
infrastructure funding responsibilities that fall outside the scope of the
The Panel agrees with Mr Woodland that the DPO must be applied within its
statutory limits and should not seek to bypass the Development
Contributions
Plan process. Where contributions are required, they must be clearly linked to
infrastructure that is demonstrably
necessary to support the development of the
land to which the overlay applies. The Panel supports including such provisions
as contributions delivered through works-in-kind, provided they are
proportionate and attributable. These may include items such
as local drainage
infrastructure, internal connector roads and pedestrian or cycling links.
Earlier concerns about ambiguity in the DPO10’s treatment of
works-in-kind and the potential inclusion of offsite or regionally
infrastructure were addressed during the Hearing. DPO10 (Final version)
demonstrates an improved and more balanced approach
by clarifying that
contributions will only apply to infrastructure directly linked to development
in the DPO10 area. This refinement
addresses concerns raised by submitters and
Mr Furness who was concerned about including infrastructure with insufficient
the precinct. Specifically, the proposed roundabouts at Main Road/King
Street and Main Road/Ashley Street, and shared paths beyond
the structure plan
area such as those along Paynesville Road.
The successful implementation of DPO10 relies on agreement between multiple
landowners. The Panel is cognisant of Mr Milner’s
cautioning about:
the importance
of flexibility in DPO10 to allow for either a single or multiple Development
risks to the
timely and equitable delivery of infrastructure resulting from failure to
coordinate or reach agreement on cost-sharing
arrangements.
(Final version) provides an appropriate approach to infrastructure funding
because its provisions:
clearly identify, deliver and coordinate infrastructure in the growth area
anticipate the
preparation of a supporting infrastructure delivery strategy through a Public
Infrastructure Plan and associated section
173 agreement to be included within
an approved Development Plan
will help guide
the equitable delivery of shared infrastructure across the precinct
Council’s aspiration to avoid the complexity and resource burden
associated with preparing a formal Development Contributions
Infrastructure Contributions Plan
are sound and
The effective implementation of the DPO10 provisions will
depend on clearly articulating responsibilities, timely preparation of
development
plans, and sustained engagement with landowners to ensure
transparent and equitable outcomes. If achieved, DPO10 is able to deliver
coordinated infrastructure without the need for a formal development
contributions tool.
As development progresses and infrastructure demands increase, Council should
remain open to preparing a more formal and transparent
cost-sharing
(iv) Conclusion and recommendations
The Panel concludes
that the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (Final version) infrastructure
funding requirements are appropriate
for identifying, delivering and
coordinating future infrastructure.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10, as shown in
a) change in Clause 3.0, ‘Infrastructure
Contributions Condition’ to ‘Public Infrastructure Delivery
and revise the permit conditions
b) revise in Clause 4.0, the Public
Infrastructure Plan requirements.
6 Other issues
6.1 Applying the DPO
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate to apply the DPO that will exclude third
party notice and review in certain circumstances.
(ii) Submissions
Submissions – Applying the DPO:
exempts future
planning applications from notice and review which erodes the rights of people
to object on future development applications
Council total control on all future decisions
procedural transparency
developers over community interests
would exclude
the Paynesville community from inputting to the development of its
At the Hearing, Resi Ventures accepted there should be
community consultation on the development plan, while acknowledging this may
problematic at the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Council submission:
Practice Note 23:
Applying the Incorporated Plan Overlay and Development Plan
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2022) confirms
that it is possible to implement a DPO before a development
It is possible to introduce either overlay into the
planning scheme before a plan is in place. However, if the overlay is approved
without a plan, it is essential that a strategic framework is in place to
provide direction and certainty about the future form of
development of the
Council has
elected to take this approach which is common across Victoria.
concern about public notice and third party review rights, Council has a
longstanding Development Plan Policy (2023) which
requires development plans to
be subject to public notice before they are determined.
DPO10 includes
this requirement in Clause 4.0.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel raised the issue of public consultation
at the Hearing because:
DPO10 expressed
the development planning community consultation as a note rather than a
requirement in Clause 4.0 (Requirements for
development plan)
it was unclear
whether this is appropriate when the DPO parent provisions
is cognisant that there are DPO schedules in other planning schemes that include
a requirement to seek comments from the
community about the proposed development
plan before the responsible authority makes a decision. This does not mean this
is appropriate.
Planning Practice Note 23 advises:
the DPO schedule
cannot include a requirement for consultation
a responsible
authority should not use non-statutory consultation practices to assist in
deciding a planning application.
Where notice is being served
without a basis in the Planning Scheme or the PE Act, it is possible that
defects in the notice process
can be judicially reviewed in the Supreme
The DPO provides a more strategic and efficient approach to planning. The
Amendment process provided the community with an opportunity
to help shape the
DPO provisions and requirements. The DPO requires a development plan that
responds to the requirements specified
in the overlay schedule. DPO10 includes
a comprehensive suite of requirements to guide the future development plan.
Council will
then objectively assess how the proposed development plan aligns
with DPO10 requirements.
After the development plan is approved, future permit applications must be
generally in accordance with the plan. The DPO recognises
future permit
applications assessments will be based on a development plan which was guided by
prior community consultation. This
approach is reflected in the DPO
To exempt an application from notice and review if a development plan has
been prepared to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
The Panel considers that Council should follow the advice in Planning
Practice Note 23 to not include a requirement for consultation.
seeks community consultation throughout the entire planning process, it should
consider applying another planning overlay.
The Panel does not make a formal recommendation because this issue was
identified through the Hearing rather than through a referred
submission.
Nonetheless, Council should be careful in how it explains its informal
non-statutory consultation process to the community
and how it uses any
community feedback to inform its decision on whether to approve the development
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes
that it is appropriate for the Amendment to apply the Development Plan Overlay
even though third party notice and review will be exempt in most future circumstances.
6.2 Social housing
(i) The issue
issue whether is it is appropriate for the Amendment to require social
(ii) Submissions
Submission:
inadequate social housing for the current population.
More incentives
are needed to increase the stock of attractive, sensitive low-cost accommodation
with convenient access to public
transport, bike tracks, the shopping centre and
other social inclusion facilities.
Council submission:
Council is not
delivering social housing.
Council actively
advocates to all levels of government to provide social housing in appropriate
The Amendment
seeks to provide for a diversity of housing choices for all ages and stages of
(iii) Discussion
The Panel was not presented with information to
explain the degree to which there is a social housing shortage in Paynesville.
PE Act does not require a certain percentage of social housing but that does
not preclude DPO10 from including requirements such
as a section 173 agreement
to secure social or affordable housing.
However, without information to understand the extent of the housing issue,
and without this issue having been further explored with
affected landowners,
the Panel does not make any recommendation regarding social housing. This does
not preclude Council pursuing
this issue through other measures such as its
advocacy work.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes
that it may be appropriate to require social or affordable housing through
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10,
however there is insufficient information
or work to recommend such a change through the Amendment.
6.3 Drafting matters
(i) General Residential Zone Schedule 3
exhibited GRZ3 did not include a decision guideline. Since exhibiting the
Amendment, Council proposed to add a decision guideline:
The extent to which the application is generally in accordance with the
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (2016, updated 2023).
This decision guideline is inappropriate because the Structure Plan is a
background document so it has a limited role in decision
making. This is
consistent with advice in the Practitioner’s Guide. Its role is to
provide context regarding relevant provisions
in the Planning Scheme.
Irrespective, it is unclear how most of the Structure Plan content is
relevant to zone-related permit triggers.
(ii) Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10
A submission requested that DPO10 be revised to not
require the preparation of a cultural heritage assessment because it duplicates
subdivision and planning permit application processes. Council agreed to this
Council made drafting changes to DPO10 (Final version) which clarify intent
and improve operation.
Consistent with the Practitioner’s Guide, the Panel agrees with the
submission and Council that local planning provisions should
not duplicate
legislative processes.
shows drafting changes which the Panel agrees.
(iii) Structure Plan
The Amendment proposes to reference the Structure
Plan as a background document in the Planning Scheme. The Structure Plan (Final
version) was revised to:
include drafting
changes which sought to make it consistent with the DPO10 (Final version) and
improve its clarity and operation
delete reference
to the expecting 8-10 dwellings per hectare in the structure plan area
‘Local Activity Centre’ with ‘Neighbourhood Activity
refer to an
activity centre being located on Paynesville Road rather than a service centre
specify that
objectives and requirements ‘should be’, rather than ‘must
renumber the
objectives, guidelines and objectives
street classifications (Table 1).
The Structure Plan will benefit
from most Council changes, as tracked in
, and ensure it is
fit-for-purpose before being referenced as a background document in the Planning
Scheme. While the Structure Plan
will have no role in decision making, it
should accurately reflect the background to the planning provisions before it is
as a Background Document in the Planning Scheme.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendations
Residential Zone Schedule 3 should not include a decision guideline seeking a
permit application to be generally in accordance
with the Structure Plan.
Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 10 and the Structure Plan would benefit from drafting
changes that clarify intent and improve their
recommends:
Amend Development Planning Overlay Schedule
10, as shown in
drafting changes which improve its clarity and operation.
Paynesville Structure Plan, before referencing it as a Background Document in
the East Gippsland Planning Scheme, to:
a) make drafting changes which improve its
clarity and operation
b) specify that objectives and requirements
‘should be’, rather than ‘must be’ met
c) delete reference to the expecting 8-10
dwellings per hectare in the structure plan area
d) replace ‘Local Activity Centre’
with ‘Neighbourhood Activity Centre’
e) refer to a Neighbourhood Activity Centre being
located on Paynesville Road rather than a service centre site
f) renumber the objectives, guidelines and
g) delete the street classifications (Table
A Document list
One Hearing was conducted for Amendments C171egip and C172egip. The
documents below include only those relevant to Amendment C172egip.
Description
Presented by
Panel Directions Hearing letter
Paynesville submitter map
Panel Directions and Hearing timetable (Version 1)
Information request – GIS mapping data
Friends of the Gippsland Lakes, Parks and Reserves (FoGL)
Panel response to FoGL information request
Gippsland Lakes/90 Mile Beach Local Hazard Assessment Project Report 1:
Summary Report (Water Technology, April 2014)
Contour 2.8 GIS plot map
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan Transport Engineering Assessment
Paynesville Growth Structure Plan Preliminary Site investigation 2024
Paynesville Growth Area Strategy Social Infrastructure Demand Report
Paynesville Structure Plan Model Review 2024
Panel declaration and information request
Email – regarding site inspection locations
Annotated Directions for site inspection maps
Letter – notice of proposed requests to revise Development Plan
Overlay Schedule 10 (DPO10)
Resi Ventures
Letter – providing background reports (Documents 28 and 29)
Resi Ventures
Coastal Hazard Vulnerability Assessment – Paynesville (Water
Technology, 8 January 2008)
Resi Ventures
Flora and Fauna Assessment – Paynesville (Nature Advisory, February
Resi Ventures
Directions and Hearing timetable (Version 2)
Part A Submission
Expert report – Warwick Bishop (surface water management, flood risk
and coastal processes)
Expert report – Aaron Harvey (conservation and ecology)
Resi Ventures
Expert report – Rob Swan (drainage)
Resi Ventures
Expert report – Jason Walsh (traffic)
Resi Ventures
Expert report – Leigh Furness (traffic)
TLC Unlimited and CCW Properties (TLCU & CCWP)
Expert report – Brian Haratsis (economics)
TLCU & CCWP
Expert report – Rob Milner (planning)
Resi Ventures
Expert report – Mark Woodland (planning)
TLCU & CCWP
Part B Submission
Part B Submission Attachment 1 – Changes Table
Part B Submission Attachment 2 – Submissions Summary
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan July 2016 (Updated 2023)
Planning Scheme map DPO10 (Version 1)
Planning Scheme map SLO2 deletion (Version 1)
Planning Scheme map GRZ3 (Version 1)
Planning Scheme map PAO3 (Version 1)
Planning Scheme map Environmental Audit Overlay (Version 1)
Explanatory Report (Version 1)
Instruction Sheet (Version 1)
General Residential Zone Schedule 3 (Version 1)
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 10 (Version 1)
Clause 72.03 Schedule (Version 1)
Clause 72.08 Schedule (Version 1)
Clause 74.02 Schedule (Version 1)
Clause 11.01 (Version 1)
Panel correspondence regarding procedural issue
Letter responding to Document 79 with attachments
TLCU & CCWP
Late submission from Norton Rose Fulbright dated 28 March 2025
TLCU & CCWP
Email from Council to Norton Rose Fulbright in response to Document 83 (31
March 2025)
TLCU & CCWP
Council meeting minutes (15 April 2025)
TLCU & CCWP
Email – response to Panel procedural issue (Document 79)
Hearing submission
Email – response to Documents 79, 82 and 86
Paynesville Cemetery Trust webpage edited version
Paynesville Cemetery
Site inspection location requests
Paynesville Cemetery
Map – Paynesville Growth Area Shoreline Erosion Hazard Extent 2100
(Source: Gippsland Lakes Coastal Hazard Assessment)
Response to expert evidence (Furness, Haratsis, Harvey, Milner, Swan, Walsh
and Woodland) – Version 1
Expert report – Jared Ewers (contamination)
TLCU & CCWP
Analytical stockpile report
TLCU & CCWP
Analytical statewide sampling report
TLCU & CCWP
Presentation of Aaron Harvey (conservation and ecology)
Resi Ventures
Plan of Subdivision 603363B
Resi Ventures
Plan of Subdivision 545181D
Resi Ventures
Panel Directions and Hearing timetable (Version 3)
Response to expert evidence (Ewers, Furness, Haratsis, Harvey, Milner,
Swan, Walsh and Woodland) – Version 2
Response to expert evidence (Ewers, Furness, Haratsis, Harvey, Milner,
Swan, Walsh and Woodland)– Version 3
Hearing presentation – Brian Haratsis
TLCU & CCWP
Additional Hearing submission
Resi Ventures
DPO24 (Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme)
Resi Ventures
DPO7 (La Trobe Planning Scheme)
Resi Ventures
DPO18 (Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme)
Resi Ventures
Paynesville Foreshore Management Plan November 2017
Resi Ventures
Hearing submission outline
TLCU & CCWP
Requested Mixed Use Zone area
TLCU & CCWP
DPO10 – requested changes to Version 1
Resi Ventures
GRZ3 – requested changes Version 1
Resi Ventures
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan – requested changes to Version
Resi Ventures
Hearing submission addendum
TLCU & CCWP
Greater Dandenong PSA C96 [2010] PPV Panel Report
TLCU & CCWP
Mondib Group Pty Ltd v Moonee Valley City Council
[2021] VSC 722
TLCU & CCWP
Instruction Sheet – requested changes
TLCU & CCWP
Clause 11.01 – requested changes
TLCU & CCWP
GRZ3 – requested changes
TLCU & CCWP
DPO10 – requested changes
TLCU & CCWP
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan – requested changes
TLCU & CCWP
DPO35 (Whittlesea Planning Scheme)
TLCU & CCWP
DPO16 (Greater Geelong Planning Scheme)
TLCU & CCWP
Closing submission
Comments on TLCU & CCWP revisions to DPO10 (Document 137)
Resi Ventures
Email – Comments on final marked up version of the Amendment
Clause 11.01 (Final version)
Map 001dpo Map 51 (Final version)
Map 002d-slo Map 51 (Final version)
Map 003zn Map 51 (Final version)
Map 004pao Map51 (Final version)
Map 005 Environmental Audit Overlay Map51 (Final version)
Explanatory Report (Final version)
Instruction Sheet (Final version)
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (Final version)
DPO10 (Final version)
GRZ3 (Final version)
Clause 72.03 Schedule (Final version)
Clause 72.08 Schedule (Final version)
Clause 74.02 Schedule (Final version)
B Panel recommended version of DPO10
The Panel recommended changes are based on the exhibited version and are
Tracked Added
Tracked Deleted
SCHEDULE 10 TO CLAUSE 43.04 DEVELOPMENT PLAN OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as
PAYNESVILLE GROWTH AREA
1.0 Objectives
orderly and integrated development of the land that enhances the character of
Paynesville as a small lakeside town and creates
a cohesive and accessible
To provide for a
range of compatible urban land uses, high quality public realm, drainage
infrastructure, open space and community
facilities.
To ensure an
integrated and connected movement network, including a pedestrian and cycle
network, designed to connect into the wider
township, foreshore reserves and
surrounding areas.
To facilitate
site responsive development at the interface of the growth area and the Lake
King foreshore, including appropriate infrastructure
and linkages.
To provide for
coordinated
delivery of
infrastructure
to support the growth area and for
the transfer of the foreshore land into public ownership.
which delivers infrastructure and developer
contributions.
2.0 Requirement before a permit is
A permit may be granted to use or subdivide land, construct a building or
construct or carry out works before a development plan has
been prepared to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority that does not prejudice the future,
orderly development of the area
affected by the Development Plan Overlay.
3.0 Conditions and requirements for permits
The following conditions and/or requirements apply to permits:
Infrastructure
Contributions
Prior to the Certification of
subdivision
is certified
, the Owners of the land
to be subdivided
must enter into an Agreement under
section 173
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
and make application to the Registrar of Titles to have
the agreement registered on the title to the land under
ection 181 of the Act.
The Agreement must
provide for infrastructure contributions to be paid, in accordance with the
Shared Infrastructure Contributions
Plan, prior to the issue of a Statement of
Compliance.
The Agreement must provide for the delivery of infrastructure and the
contributions required, both in respect of projects required
by that development
and to the extent any relevant project necessitate contributions from multiple
landowners. The Agreement must
give effect to the Public Infrastructure Plan
insofar as it relates to those projects which necessitate contributions from
landowners as relevant to the land and specify:
and responsibility for the delivery of the projects required to support the
proposed future development of the land, where
those projects require
contributions to be made from multiple landowners.
If relevant,
the arrangements for cash contributions to be made to the responsible authority
in respect of projects contemplated in
the Public Infrastructure Plan to be
delivered by other landowners.
If relevant,
the payment of any contributions to the responsible authority in respect of
community infrastructure. The agreement must
be prepared at the cost of the
Owner and be to the satisfaction of the responsible
Three-Dimensional Building Envelope
Prior to the issue of
a Statement of
Compliance of a plan of subdivision
is issued which includes serviced lots on
land below the northernmost 19 metre AHD contour line
, for land on
north-facing slopes
at 1255 Paynesville Road (Lot 1 PS318977) and 1325
Paynesville Road (Lot
3 PS 307152)
, the Owner of the land must enter into an
Agreement under
section 173
Planning and Environment Act 1987
make application to the Registrar of Titles to have the agreement registered on
the title to the land under
ection 181 of the Act. The
Agreement must provide for three dimensional building envelopes on individual
below the northernmost 19 metre AHD contour line which
reflect the design guidelines for that land prepared as part of
accordance with
the approved Development Plan.
A dealing number from Land Victoria indicating that the application for
registration has been made, must be provided to the responsible
prior to the issue of
a Statement of Compliance
The agreement must be prepared at the cost of the Owner and be to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Kangaroo Management Plan
Before any works start, any permit must comply with the approved Kangaroo
Management Plan forming part of the Development Plan.
The Agreement must be prepared at the cost of the Owner and be to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
4.0 Requirements for development plan
A single Development Plan must be prepared for whole of the land to
which this Schedule applies.
A Development Plan must
be generally in accordance with the objectives,
requirements and guidelines defined in the Paynesville Growth Area Structure
include the following requirements
as relevant to the
subject land
Land Use and Township Character
Provide a layout
that is generally in accordance with
Paynesville Framework Plan
and includes a range of lot sizes and densities
which provide the opportunity for a diverse range of housing types including
density housing and aged care and retirement living where
appropriate.
Identify the
location and preferred land uses of a
Neighbourhood
Activity Centre generally in accordance with
the Paynesville Framework Plan
and the Retail Economic
Assessment.
landscape buffers or other mechanisms for sensitive interfaces to surrounding
rural land.
streetscape treatments and landscaping to ensure development appropriately
fronts streets, open space and public areas.
areas on the north-facing slopes at 1255 Paynesville Road (Lot 1 PS318977) and
1325 Paynesville Road (Lot 3 PS307152) that
will require three-dimensional
building envelopes to be prepared.
Ensure that
the subdivision provides appropriate linkage and interface treatments to
adjoining land.
Provide design
guidelines to inform the
preparation of three dimensional building
envelopes on individual
located below the ground level
of the northernmost 19.0 metre AHD line of 1255 Paynesville Road (Lot 1
PS318977) and 1325 Paynesville
Road (Lot 3 PS307152).
The guidelines should be informed by a view sharing analysis and seek
where required, to include consideration
the objectives of this overlay and set out how new development will maintain
view sharing opportunities to Lake King and
from the public realm.
a lot layout which responds to the topography of the land and maximises solar
building heights from natural ground level and side setbacks to avoid continuous
built form.
setbacks from sensitive foreshore areas.
the relationship between the landscaping in the foreshore and any impacts this
has on views to and from the subject land.
to and from Lake King through the management of maximum building heights from
natural ground level.
boundary set backs to avoid continuous built form.
corridors from the road network and public realm, including public open space,
towards Lake King.
- Reasonable
sharing of views from dwellings to Lake King.
A network of
open space linkages that accommodate natural drainage patterns and existing
native vegetation.
pedestrian and cycling connections through the growth area and linkages to
surrounding foreshore paths.
Provision of
appropriate public facilities in open space, suited to the function of that open
Maximise the
safety of public open spaces through the informal surveillance of streets and
public spaces from the private realm.
Public Infrastructure
A Public Infrastructure Plan which addresses the following:
stormwater management that incorporates water sensitive urban design techniques
to protect natural systems, integrate stormwater
treatment into the landscape,
improve water quality, and reduce and mitigate run-off and peak flows, including
consideration of downstream
Drainage assets must allow for the
conveyance and treatment of any upstream catchments.
Impact Assessment which
provides for
a road network
high degree of connectivity including the location and details of any
existing roads or intersections.
- New roads and
intersections.
- Access points
to the primary road network.
- Pedestrian
crossings or safe refuges.
- Pedestrian and
cycle corridors.
transport infrastructure within easy walking distance to dwellings and key
destinations, in consultation with relevant agencies
authorities.
Provision of
suitable infrastructure and utilities to efficiently service development and
minimise maintenance costs while meeting
user needs.
Identification
and sequencing of public infrastructure projects which require contributions
from multiple landowners within the growth
improvement works outlined in the Foreshore Improvement Plan.
Arrangements
for coordination between landowners, including an explanation of how the
equalisation of land and contributions for infrastructure
Arrangements
for public infrastructure to be delivered through works in kind, where
matter required by responsible authority.
detailed staging and sequencing plan indicating how the development of the
growth area is to proceed.
Foreshore Improvement and
Management Plan
A Foreshore Improvement and Management Plan that covers the
land affected
by this overlay with a natural ground level of below 2.8 metre AHD
also has regard to Point Fullarton wetlands and adjoining public areas, to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority
and the East Gippsland Catchment
Management Authority
. The Foreshore Improvement and Management Plan
acknowledge the future public ownership and should
Demonstrate how
and is to be rehabilitated including the provision
of vegetated buffers to prevent wetland degradation and provide habitat.
Demonstrate how
works and future use of the
and enhance the environmental values of the Gippsland Lakes, wetlands and
fringing areas.
not significantly impact on the habitat of nationally
significant migratory shorebirds or any other threatened species recorded on
Land as outlined within the Flora and Fauna Assessment.
biodiversity objectives and targets for species identified within the Land,
based on outcomes of the Flora and Fauna Assessment,
and outline a monitoring
and adaptive management program to assess performance against those objectives
and targets.
convenient public access to reserves and the provision of facilities suited to
the natural foreshore environment, including
interpretive facilities.
Demonstrate
how the visual impact of development when viewed from Lake King is
alignment for the walking/cycling path from
Burden Place to Bay Road,
generally in accordance with Diagram 1 to
separation from the
adjacent wetlands and
facilitate a natural vegetation shift over
Outline ongoing
maintenance obligations, including drainage management obligations if drainage
assets are proposed to be located within
the foreshore.
Address coastal
hazard vulnerability including risks associated with sea level rise, storm surge
and coastal processes and mitigate
any identified
Cultural Heritage
To provide a cultural heritage assessment prepared by a suitably
qualified professional including how Aboriginal cultural heritage
places will be
Flora and Fauna
A Flora and Fauna Assessment
must demonstrate the application of the avoid
and minimise principles and consider
, that considers
impacts on native flora and fauna under relevant national, state and local
legislation and policy frameworks, prepared by a suitably
qualified professional
in consultation with relevant agencies and authorities.
The assessment must make recommendations in relation to subdivision design
and make appropriate links to the Foreshore Improvement
Management Plan. The
assessment must also have regard for any habitat values and threatened species
and include targeted surveys
of those threatened species.
Kangaroo Management Plan
A Kangaroo Management Plan must be approved by the Department of Energy,
Environment and Climate Action (DEECA). The approved plan
will form part of the
permit and must include:
Strategies to
avoid land locking Kangaroos, including staging of subdivision.
Strategies to
minimise animal and human welfare risks.
and monitoring actions to sustainably manage a population of Kangaroos within a
suitable location.
address the containment of Kangaroos and to ensure adequate animal
The approved Kangaroo Management Plan must be
implemented to the satisfaction of DEECA.
Retail Economic Assessment
A Retail Economic Assessment which must be prepared by a suitably qualified
professional to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
The assessment
must determine the size of the future
neighbourhood
activity centre and include suitable land uses. Proposed use and development
neighbourhood
activity centre must not
adversely affect the primary role of the existing Paynesville Activity
Infrastructure Contributions
A Shared Infrastructure Contributions Plan, which identifies all
items for infrastructure contributions, the proportion of each lot
provided for roads, open space, and stormwater drainage purposes and a clause
that explains how the equalisation of land and
contributions for the
infrastructure items is to operate, including reference to staging and
sequencing. The Shared Infrastructure
Contributions Plan must
the construction of landscaped shared path corridors, areas of foreshore
reserves, and the Paynesville Road/Grandview Road/Waterview
intersection.
Construction
of landscaped shared path corridors. Construction of new roads and/or upgrades
to existing roads.
Construction
of stormwater drainage infrastructure including main drainage, wetlands and
retarding basins, and on site water storage
in accordance with water sensitive
urban design principles, as identified in the approved Development
provision of the public open space and associated infrastructure as identified
in the approved Development Plan.
Construction
of public transport infrastructure.
Construction
of improvements in accordance with the Foreshore Improvement and Management
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) for the construction of other community or
social facilities capped at the sum identified by
Department of Transport and
Planning at the time the planning permit is
Bushfire Management
Development Plan must include a requirement for
any subdivision and development to provide a Site Management Plan that addresses
bushfire risk during, and where necessary, after construction, to the
satisfaction of the C
. The Plan must
, amongst other things
The staging of
development and the likely bushfire risks at each
An area of land
between the development edge and non-urban areas consistent with the separation
distances specified in AS3959-2018,
where bushfire risk is managed to ensure a
Bushfire Attack Level (
rating of no greater than BAL 12.5 is
The measure to
be undertaken by the developer to reduce the risk from fire within any
surrounding rural or undeveloped landscape and
protect residents and property
from the threat of fire
opportunities for access and egress for residents, construction workers and
emergency vehicles.
Community and Stakeholder
Consultation
Development Plan will be
developed with
subject to an
appropriate level of community and public
authority consultation
before it is endorsed, to the satisfaction of the
as determined by the
responsible authority.
Diagram 1 – Paynesville Growth Areas Structure Plan
Preferred Urban Structure
Appendix C Panel
recommended version of the Structure Plan
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Since its settlement in the late 19
century as a small lakeside
fishing village, Paynesville has always undergone growth and change.
From the collection of fishermen’s cottages, hotels and stores along
the foreshore at the turn of the 20
Century, through the baby boom
and post-war housing growth as a young community strongly linked to employment
in Bairnsdale, to the
growth in tourism and lifestyle appeal for retirees, the
town has expanded substantially to the north and west. Paynesville has been
transformed over the past 30 years by investment in residential canal estates,
retail and commercial facilities, boating infrastructure,
education, health and
community facilities.
In essence, however, Paynesville has retained its same local character as a
small lakeside town, physically and visually connected
to the water and
surrounding landscape, reflected in the wide tree-lined streets in the older
section of the town, good accessibility
to the foreshore and town services and a
strong sense of local identity.
The aim of the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan is to maintain and
enhance that identity, so that the town can continue to grow
and change to meet
the needs of the future.
The East Gippsland Planning Scheme (Clause 11.01-1L-02),
includes the following Strategies for Paynesville:
variety of housing types and styles that add to the special character of
Paynesville.
Provide key
linkages between residential, commercial, recreation, town centre activity
areas, the foreshore, the waterfront and the
hinterland.
tourism opportunities and event spaces that facilitate an all year-round
destination.
Encourage the
maritime industry (including marinas and workshop facilities) and service
industry in the Industrial 3 Zone at Slip
industry that is not reliant on access to water in the Industrial 3 Zone on Slip
town westwards generally between Waratah Avenue and Grandview Road.
Contain urban
development within the area to the east of Grandview Road.
higher densities in the redevelopment of existing areas.
distinct separation of Eagle Point and Paynesville incorporating extensive open
space areas.
expansive green edges to abut entry roads to maintain the sense of country
atmosphere to the arrival experience.
development of a variety of tourist accommodation options within Paynesville,
particularly in the town centre or close to
the canals.
Encourage the
use of the site adjoining the coast north-west of Paynesville to be development
for resort development or for urban/residential
resort development as an integrated development that does not land uses that
would be prejudicial to the primacy of the Paynesville
1.2 Preparation of the Structure Plan
The development of the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (PGASP) was
undertaken in two main stages.
In 2013 a community consultation and structure planning process was
undertaken by consultants working for East Gippsland Shire Council
to establish
key principles and requirements for future growth. A substantial amount of
consultation was undertaken to establish
community aspirations and to develop
and document options for the future urban structure of the growth area.
Initial assessment of site constraints and opportunities was undertaken,
including community workshops to establish community values
and to identify the
key issues that need to be addressed in planning for future growth of the
In 2015 this work was reviewed and updated, based on further community input,
consultation with the Council and landowners and refinement
of planning
objectives and outcomes. This second stage of work sought to establish a much
clearer and responsive design philosophy
for the growth of Paynesville and a
strong focus on the character and identity of new growth and a shift to a more
sustainable, attractive
and liveable urban environment in the lakeside
The work included further assessment of opportunities and constraints for the
growth area, the identification of preferred road and
open space layouts,
traffic assessment, and review of native vegetation requirements, including
ecological and cultural heritage
Further investigations included traffic modelling and impact assessment,
hydrological analysis, native vegetation scan, and social
impact assessment.
Substantial local knowledge and technical information about the Paynesville
Growth Area have informed the preparation of the PGASP
and it has been guided by
the views and preferences of community members through extensive
consultation.
Consultation with community members through targeted community focus groups
and meetings with all landowners and their representatives
was undertaken to
test propositions for the initial structure plan and obtain further input on
preferred development options.
This background information is included in Appendix 4.
The final preferred urban structure plan and this document have been prepared
with the aim of satisfying community aspirations for
the growth area, including
the stated desires of landowners for a practical and achievable plan and within
the broader policy requirements
of Victorian Government agencies and the East
Gippsland Shire Council.
PGASP was reviewed and updated in 2023 to achieve the following outcomes:
statistical information used to inform the Structure Plan remained relevant and
up-to-date.
recommendations regarding Statutory Implementation to align with structural
changes to the East Gippsland Planning Scheme Municipal
Planning Strategy and
Planning Policy Framework
(pursuant to planning scheme amendment
Updates to PGASP were policy neutral and did not
affect the policy intent of recommendations contained in the original 2016
of the Structure Plan.
1.3 Purpose
The purpose of the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan (PGASP) is to
provide a set of desired outcomes, objectives, guidelines
and requirements for
future development of the growth area, based on principles of good urban design
and sustainability.
It aims to:
structure of the growth area previously established in the Urban Design
Framework for Paynesville which identified land for
the foreseeable long-term
urban growth of Paynesville (up to 35-40 years). Plan for the services necessary
to support the town’s
economic and social well-being;
Outline and
describe a preferred urban structure that broadly defines the allocation of land
for future residential development, open
space, drainage and other urban uses to
support sustainable growth, good urban design and housing choice within the
Paynesville township
Provide a road
hierarchy and standards; identify future traffic and pedestrian circulation; and
identify road and intersection upgrades
necessary to provide for safe and
efficient movement within, to and from the study area – including plans
for funding of that
infrastructure;
Plan for the
appropriate mix and separation of urban land uses necessary to achieve a vision
for optimum community and economic outcomes;
Identify key
townscape themes that will be incorporated into the public realm to retain and
reinforce the local identity, urban character
and sense of place for
Paynesville;
Take advantage
of the environmental and social values that are unique to Paynesville and which
give the town its competitive advantage
as a place to live, work and play;
Incorporate
sustainability principles to minimise the environmental footprint of
development;
assessment of social impact to guide the provision of community infrastructure
and services;
Integrate public
open space, foreshore areas and pedestrian/cycle networks to achieve
conservation and recreational objectives;
Identify the
social infrastructure required both within the study area and the town as a
whole to provide optimum facilities and services
for the community, including
practical and effective arrangements for funding and delivery.
Infrastructure
Contributions
Plan to assist in funding key infrastructure in the PGASP
that infrastructure requires contributions from multiple
Provide for the
transfer of land required for key movement corridors and development of
walking/cycle paths as early as possible in
the development process;
Provide guidance
on the preparation of Planning Scheme Amendments; transfer of land for, and
management of, public open space assets;
and delivery of infrastructure
investment in the study area.
update key recommendations of the Paynesville Urban Design
1.4 Planning Policy Context
The PGASP is informed by:
The Municipal
Planning Strategy and Planning Policy Framework as set out in the East Gippsland
Planning Scheme;
The Paynesville
Urban Design Framework 2007;
Local policy and
strategy plans including:
- Paynesville
and District Community Plan 2012;
- East Gippsland
Shire Council Urban Waterways Strategy 2012;
- East Gippsland
Regional Towns Industry Study 2012; and
- Paynesville
Foreshore Management Plan
A range of other
State and local legislation, policy and plans.
The PGASP is intended
to be adopted and implemented through the East Gippsland Planning Scheme to
guide further urban design, subdivision
and development within the growth
The PGASP does not absolve any party from obligations under Commonwealth,
State and Local Government legislation. It seeks to maintain
consistency with
those obligations in setting development objectives and requirements to achieve
the community’s desires for
sustainable growth outcomes for
Paynesville.
In particular, it is guided by the objectives and strategies of the
Paynesville Urban Design Framework, as follows:
pedestrian and bicycle links to nearby towns and attractions including Newlands
Arm, Raymond Island, Eagle Point, Banksia
Peninsula, the Mitchell River Silt
Jetties and Bairnsdale.
for open space links to foreshore areas and walks from north to south.
for the expansion of the town westwards generally between Waratah Avenue and
Grandview Road.
a variety of lot sizes
in new subdivisions, with an average gross lot
yield of 8 to 10 lots per hectare.
and housing types to meet
community needs.
there is a distinct separation of Eagle Point and Paynesville urban areas with
appropriate forms of development that incorporate
extensive open space.
expansive green edges to abut entry roads to maintain the sense of country
atmosphere to the arrival experience.
On the south side of Bairnsdale
Paynesville Road this is to consist of a minimum 15 metre vegetated
Investigate
the possibility of allocating land for clean, non-maritime industrial uses and
commercial uses servicing the local community.
An objective of the
Community Plan for Paynesville and a key role for this document is to ensure
that new residential development
is sympathetic to, and supports retention of,
the character of Paynesville as a lakeside town.
The plan describes a pattern of land use and development that will: provide
good connections to the existing town and foreshore areas;
provide spacious
streets and landscape corridors; stimulate variety in residential lot sizes; and
sensitively locate land uses to
support Paynesville’s future growth.
1.5 How to use this document
The Structure Plan guides
land use and development for the
urban growth area
where a planning permit is required under the East
Gippsland Planning Scheme
Existing planning permits are in place for the ‘Coast’
development where a 376 lot subdivision permit exists for the first
constructed
stage and for the undeveloped land zoned in the General Residential Zone in the
south-east portion of the growth area.
The preferred urban structure shown in
this plan has been prepared to generally align with and enable the permitted 376
lot development,
should it proceed in accordance with approved plans. Should
further planning permits be sought for alternative development or staging
development within this land, the provisions of this PGASP will apply to ensure
development within the growth area is integrated
and that an orderly and
efficient pattern of growth occurs.
The PGASP requires the preparation
of an overall
development plan
, demonstrating general conformity with this
document and the coordination and integration of development on adjoining
Development Plans, overlays, planning applications and planning permits must
implement the outcomes of the PGASP. The outcomes are
expressed by the Vision,
Objectives and Requirements. Possible ways to achieve these outcomes are
included in the Guidelines.
Each element of the PGASP contains objectives, requirements and guidelines as
describe the design outcomes that apply to the PGASP that
be met to achieve the vision for the
Requirements
be adhered to in
development of the land. Where they are not demonstrated in an overall
Development Plan or permit application, requirements
may be included as a
condition on a planning permit or obligations in a legal agreement, whether or
not they take the same wording
as the structure plan, to achieve its intent.
express how the discretion will be exercised by the
responsible authority in certain matters that require a planning permit. If the
responsible authority is satisfied that an application for an alternative to the
guidelines implements the outcomes, the responsible
authority may consider the
alternative.
These objectives, requirements and guidelines will operate within the
statutory planning framework to implement the outcomes of the
PGASP. The PGASP
also includes recommendations for a
Infrastructure
Contributions
which functions in
to apportion the costs of key infrastructure where multiple landowners
benefit from the infrastructure, and for the preparation of
legal agreements to
deliver infrastructure by individual landowners within or directly adjacent to
their landholdings
in respect of that key infrastructure
A range of other measures are also recommended to facilitate implementation
of the PGASP, including agreements between Council and
other agencies for the
future management of foreshore reserves, processes for preparation of
Development Plan
for the landholdings,
delivery of landscape corridors and walking/cycling connections, and
forward planning and budgeting for expansion and maintenance
facilities.
Development must also comply with all other Acts and approvals where
relevant, including the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
, amongst others. These requirements will be
applied at the Planning Permit stage.
1.6 Land affected by the Paynesville Growth Area
Structure Plan
Figure 1: Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan
– Land affected by the PGASP
Land affected by this Structure Plan comprises land holdings to the west of
the existing Paynesville town area. The affected land
has a total area of 227
hectares, including land used for grazing, some existing vacant
residential-zoned areas and the Paynesville
Cemetery. The area is bounded
generally by Grandview Road to the west, Newlands Drive to the south, Lake King
and Bay Road to the
north and the existing urban area to the east.
The Structure Plan area includes land in the General Residential Zone 1,
Farming Zone 1, Transport Zone 2 and Public Conservation
and Recreation
It includes land in the General Residential Zone in the south-eastern portion
of the growth area, and shown in Figure 1 as “Existing
Permit”. This land is included for the purposes of showing the overall
preferred development of the Study Area, but
will only be subject to the
requirements of the Structure Plan in the event that a new planning permit is
issued for the land.
The coordinated development of this parcel and the adjoining land to the west
is critical to achieving the objectives of the East
Gippsland Planning Scheme
and this Structure Plan, in particular, the appropriate staging of development
to facilitate timely extensions
of Ashley Street and King Street towards the
If new or amended planning permits are sought for this land, it must be
demonstrated that the development will generally be in accordance
Structure Plan and will not prejudice the timely and efficient development of
adjoining land.
Directly to the west of land affected by the PGA Structure Plan
(north of Paynesville Road) is the Eagle Point Growth Area to which
structure plan will apply.
Land to the west of Grandview Road (south of Paynesville Road) is not
included within existing defined urban growth areas –
although a part of
that land is proposed for consideration as the site for the Paynesville
Employment and Emergency Services Precinct
as an adjunct to this structure plan
– on the basis such a precinct is seen as preferably located on the outer
edge of the
Paynesville Growth Area. The rationale for this location is
contained later in this report.
The achievement of a suitable transition from the rural landscape west of
Paynesville to the town itself also requires management
of the approaches to the
town and view corridors, to ensure that development of land outside the
structure plan area does not detract
from the objectives of this plan.
1.7 Assumptions for Growth
1.7.1 Land supply, Lot Yield and
The PGASP aims to plan the development of the growth area in which the Urban
Design Framework identified sufficient land for the foreseeable
residential growth of Paynesville; and the provision of services to support the
town’s economic and social well-
Profile ID’s data regarding population forecasting for Paynesville (1)
indicates an increase over the next 20 years from a population
in 2021 of 3,636
people to a population in 2041 of 6,250 people (Profile ID, East Gippsland Shire
Council - October 2023).
There are projected to be 1,025 dwellings to accommodate growth over that
lot yield for the area within the
structure plan is estimated for the purpose of the structure plan to be 1,375
at the top end of the expected density range of 8-10 dwellings per
. At predicted occupancy rates for Paynesville of 2.55 persons
per dwelling, this will accommodate an additional population of 3,506
At current and projected rates of growth, the PGASP area equates to 25.5
years of demand, not including demand taken up by infill
development of existing
residential areas, for which there is significant potential. The 25.5 year time
frame is therefore a conservative
This structure plan exceeds the rule of thumb requirement to plan for urban
supply of 20 years, but in doing so it satisfies long-term
growth needs for the
foreseeable future within the already designated urban boundary.
Despite the long timeframe to achieve ultimate development, there is no
strong rationale to “withhold” land within the
growth area for
future rezoning, and there are advantages in rezoning all of the growth area to
enable stages of development to commence
on the different landholdings and
provide different products to the market.
1.7.2 Infrastructure and Servicing
Each of the landholdings is able to be efficiently serviced and logical
extensions of major services can occur on a number of fronts,
provided there is
general consistency with the preferred urban structure and requirements of the
Structure Plan.
Extension of the road network, sewer, water, power, gas and
telecommunications services will be undertaken by developers at their
accordance with the requirements of service providers. Where land transfers and
development of infrastructure for drainage,
open space, pedestrian/cycle
connections, road intersections and upgrades are required, these
part of the
Infrastructure
Contributions
Plan, which outlines the requirements and costs
to be met in providing these facilities.
Community Infrastructure Contribution will
capped cash
contribution for the purposes of community infrastructure may
provided per lot to contribute to any required upgrading of existing community
services outside of the growth area.
The Plan also allows for a transitional form of development to occur through
the subdivision of larger lots with requirements in place
to facilitate the
longer-term re-subdivision of these lots to achieve the ultimate residential
yield. Over the time period of development
monitoring and review of the
structure plan will need to occur to coordinate lot release and the delivery of
infrastructure.
1.7.3 Traffic
The objective of the traffic modelling is to ensure that the road network is
capable of meeting traffic demand, however it is important
that traffic
generation is not overestimated and that no more road infrastructure is provided
than will be required.
Over-design of the road system has the potential to conflict with the
planning objectives for the area by creating excessive road
pavement widths
(thus reducing the available space for pedestrians and cyclists, landscape
corridors and infiltration of surface
water), encouraging higher traffic speed,
and adding unnecessarily to the cost of initial development.
The risk of “under-design” is much less given the long period of
development and opportunity to review actual traffic
generation over time.
Generous road reserves are proposed to accommodate local place-making objectives
and to create spacious street
corridors for multiple use (street trees,
lighting, pedestrian/cycle movement, storm water management). In the unlikely
traffic generation exceeds the predicted volumes, there will be time
and capacity to upgrade the road network. But this would require
traffic volumes
to be 2.5 times the current measured trip generation in Paynesville.
Infrastructure Design Manual (
standard is 10 trips per
day for residential dwellings, however the IDM specifically anticipates
variations from this standard figure
on an evidence base. Where actual
measurement of traffic generation in a locality demonstrates a lower traffic
generation figure,
that data should be used as the primary evidence-based
Evidence from traffic monitoring undertaken in Paynesville indicates a
traffic generation rate of 3.2 vehicles per day.
Anecdotally, the reasons for the residential traffic generation figures to be
less than the adopted standard may include:
profile of the community, including a much higher proportion of retirees and
semi-retirees, who are less likely to undertake
daily trips related to work,
children’s’ sporting activities, or convenience shopping as might be
undertaken by working
families with children;
socio-economic characteristics in Paynesville including single-parent families
and lower levels of car ownership.
The modelling therefore adopts a
traffic generation rate of 7 vehicles per day as a conservative assumption, well
in excess of the
measured actual rate. Given the benefits of providing a road
network that is designed for optimum, rather than maximum volumes of
and the long time period over which actual traffic volumes can be monitored,
there is no tangible disadvantage in modelling
and designing the road network
based on this figure.
2. OUTCOMES
The Paynesville Growth Area will provide an attractive, spacious and
accessible residential environment for approximately 3,506 additional
It will provide for a range of family types and lifestyles, with good access
to employment, services and facilities, while
maintaining
the function of the Paynesville town centre and
maritime precinct as the
established
for retail and commercial services and maritime activities respectively.
Entry to Paynesville at the Grandview Road intersection will strongly
reinforce a transition from rural and lake vistas and arrival
in a spacious
carefully designed
lakeside urban parkland environment.
A well-connected road network will allow for convenient and efficient traffic
movement and distribution of traffic.
Residential neighbourhoods with dwellings and lots suitable for a range of
lifestyles will be well connected to the existing township
via existing roads
and new extensions to Ashley Street and King Street; connections of Fullarton
Drive and Bay Road with Paynesville
Road and to the foreshore and cycling paths
on Newlands Arm and Lake King.
The area will accommodate a
Neighbourhood
Activity Centre fronting Paynesville Road
and may include a service
station and complementary retail services
that will not
adversely affect
the core commercial
An employment and emergency services precinct will be established on the
western side of Grandview Road, in a landscaped parkland
setting, to accommodate
additional local services for the town and support local employment.
The new residential neighbourhoods
spacious tree-lined streets, a variety of residential lot sizes and
centrally-located open spaces for local recreation and relaxation.
Generous open space linkages and pedestrian/cycle corridors will provide
convenient off- road access into the existing town and to
connect with public
foreshores. The Lake King foreshore will be managed and protected as an
important environmental and public open
space asset.
Open spaces will create green corridors supporting natural drainage and
provide off-road connections for cyclists and pedestrians,
retaining as much
native vegetation as possible and enhanced with new plantings.
The growth area will provide for a range of residential lot sizes and options
for a diverse and inclusive community, aged care and
visitor accommodation and
other land uses to meet social and economic needs for Paynesville.
Strong native landscape themes will provide visual and environmental
character for the growth area, establishing tree-lined avenues,
corridors and an urban landscape respectful of the lakeside location.
The cost of provision of infrastructure to service the community will be
apportioned through infrastructure contributions by landowners,
augmented by
public investment to support on- going maintenance and management of services
and amenities.
2.2 Achieving the Vision
The Vision described above will only be achieved over a long period and
through a combination of planning and development processes
that will occur over
many years.
These processes include:
Adoption of the
Structure Plan and the provisions of this document in the East Gippsland
Planning Scheme to establish a statutory
basis for the approval of more detailed
plans for the growth area;
Implementation
of a Development Plan Overlay for the growth area, setting requirements for more
detailed planning to satisfy the objectives,
requirements and guidelines
contained in this document;
The rezoning of
land to allocate areas for residential and other land uses with negotiated legal
agreements to establish obligations
with respect to land transfer,
infrastructure and staging requirements;
Preparation by
landowners of
one or more
Development
for the growth area, including more detailed investigation of site
constraints, vegetation, sites of cultural heritage significance,
detailed design and layout of streets and lots;
Preparation of a
Infrastructure
Contributions
Plan, setting out the
arrangements for
equitable delivery of
infrastructure
. The Public
Infrastructure Plan will also consider development staging and apportionment of
contributions for infrastructure as
outlined in the Development Plan
, potentially including some roads and intersections, open
spaces, foreshore reserves drainage facilities, landscaping and other services
required to support land development;
Preparation
by landowners of Precinct Infrastructure Plans to demonstrate orderly and
efficient delivery of local infrastructure and
show staging and lot
thresholds;
Planning by
Council for public works and future maintenance of public land identified in the
Structure Plan and subsequent Development
engagement and consultation with the community to provide opportunities for
of more detailed
proposals as part of the consideration of a Development Plan
proposed Development Plans.
Preparation by
landowners of planning permit applications for individual landholdings for
subdivision and development, in accordance
with this Structure Plan and overall
Development Plan for the growth
2.3 Planning and Design
The following planning and design principles underpin the vision described
above. They are principles that should guide the detailed
design and development
implementation processes over time.
2.3.1 Town character and identity
Entry to Paynesville will be at Grandview Road, where the transition for a
rural landscape and views across Lake King and of tree-lined
road corridors
signal arrival in the town.
Neighbourhood design should seek to create an urban character that is
, well- connected, and distinctive, through the overall road
and lot layout, landscape and open space design, entry thresholds, street
character and variety in lot size
and design.
The design, layout and orientation of subdivisions should maintain a
primarily grid-like pattern of wide landscaped streets to deliver
preponderance of desirable east – west oriented lots, with accessible
local open spaces and parkland corridors connecting
neighbourhoods and the
existing town.
Tree-lined road corridors on the major approaches and internal street system
and generous landscaped open spaces will create a distinctive
townscape and vistas.
2.3.2 Urban Land Use
The growth area is intended primarily to accommodate residential land use.
Compatible land uses including retirement living and aged
care facilities and
community facilities will be encouraged to support local community needs.
Commercial or industrial land uses are not needed or desirable in the
growth area.
An area for small-scale service business activities and
emergency services has been identified to the west of Grandview Road and can
accommodated in a landscaped setting outside the residential area to avoid
conflict with residential use.
Tourism development is encouraged on designated land in the study area, to
provide sensitively developed accommodation and tourist
facilities designed to
blend into a semi- rural landscape at the entry to Paynesville on Waterview
service station site
Neighbourhood Activity Centre
is able to be accommodated fronting Paynesville Road
as part of the
Local Activity Centre
, just west of the cemetery, with suitable access
via a service road and appropriate separation from nearby residential
2.3.3 Movement Network
The road network should be designed to achieve a distribution of traffic and
choice of route into and through the town.
The street network design should provide capacity sufficient to cater for
traffic volumes based on evidence of local trip generation
and avoid over-design
based on arbitrary traffic volume predictions. For the purpose of road design
within the structure plan area,
a trip generation of 7 vehicles per day per
dwelling is assumed, based on local evidence.
Paynesville Road and Grandview Road should form tree-lined avenues with a
minimum number of connector road intersections provided
to provide choice of
vehicle movement through the growth area.
Connector roads and residential streets should generally form a north-south
and east-west grid pattern and provide generous reservations
for tree planting
and pedestrian/cycle paths.
Local street layouts shall create a permeable street network for vehicles and
pedestrians/ cyclists, avoiding cul-de-sacs and indirect
line of travel.
Off-road pedestrian and cycle links shall be provided along the alignment of
Paynesville and Grandview Roads and through open space
connections within the
growth area to provide safe access to residential areas, foreshores and the
existing town area.
2.3.4 Foreshores and Wetlands
Protection of the recreational and ecological values of foreshore and wetland
areas on Lake King shall be of the highest priority.
Areas of foreshore land below 2.8 metres AHD shall not be developed for urban
, except for appropriate infrastructure,
and should generally be
transferred to public ownership and managed to maintain and enhance ecological
Foreshore reserves should be accessible for passive recreation (primarily
walking and nature watching) where appropriate,
and managed for
conservation purposes in more sensitive areas.
The unmade road reserve connection between Bay Road and Fullarton Drive and
the Eagle Point-Paynesville walking/cycling path should
be retained.
generally define the southern boundary
The 2.8 metre AHD
line will define the southern extent
of the foreshore reserve
vegetation and environmental protection.
Foreshore areas should be revegetated with suitable species where
Drainage and nutrient stripping on foreshore reserve areas shall be designed
and implemented to prevent adverse environmental effects.
2.3.5 Public Open Space
Public open space should be provided in central locations within 400 metres
of all residents.
Local neighbourhood spaces should provide passive and active recreational
opportunities for all ages, with play facilities, seating,
landscaping and
amenities to meet local demand.
Landscaped open space corridors will connect neighbourhoods and the existing
town and foreshore areas for pedestrians and cyclists,
providing a district
movement network.
Open space should be designed and landscaped to provide habitat for wildlife
and assist with drainage functions through water sensitive
urban design.
2.3.6 Drainage and Water Management
Stormwater drainage will be integrated into the overall design of new
subdivisions through water sensitive urban design, including
retention and
infiltration at source, the creation of areas for stormwater detention and
nutrient stripping (such as “water
gardens” within open space and
road reserves), to minimise volumes of stormwater flow and nutrients exiting the
Stormwater management can be integrated into the design of residential lots,
roads and open space (including the Lake King foreshore
reserve), providing that
the recreational functions are also maintained.
Drainage assets should allow
for the conveyance and treatment of upstream catchments.
2.3.7 Infrastructure and Subdivision
Infrastructure and works to facilitate subdivision and development shall be
designed and developed to meet the objectives of the structure
plan, which
establishes functional requirements for roads, pedestrian/cycle paths, open
space, drainage and other infrastructure.
Public infrastructure should be designed for sustainability, efficiency and
amenity of residential areas, avoiding a “standardised”
approach, in
favour of using local materials and creating a unique urban character in streets
and public spaces.
The Infrastructure Design Manual (IDM) used by Council to achieve
standardised design of public infrastructure provides for discretion
design standards to meet local objectives. Where the requirements of this
structure plan conflict with the IDM, the objectives
and requirements of this
Structure Plan take precedence.
2.3.8 Coastal Inundation
This Plan adopts a position that the any development of the subject land is
new greenfield development outside current town boundaries
for the purpose of
planning for sea level rise and coastal inundation.
Planning for land at risk of inundation, including an allowance for sea level
rise of not less than 0.8 metres by 2100, means that
all land below the level of
2.8 metres AHD will be excluded from urban development, in accordance with the
Victorian Coastal Strategy
and State Planning Policy Framework.
2.4.9 Sustainability
Residential development within the growth area should provide a range of
housing choices in neighbourhood environments designed for
sustainability,
through water sensitive urban design, energy efficiency, promotion of walking
and cycling and public realm design
measures intended to support a cohesive and
accessible community.
Development should accommodate a range of family types to support community
Development within the growth area should meet the highest standards of
environmental efficiency.
The growth area should provide opportunities for tourism, business and
employment in designated areas.
The sustainability of the Paynesville Growth Area will also be augmented by
the significant plantings proposed within the Structure
Plan for roadsides;
streetscapes; public open spaces, drainage wetlands and retention basins and
foreshore reserve revegetation.
2.5 Preferred Urban Structure
The Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan is illustrated in Figure 2
Figure 2: Paynesville Growth Area –
Preferred Urban Structure
Figure 3: Annotated Preferred Urban Structure Plan
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Planning Objectives, Requirements and
3.1.2 Town Character and Identity
To establish a pattern of residential development across the growth area
that supports good access, neighbourhood cohesion and reinforces
To support a strong sense of place and local character that builds on
Paynesville’s existing character and sense of place.
To create distinctive tree-lined streets environments that form a strong
landscape setting for housing development.
To establish native planted corridors in key locations that frame road
corridors and major entry points, provide open space connections
for cyclists
and pedestrians and enhance the visual appearance of the built
environment.
To ensure the scale and location of land uses and activities support the
preferred future character of Paynesville.
To establish a town entry at Grandview Road that provides a distinctive
visual transition into the town and maintains a vista to the
To establish tree lined corridors along Paynesville and Grandview
To provide a walkable town with good connections and relationships with
foreshore open space.
REQUIREMENTS
Development
provide a parkland
townscape character with native tree corridors on arterial roads, generous,
planted road verges on local streets
and open space connections where water
sensitive drainage is integrated with public access.
Residential neighbourhoods
convenient access to local open spaces and off-road pedestrian and cycle
networks, linking to the town centre and foreshore areas.
Street trees selected from a species list approved by the Council must be
provided on both sides of all new roads and streets (excluding
Trees (native, indigenous and exotic) in parks and streets must be:
- Larger species
wherever space allows
- Suitable for
local conditions and to minimise fire risk
- Planted in
modified and improved soil as required to support longevity
Landscape corridors of minimum 15 metres width must be provided on
Paynesville Road (both sides), Grandview Road
(both sides)
Waterview Road (east side) and planted to establish avenues of large native
trees between road intersections.
The intersection of Paynesville Road and Grandview Road and surrounding
development must
designate a physical and visual threshold
a transition from a rural environment with views to
Lake King into a spacious townscape with tree- lined streets.
Native tree planting shall be implemented on the foreshore reserve and
adjacent streets to soften the visual impact of development
when viewed from
Lake King while providing reasonable opportunities for view sharing from
residential lots north of Paynesville Road
and complying with bushfire
management requirements.
Development shall only proceed in accordance with approved Cultural
Heritage Management Plans prepared by landowners as part of Planning
Applications for a High Impact Activity.
Development must be in accordance with the recommendations of a Flora and
Fauna Assessment prepared by
proponents as part of
Development Plan to the satisfaction of the responsible
Street networks within subdivisions should be designed to maximise direct
connections to surrounding areas and long distance views
to the water.
All residential lots should be within a 400 metre distance of a local or
district open space area or foreshore reserve.
Street trees should be planted as follows AVERAGE INTERVAL TREE SIZE
8-10 metres Small trees (less than 10 metre canopy)
10-12 metres Medium trees (10-15 metre canopy)
12-15 metres Large trees (canopy larger than 15 metres)
Street trees and associated landscaping should be selected to provide
consistent landscape themes to reinforce movement hierarchy
and differentiated
neighbourhood themes. Landscape designs should feature iconic local species
consistent with the existing town
character and surrounding landscape (e.g. red
gums, paperbarks and similar species that reflect the Gippsland Plains and
vegetation species).
A consistent suite of lighting and furniture should be used across
individual subdivisions and the growth area appropriate to the
the public space to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Three-dimensional building envelopes should be prepared for residential
north-facing slopes north
land below the northernmost
19 metre AHD contour
of Paynesville Road
to demonstrate
suitable management of
building bulk and visual
heights and view sharing to Lake King.
Where landscape corridors are required to accommodate drainage features,
such as detention basins, they may need to be wider than
15 metres to satisfy
this purpose.
3.1.2 Urban Land Use
To provide for a
spacious residential character with a
variety of lot sizes and housing types to meet community needs.
To accommodate medium density residential development, aged care and
retirement accommodation and a
Neighbourhood
Activity Centre in locations consistent with the Preferred Urban
To support the development of visitor facilities and services that
complement Paynesville’s economic function and take advantage
of land with
proximity and access to the foreshores and wetlands of the Gippsland
To ensure that land use and development is located and designed to provide
community benefits, minimise conflict and provide amenities
and services to meet
the future needs of the community.
To provide the opportunity for high-quality tourism and eco-tourism
facilities through the allocation of suitable land within a Comprehensive
Development Zone (or similar), with guidelines for design, use and scale of
facilities.
To provide for different types of housing and a range of lot sizes and
densities that will provide for diversity and greater choice
in the future
To ensure a suitable standard of design for residential and other land uses
that meets contemporary standards for efficiency and sustainability.
To accommodate work-from-home and non-residential land use for employment
and local services.
REQUIREMENTS
Residential lots must be provided at approximately 8-10 dwellings
per net developable hectare across the area of the overall Development
residential subdivision.
A range of residential lot sizes
provided within each neighbourhood.
Residential lots
be designed and
oriented to:
public open space, where possible;
- Provide a
direct frontage to connector roads and local roads;
- Provide for
building setbacks and orientation to manage building bulk;
- Maximise solar
orientation to dwellings; and
suitable land area and dimensions on lots north of Paynesville
accommodate dwellings that provide for reasonable view sharing from adjacent and
nearby lots.
Specialised housing forms such as retirement living or aged care
- Integrated
into the wider urban structure by way of street and pedestrian connections;
- Conveniently
accessed by connector roads and bus routes.
Tourism development and/or visitor accommodation on the site shown as
‘Future tourist accommodation precinct subject to further
investigation’
must be subject to a comprehensive development plan
outlining design criteria and demonstrating:
- A scale and
design of development to reflect the semi-rural lakeside setting;
- Retention of
views from surrounding public roads;
landscaping themes; and
Integration with public streets and
walking/cycle paths.
Development of the
Neighbourhood
- Consider the
local retail needs and not adversely affect the primary role of the existing
Paynesville Activity Centre;
access from a service road set back from Paynesville Road by a minimum 15 metre
landscape buffer; and
- Be separated
and screened from surrounding residential development to
impacts on residential amenity.
The ‘Paynesville Employment and Emergency Services Precinct’
be developed in accordance with an
overall Development Plan indicating desired land uses and overall subdivision
- Be located to
the west of Grandview Road and set back from the road behind a 15 metre
landscape buffer, developed to provide walking
and cycling connections from
Paynesville Road to Newlands Drive;
- Provide for
low impact, local non-retail service businesses not suitable for location in the
Paynesville town centre;
- Provide for an
emergency services facility;
- Be screened
from Paynesville Road by suitable landscaping; and
environmental or amenity impacts in accordance with the requirements of the
Each residential subdivision stage should generally provide a range of lot
varying in size between 500-1000 square
Residential lots less than 500 square metres
should be considered where adjacent open space
, activity centre
or natural features provides an opportunity for more compact housing.
Residential lots greater than 1000 square metres will be discouraged, but
may be provided where it is demonstrated that a future subdivision
of the lots
and street construction can be achieved to provide direct street frontage
without battle-axe lots.
Land uses in the ‘Employment and Emergency Services Precinct’
should be limited to service industries, storage, emergency
services facilities
and business activities that do not compete with or detract from the retail and
business services located in
the Paynesville town centre.
3.1.3 Movement Networks
To provide a permeable and functional hierarchy of streets, roads and
pathways with connections to existing and planned networks outside
the Structure
Plan boundary.
To provide direct and safe access to the surrounding road network that
connects residents within the growth area and to the existing
town, with choice
of vehicle movement in a low speed traffic environment.
To promote a range of transport options including walking and
To provide a legible and functional structure of blocks and streets that is
easily navigated and also recognises existing land tenure.
To provide off-road walking and cycling routes along Paynesville and
Grandview Road in landscaped corridors.
To ensure the movement network accommodates the diversity of transport
modes and supports land use activities.
To ensure the interface between the street and buildings supports
pedestrian amenity and safety.
To maximise pedestrian and cyclist safety, amenity and security.
To accommodate bus routes that can be extended over time.
To facilitate timely delivery of a road network and the upgrading of key
intersections and external road connections.
To minimise direct access to Paynesville Road.
REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision layouts must provide a permeable street network to
provide a legible choice of access to residential areas and the town
Roads are to be provided and designed in accordance with the
classification included in Table 1 and the cross-sections provided in
Connections to Paynesville Road must be minimised and located and
designed to provide safe vehicle movement, without requiring loss
of substantial
roadside vegetation.
The street network must be generally oriented on a north-south or
east-west access to maximise solar orientation to lots and to maintain
consistent and legible street pattern.
Subdivision layouts must provide a permeable street network to provide a
legible choice of access to residential areas and the town
Roads are to be provided and designed in accordance with the
classification included in Table 1 and the cross-sections provided in
Connections to Paynesville Road
minimised and located and designed to provide safe vehicle movement, without
requiring loss of substantial roadside vegetation.
The street network must be generally oriented on a north-south or
east-west access to maximise solar orientation to lots and to maintain
consistent and legible street pattern.
Streets must be designed to provide safe traffic movement at speeds
consistent with the residential environment.
Shared bicycle and pedestrian paths must be delivered consistent with the
network shown on the Structure Plan.
Intersections of local streets and connector roads with off-road
bicycle/pedestrian paths must be designed to allow safe passage by
bicycles and
pedestrians with appropriate visual cues and signage.
A road connection must be provided as an extension of Bay Road to
the east and south to connect to Paynesville Road.
Fullarton Drive must be extended to the west to provide a
connection to the Bay Road extension, to provide a permeable road network
alternative means of access and egress
A designated bus route must be provided through
network both north and south of Paynesville Road
must be designed to be bus
Pedestrian connections are to be provided within and between the street
network to provide permeability.
Where development adjoins public land in the form of foreshore reserves or
local open spaces, a road interface is to be provided to
avoid establishment of
rear or side fences abutting those reserves.
Shared bicycle and pedestrian paths are to be delivered to make connections
through the growth area at the earliest opportunity.
Land is to be transferred for off-road pedestrian/cycling corridors along
Grandview, Waterview and Paynesville Roads and corner splays
Paynesville/Grandview Road at the earliest opportunity.
Footpath connections will be provided to provide access for residents to
the existing town footpath network.
Road connections should be provided to Paynesville Road, Grandview Road,
Newlands Drive, King Street, Ashley Street, Fullarton Drive
and Bay Road.
Road connections to Paynesville Road should be located to avoid 4
way intersections.
Street cross-sections should be designed in accordance with the
diagrams in Appendix 2.
Street block lengths should not exceed 240 metres to ensure a
permeable and low speed environment for vehicles, pedestrians and
Cul-de-sacs should not prevent convenient pedestrian and vehicle
connections.
Lighting should be installed along shared pedestrian and cycle paths
linking key destinations, unless otherwise approved by the responsible
Off-road cycling and pedestrian paths should be a minimum of 1.5 metres in
width and constructed in accordance with the design requirements
responsible authority.
Shared paths should be at least 2.5 metres in
District cycling and walking connections should be provided adjacent to the
alignment of Grandview/Waterview Roads to provide a continuous
connection for
pedestrians and cyclists to the walking paths and foreshores on Newlands Arm and
Table 1: Street
Classifications
Street Type
Target Speed
Verge width
Pedestrians/ Cyclists
Shared zone
Access Place
4.5m both sides
1.5m footpath one side Cyclists on road
4.5m both sides
1.5m footpath one side
Cyclists on road
Connector Street
6.0m both sides
2.5m shared path one side
Arterial Road
As required
4.5m one side
7.5m other side
As required
2.5m shared path one side
3.1.4 Foreshores and Wetlands
To support the protection, management, enhancement and public enjoyment of
natural foreshore areas as public open space.
To protect the environmental values of the Gippsland Lakes and associated
wetlands and fringing areas.
To protect property and infrastructure from natural hazards such as
bushfire, flood and inundation.
To provide the opportunity for visitor accommodation and facilities in
proximity to the wetlands and public foreshores.
To provide for convenient public access to reserves and the provision of
facilities suited to the natural foreshore environment, including
interpretive
facilities.
To avoid the direct discharge of stormwater or pollutants into natural
To provide opportunities for revegetation and the creation of vegetated
buffers to prevent wetland degradation and provide habitat.
To integrate the urban growth area with adjoining and connected foreshore
areas with appropriate connections and interfaces of private
To reduce the visual impact of development when viewed from Lake King,
whilst enabling the reasonable sharing of views from private
To ensure the sustainable management of the foreshore and wetland
environment.
To provide for developer contributions to the improvement of open space and
foreshore areas.
To minimise disturbance of coastal acid sulfate soils and ensure that
ensure that development complies with requirements for management
sulfate soils.
REQUIREMENTS
Residential lots shall only be created on land at or above 2.8
metres AHD. All land below 2.8m AHD must generally be included in the
All land shown on the Structure Plan as foreshore reserve must be
transferred to the Council at no cost to the Council and must be
improved in
accordance with an approved Foreshore Improvement and Management Plan to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Residential lots shall only be created on land at or above 2.8 metres
AHD. All land below 2.8 metres AHD must generally be included
in the foreshore
All land shown on the Structure Plan as foreshore reserve must be
transferred to the Council
at no cost to the Council
must be improved in accordance with an approved Foreshore Improvement and
Management Plan to the satisfaction of the responsible
Residential lots
within 500 metres of the Crown reserve
below the northernmost 19.0 metre AHD contour
must be designed
and oriented to allow for siting of dwellings to minimise the visual impact of
development, provide for reasonable
sharing of views and for casual surveillance
of public open space areas.
Extensions of Fullarton Drive and Bay Road must be provided along
the southern boundary of the enlarged foreshore reserve to provide,
practical, a road frontage to the reserve.
Storm water detention basins must be integrated into the design of public
open space and designed to prevent the direct discharge
of storm water flows
into waterways in accordance with best practice urban stormwater
management.
A new alignment for the walking/cycling path from Burden Place to Bay Road
(if required)
shall be defined generally in accordance with the Preferred
Urban Structure plan to provide greater separation from the adjacent wetlands,
to facilitate natural ‘vegetation shift’ over time, and to enable
the future construction of a new path alignment.
Development adjacent to existing and proposed foreshore reserves shall be
in accordance with the objectives and requirements of any
adopted Foreshore
Management Plan.
Development must be generally consistent with the requirements of
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 14 – Residential Development
Coastal Settlements: Paynesville.
Public playgrounds and other active recreation facilities (other than
pedestrian and cycling paths) shall not be located
in close proximity to
wetlands on the foreshore reserve to avoid disturbance to
below the 2.8 metre AHD line.
Residential lots directly abutting the foreshore reserve should be
Development causing disturbance to low lying areas should meet the
requirements of the Victorian Best Practice Guidelines for Assessing
Managing Coastal Acid Sulphate Soils (DSE, October 2010).
New walking and cycling paths should be located within a buffer not less
than 50 metres from existing wetlands.
Development of lots fronting the foreshore reserve (or a road adjacent to
the foreshore reserve) should be restricted by three-dimensional
envelopes defining maximum height limits and side boundary setbacks to avoid
continuous built form.
3.1.5 Public Open Space
To provide a system of open space linkages in parklands that accommodate
natural drainage patterns and existing native vegetation,
and establish off-road
pedestrian and cycling connections through the growth area and to surrounding
foreshore paths.
To ensure all users have convenient and safe access to and through public
To ensure comfortable and enjoyable public spaces.
To establish neighbourhood and district open spaces suitable for local
recreational activity.
To ensure the public realm is able to be well-maintained and managed.
To maximise the safety of public open spaces through informal surveillance
of streets and public spaces from dwellings and streets.
To provide a reasonable level of public facilities in local open space,
suited to the function of the open space.
To ensure the retention, protection and enhancement of environmental values
in the foreshore reserve and wetlands.
REQUIREMENTS
Public open space
be provided:
To create conveniently accessible areas for passive recreation in each
neighbourhood;
To create linear pedestrian and cycling links between neighbourhoods and
foreshores;
To preserve or provide habitat, landscape values and significant stands of
native vegetation; and
To supplement any existing vegetation and habitat corridors.
Public open space
have direct access to
a continuous road frontage on one side to provide for casual surveillance.
Public open space
be of a size and
location suitable to its purpose and developed in accordance with an approved
Landscape Master Plan to include public
facilities (including car parking,
playgrounds, public amenities, shelter and shade) to properly serve that
Land provided in public open space for the primary purpose of drainage
shall not be included in any calculation of public open space
allocation.
Existing trees within open space areas shall be retained.
All public open space should be located, designed and developed in
accordance with the description in Table
sensitive drainage functions may be integrated with the recreational use of the
open space.
Development plans for open space areas shall be prepared showing proposed
access, park furniture and facilities, pathways and landscaping
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Detention basins and associated drainage infrastructure should be
incorporated into public open space provided that sufficient land
allocated for recreational use.
Public open spaces should be connected by off road paths where
All public open space must be designed and constructed to enable practical
maintenance and planted with species suitable for the local
climate and soil
conditions.
Open space should contain extensive tree planting to create local habitat,
enhance neighbourhood identity and improve the visual appearance
of surrounding
development.
Planted open space corridors should be provided on the entire length of
Paynesville Road to Grandview Road, and the southern section
of Grandview Road
from its intersection with the King Street extension, within a minimum 15 metre
landscaped setback. of the inclusion
of some fire retarding species should be
encouraged.
Encumbered areas of reserves, required for purposes other than public
recreation, will not be included in the calculation of open
Space Types
Neighbourhood Park
Passive recreation
<400m of all lots
Seating, shelter, BBQ, playground
Linear Park
Local access, water management
Natural drainage lines
Cycle/walking paths
Foreshore Reserve
District access, environmental protection, water management
Land less than 2.8m AHD
Cycle/walking paths, revegetation areas, drainage basins, visitor
Roadside trail
District access
Grandview Road/Waterview Road
Cycle/walking path
Landscape Corridor
Visual landscape, habitat, water management
Paynesville Road
Drainage basins
Landscape/ Cultural Protection
Preservation of landscape or cultural values
As required
Cycle/walking paths
3.1.6 Drainage and Water Management
To provide for infiltration and detention of surface water and reduce the
“downstream” flow of floodwaters and nutrients
in accordance with
best practice water sensitive urban design.
To integrate the design of drainage facilities with the design of roads,
open space and public reserves.
To adhere to water sensitive urban design principles in accordance with
Council policy.
To manage drainage at a sub-catchment level and ensure that stormwater
detention and nutrient stripping requirements are met for each
sub-catchment
with an integrated stormwater design not limited to land ownership
boundaries.
To integrate drainage functions into open space areas and linear corridors,
while maintaining their function as recreation spaces.
REQUIREMENTS
All drainage infrastructure shall be designed in accordance with an
Infrastructure Plan to be
prepared in conjunction with a Development Plan
for the subject area
Drainage for all lots must be designed to minimise the volume and velocity
of storm water flow and transport of nutrients into the
Gippsland Lakes.
Stormwater flows and quality must be managed through constructed detention
basins and/or nutrient stripping measures to minimise flooding
and nutrient
Drainage corridors and detention basins must be integrated with the open
space network to provide areas for passive recreation and
pedestrian and cycle
Final design and boundaries of constructed waterways, waterway corridors
and detention basins must be to the satisfaction of the responsible
Development staging must provide for the delivery of the ultimate waterway
and drainage infrastructure, or demonstrate how any interim
solution adequately
manages flood protection and stormwater treatment.
Drainage easements shall be created and/or land transferred to Council
ownership where necessary to protect drainage functions, at
Section 173
Agreements and/or Notice of Restrictions shall include on-site
water sensitive urban design requirements including water storage
stormwater detention tanks and other on-site drainage retention and nutrient
stripping mechanisms.
The design of roads, road reserves and open space should optimise water use
efficiency and long term viability of vegetation through
water sensitive urban
Where practical, integrated water management systems should be used to
maximise habitat values for local flora and fauna.
3.1.7 Infrastructure and Subdivision
To ensure the provision of suitable infrastructure and utilities to
efficiently service development.
To ensure that local infrastructure is designed and constructed to assist
in creating local character and reinforcing “sense
To provide public infrastructure and utilities that are durable and
minimise maintenance costs while meeting user needs.
To ensure the timely delivery of infrastructure to service successive
stages of development.
To provide for the equitable distribution of infrastructure costs between
developers.
REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision of land within the structure plan area must provide and meet
the total cost of delivering the following infrastructure
, unless otherwise
contemplated for shared contributions pursuant to the Public Infrastructure
All roads and streets other than arterial roads;
Local bus stop infrastructure (where locations have been agreed
with Public Transport Victoria);
Landscaping of all future roads and local streets;
Intersection works and traffic management measures on all roads and streets
(except those included in the SICP);
Council approved fencing, landscaping and drainage along arterial roads
(except where included in the SICP);
Local shared pedestrian and bicycle paths along streets and roads, open
space corridors and parks
(except those included in the
Bicycle parking, street furniture, street and park lighting and open space
improvements to the satisfaction of the responsible authority);
Infrastructure as required by utility service providers, including
sewerage, electricity, gas, telecommunications and drainage
where included in the SICP).
All public open space (except where included in the
) must be developed in accordance with a Landscape Master Plan
prepared by the applicant and approved by Council, finished to a standard
acceptable to the Council prior to transfer, including:
- Provision of
landscaping, tree planting and drainage;
- Provision of
water supply;
- Provision of
vehicle exclusion devices, where required;
- Installation
of park furniture including barbecues, shelters, furniture, rubbish bins and
play areas to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
All utility services are to be provided at the developers’ cost and
to the satisfaction of the relevant servicing authorities.
Development staging must provide for the timely provision of connector
streets and the off-road pedestrian/cycle network.
Infrastructure
shall be prepared to be consistent with the
overall Development Plan indicating lot yields, staging and thresholds for
delivery of
local infrastructure.
Sewer pump stations, electricity substations, and other above ground
infrastructure should be located out of view lines and have appropriate
Development staging should not occur in a way that residents are isolated
from adjacent street networks, open spaces or the arterial
road network.
The design of all subdivision works, including roads, paths, drainage
facilities and public open space should be undertaken to contribute
to a distinctive local character and sense of place. Standardised infrastructure
design should be avoided, unless it is
demonstrated to be consistent with
achieving aesthetic outcomes and contributing to neighbourhood character.
Where infrastructure is not provided at the time of land release due to
staging constraints, suitable arrangements should be made
for the lodgement of
bonds or bank guarantees to ensure the eventual provision of the
infrastructure.
Landscaping within road reserves and public open space should be subject to
-year maintenance period during which the
developer is responsible for the maintenance and/or replacement of landscaping
long term viability.
3.2 STATUTORY IMPLEMENTATION
The Structure Plan shall be incorporated into the East Gippsland Shire
Planning Scheme via Planning Scheme Amendment, as follows:
the relevant clauses of the Planning Policy Framework to implement updated
policy direction, specifically those pertaining to
Paynesville.
land to General Residential Zone (except for the Emergency Services Precinct,
Tourism site, activity centre site and the foreshore
land below 2.8 metres
the activity centre site to Mixed Use Zone.
the Significant Landscape Overlay.
the Development Plan Overlay (except for the Emergency Services
the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan as a Background Document into the
Planning Scheme.
to further strategic work, rezone the Emergency Services Precinct, Tourism site
and foreshore land to a suitable
3.2.1 Amend the
Planning Policy Framework
Replace the ‘Paynesville Framework Plan’ in Clause
11.01-1L-02 with an up-to-date plan reflecting the Paynesville Town
Structure Plan, Paynesville Maritime Precinct Master Plan, Paynesville Foreshore
Management Plan and Paynesville Growth Area
Structure Plan.
a) Amend Clause 11.01-1L-02 under Paynesville Strategies
‘Expand the town westwards generally between Waratah Avenue and Grandview
Road.’ and replace with ‘Expansion
of the town westwards should
occur generally in accordance with the Paynesville Growth Area Structure
‘Discourage industry that is not reliant on access to water in the
Industrial 3 Zone on Slip Road.’ and replace
with ‘Business
activities not suitable for the town centre nor reliant on access to water will
be encouraged to locate in the
Paynesville Employment and Emergency Services
Precinct on Grandview Road’.
‘Promote higher densities in the redevelopment of existing areas’
and replace with ‘Promote higher densities
in proximity to areas of high
amenity in particular the town centre, open space and recreational
‘Encourage development of a variety of tourist accommodation options
within Paynesville, particularly in the town centre
or close to the
canals’ and replace with ‘Encourage development of a variety of
tourist accommodation options within
Paynesville, particularly in the town
centre or on key sites close to the canals and Lakes
foreshores.’
b) Implement updated Clause 11.01-1L-02 into the East Gippsland Planning
3.2.2 Rezone Land Affected by the
Structure Plan
a) Rezone all land affected by the Structure Plan, with exception of
land identified as ‘Employment and Emergency Services’,
‘Future tourist accommodation precinct subject to further
investigation’ to General Residential Zone, thereby applying
Clause 32.08
of the Planning Scheme.
b) Subject to further investigation, rezone the land shown on the
Preferred Urban Structure Plan as ‘Future tourist accommodation
subject to further investigation’ to Comprehensive Development Zone (or
similar) and include a Schedule outlining
the purpose and design of the
objectives applicable to the land.
c) Subject to further investigation, rezone land shown on the Preferred
Urban Structure Plan as ‘Future Employment and Emergency
Area’ to Special Use Zone (or similar) and include a Schedule outlining
the purpose and design objectives applicable
to the land,
envelopes and design criteria
Landscaping
d) Rezone the area shown on the Preferred Urban Structure Plan as
‘Foreshore Reserve’ (generally north of Bay Road) as
Conservation and Recreation Zone upon transfer of land to a public
3.2.3 Remove the Significant Landscape
a) Remove the SLO affecting land within the Structure Plan area except
the ‘Future tourism area’ and public land adjacent
to the Lake King
foreshore area.
3.2.4 Apply a DPO and Schedule
a) Apply Development Plan Overlay (DPO) to land affected by the
Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan.
b) The DPO Schedule Paynesville Growth Area should include the following
requirements for the preparation of the Development Plan:
Development Plan must be prepared as a whole for the land to which the schedule
otherwise directed by the responsible authority the Development Plan must
contain all necessary details to demonstrate conformity
with the Paynesville
Growth Area Structure
3.3 INFRASTRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT CONTRIBUTIONS
Land included within the Paynesville Growth Area Structure Plan, including
land zoned General Residential Zone for which any future
planning application is
sought, will be subject to the requirements of a
Infrastructure
Contributions
is intended to provide a fair and
transparent mechanism for attributing and recovering costs
and credits
for land transfer and infrastructure
affecting more than one land
holding, where this is
required to implement the structure plan.
sets the requirements for infrastructure
across the growth area
also deal with the limited circumstances
where the infrastructure requires
co-contribution by more than one landowner.
This includes:
requirements for landscape corridors and the foreshore reserve;
Contributions
towards initial vegetation of roadside corridors;
Truncations and
land transfers for future development of the Paynesville Road/Grandview Road
intersection;
Upgrading of the
northern section of Grandview Road, from the Ashley Street extension to
Paynesville Road;
Provision of
pedestrian/cycle connections through the growth area;
Community Infrastructure Levy of $1,346 per lot.
Capped cash
contributions for community infrastructure.
will be secured via Section173 Agreements specified within
the Development Plan Overlay for the growth area and it will be the
responsibility
of landowners within the precinct to prepare the
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Contributions relating to community infrastructure are covered by a
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) which is a capped levy of
dwelling, maximum. These funds contribute to facilities such as libraries, youth
services and sports facilities.
The Social Impact Assessment determined that there are some site specific
community infrastructure needs identified within the assessment
such as passive
open space and playgrounds, but the key issue with this development is the need
to provide linkages to existing local
schools, children’s services, social
and medical support, community meeting facilities, retail and sporting
For the purposes of allocating costs of land exchange to facilitate the
PGASP, the area of net developable land area (NDA) is determined
by deducting
the land requirements for major roads, servicing, drainage and open space from
the overall growth area.
The calculation of NDA will be finalised through the
preparation of the PIP.
The East Gippsland Planning Scheme indicates an aim of achieving 12
dwellings per hectare of NDA. Community expectations are for a
more spacious
residential environment with a variety of lot sizes and housing types. The need
for minimum densities to be achieved
is far less important in this particular
urban growth environment, and a target of 8-10 dwellings per hectare of NDA is
as more practical, desirable and consistent with community
expectations.
3.4 OTHER IMPLEMENTATION
In addition to statutory implementation through Planning Scheme Amendments,
the implementation of the PGASP will be facilitated through
a range of other
This section outlines those implementation mechanisms.
3.4.1 Creation of Landscape Corridors and Public
Agreements and arrangements will be required for the delivery of land for key
landscape corridors and the expanded foreshore reserve
at early stages of
development and for landscape implementation.
Early delivery of landscaped corridors along the major roads and on some
areas of the foreshore reserve will provide an important
element of the vision
for a good pedestrian/cycle network and the overall character of the area.
The Development Plan Overlay should include a requirement for legal
agreements be established for transfer of land and financial contributions
landscape corridors as early as possible in the development process upon issue
of the first subdivision permit for each landholding.
Land transfers and the
equalisation of costs will be calculated on net loss/gain for each landholding
against a combined total open
space and landscape corridor allocation.
A cost will be estimated for initial planting and apportioned between
landowners.
3.4.2 Precinct Infrastructure Plans
Design and delivery of local infrastructure within subdivision stages is to
be set out in Precinct Infrastructure Plans prepared in
consultation with
relevant Council staff and demonstrating general conformity with this Structure
Plan. These are to be prepared
at the Development Plan stage.
Precinct Infrastructure Plans are required to provide the design of road,
drainage, open space and utility services to support each
stage of subdivision
and integrate with surrounding development.
3.4.3 Community Services Planning and
Mechanisms can be adopted for Council to plan future maintenance, capital
works and facilities upgrades based on development timing.
As the urban area of Paynesville grows, Council will need to invest in future
maintenance of local roads, drainage, open spaces and
foreshore reserves and
provide increased services for a larger town.
Community Infrastructure Levy
capped cash
contribution
of $1,346 per lot
(indexed annually)
can be collected
for the increase in community services demand and it may be appropriate for
Council to plan and budget for future
public investment as certain lot
thresholds are reached, so that the community infrastructure improvements
identified in the Social
Impact Assessment can be delivered at the right
In this way, a reserve of funds can be established to contribute to upgrading
or expansion of existing community facilities at trigger
points for population
growth and increased demand.
3.4.4 Foreshore Improvements and
The Lake King foreshore and Point Fullarton wetlands provide a unique
opportunity for landscape scale environmental rehabilitation,
revegetation and
management on a site that is able to support ecological values, passive
recreation and eco-tourism opportunities.
There are substantial benefits to be
gained for the environment, the local community and visitors in undertaking a
major foreshore
wetland conservation and interpretation project on the expanded
public foreshore areas.
The entire public foreshore area including the Point Fullarton wetlands and
adjoining public areas requires a Foreshore Improvement
and Management Plan,
outlining measures for conservation, access and interpretation.
Such a plan needs to be developed in conjunction with responsible agencies
with the objective of conserving and showcasing the Gippsland
ecological values in this significant site and putting suitable future
management arrangements in place.
Such a project could be undertaken in conjunction with Department of Energy,
Environment and Climate Action, Parks Victoria, East
Gippsland Catchment
Management Authority, Greening Australia and Landcare and could potentially
attract State or Commonwealth funding.
3.4.5 Preparation of Development Plans
To facilitate the subdivision and development of land parcels, the
preparation of
Development Plan
is required
to implement this Structure Plan. This will require consultation with the
Council, service providers and, where appropriate,
the local community.
Development Plans are the mechanism for the detailed design of subdivision
layout, lot size and orientation, building envelopes, street
design, public open
space and drainage infrastructure, landscaping treatments and public
facilities.
The Development Plan
should be prepared in an open public process
where possible to provide an opportunity for the community to provide input and
that community expectations for implementation of the structure plan are
considered.
4. APPENDICES
4.1 Traffic Impact Assessment
4.2 Social Impact Assessment
4.3 High Level Hydrological
4.4 Background Papers
4.4.1 Issues and Responses
4.4.2 Consultation Report
Document 79
Document 82
Document 86
Document 88
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter