URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:38:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sacco (GRE) - App 12 2008 [2009] VRAT 4 (17 April 2009)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
ANTHONY SACCO (LICENSED
GREYHOUND RACING VICTORIA
HIS HONOUR JUDGE HICKS
DATE OF HEARING
DATE OF JUDGMENT
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Anthony Sacco v Greyhound Racing Victoria
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Catchwords:
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr Joe Ferweda
John R Sharkie
For the Defendant
Dr Brian Wiliams
HIS HONOUR:
1 This is an appeal by Anthony Sacco against the decision of Greyhound Racing
Victoria Stewards made on 23 December 2008 where the
appellant was found
guilty of breaching Greyhounds Australasia Rule 83(ii) and was disqualified
for a period of two years.
2 Greyhounds Australasia Rules 83(ii)
“The owner, trainer or
person in charge of a greyhound nominated to compete in an event ... shall
present the greyhound free
of any drug.” (GAR
3 It was agreed by all parties before the Tribunal that GAR 83(ii) is a rule of
absolute liability.
Background facts
4 Anthony Sacco was a licensed trainer who had presented his greyhound
‘Uno Toni’ in Race 9 at the Ballarat Racing Club
20 August 2008.
5 ‘Uno Toni’ won Race 9.
race swab, Sample No. V121143, was taken from ‘Uno Toni’ and
subsequently analysed.
7 On analysis, the presence of a prohibited
substance, namely Benzolecgonine, was found. Benzolecgonine is a derivative of
issue at trial
8 The principal issue before the Tribunal was whether ‘Uno Toni’ had
been contaminated, either inadvertently or deliberately,
with cocaine
immediately after the race when the dog was caught in the catching pen at the
Ballarat Greyhound Racing Club meeting
on 20 August 2008. In essence, the
appellant argued that it was a reasonable possibility that cocaine entered
‘Uno Toni’s’
blood or urinary system post race when the dog
was caught by a catcher.
9 It was agreed by all the parties before me that if
the Stewards had excluded all reasonable possibilities of post race
contamination,
then the offence has been proven as one of absolute liability.
That is, that the licensed trainer and the appellant in this case,
Mr Anthony Sacco, would be found guilty of breaching GAR 83(ii) in
that he presented his greyhound ‘Uno Toni’ in Race
Ballarat Greyhound Racing Club meeting on 20 August 2008.
10 It was not
in dispute that Benzolecgonine is a prohibited substance within the rules of
greyhound racing.
11 There was no challenge to the taking of a proper swab
and the proper analysis of such swab.
12 The onus is on the Stewards to prove on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Sacco breached Rule 83(ii). I regard a breach of
this rule as a
serious offence. The standard of proof to be applied is that standard of proof
referred to in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
and later confirmed by
the High Court in Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517.
Whilst the standard is
on the balance of probabilities, I must be reasonably satisfied that the
Stewards have proven the charge.
It is not a mere matter of a mechanical
comparison between competing views. I am bound and must consider the
seriousness of the
charge and the gravity of the consequences which may follow a
particular finding.
13 Accordingly, if the Stewards prove to the relevant
standard that a horse is presented for a race not free of prohibited substances,
then the licensed trainer of such horse is guilty of an offence.
High Court has stated, however, in Rejfek v McElroy:
difference between the criminal standard of proof and the civil standard of
proof is no mere matter of words: it is a
matter of critical substance. No
matter how grave the fact which is to be found in a civil case, the mind has
only to be reasonably
satisfied and has not with respect to any matter in issue
in such a proceeding to attain that degree of certainty which is indispensable
to the support of a conviction upon a criminal
15 The appellant has pleaded not guilty to the charge.
16 An appeal to this
Tribunal is by way of re-hearing.
17 Dr John Vine gave evidence that he was the Laboratory Director of Racing
Analytical Services Limited of 400 Epsom Road, Flemington.
He holds the degrees
of Bachelor of Science with Honours and Master of Science and Doctor of
Philosophy in Chemistry.
18 Dr Vine gave evidence that Sample V121143,
relating to the dog ‘Uno Toni’, was analysed by his laboratory and
contained Benzolecgonine. Dr Vine gave evidence that
Benzolecgonine is a substance which is characteristic of the use of cocaine.
is a direct metabolite of cocaine.
19 Dr Vine gave evidence that the
presence of Benzolecgonine is a direct indicator of ingestion of cocaine.
Dr Vine went on to state
that there has been very little work done in the
greyhound industry generally with respect to the known metabolism rates of
within the system of a greyhound. Dr Vine gave evidence of a crude
ad hoc study conducted some years ago by his laboratory. Small
cocaine were rubbed inside the gums and mouth of a greyhound and the
Benzolecgonine metabolite appeared quite quickly
in the urine of the greyhound
after the administration of cocaine.
20 Dr Vine gave evidence that the
cocaine in question was relatively small. Dr Vine, however, gave evidence
that the tests that he
conducted were qualitative and not quantitative.
21 Dr Vine stated his opinion that the amount of cocaine was relatively
small was based on his experience as an analysist only.
22 However,
Dr Vine stated that it was difficult to determine precisely as to the
amount of cocaine administered or ingested into
the system of ‘Uno
Toni’. It could have been quite a significant or large amount some days
earlier which had mainly
metabolised out by the time the test was done or it may
have been a relatively small amount administered only shortly pre or post
Dr Vine gave evidence that cocaine was a relatively fast-acting substance
and that it was a stimulant.
23 Dr Vine gave evidence that it is not
possible to draw any scientific conclusions to indicate how the drug would have
been administered.
24 Dr Vine stated that of the 40,000 to 50,000
laboratory samples tested with respect to the greyhound or racing industry, it
rare to detect cocaine or its derivative or metabolite,
Benzolecgonine.
25 Dr Vine was of the opinion that, if there was a
catcher who was a cocaine user and had cocaine on their hands which came in
with a dog’s mouth or muzzle, it would be possible that a sample
of urine collected some 30 or 45 minutes later would show
up the presence of
Benzolecgonine. However, Dr Vine was of the opinion that he would have
expected, on the basis of the circumstances,
to find some cocaine in the sample,
which they did not. They only found the metabolite. Dr Vine did, however,
indicate that individual
dogs had different abilities to metabolise cocaine, so
the absence of cocaine may not be much of an indicator. Dr Vine was of the
opinion that it is possible, if a handler had cocaine on their hands which came
into contact with a dog’s mouth or muzzle,
that it could be ingested into
the system of the dog.
26 Dr Alistair Smith gave evidence that he is a
fully qualified veterinary surgeon and that he is the principal veterinarian at
Sandown Veterinary Clinic. Dr Smith stated that cocaine is a stimulant
but acts on the central nervous system and alters the state
of the brain, and
induces feelings of euphoria, excitement and wellbeing. That in relation to
racing greyhounds, it has been used
to enhance performance.
27 Dr Smith
gave evidence that cocaine has no legal or proper medicinal use in the treatment
of greyhounds. Dr Smith was of the opinion
that he could not tell with
certainty whether cocaine, if it had been in ‘Uno Toni’s’
system in Race 9 on 20 August
2008, would have affected its
performance or not.
catching process
28 Evidence was given by Dianne Marie Pyers that she was the Chief Steward in
charge of the Ballarat Greyhound Racing Club meeting
on 20 August 2008.
Ms Pyers gave evidence that after the running of the race in question,
which was over a distance of some 450
metres, the dogs were caught. There were
eight dogs in Race 9.
29 A system operates where a lure is released and
the greyhounds chase the lure past the finishing post. Once all the dogs have
the finishing post, a gate is drawn across the track behind the dogs and
there is already in place immediately after the race a further
gate across the
track and short of the starting area. In other words, the dogs are fenced or
gated in in a particular segment of
the track. There is a small shed adjacent
to the track and adjacent to the catching pen area. In that shed, catchers
gather. The
shed itself has a small entrance by means of a gate into the
catching area of the track. Catchers wear coloured vests, but with
designated number upon them.
30 The usual practice is for the trainer, or an
associate of the trainer, to make arrangements for a person to catch the
immediately after a race. The going rate is in the order of about $10
for a catch. If it so happens that the catcher’s dog
wins the race, then
sometimes a gratuity or tip is also given to the catcher. The rules of
greyhound racing designate that the handler
of the dog is the person responsible
for organising the catching of the dog.
31 After the catcher catches the dog,
the dog is then normally handed to the handler or trainer of the dog.
swab is called for, the handler, either at the catching pen area or immediately
outside the catching pen area, meets the Steward,
who then accompanies the dog
and the handler or trainer to the swabbing area.
sole issue before the Tribunal
33 The sole issue before the Tribunal was whether the Stewards had excluded all
possibility of contamination occurring during the
catching process. As stated,
no issue was raised as to the obtaining of the swab or subsequent analysis, nor
was there any suggestion
put forward of any contamination occurring at any other
stage of the evening other than in the catching pen area.
The evidence relating to the catching pen
34 Ms Pyers, the Chief Steward, gave evidence that she had observed over a
number of years catchers catching greyhounds in the catching
pen area after
races. She agreed that some of the greyhounds would sometimes be fired up and
some were still looking for the lure.
On occasions, they would group together
and on occasions there would be fighting between the dogs. The dogs wear
muzzles at the
time of the race, but some dogs were excitable after a race.
35 The Chief Steward was of the view that it was uncommon for catchers to
have to push dogs out of the way to get to their dog. She
stated, from her
observations, that after a race the dogs would be panting, and sometimes their
tongues would be hanging out and
would come in contact with their
36 Ms Pyers stated, from her observations, that the hands of a
catcher did not necessarily have to come into contact with a dog’s
37 Renee New gave evidence that her occupation was home duties and
that she lived in the Ballarat region. She stated that she was
catcher and that she had attended the Ballarat Greyhound Racing Club meeting on
20 August 2008. Ms New gave evidence
that she had many years
experience as a catcher in the greyhound industry. She described some
greyhounds, after a race had been
finished, as being hypo and some were
aggressive, that fighting can occur on regular occasions and that a
catcher’s hands sometimes
came into contact with other dogs when they were
trying to catch their dog. She stated that sometimes catchers have to push the
back legs of other dogs out of the way so that they can get their dog. She said
that, on occasions, catchers may have to grab another
dog by the neck to pull it
away from their dog if it was biting or fighting.
38 She stated that the
catcher’s hands are likely to come into contact with the dog, and many
parts of the dog, when actually
trying to catch the dog. She stated that
sometimes the catcher’s hands might come in contact with the mouth or
muzzle of the
dog that is being caught. She stated that her hands would
sometimes be gritty and slimy, especially if a dog had dribbled on her
something like that.
39 She gave evidence, however, that she made no
observations concerning the capture of ‘Uno Toni’, the winner of
9 on the night in question.
40 It is clear that her evidence was of
what generally can occur in a catching pen area.
41 The statement of Dylan
Riske, who was also a catcher on the night, was admitted into evidence by
consent. He stated that he did
not notice anything particularly strange in the
catching of the winning dog after the race.
42 Colin Warner gave evidence
that he is a licensed hobby trainer of greyhounds and that he had known Mr and
Mrs Sacco for some time;
that on the night in question at the Ballarat
Greyhound Racing Club meeting on 20 August 2008, Mr Sacco had
approached him and asked
him to handle his dog as Mr Sacco had a bad back.
Mr Warner gave evidence that he did not notice anything unusual in the
temperament
of ‘Uno Toni’ that night. Mr Warner gave evidence
that he had experience catching dogs and stated that the catching
hectic, with dogs running backwards and forwards, and that you normally wait
till they slow down until you go and sort
them out, catch them and put their
lead on. He said dogs were often exhausted after a race and some were difficult
to catch. Mr
Warner gave evidence that their hands can come into contact
with the dog they are trying to catch, on the head, the neck or underneath,
that they generally grab them underneath to hold them while putting the lead on.
He said it is possible that their hands can
sometimes come into contact with the
muzzle. He stated, after having caught the dog, they do sometimes notice saliva
on their hands
from the dog when it has been dribbling after a run and that
often they would notice that.
43 Mr Warner gave evidence that the
catcher handed him the dog and that he accompanied the Steward to the swabbing
area. Mr Warner
stated that at no stage had he ever used cocaine, that he
did not administer any cocaine to the greyhound in question and he had
seen cocaine administered to a greyhound.
44 Mr Warner gave evidence
that he was not the catcher on the night.
catcher, Melissa Anderson
45 Melissa Anderson gave evidence that she is twenty years of age, that she is a
Year 12 student studying VCE English and legal studies
and that she lives
in the Ballarat region. She gave evidence that she attended the Ballarat
Greyhound Racing Club meeting on 20
August 2008 and that she attended most
Wednesday night Ballarat meetings. She stated that she had been a catcher for a
years and had started in her early teenage years. She stated that she
would normally catch approximately 12 a night; that is, one
for each race
conducted. She specifically stated that she had never had any contact with
cocaine in the past, that she had never
used cocaine and she had never handled
cocaine. She stated that her memory in respect to the circumstances surrounding
the meeting
and the greyhound ‘Uno Toni’ in Race 9 was a bit
46 She stated that she could remember going out and catching the
dog and she also remembered bringing it to Colin Warner. She stated
would tend to catch a dog the same way every time. She stated that she would
use the same lead all the time. She stated
she never removed the muzzle and she
specifically stated she did not remove the muzzle on the night in question. She
stated that
she can actually recall catching ‘Uno Toni’ and she
stated she was not aware at the time she was catching the dog that
the dog was
to be swabbed. She stated she has no antipathy or empathy with the Saccos at
47 Under cross-examination, Ms Anderson stated she has never used
cocaine. She did not know what cocaine looked like. She did not
know if it was
a powder or liquid. She agreed that her memory of events that evening was very
blurred, that her memory of being
approached to catch the dog was very
48 Ms Anderson stated that, after a race, the dogs were
excited, that they can still be looking for the lure, they can be running
frantically over the catching pen area, that the dogs were often in groups and
there can often be fighting between the dogs. She
stated it can be often
difficult to catch the dog in the pen and they might have to push other dogs out
of the way in order to catch
49 She stated that, whilst most
catchers use a loop or a lead over the head of a dog, she in fact uses a collar.
She stated the dogs
are often panting after a race and their tongues can be
hanging out through the grate of the muzzles they are wearing.
50 However,
she gave quite specific evidence and refuted the suggestion her hands often came
into contact with the dogs’ tongues.
She said, no, they do not and she
stated that she would not find saliva on her hands after catching a dog. She
stated that her
hands would not inadvertently come into contact with the tongue
of a dog. In particular, Ms Anderson stated that her hands did not
come into contact with the tongues of the dogs and she specifically stated her
hands did not come into contact with the dogs,
even when their tongues were
hanging out of their muzzles. She stated that she would not normally get saliva
on her hands.
51 Ms Anderson gave evidence that her method of using a
collar, as distinct from a lead, was clearly putting the collar around the
of the dog and that she was not going up over the nose at all and that that was
always her method of catching a dog.
52 In my opinion, whilst not really relevant to the proceedings before me, a
dispute arose on the night in question as to who should
Toni’. The organisation for obtaining catchers was clear, on the
evidence, to be a very ad hoc system. Trainers
or handlers would approach
potential catchers and on an ad hoc basis agree to pay them in the order of $10
to catch their dog at
certain stages throughout a race meeting. There is no
official sheet as to who was to catch what dog and the whole system was carried
out pretty much by trainers and handlers organising persons to catch their
respective dogs.
53 Renee New gave evidence that Mrs Sacco, the wife of
the appellant, approached her early in the evening to catch one of the
dogs in the first race. However, she had an engagement to catch
another dog so could not do it and turned to Dylan Riske, who indicated
Mrs Sacco that he could catch her dog. She said that she was present when
Mrs Sacco organised with Dylan Riske to catch the Saccos’
first race and also ‘Uno Toni’ in Race 9. She said she
observed Mrs Sacco hand over the standard $10 fee.
54 Ms New gave
evidence that what normally occurs is the attendant in the catching pen area
would ask the group of catchers gathered
in the shed in order, “Who is
catching greyhound No. 1, who is catching greyhound No. 2”, et cetera, and
Toni’s’ name was announced by the attendant, both
Melissa Anderson and Dylan Riske put up their hands prior to the race.
said that, when this occurred, Melissa Anderson turned to Dylan Riske and
stated, “I’ll be catching the dog anyway”.
stage, the race had not been run. In the end, Melissa Anderson caught
‘Uno Toni’. She did not get paid for
catching the dog, but in fact
Dylan Riske got paid by Mrs Sacco for catching the dog. During her
evidence, Ms Anderson conceded
there was a misunderstanding about who
should catch ‘Uno Toni’ and that she had caught dogs for the Saccos
previously,
but she had not done so for some two years. Ms Anderson stated
that she had a process where, on a sheet of paper, she would simply
“Race. 6, Dog 3”, et cetera, and that she could have made
a mistake on her notepad as to which dog she was
meant to catch in Race 9.
She stated that it was quite possible that she had made a mistake as to who
should catch ‘Uno Toni’
57 In my opinion, on the
evidence, it is clear that a misunderstanding had occurred by Melissa Anderson
as to who should catch ‘Uno
Toni’. As I stated, the system is a
very ad hoc one where catchers often just jot down on a piece of paper the race
and number of the dog that they are meant to catch. Ms Anderson
stated that when both she and Mr Riske put up their hands, she simply
stated, “Look, I’ll catch the dog”. She never asked for any
money or payment from the Saccos for catching the
58 In my opinion,
whilst I accept that Ms Anderson was not the person authorised to catch the
dog, no real relevance turns on this
59 The issue raised by the
appellant is whether contamination concerning cocaine occurred in the catching
60 Ms Pyers, the Senior Steward at the meeting on the night in question,
after the swab had been returned and shown to be positive,
gave evidence on
Tuesday 16 September 2008 that she had attended with another Steward from
Greyhound Racing Victoria at the property
of Mr Sacco. In short, she gave
evidence that there was little or no security at the Saccos’ premises;
that the Saccos were
out at the relevant time and anyone could have gained
access to the unlocked area of the Saccos’ kennels. She stated there
no security at the Saccos’ premises.
61 Mr Sacco, the appellant,
gave evidence that he was a licensed trainer and had been so for a number of
years; that he did not use
cocaine and did not administer cocaine to ‘Uno
62 He stated that he played no part in organising a catcher for
either of his two dogs. He stated that he had not handled cocaine
and that he
did not have cocaine on his property.
Submissions
63 The appellant submitted that the Stewards had not excluded all reasonable
plausible possibilities that contamination occurred
in the catching pen area
when contact occurred between a catcher and ‘Uno Toni’. In
particular, it was submitted it
was a reasonable hypothesis that the
catcher’s hands came into contact with the dog she was trying to catch or
that another
handler, in trying to get at his or her dog, had inadvertently
placed their hand in contact with ‘Uno Toni’s’ mouth
64 It was submitted that the evidence of Dr Vine and
Dr Smith was inconclusive of itself as to when the dog may have ingested
namely, either before or after the race. It was submitted, in all the
circumstances, that the evidence that Mr Sacco stated he did
not administer
cocaine to the dog, that Colin Warner, the handler, stated that he observed
nothing untoward about the dog’s
behaviour on the night in question and
that no cocaine was found at Mr Sacco’s premises upon inspection,
that there was a reasonable
possibility that contamination occurring during the
catching pen procedure when a catcher’s hands came into contact with
Toni’. Either Melissa Anderson, or some other catcher as they
were trying to get to their dog, had inadvertently pushed ‘Uno
out of the way and, in particular, had put their hands on the head or mouth
region of ‘Uno Toni’, and that
the evidence was that the catchers
would often have saliva on their hands after catching their dog. Also, that the
scientific data
does not indicate how much cocaine was administered, only that a
low amount was found and the data does not indicate when such ingestion
65 Dr Williams, on behalf of the Stewards, stated the evidence
is quite clear-cut as to what happened in the catching pen on the night
question; that Melissa Anderson caught the dog in question. That
Ms Anderson gave quite specific and clear evidence that she
cocaine user, has never been a cocaine user, does not come into contact with
cocaine and is a Year 12 student who does not
even know what form cocaine
66 Dr Williams submitted further that the only other person who
handled the dog post race on the evidence was Mr Warner, the authorised
handler of Mr Sacco, and he also stated that he does not use cocaine, has
not come into contact with cocaine and did not administer
cocaine to ‘Uno
67 In short, Mr Williams submitted that the only known
two persons who came into contact with ‘Uno Toni’ on the night
question had no contact whatsoever themselves with cocaine and that they could
not possibly have caused, by their handling or
catching, any
contamination.
68 Dr Williams further submitted that there was the
evidence of Melissa Anderson, who stated that it was her practice to put a
on the dog she was catching and that her hands would not pass over the
nose, face or mouth of the dog to do so.
69 In my opinion, I am satisfied to the relevant standard that the Stewards
excluded all reasonable possibilities of contamination
with cocaine occurring
70 The only two persons known to have handled ‘Uno
Toni’ on the night in question post race were Melissa Anderson, who
quite specific evidence that she had never come into contact with cocaine, did
not use cocaine and that, in any event, her hands
did not, as a general practice
in the way that she caught, ever come into contact with the dog’s mouth.
That upon catching
the dog she gave it to Colin Warner, the authorised
handler of the dog and Mr Warner gave evidence that he had no contact with
did not administer cocaine to the dog and that he then accompanied the
Steward to the swabbing area.
71 In my opinion, it is only a remote, if not
fanciful, possibility that some other handler in the catching pen area on the
in question had not only come into contact with ‘Uno Toni’ to
get at their dog but, in addition, somehow managed to have
their hands contact
the mouth or muzzle area of ‘Uno Toni’ with sufficient contact for
the cocaine to get into the system
of ‘Uno Toni’.
72 In all the
circumstances, I am satisfied to the relevant standard that ‘Uno
Toni’ was not presented in Race 9 of the
Ballarat Greyhound Racing
Club meeting on 20 August 2008 free of a prohibited drug. I find the
charge proven. I should state that,
whilst this decision is mine and mine
alone, such decision is unanimous with that of my advisers.
I have now heard a plea on behalf of the appellant in this
matter. In this case, I have found that I should not be satisfied to
relevant standard the drug in question was deliberately administered by Mr
Sacco. However, it is the responsibility of the trainer
to present his dog drug
free of a prohibited substance at any race meeting. It would be fair to say
Mr Sacco's security at his kennels was not good.
I state that I have taken the following matters
into account in
mitigation of his appropriate penalty. One, Mr Sacco is 68 years of age. In my
view, this is the most relevant factor
in terms of his remaining life, and his
livelihood in terms of what he would want to do as a hobby trainer, and also his
of life. Secondly, he has had 35 years in the industry, and he has
one prior conviction.
I accept that greyhound racing is a huge part of
his life, and that in
fact he has been a committee member of a particular greyhound institution, and
also his wife performs voluntary
work. I accept that he is an aged pensioner.
I also accept that he has suffered by being shunned by certain persons, and also
undergone legal costs.
However, against these matters, this is a serious offence. The integrity
of racing is an issue. A dog must be presented drug free.
The whole idea of
integrity of racing, whether it be greyhound or thoroughbred or harness
racing, is to produce a level playing field. Drugs do not
produce a level
playing field. General deterrence is a very important aspect of any sentencing
position as far as the detection
of drugs is concerned.
Further, in my opinion, specific deterrence has some relevant to this
matter. Even though the prior conviction is some 20 years
old, it does involve
a drug offence. Further, in my opinion it is a serious matter when one
considers the drug in question, cocaine.
On any view of the accepted evidence
before us, it is a stimulant and is a performance enhancing drug.
Cocaine is rarely used in the industry, according to the some minor number
of tests performed by the
Racing Analytical Laboratories. In my opinion, it
is proper, in terms of general deterrence, that this should be in the interests
of industry generally, that cocaine be kept of any type of greyhound racing.
I pass by way of note only, as I am not sure of
any legal significance
of the guidelines to this Tribunal. They are guidelines to the penalties
appropriate to be imposed by stewards.
However, I do note the purposes in terms
of a general way, that a two year policy, a two year disqualification policy, is
and has been put into place in the
greyhound racing industry.
In my opinion, in all the circumstances it is appropriate that there be
some reduction in the penalty in this case. In all the
circumstances, Mr Sacco
is found guilty, and is disqualified for a period of
I am proposing to offer a such disqualification from 1 May this year and I
will order a refund of the deposit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter