URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-152 [2007] VMHRB 7 (26 June 2007)
In the Review of P
An involuntary patient at Austin
[2007] VMHRB 7
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Ms D Saunders
Dr H Chopra
Section 12 –
Mental Health Act 1986
– criteria for involuntary treatment – whether patient meets
the criteria in
P was a 24 year old woman with an extensive history of involvement with both
the mental health and criminal justice systems. At age
11 she was referred to
the Centre for Adolescent Health, where she was diagnosed with ADHD and
prescribed Ritalin. It was reported
that after two years her parents ceased the
medication because in their view it was not working. In 1997, P was referred to
health services at which time she stated that she had thoughts of hurting
and killing people. P has been admitted to supported accommodation
services in
the past, along with in-patient stays at mental health care facilities, and also
periods of detention in the Dame Phyllis
Frost Centre.
There was a lack of clarity between the parties who appeared before the Board
as to the purpose of the hearing. As a consequence,
there was considerable
argument in relation to
of the Act. The legal representatives for P argued
that the hearing should proceed as a determination of the
criteria. It
was their preliminary submission that P did fit the criteria and so the Board
should maintain the involuntary treatment
order. The Chief Psychiatrist was of
the same view. In contrast, Associate Professor AB and Dr AG argued that P did
not fit the
criteria, however they maintained that it was their intention that
she should receive on-going treatment and care. After hearing
preliminary
submissions, the Board determined to proceed with a hearing under
section 12AC
of the Act. However, before continuing with the issues pertinent to such a
hearing, the Board chose to expound on the purpose of
section 12A
At the hearing the Board considered, in particular, the words contained in
subsection 12A(2)(c)
“... the person, if not continued to be detained and
treated, would cause serious physical harm to himself or herself”
hearing, the Board regarded these words as reflecting the specific intention of
Parliament.
The Board also considered the limited nature of the
circumstances where P had acted to harm herself. Moreover, as the Chief
Psychiatrist
stated, the process for an application for continued detention for
treatment and care is one that should be made to his office. On
the receipt of
such an application, the Act requires that a committee of the Chief Psychiatrist
and two other psychiatrists must
be formed to consider the application and if
approved grant the detention for a period of up to three months. He also stated
no such application had been made in relation to P.
(1) The Board formed the view that P appeared to be mentally ill, exhibiting
an array of symptoms regardless of the diagnostic nosology.
The symptoms are
clearly indicative of a mental illness. In forming this view, the Board also
accepted the evidence of Associate
Professor AT as well as that of Associate
Professor AB that significant improvements had been achieved as a result of the
and care provided to P.
(2) The Board accepted Associate Professor AT’s view that P satisfied
this criterion, which was based on several opinions of
different psychiatrists
and his own regular contacts with P over the last few years.
(3) The Board took into account two points in determining its view. The first
was that the Act requires that the person appears to
be mentally ill,
regardless of a diagnosis specifically applicable to a person. The Board found
that she clearly met that criterion.
The second point was that the
Board’s view was that personality disorder is a mental illness, and noted
that only anti-social
personality disorder is excluded in the legislation from
meeting the criterion of mental illness. P was characterised by Associate
Professors AT and AB as meeting the criteria for a number of diagnoses. The
Board accepted that although anti-social personality
disorder might be one of
those diagnostic entities, that there were others, including borderline
personality, that would also, or
even more appropriately, attributed to P. On
the basis of these considerations, the Board found that P met the
(4) The Board was satisfied that P was receiving and could continue to
receive treatment by being subject to an involuntary treatment
(5) The Board was satisfied that because of P’s mental illness
involuntary treatment was necessary for her health and safety
and for the
protection of the public.
(6) The Board accepted the uncontested evidence that P was unable to consent
to the necessary treatment and care and that she was
at best changeable in her
views about accepting treatment and remaining in a treatment setting.
(7) The Board accepted the evidence of all parties that P requires the
containment and rehabilitation of the secure extended care
unit. In the
Board’s view it is via this treatment regime that P has the best
opportunity of re-integration to the community.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued
treatment of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was represented by Ms I Bolger of Counsel, briefed by Victoria Legal
Date of Decision: 26 June 2008
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Austin Health - Mental Health Service
REFERENCE NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
26 June 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to an involuntary treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms D Saunders
Community Member: Dr D List
Psychiatrist Member: Dr H Chopra
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 26 June 2007:
Patient: P did not attend
Doctors: Associate Professor AB
Chief Psychiatrist, Associate Professor AT
Legal representatives: Ms Irene Bolger of Counsel
Ms Toni Higgins of Victoria Legal Aid
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary treatment order was
The Board therefore confirmed the involuntary treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
26 June 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to an
involuntary treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
1. Clinical file of P.
on Involuntary Status dated 21 June 2007, prepared by Dr CD and presented to the
Plan of P dated 6 May 2007, prepared by Associate Professor AB and presented to
evidence at the hearing.
if, having regard to the criteria specified in
, the Board
is not satisfied that the continued involuntary treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order is necessary, the
Board must order that the person be discharged from the involuntary treatment
order. Therefore,
the Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by P being subject to an involuntary treatment
of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P necessary for her health or
safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in her physical or mental condition
or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public; and
P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P is a 24-year-old woman with an extensive history
of involvement with the mental heath and criminal justice systems. The Board
a lengthy discharge summary (“the discharge report”)
prepared by Thomas Embling Hospital. The date of discharge to the
Austin was 2
April 2007. At 11 years old she was referred to the Centre for Adolescent
Health where she was diagnosed with ADHD
and prescribed Ritalin. It is reported
that after two years her parents ceased the medication because in their view it
was not working.
In 1997 P was referred to mental health services at which time
that she stated she had thoughts of hurting and killing people.
In October 1998
she hit her younger sister’s friend on the head with a baseball bat in
what was considered to be a premeditated
attack in response to an earlier
perceived insult.
Soon after, P was first admitted to supported accommodation and subsequently
to in-patient care in various mental health services,
and also periods of
detention in the women’s prison, Dame Phyllis Frost Centre.
Forensic history
In late 1998, P was an inpatient in mental health facilities where there were
multiple assaults on family and staff. In mid 1999
she was transferred to a
community care unit. When she arrived she assaulted a female staff member
within an hour and went on to
seriously assault a resident the following
weekend. She was then transferred to an adult acute psychiatry unit where she
months with ongoing assaults on staff.
Notably there is a period of stability between September 2000 and December
2002. The factors leading to the stability were identified
accommodation, the development of relationships with trusted case managers, the
establishment of meaningful peer relationships
and treatment with Clozapine.
However, during the last 6 months of that period of stability there was an
increase in behavioural
problems including abuse and assault of staff, other
residents and minor incidents where P self harmed.
The discharge report also documents 10 separate incidents in January 2003
where P continued or attempted to self-harm but in minor
ways. The remaining
incidents concern the assault of staff, the assault of her mother and the
assault of her grandmother. On one
of these occasions her behaviours led to her
being charged with attempted robbery, attempted theft and unlawful assault.
was released on bail, the violence continued and later that month she
was sentenced to 90 days imprisonment. She was transferred
to the youth
training centre where she stabbed a female worker twice in the back with a knife
causing serious injury. It is reported
that after the event she said she wanted
to know what it would be like to kill someone. P was charged with attempted
murder, intentionally
causing serious injury and various assaults. She pleaded
guilty to these offences and began her second period of imprisonment.
According to the discharge report during that term of imprisonment she was
transferred to the Thomas Embling Hospital for the first
time for an assessment.
The incidents of violence continued and included a brutal assault on a female
staff member where it is reported
that P banged the nurse’s head against
the concrete floor and walls of the smoking area causing significant and long
injury to the nurse.
At the conclusion of that period of imprisonment, P spent 4 months living
with community support before the frequency of violence
and unstable behaviour
again increased. In February 2006 she was again sentenced to prison for
numerous charges of assault, damaging
property, entering a private place,
recklessly causing serious injury and making threats to kill.
During her custodial history between March 2003 and June 2006 there were 129
prison incidents. These consisted of episodes of self-harm,
using pieces of
broken plastic or cigarettes, threats to kill staff members including nursing
staff and correctional officers and
verbal and physical abuse of staff. At the
conclusion of her sentence she was transferred to be managed at the Thomas
Embling Hospital
in order to assist with independent living and her
rehabilitation into the community.
History of mental state
P has been diagnosed with a number of severe psychiatric conditions and a
background of chronic tic disorders, obsessive-compulsive
features and
non-verbal learning difficulties. It is reported that she exhibits a range of
features consistent with borderline personality
disorder, such as an enduring
difficulty with her sense of self, impulsivity and affective dysregulation. She
is assessed as showing
an inability to tolerate criticism, anxiety or
frustration. These often result in self-harm or displays of aggression.
In terms of her mental state at the time of discharge from Thomas Embling
Hospital, the discharge report noted that she exhibits a
number of features
consistent with borderline personality disorder, mainly frantic efforts to avoid
abandonment that have included
self harm and threats to others, identity
disturbance, impulsivity, unstable and intense relationships, recurrent suicidal
and self harm, affective instability, inappropriate intense anger and
transient stress related psychotic features. In considering
personality disorder, P is said to display a reckless disregard to the safety of
herself and others, and an indifference
to having hurt, mistreated or stolen
from people. It is also reported that she has a very low frustration tolerance,
is quick to
resort to aggression, present from childhood, and does not appear to
experience guilt as she prone to blame others. However, it
is reported that P
appears deeply attached to her family, in particular her mother and does not
have other features and qualities
which are consistent with antisocial
personality disorder.
In the Board’s view it is worthwhile considering the number of
medications that P was receiving on discharge from Thomas Embling.
discharge report listed:
Olanzapine 5mg mane, 15mg 1700
Carbamazepine 500mg bd
Valproate 1g
Venlafaxine XR 150mg mane
Metformin 500mg bd
Chlorpromazine 50-100mg
prn, max 300mg/d
Paracetamol 1g qid prn
Salbutamol ii inh
Olanzapine 5-10mg prn, max 15mg/d
It is further noted that while at Thomas Embling she was primarily managed in
seclusion and during the ten months she gained 30kg
Purpose of the hearing
In the hearing of P’s involuntary status on 24 November 2006, that
division of the Board ordered an early review to take place
on or about 16 March
2007. On 16 March 2007, P’s legal representative requested an adjournment
of the hearing for a further
6 weeks, which was granted. The Board on 15 May
2007 again adjourned the hearing of the early review at the request of the
and with the consent of P’s legal representative to enable the
doctor to examine P and prepare a report. The hearing was then
convened as both
a review of continued involuntary status and an annual review, this being a
hearing of a decision made under
section 12AC
There was a lack of clarity between all parties who appeared before the Board
as to the purpose of the hearing. As a consequence
there was some considerable
argument about
section 12A
. The legal representatives for P argued
that the hearing should proceed as a determination of the
section 8(1)
It was their preliminary submission that P did fit the criteria and so the Board
should maintain the involuntary treatment
order. The Chief Psychiatrist was of
the same view. In contrast, Associate Professor AB and Dr AG argued that P did
not fit the
criteria, however they maintained that it was their intention that
she should receive on-going treatment and care.
After hearing preliminary submissions the Board determined to proceed with a
hearing under
section 12AC
. However, before continuing with the
issues pertinent to such a hearing, the Board chose to expound on the purpose of
section 12A
Section 12A
Section 12A
provides for an application to continue detention and treatment
of an involuntary patient in the following circumstances:
(1) This section applies to a person who is detained in an approved mental
health service under an involuntary treatment order that
has been confirmed
section 12AC.
2) If the authorised psychiatrist for the approved mental health service in
which a person to whom this section applies is detained
a) the person no longer satisfies the criteria in
section 8(1)
(b) the person appears to have a mental disorder; and
(c) having regard to the person’s recent behaviour, the person, if not
continued to be detained and treated, would cause serious
physical harm to
himself or herself; and
(d) treatment for the mental disorder can be obtained in the approved mental
health service—
the authorised psychiatrist, despite discharging the person from the order
section 37(1)
, may apply in writing to the chief psychiatrist for approval
of the continued detention and treatment of the person for a period
exceeding 3 months.
(3) Before making an application under this section the authorised
psychiatrist—
(a) must consider the relevant characteristics of the person’s
behaviour, including its nature, duration and frequency and its
impact on the
person; and
(b) may consult any person, including—
(i) any member of the family of the person or his or her primary carer or
(ii) any registered medical practitioner or other person who is or has been
involved in the provision of treatment to the person.
(4) On the making of an application under this section the authorised
psychiatrist may authorise the continued detention and treatment
of the person
until the application is determined.
(5) The chief psychiatrist must advise the Secretary as soon as
practicable
At the hearing the Board considered, in particular, the words contained in
subsection 12A(2)(c)
... ‘the person, if not continued to be detained and
treated, would cause serious physical harm to himself or herself’.
hearing, the Board regarded these words as reflecting the specific intention of
Parliament.
It is noted that the second reading speech for the introduction of the amending
bill states:
A set of principles of
treatment and care will be introduced into the
to guide the provision of
services to all people with a mental disorder. ... The government has made a
commitment to provide services
to people with a severe personality disorder in
the framework for service delivery. Most services to this group of people are
in the community or on a voluntary basis. However, there is a small
group of people who sometimes require involuntary treatment.
The government has recognised that the
Mental Health Act
should be amended to
take the needs of this group into account. A number of comments by the coroner
have also highlighted the need
for legislative change. It is the intention of
the government that the amendments will apply to a very small group of people
a severe mental disorder who aggressively
self-mutilate.
The Board also considered the limited nature of the circumstances where P
had acted to harm herself. Moreover, as the Chief Psychiatrist
stated, the
process for an application for continued detention for treatment and care is one
that should be made to his office. On
the receipt of such an application, the
requires that a committee of the Chief Psychiatrist and two other
psychiatrists must be formed to consider the application and if
approved grant
the detention for a period of up to three months. He also stated that no such
application had been made in relation
Submissions on behalf of P
After accepting the
submissions of both Ms Bolger and Ms Higgins that P had expressed the choice not
to attend the hearing, the Board
accepted submissions of her legal
representatives in her absence.
Ms Bolger, on behalf of P, argued that her client satisfies the
section 8(1)
criteria and that she was instructed that P wanted to remain in the facility to
receive the treatment and care that she was currently
receiving. In
cross-examination of Associate Professor AB and Dr CD, Ms Bolger argued that P
had a mental illness or disorder and
was suffering with symptoms that were being
treated. In conjunction with her argument that P met the
section 8(1)
she referred to the definition of mental disorder in
being a mental illness. She argued that the distinction being made by the
treating team was an artificial distinction and argued
that the Board should be
satisfied that all the criteria were able to be met in relation to her
client’s mental illness, the
treatment and care she required and that such
treatment and care should be obtained by a continuing involuntary treatment
Submissions/Evidence of treating team
Associate Professor AB submitted that P needs
treatment and care, that she has responded to treatment and that she was
cooperative
with treatment, however she did not fit the
section 8(1)(a)
criterion in that she did not appear to be mentally ill. He stated that he did
not believe that P had a medical condition characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory. He argued that there was
nothing in P’s presentation
to signify a longitudinal development of such
condition. He pointed out that he had been treating P for eleven weeks and with
reduction of medication there had been no emergence of such a disturbance.
Associate Professor AB stated that he would have expected
psychiatric symptoms
to have appeared if what P was being treated for was a mental illness. Dr CD
supported this view and said that
P had responded to a structured environment
and limit setting on her behaviours.
He argued that, in his view, any behaviours P was currently demonstrating
were driven by her personality rather than being symptomatic
of a mental
illness. In response to questions from Ms Bolger, Associate Professor AB stated
that P was responding to treatment,
in particular interventions aimed at her
behaviour like limit setting, and interventions that focus on her physical
health and social
interactions. He stated that while P had gained 30kg during
her stay in Thomas Embling Hospital she had lost 10kg since being at
and was going to the pool and coffee shops. He also argued that P was unable to
be left to her own devices, thus needing
on-going treatment and care in a
treatment setting.
However, if P did meet
section 8(1)(a)
he argued that she did not meet
section 8(1)(c).
In relying on such a view Associate Professor AB suggested that
the wording “because of the person’s mental illness”
a current presentation of symptomatology. Accordingly, his current assessment of
P was that she presented without symptoms
of a mental illness in a context where
her medications had been reduced and without a recurrence of symptoms. Further,
that he must be satisfied that because of her mental illness
involuntary treatment was necessary for her health or safety or for
of the public. Associate Professor AB stated that he was not satisfied that it
was because of P’s mental illness
that she needed treatment. Instead he
stated that it was her behaviour that was the primary reason for treatment and
care. Similarly
it was her behaviour that needed containment as a means to avoid
a deterioration in her health and for the protection of the community.
The Report on Involuntary Status for the Mental Health Review Board
(“the Report for the Board”) stated that P inconsistently
treatment, stating one minute that she will agree to stay in hospital, but
shortly after demanding immediate discharge and
cessation of treatment. It also
stated that she is unable to appreciate the full ramifications of the choices
she makes, rather it
describes that she caters to her acute distress at any
given time.
In relation to treatment in a less restrictive setting the Board had before
it the Report for the Board and the doctors’ evidence
that there was no
alternative for P at the present time.
Treatment Plan
The treatment plan, dated 6 May 2007 and authorised by Associate Professor
AB, identifies the current diagnosis as a borderline personality
disorder and
includes that the aims of treatment are the stabilisation of mental state,
psycho-education, triggers, early warning
signs, input by a psychologist in
particular in relation to anger management and ongoing strategies, an increase
in ward activities
to develop appropriate social interactions, relieve boredom
and reduce weight. Further strategies were identified as liaison with
and community services supports (NEAMI and Spectrum) with the eventual and
gradual transition to the community.
The Report for the Board stated that there had been success in progressing
P’s management plan to the point where she is no
longer responding with an
immediate physical assault when upset or angry. Further, she has commenced a
leave program that is giving
her greater freedom, whilst promoting autonomy. She
has also increased her self-management along with a reduction of her medication.
Submissions/Evidence of Chief Psychiatrist
The submissions of the Chief Psychiatrist were that
P satisfied the
section 8(1)
criteria. While acknowledging a diagnostic
complexity for P, he stated that on the basis of many opinions that have been
P suffers, in part, an anxiety disorder. She has also suffered with a
disturbance of thought, mood and at times perception. She has
therefore been
treated with anti-psychotic medications, mood stabilisers and anxiolytics over
many years. He also expressed the
same view as the treatment team that P was
unable to provide informed consent. Past failed attempts at community
placements were
also referred to by the Chief Psychiatrist, as well as the plan
to re-introduce P to the community.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board formed the view that P appears to be mentally ill as she exhibits
an array of symptoms regardless of the diagnostic nosology.
The symptoms are
clearly indicative of a mental illness. In forming this view, the Board also
accepted the evidence of Associate
Professor AT as well as that of Associate
Professor AB that significant improvements had been achieved as a result of the
and care provided to P.
The Board accepted Associate Professor AT’s view that P satisfied this
criterion, which was based on several opinions of different
psychiatrists and
his own regular contacts with P over the last few years. In spite of the
diagnostic complexity, P has experienced
episodes of severe anxiety and has also
suffered from disturbances of thought, mood and at times perception, and the
risks to others
have been due to her impaired judgement; P has shown significant
improvement with treatment in these areas.
The Board took into account two points in determining its view. The first was
requires that the person appears to be mentally ill, regardless of
a diagnosis specifically applicable to a person. The Board found
clearly met that criterion. The second point was that the Board’s view was
that personality disorder is a mental illness,
and noted that only anti-social
personality disorder is excluded in the legislation from meeting the criterion
of mental illness.
P was characterised by Associate Professors AT and AB as
meeting the criteria for a number of diagnoses. The Board accepted that
anti-social personality disorder might be one of those diagnostic entities, that
there were others, including borderline
personality, that would also, or even
more appropriately, attributed to P. On the basis of these considerations, the
Board found
that P met this criterion.
Further, the functions of the Board under
section 22(2)
that the Board must have regard primarily to the patient's current mental
condition and consider the patient's medical and
psychiatric history and social
circumstances. The Board has therefore taken into account the extensive history
of P being the concerns
for her physical health arising from her obesity,
diabetes and associated health concerns, her psychiatric history and her social
circumstances including her forensic history that has arisen because of the
behaviours and associated violence.
The Board in this matter agreed with the comments in an earlier case of
the Appeal and Review of 05-009
(unreported, MHRB (Vic), 22 July 2004) where
the Board commented:
“The value of prior matters as predictive factors stems, amongst other
things, from their nature, their context, their frequency
The Board was therefore satisfied that this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by P being subject to an involuntary treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board accepted the evidence that the treatment P is receiving is
lessening the effects of her mental illness. The treatment she
receiving must be seen in its widest context not simply a list of
pharmacotherapy. The Board formed the view that P needs
treatment that includes
appropriate dosages of medication as well as interventions to assist her to
change her behaviour, such being
the ill-effects of her mental illness.
The Board was satisfied that P was receiving and could continue to receive
treatment by being subject to an involuntary treatment
Because of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P
necessary for her health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of
the public?
The Board was satisfied that because of P’s mental illness involuntary
treatment was necessary for her health and safety and
for the protection of the
public. P has been on a treatment regime that involves a reduction of
medications and intensive interventions
to assist in behaviour modification.
This regime also includes opportunities for increased socialization and physical
activities,
thus being necessary for her own health.
The Board accepted Associate Professor AT’s view that P would require
ongoing treatment. His evidence was that because P’s
condition varied,
that he could not state with certainty that on the day of the hearing (in its
most specific form) that P required
involuntary treatment, although she
certainly had required it at numerous points in her treatment, and he
anticipated that she would
in the foreseeable future. In that context, the Board
took the view, as with numerous conditions such as bipolar affective disorder,
that the Board must take into account, and be satisfied, that cyclic or other
patterns of psychological functioning, on the basis
of psychiatric history, will
with reasonable certainty require immediate involuntary treatment within the
operational period of an
involuntary treatment order for the protection of the
patient or members of the public.
P has a well documented history of assault against persons both known to her
where she has an existing relationship and others who
are more distant. The
Board accepted the evidence that her violent behaviours are to a large extent a
result of her mental illness.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
The Board accepted the uncontested evidence that P was unable to consent to
the necessary treatment and care and that she was at best
changeable in her
views about accepting treatment and remaining in a treatment setting.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
The Board accepted the evidence of all parties that P requires the
containment and rehabilitation of the secure extended care unit.
Board’s view it is via this treatment regime that P has the best
opportunity of re-integration to the community.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The treatment plan for P was seen by the Board as aiming for the
stabilisation of P’s mental state, psycho-education to improve
understanding of her condition and its triggers and early warning signs. It also
included input by a psychologist in particular
in relation to anger management
and ongoing strategies with an increase in ward activities to develop
appropriate social interactions,
relieve boredom and reduce weight. Further
strategies were identified as liaison with family and community services
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The plan was being implemented by the mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met, the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Dated the 22
day of August 2007
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
Parliamentary Hansard, Legislative Assembly, 5 October 1995, p425.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (98.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter