URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/991.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ivic v Nillumbik SC [2025] VCAT 991 (7 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P712/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 313/2025/VS01
Nillumbik Planning Scheme; Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 as
found in the Nillumbik Planning Scheme; policy at Clause 15.01-5L
Nillumbik Planning Scheme; construction of a solid paling fence within the semi
bush preferred character area.
Chimene Ivic & Matthew Ivic
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Nillumbik Shire Council
SUBJECT LAND
7 Leonard Crescent
ELTHAM VIC 3095
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
6 November 2025
DATE OF ORDER
7 November 2025
Ivic v Nillumbik SC [2025] VCAT 991
application P712/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is set
planning permit application 313/2025/VS01 a permit is granted and directed to be
issued for the land at 7 Leonard Crescent Eltham
VIC 3095 in accordance with the
endorsed plans and the conditions set out in Appendix A. The permit
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 42.03-2
Construction of a fence
APPEARANCES
For applicant
Chimene Ivic appeared in person
For responsible authority
Crystal Ye, Town Planner of Nillumbik Shire Council
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
The construction of a fence
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the refusal to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Nillumbik Planning Scheme
Zone and overlays
Low Density Residential Zone
Bushfire Management Overlay
Significant Landscape Overlay 2
Permit requirements
Clause 42.03-2 to construct a fence on land to which the Significant
Landscape Overlay applies
Relevant scheme policies and provisions
Clauses 02, 11, 15, 16, 32.03, 42.03, 44.06, 52.06, 59.05, 65, 71.02 and
Land description
The land is a corner allotment with a frontage to Leonard Crescent of 17.45
metres, a sideage to Rodd Parade of 50.29 metres, and
an overall area of
approximately 863 square metres. The land presently supports a single storey
detached dwelling with an undercroft
car parking area.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
& Matthew Ivic (the ‘applicants’) seek to review the decision of
the Nillumbik Shire Council (the ‘Council’)
to refuse to a grant a
permit for a proposed fence, on land at 7 Leonard Crescent, Eltham (the
‘review site’).
have decided to set aside the Council’s decision, and direct the grant of
a planning permit subject to conditions. Reasons
for my decision were given
orally at the conclusion of the hearing. What follows is an edited version of
my oral reasons.
land is a corner allotment, and the proposed fence is a 1.95 metre high solid
paling fence (with capping at the top) to enclose
the rear yard, as depicted on
the plan set out below (with the proposed fence marked in
Council’s grounds of refusal are set out below.
height and form of the proposed fence creates a solid visual barrier and does
not allow for the continuous flow of vegetation
as encouraged by Clause 15.01-5L
of the Nillumbik Planning Scheme.
proposed fence creates a clear delineation between the garden and roadside that
is not consistent with the Significant Landscape
Overlay – Schedule
design of the proposed fence presents as a dominant feature of the streetscape
which is not responsive to the visual dominance
of vegetation, and vegetation as
a key character to the appearance of the area encouraged by the Significant
Landscape Overlay –
Schedule 2.
2 to the Significant Landscape Overlay (SLO2) provides the following guidance in
my discretion on this planning permit application.
Landscape character objectives to be achieved
To provide for housing in a residential location in a bushland setting.
To provide for sensitive siting of buildings and works, access and earthworks
and by the restoration of native vegetation where considered
appropriate.
To provide for conservation and enhancement of the environmental values of the
To ensure that the development of land and the removal of native vegetation are
not detrimental to the natural environment and character
of the area.
To minimise the threats to the natural environment through the unnecessary
removal of vegetation in these areas.
Decision guidelines
The following decision guidelines apply to an application for a permit under
Clause 42.03, in addition to those specified in Clause
42.03 and elsewhere in
the scheme which must be considered, as appropriate, by the responsible
The role of the
vegetation in contributing to the character and appearance of the area.
The objectives
and recommendations of the Nillumbik Siting and Design Guidelines.
Any other design
and siting guidelines adopted by the responsible authority.
The need to
screen buildings and structures to maintain the character of the
addition, policy at Clause 15.01-5L of the Nillumbik Planning Scheme sets out
the following objectives.
All precincts objectives
To maintain the existing vegetation including canopy trees.
To minimise detrimental impacts on the landscape from site erosion and
excavation.
To ensure buildings do not dominate the streetscape.
To ensure that car parking areas, garages and carports do not dominate sites
when viewed from the street.
To maintain and enhance the continuous flow of the garden settings and the
openness of the front boundary treatment.
Semi Bush precincts objectives
To maintain the appearance of development that is partly obscured from view by
the topography or tree canopy.
To maintain the precinct’s rolling and hilly topography and its bushy
vegetation character with significant indigenous or native
canopy trees.
All precincts strategies
Encourage contemporary design that does not detract from the preferred character
of the area.
Retain or plant substantial trees as necessary to contribute to the desired
future character of the area while maintaining solar
access and residential
amenity, and minimising bushfire safety issues.
Site development so it responds to existing vegetation (including drip-lines of
trees) and minimises the removal of existing trees,
including by:
Siting open
space around significant vegetation.
sufficient space for:
The planting of
vegetation that supports the preferred character of the area.
Canopy trees
(preferably indigenous to the area) in the front setback of the development and
in other strategic locations on the site.
Maintain the pattern of orientation and setbacks of adjoining properties and the
streetscape.
Site and design driveways and car storage areas to occupy the minimum functional
Semi Bush precincts strategies
Avoid fencing unless it is of post and wire construction.
Encourage gardens with mostly indigenous or native vegetation that flows
uninterrupted to the edge of the roadway.
Council submits that the proposal is inconsistent with the character of the area
and the guidance provided by the Nillumbik Planning
Scheme. The Council’s
substantive submissions are set out below.
proposed fence is a solid timber paling fence that is 1.95m high finished in its
natural state, consisting of a yellow like colour.
The fence is proposed to run
the entire length of the rear boundary (17.45m), a portion of the Northern side
boundary abutting 9
Leonard Cresent (31.3m), and a portion of the side boundary
facing Rodda Parade (21.15m).
proposed fencing is not consistent with the Significant Landscape Overlay
– Schedule 2. The proposed fencing and its lack
of transparency and its
substantial height is at odds with the statement of nature and key elements of
landscape where “gardens
are continuous with roadside and surrounding
property vegetation where there are no solid fence and fencing, if present, is
of post and wire construction”.
guidelines under Schedule 2 of the Significant Landscape Overlay also stipulate
that the Responsible Authority as appropriate
must consider the objectives and
recommendations of the Nillumbik Siting and Design Guidelines. In particular, in
relation to the
proposed fencing, minimising the visual impacts on the
landscape, ensuring development is integrated with the landscape and surrounding
vegetation through its siting, built form and colour, and screen planting.
proposed fencing is also not consistent with the objectives and recommendations
within the Residential Design Guidelines 2001
(Amended 2003). The proposed fence
creates a solid visual barrier that is not in line with the design objective of
‘Semi-Bush’
areas, which is “To maintain and enhance the
continuous flow of the landscape and vegetation and the bush character of the
front garden vegetation”. The proposed fence would become a dominant
feature and create a disconnect in the views of continuous
flow of vegetation in
the landscape.
Semi Bush precinct strategies under Clause 15.01-5L seek to avoid fencing unless
it is of post and wire construction. The proposed
paling fence is incompatible
with Clause 15.01-5L due to its visual prominence and solid nature. It fails to
encourage gardens that
flow uninterrupted to the edge of the roadway.
proposed solid paling fence is also not consistent with the surrounding context
and character of the area. The prevailing character
of the area features open
and unobscured gardens with no fencing, post and wire fencing or post and rail
style fencing with a high
level of transparency. Whilst some examples of solid
fencing can be observed in the surrounding, broader area, they appear to be
existing fences that were constructed quite a while ago, according to historic
google street view imagery, and potentially benefit
from existing use rights.
predominant feature within the site and surrounds is that fencing along title
boundaries are either non-existent, post and wire
or where boundaries are
delineated through naturally occurring vegetation. The proposal in question is
at odds with the existing
character and presents an outcome which is not only
dominant but intrusive into the view lines adjoining rear gardens.
am not persuaded by these submissions, and instead find that the proposed fence
is an appropriate outcome having regard to the guidance
provided by the
Nillumbik Planning Scheme. I make this finding for the following reasons.
difference to the Council’s approach, I find a need on a corner allotment
such as this to balance the outcomes sought by
SLO2 and related planning policy,
with the needs of the applicant in this proceeding. The applicant desires for a
fence to enclose
their rear yard to provide security and privacy, particularly
for their young children and pets. This desire needs to be understood
context that the review site is a corner allotment, and so the rear yard of the
lot abuts the side street, and is presently
open to the side street.
per the depiction on the plan set out earlier in these reasons, the proposal is
to enclose the rear yard, which will include a
fence abutting the side street,
but leave the front yard open and unfenced. I am persuaded that this is an
appropriate balance that
achieves the outcomes sought in the Nillumbik Planning
Scheme. I find that the proposal is an appropriate response to the Landscape
character objectives and Decision guidelines at SLO2 for the following
proposed fence is sensitively sited by being positioned at topography lower than
the adjacent road, thus reducing its presence
in the streetscape. As there is
no footpath in Rodda Parade, and due to the sloping topography, people would
walk along the constructed
road at a level that is much higher in elevation than
the siting of the proposed fence.
there exists a deep setback between the constructed road, and the edge of the
road reserve where the proposed fence is to
be located. The depth of this
setback, coupled with the existing vegetation within this setback will also
assist to reduce the presence
of the proposed fence when viewed from the
constructed road.
proposed fence being of a natural color preferred by Council, will sit in the
background to the dominance of vegetation in the
proposed fence will not require the removal of any vegetation, and will not
impact the health or condition of any existing vegetation.
proposed fence will have a minimal impact on the role of vegetation in
contributing to the character and appearance of the area.
While the fence will
alter the existing balance between views to vegetation and built structures on
part of the review site, it
will not supplant the dominant presence that
vegetation has in this context. Views will still be gained from Rodda Parade
fence to the vegetation behind, and the front yard of the review site
will continue to contribute to an open vegetated front garden
response to the neighbourhood character policy at Clause 15.01-5L of the
Nillumbik Planning Scheme, I find the proposal is an appropriate
response for
the following reasons.
to the proposed fence will be partly obscured by the topography and by existing
vegetation, in keeping with the preferred appearance
of development.
stated above, the existing vegetation will be maintained.
the reasons set out above, the proposed fence will not dominate the landscape,
particularly given it is sited at a lower elevation
that the adjacent Rodda
Parade. Rather the existing vegetation will continue to dominate the local
acknowledge that there will be some marginal impact on the continuous flow of
the garden from the road reserve into the rear yard
of the review site. To the
extent that this objective is primarily intended to relate to the front garden
treatment, the proposed
fence does not impact the existing open front garden on
the review site. To the extent that part of this objective could be read
influence rear yards on corner allotments, it needs to be read in balance with
the reasonable desire to enclose one’s rear
yard. In this proceeding I
find that an appropriate balance has been achieved due to the siting of the
proposed fence at a lower
topography than the public viewing location in Rodda
Parade. In making this finding I note that while the proposed fence is a solid
structure, there will still be a continuous flow of canopy vegetation and other
vegetation that will be able to be seen over the
proposed fence.
proposed fence will not impact the precinct’s hilly topography and its
bushy vegetation character.
their submissions the Council relies on two previous Tribunal decisions. I
distinguish those decisions from the context and particulars
that are before me
on the following basis:
decision of
Cottrell v Nillumbik SC
[2022] VCAT 915
involved a proposal
to fence the entire curved front boundary of a site to a length of approximately
100 metres. Further, the fence,
which had already been constructed, was
elevated above road level, and therefore highly prominent in the streetscape.
This is very
different to the proposal that is before me, where the front
boundary is not proposed to be fenced, and where the proposed fence
will sit at
a lower topography as compared to the side street.
decision of Teoh v Nillumbik SC (unreported – P1216/2022) also involved a
proposal to fence a front boundary to a lot in
a mid block location. This is
very different to the proposal that is before me, which is to fence the rear
yard of a corner site,
and present that fence to part of the respective side
street, but at a lower topography to the constructed road.
these reasons I am not persuaded by the Council’s submissions that an
approval of this fence on the review site that is
before me, will be at odds
with previous Tribunal decisions. I do not read either of the previous Tribunal
decisions as standing
for the proposition that any and all paling fences on
sites covered by SLO2 will be inappropriate. Rather, any single Tribunal
can only deal with the facts and circumstances of a single proposal on
a particular site.
these reasons I find it appropriate to direct the grant of a planning permit for
the proposed fence.
therefore follows that I will set aside the Council’s decision, and direct
the grant of a planning permit subject to conditions.
I will broadly adopt the
draft conditions as circulated by Council prior to the hearing, except
will delete most of the Council’s drafted components of Condition 1 as for
the reasons set out above, I am not persuaded that
amendments are required to
the proposed fence design and layout to achieve an acceptable outcome. The
applicant has accepted a condition
as drafted by Council to address the color of
the fence, and so that part of Condition 1 will be retained.
will reword Condition 4 in the manner requested by the applicant, to stipulate
that there is to be no removal of vegetation associated
with the construction of
the fence. Vegetation elsewhere on the review site that is exempt from
requiring a planning permit under
the provisions of the Nillumbik Planning
Scheme should not be caught by such a permit condition.
will replace the permit expiry condition with the one that is applied as
standard by the Tribunal.
Michael Deidun
APPENDIX A – PERMIT DESCRIPTION AND CONDITIONS
313/2025/VS01
PLANNING SCHEME
Nillumbik Planning Scheme
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Nillumbik Shire Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND
7 Leonard Crescent
ELTHAM VIC 3095
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 42.03-2
Construction of a fence
CONDITIONS TO APPLY TO THE PERMIT:
the development commences, amended plans to the satisfaction of the Responsible
Authority must be submitted to and approved
by the Responsible Authority. When
approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of this permit.
The plans must
be generally in accordance with the plans dated 12-Jun-25 and
prepared by JRD Building Design but modified to show:
(a) The fence to be finished in a muted colour to integrate with the surrounding
vegetation by adopting a colour such as but not
limited to, woodland grey or
pale eucalypt.
development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered unless with the
prior written consent of the Responsible Authority.
the construction of the approved fence, no vegetation on-site unless specified
on the endorsed plans shall be removed, destroyed,
felled, lopped, ringbarked,
uprooted or otherwise damaged except with the prior written consent of the
Responsible Authority.
nature and colour of building materials employed in the construction of the
buildings and works hereby permitted shall be in muted
and earthy tones and of
low reflectivity and accord with the schedule of construction materials, colours
and finishes as shown on
the endorsed plans and maintained to the satisfaction
of the Responsible Authority.
permit as it relates to development (buildings and works) will expire if one of
the following circumstances applies:
(a) The development is not started within two (2) years of the issued date of
this permit.
(b) The development is not completed within four (4) years of the issued date of
this permit.
In accordance with
Planning and Environment Act 1987
an application may be submitted to the responsible authority for
an extension of the periods referred to in this condition
– End of conditions –
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter