URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/691.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lin v Lin (Ruling No 1) [2025] VSC 691 (10 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
COMMON LAW DIVISION
TRUSTS, EQUITY AND PROBATE LIST
S CI 2018 02053
TSAI MEI CHUAN LIN and Others
(according to the schedule)
SHIH-HSIEN LIN and Others
(according to the attached schedule)
DATE OF HEARING
On the papers
DATE OF RULING
10 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Lin v Lin (Ruling No 1)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 691
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr N Kaskani with
Hunt & Hunt Victoria
For the First Defendant
Mr J D S Barber KC with
Mr C J Fitzgerald
AUM Lawyers Pty Ltd
For the Eighth Defendant
Mr R Wells with Ms B Paull
Hicks Oakley Chessell Williams Pty Ltd
HIS HONOUR:
1 On 11 November 2025, the Court will hear
an application for relief in a summons dated 5 August 2024 filed on behalf of
and seventh defendants (the
5 August summons
circumstances in which the 5 August summons is to be determined are set out in
Lin v Lin (No. 4)
2 Objections to evidence proposed to be
adduced at the hearing of the 5 August summons have been filed by the first
and the plaintiffs and
eighth defendant.
The parties have
filed written submissions in support of their objections and responding to the
objections made by opposing
The parties have
consented to the Court determining the objections on the papers and, in the case
of the extensive objections made
by the first defendant to the consolidated
affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin affirmed 17 September 2025, by reference to groups or
of objections.
3 The parties have each
conceded that certain parts of the affidavits proposed to be relied upon at the
hearing of the 5 August summons
will not be read. The parts of the affidavits
not to be read are set out in Tables A and B in Annexure 1
4 In relation to the objections raised by the
plaintiffs and the eighth defendant to the first defendant affidavits, the
rulings are set out in the fifth column of Table C in Annexure 1
5 In relation to
the first defendant’s objections to the affidavit of Lachlan James
Vallance dated 5 July 2025, the Court’s
rulings are set out in the sixth
column of Table D in Annexure 1 below.
Consolidated affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin affirmed 17 September
6 The parties have agreed for the Court to
rule upon the first defendant’s objections to the consolidated affidavit
of Shih-Kai
Lin affirmed 17 September 2025 by reference to groups or categories
of evidence referred to therein. Having considered the parties’
submissions in relation to the objections, the Court’s rulings in respect
of relevant categories are set out below.
7 This category is evidence of previous
representations from witnesses not proposed to be called at the hearing of the 5
August summons.
It generally accords with ‘category 1’ referred to
in the first defendant’s submissions, and ‘category 2’
plaintiffs’
submissions.
evidence in Category 1 is hearsay as it purports to be evidence given by
Shih-Kai Lin of what other witnesses have said at previous
hearings in this
proceeding, in circumstances where those witnesses are not proposed to be called
at the hearing of the 5 August
plaintiffs submit that the evidence is admissible under
Evidence Act 2008
which provides that the hearsay rule does not apply in
‘interlocutory proceedings’ if the party who adduces it also adduces
evidence of its source. It may be accepted that this last requirement is
Evidence Act 2008
define an ‘interlocutory proceeding’. According to the Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary, in the area of law,
‘interlocutory’ has
the following meaning:
Of a decree or judgment; given in the course of an action or a as a preliminary
to coming to trial; preliminary, provisional, interim.
To similar effect, the Macquarie
Dictionary includes the following definition of ‘interlocutory’ in
the area of law:
temporary or provisional, pending final judgement or determination; interim:
interlocutory injunction.
11 Although the evidence in Category 1 is
proposed to be adduced at a hearing in relation to relief which is sought by
summons, the
character of the proceeding is to be determined from the nature of
the relief sought, not by its form.
Whether the character of a proceeding is interlocutory or final is to be
determined by the nature of the order that results from
determination.
Court granted final relief in this proceeding on 2 February 2023, including an
order that the proceeding be dismissed. The
5 August summons is brought
pursuant to the grant of liberty to
and seeks the Court’s
leave for the first defendant to be relieved of certain undertakings he gave to
the Court as part of
the grant of final relief. Relevantly, those undertakings
have the same operation and effect as an order of the Court. Accordingly,
nature and effect of the relief sought by the first defendant in the 5 August
summons is to alter an aspect of the final relief
granted by the Court in the
proceeding. The relief sought is in no way provisional or preliminary. The
proceeding is accordingly
not an ‘interlocutory proceeding’ within
the meaning of
Evidence Act
13 The plaintiffs’ alternative submission was
that the evidence in Category 1 was relevant for a non-hearsay purpose and
admissible under
Evidence Act
was submitted that the evidence is relevant to whether, in seeking to exercise
his power of appointment, the first defendant
was acting genuinely and for
proper purposes. I accept this
submission.
14 However, for the reasons outlined in
paragraph 14 of the first defendant’s submissions, in the absence of the
relevant witnesses
being available for cross-examination, there is a real danger
that the evidence would be unfairly prejudicial to the first defendant.
Court accordingly directs under
Evidence Act 2008
the Category 1 evidence be limited in its use such that it is only evidence of
the first defendant’s notice, awareness
or knowledge of the evidence, and
not the truth of its contents.
15 This category is evidence of previous
out-of-court representations by the first plaintiff and the sixth defendant. It
accords with ‘category 2’ referred to in the first
defendant’s submissions and ‘category 3’ in the
plaintiffs’ submissions. This evidence is hearsay as it is not proposed
that the makers of the representations will give evidence
at the hearing of the
5 August summons.
16 The plaintiffs’ reliance
Evidence Act 2008
is rejected for the reasons given
above in respect of the Category 1 evidence.
the alternative, the plaintiffs submit that the evidence is admissible under
Evidence Act 2008
because it is relevant for a
non-hearsay purpose: providing ‘context’ to the making of a previous
open offer said to
have precipitated the appointment of the eighth defendant as
trustee, as well as context as to the second plaintiff’s opposition
first defendant’s application in the 5 August
18 The plaintiffs have not elucidated the
relevance of these contextual purposes for the task of determining the 5 August
The Category 2 objections are accordingly upheld.
19 This category of evidence corresponds
with ‘category 3’ referred to in the first defendant’s
submissions. It
is convenient to deal with the two objections in this category
separately.
20 The objection in item 67 is to a
statement by Shih-Kai Lin that he opposes the relief sought in the 5 August
summons because of
his belief that it was necessary for Mr Vallance to
perform a significant amount of work to familiarise himself with matters
to the trusts. The remaining part of the paragraph, which is not
subject to objection, sets out in uncontroversial terms the witness’
concerns in the event that a new trustee is appointed relating to the incurring
of additional costs. The part of the paragraph the
subject of objection is in
substance argumentative or in the nature of submissions based upon opinions of
the deponent which I am
not satisfied satisfy the exception in
Evidence Act 2008
relating to lay opinion evidence. The objection in
item 67 is accordingly upheld.
21 The objection in
item 69 relates to evidence to be given by Shih-Kai Lin as to four matters which
he considers have given rise
to a significant portion of
Mr Vallance’s fees. The requirements for the admission of lay
opinion evidence in
Evidence Act 2008
are not met for
the admission of this evidence. The objection is upheld.
22 This category of evidence accords with
‘category 4’ referred to in the first defendant’s submissions.
It concerns
paragraphs of the affidavit made by Shih-Kai Lin in which he
extracts or refers to observations or findings made by judicial officers
proceeding about the first defendant.
23 I do not
consider this evidence to be relevant. Contrary to the submissions made on
behalf of the plaintiffs, I do not accept
that evidence of observations made by
the Court to, or in the presence of, the first defendant on previous occasions
could rationally
effect an assessment of his state of mind in the context of the
present application for relief and whether or not he is acting bona
fide and for
proper purposes. The assessment of the first defendant’s state of mind in
respect of these matters is to occur
by the Court as constituted to hear the 5
August summons and not on the basis of conclusions or impressions expressed by
officers on other occasions in other contexts. The objection is
Other objections
24 The remaining objections to the
consolidated affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin affirmed 17 September 2025 are addressed
in Table E in Annexure
Further steps
25 The parties are to prepare a schedule
of the specific parts of the affidavits which have been the subject of
successful objection
in accordance with this ruling (including whether the
relevant part is not to be received as evidence at all, or on a limited basis).
The Schedule is to be provided on the Court at the commencement of the hearing
of the 5 August summons.
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
S CI 2018 02053
TSAI MEI CHUAN
(in her own capacity and as administrator
of the estate of WEN CHIH LIN, deceased)
First plaintiff
SHIH-KAI LIN
Second plaintiff
JAVELIN TOWNS PTY LTD
(ACN 007 274 259)
(in its own capacity and
as trustee for THE LIN FAMILY TRUST)
Third plaintiff
W C LIN NOMINEES PTY LTD
(ACN 007 455 987) (in its own capacity and
as trustee for THE LIN FAMILY TRUST NO 2)
Fourth plaintiff
SHIH-HSIEN LIN
First defendant
WEN CHIH LIN MEMORIAL PTY LTD
(ACN 622 246 575)
(in its own
capacity and as trustee for THE LIN FAMILY TRUST
Second defendant
WEN CHIH LIN MEMORIAL PTY LTD NO 2
(ACN 622 246 619) (in its own
capacity and as trustee for THE LIN FAMILY TRUST NO 2)
Third defendant
LUXTRON PTY LTD
(ACN 007 442 819)
Fourth defendant
REGISTRAR OF TITLES
Fifth defendant
SHU-CHEN LIN
Sixth defendant
EAST OCEAN INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
(ACN 122 892 095)
Seventh defendant
LACHLAN JAMES VALLANCE
in his capacity as Trustee of the Lin Family
Trust and the Lin Family Trust No 2.
Eighth defendant
TABLE A: OBJECTIONS CONCEDED BY EIGHTH DEFENDANT AND PLAINTIFF
Objection by the first defendant
1. Affidavit of Lachlan James Vallance dated 25 July 2025
Paragraph 19.5 (part): Last sentence
(submission/argument); opinion
Accepted on the basis that the evidence of the second plaintiff speaks for
Not required.
Paragraph 19.46 (final sentence).
(speculation); opinion
Accepted without prejudice to the eighth defendant’s seeking to
tender into evidence an email dated 1 August 2024 from McKay
Law to AUM, HOCW
and Hunt & Hunt (without attachment) which forwarded proposed joinder orders
in proceeding SCV 2018 1192 with
extended dates and contained an email chain
dated 28 July 2024 between McKay and Ryan Law re proposed joinder orders.
Not required.
2. Consolidated affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin filed on 17 September
Paragraph 79 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs, but excepting footnoted
references to transcript).
(evidence not of deponent); the transcript speaks for
However, transcript is not objected to and therefore remains in
Not required.
Paragraph 167 (entirety, save for sub-paragraphs (a)-(c)).
; evidence not of deponent.
Not required.
TABLE B: OBJECTIONS CONCEDED BY FIRST DEFENDANT
Objection by eighth defendant and plaintiffs
Response by first
First affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 6 August 2024
Last sentence
The summary of the letter is misleading or confusing
Not required.
First affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 6 August 2024
Last two sentences
Hearsay – it is unknown if the maker is available. Further,
applies as Mr Gong is not called and therefore not available for
cross-examination.
Not required.
Third affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 11 September 2025
Entire paragraph from ‘I believe that the Trustee ...’ onwards.
Concede the words “I believe that...” to and including
“for instance:” and sub-paragraph 20(a)
sub-paragraphs 20(b) and 20(c)
Sub-paragraphs 20(b) and 20(c) contain
direct evidence of fact and are not matters of opinion.
Partially required.
TABLE C: EIGHTH DEFENDANT AND PLAINTIFFS’ LIST OF OBJECTIONS TO
Objection by eighth defendant and plaintiffs
Response by first
First affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 6 August 2024
Last sentence
, where one of the makers of the statement (the mother) is
available and the exception in
does not apply.
Opposed. The evidence is of contemporaneous representations about each of
those person’s intention or state of mind:
Objection upheld.
For reasons in [3] of eighth defendant’s
submissions dated 6 November 2025.
Third affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 11 September 2025
First sentence and last sentence
, not based on relevant specialised knowledge, training study
or experience of the first defendant.
Opposed. The evidence set out is on the
basis of the witness’
experience in dealing with and managing LFT and LFT2 as a director of the former
trustees (including as
described in the final sentence of [37]).
Further, the
evidence is not sought to be admitted to prove the existence of a fact about the
existence of which the opinion was expressed,
but instead as evidence of a
concern held by the witness relevant to the fact in issue of his good faith and
proper purpose:
Objection dismissed.
Evidence is admissible under
relates to the concerns held by the first defendant which is relevant to his
good faith and proper purpose which is a relevant
issue. Evidence not received
as proof of the existence of facts about the existence of which the opinion was
Third affidavit of Shih-Hsien Lin filed 11 September 2025,
Entire paragraph
, not based on relevant specialised knowledge, training study
or experience of the first defendant.
Opposed. As above in relation paragraph 37.
Objection dismissed (per [37] above).
TABLE D: FIRST DEFENDANT’S LIST OF OBJECTIONS TO THE AFFIDAVIT OF
LACHLAN JAMES VALLANCE DATED
25 JULY 2025
Objection by first defendant
Paragraph 6 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs)
The documents are in evidence and speak for
themselves.
Not accepted.
The first defendant maintains his objection (he does not object to the
tender of the underlying
Objection upheld.
Where the underlying documents not subject to
objection, witnesses’ evidence in narrating them is not relevant to fact
Paragraph 15 (entirety)
The Court’s reasons speak for themselves.
does not prevent the tender of a judgement which contains findings as
to the existence of facts relevant to the issues in the trial
defendant’s August Summons.
What occurred between 22 February
2024 and the making, on 14 March 2024, by McMillan J of consent orders
appointing Lachlan Vallance
as trustee of the LFT and LFT2 is relevant as it
explains the factual
basis leading to the making of the consent orders by the
Court rather
The first defendant maintains his objection (but he does not object to the
tender of the judgment itself).
Objection upheld.
Where the underlying document not subject to
objection, witnesses’ evidence in narrating them is not relevant to fact
Paragraph 19.13 (part):
The entire paragraph, insofar as it concerns the
Trustee’s costs since 21 December 2023, as to which no such costing or
certification
has been provided to the first defendant or put into
(conclusion); hearsay
Not accepted. Relevant.
Not hearsay.
Not an expression of an
Sub-paragraph 19.13 commences with the words “as noted
below”. Sub-paragraph 19.30 is that notation.
Maintained (insofar it concerns events since 12 December 2023).
Objection dismissed.
Matter for cross examination in light of
opening words ‘as noted below’.
Paragraph 19.18 (part):
The words “and having
Counsel’s advice in conference”.
(conclusion); evidence likely to mislead in absence of
disclosure of the advice received
Not accepted.
Relevant as being probative of the factors to which the
eighth defendant had regard to when determining to pay all named LFT2 Balance
Sheet UPEs which determination the first defendant strongly disagrees with.
not satisfied. The Words are not evidence which give rise to the danger that
they might be misleading or confusing to the Court absent
disclosure of the
advice received.
The Words are probative of the fact that, inter alia, the
eighth defendant received counsel’s advice in conference prior to
determining to pay the LFT2 UPEs.
Maintained.
Objection dismissed.
For reasons given in response (column 4).
Paragraph 19.33 (part): Third sentence.
(argument/submission/ conclusion).
Not accepted.
Neither an argument, submission or conclusion.
and repeat response to 19.13 (part) above.
Maintained (see the related objection to paragraph 19.13 at item 5
Objection dismissed.
Not argument, submission or conclusion. Matter
for cross examination.
Paragraph 19.35 (part): First sentence.
(argument/submission/ conclusion); opinion
Not accepted.
Not argument or by way of submissions.
Relevant as to
the eighth defendant’s perception/understanding of the timeliness of his
provision of costs information to the
beneficiaries.
Limit use under
to evidence of eighth
defendant’s
understanding (i.e., the witness’ belief or understanding).
Objection (in part) upheld.
Objection confined to words ‘on a
timely basis’. Conclusionary, but relevant to Trustee’s perception/
understanding.
Use of such evidence to be limited accordingly per s 136 of the
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act
Paragraphs 25-30 (entirety).
Relevance (s 56) (the documents are in evidence and speak for themselves);
s 135 (undue waste of time and costs; paragraph 29 inaccurately
records the true
content of the document cited and is likely to mislead).
Accepted that the letters of 9 July 2024, 22 July 2024, 26 July 2024
1 August 2024 (four letters) are contained in the eighth
defendant’s exhibit bundle.
The four letters are
appropriately
characterised as “significant pre-issue
correspondence”.
They have been deliberately placed into the body of
defendant’s affidavit to underline the importance to be
attributed to them.
S 135(c). Reading the four letters in the body of the
affidavit means that they are not required to be read in the exhibit bundle.
They are not productive of undue waste of time.
S 135 (c) does not allow the
Court to refuse to admit evidence on the basis of an alleged waste of
S 135(b). There is no or no proper explanation of the allegation that
paragraph 29 inaccurately records the true content of the document
cited and is
likely to mislead.
Maintained (though the first defendant does not object to the underlying
documents being tendered).
As to the inaccurate recording in paragraph 29 and
s 135(b), see fn 2 of the first defendant’s submissions in reply to the
defendant dated 27 August 2025 (the extracted text at paragraph 29
incorrectly recites passages of the letter).
Objection (in part) upheld.
As the letters which are extracted are
proposed to be tendered into evidence, the paragraphs are not relevant to a fact
and inclusion of paras 27-30 is unnecessary. Para’s 25-26 to be
admitted as summary of correspondence considered to be significant
which is relevant to his actions.
TABLE E: OTHER OBJECTIONS TO CONSOLIDATED AFFIDAVIT OF SHIH-KAI LIN FILED
17 SEPTEMBER 2025
2. Consolidated affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin filed on 17 September
The first defendant objects generally to the affidavit of Shih-Kai Lin
insofar as it quotes, duplicates (in some instances more than
summarises witness statements and transcripts that are already on the Court file
in this proceeding, because this is productive
of wasted time and cost.
Specific objections appear below.
This is not a basis for objection. It is an unfounded criticism by the
first defendant who consistently relies upon selective historical
support of his position and then criticises those family members who
(regrettably) fill-in the gaps to avoid the selective
account presented by the
first defendant.
Objection dismissed.
Objections to be dealt with separately.
Paragraph 16 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion) and, as to the last
sentence, hearsay (s 59).
Lay opinion of primary beneficiary/plaintiff
(s 78) - witness is
deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise perceived about the events in issue
and this is necessary to obtain
an adequate account of the plaintiff’s
perception of the events.
Last sentence: evidence relevant for a non-hearsay purpose (s 60) –
this evidence provides evidence of the second plaintiff’s
state of mind
(in support of his opposition of the first defendant’s application).
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Relevance not established.
Last sentence: state of mind of the witness is irrelevant even if for the
non-hearsay purpose.
As to s 136 and weight, see item 18 above.
Objection upheld.
Paragraph is in the nature of opinion and requirements for the
admission of lay evidence in s 78 of the Evidence Act not established.
Paragraph is otherwise in nature of argument or submission.
Paragraph 17 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
76); hearsay (s 59) (final sentence only).
Lay opinion of primary beneficiary/plaintiff
(s 78) - witness is
deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise perceived about the events in issue
and this is necessary to obtain
an adequate account of the plaintiff’s
perception of the events.
Final sentence: evidence relevant for a non-hearsay
purpose (s 60) – this evidence provides evidence of the second
plaintiff’s
state of mind (in support of his opposition of the first
defendant’s application).
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Relevance not established.
Last sentence: state of mind of the witness is irrelevant even if for the
non-hearsay purpose
As to s 136 and weight, see item 18 above.
Objection upheld.
Paragraph is in the nature of opinion and requirements for the
admission of lay evidence in s 78 of the Evidence Act not established.
Paragraph 19 (entirety).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Lay opinion of primary beneficiary/second plaintiff (s 78) - witness is
deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise perceived about
the events in issue
and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the second
plaintiff’s perception of the events.
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Relevance not established.
State of mind of the witness is irrelevant even if for the non-hearsay
As to s 136 and weight, see item 18 above.
Objection dismissed.
Paragraph records the witnesses stated
concerns not opinions. The existence of
those concerns is arguably relevant
whether the first defendant is seeking to
exercise the power of
appointment bona
fide and for proper purposes.
Paragraph 30 (last sentence).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion).
Evidence is relevant because it could rationally affect (directly or
indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the existence
of a fact in
issue in the proceeding (s 55). This evidence is relevant (a) to demonstrate the
first defendant’s failure to
act with “an entire and single view to
the real purpose and object of the power” but rather carrying into effect
(long-standing) sinister object:
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
at 1251 and (b) to the credibility of the first defendant (due to the selective
nature of his evidence).
Maintained. Evidence amounts to no more than a submission.
Objection upheld.
Sentence is in nature of argument or submission
Sub-paragraph 82(a) (entirety).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Evidence is relevant because it could rationally affect (directly or
indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the existence
of a fact in
issue in the proceeding (s 55). This evidence is relevant (a) to demonstrate the
first defendant’s failure to
act with “an entire and single view to
the real purpose and object of the power” but rather carrying into effect
(long-standing) sinister object:
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
at 1251 and (b) to the credibility of the first defendant (due to the selective
nature of his evidence).
Lay opinion of primary beneficiary/plaintiff (s 78) - witness is deposing
to what he saw, heard or otherwise perceived about the events
in issue and this
is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the plaintiff’s perception
of the events.
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Relevance to face in issue not established. Witness does not
describe the matters he saw, heard or otherwise perceived.
As to weight and s
136, see item 18.
Objection upheld.
Sub para is conclusionary and in nature of argument or submission
Sub-paragraph 85(b), final sentence, from the words “and
therefore” to the end of the sentence.
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission /conclusion).
Evidence of the second plaintiff’s / primary beneficiary’s view
of the reliability of the accounts is relevant because
it could rationally
affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in issue in the
proceeding (s 55), namely whether the first
defendant is acting with “an entire and single view to the real purpose
of the power”:
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
Further this lay opinion of the primary beneficiary/ second plaintiff (s
78) - witness is deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise
perceived about the
events in issue and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the
plaintiff’s perception of the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. Witness does not describe the matters
he saw, heard or
otherwise perceived. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection upheld.
Words are in nature of argument or submission and otherwise lay
opinion for which requirements of s 78 are not satisfied.
Paragraph 95 (entirety).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Evidence of the second plaintiff’s / primary beneficiary’s view
of the first defendant’s assessment of the impact
of UPEs is relevant
because it could rationally affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of
the probability of the existence
of a fact in issue in the proceeding
55). In particular, this evidence provides a rebuttal of the first
defendant’s opinion about these matters and assists in
an assessment as to
whether the first defendant is acting with “an entire and single view to
the real purpose and object of
the power” cf carrying out some sinister
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
Further this lay opinion of the primary beneficiary/ second plaintiff (s
78) - witness is deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise
perceived about the
events in issue and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the
plaintiff’s perception of the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. Witness does not describe the matters
he saw, heard or
otherwise perceived. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection dismissed.
Basis of conclusion referred to in following paragraphs.
Paragraph 96 (second sentence).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Evidence of the second plaintiff’s / primary beneficiary’s view
of the first defendant’s assessment of the balance
of the UPEs and
beneficiary loans is relevant because it could rationally affect (directly or
indirectly) the assessment of the probability
of the existence of
issue in the proceeding (s 55). In particular, this evidence provides a rebuttal
the first defendant’s opinion about these matters and assists in an
assessment as to whether the first defendant is acting with
“an entire and
single view to the real purpose and object of the power” cf carrying out
some sinister object:
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
Further this lay opinion of the primary beneficiary/ second plaintiff (s
78) - witness is deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise
perceived about the
events in issue and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the
plaintiff’s perception of the events.
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. Witness does not describe the matters
he saw, heard or
otherwise perceived. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection upheld.
Sentence is a lay opinion and requirements of s 78 are not
Paragraph 97 (entirety).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Direct evidence of the second plaintiff’s/primary beneficiary’s
receipt of trust distributions (as recorded in the financial
accounts) is
Further, to the extent that this paragraph contains any
opinion of the second plaintiff, it is admissible lay opinion of the primary
beneficiary/ second plaintiff (s 78) - witness is deposing to what he saw, heard
or otherwise perceived about the events in issue
and this is necessary to obtain
an adequate account of the plaintiff’s perception of the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to
the evidence.
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. Witness does not describe the matters
he saw, heard or
otherwise perceived. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection dismissed.
Witness deposes to his understanding, and its basis, about a matter
which is arguably relevant to whether the first defendant is seeking
to exercise
the power of appointment bona fide and for proper purposes.
Paragraph 136 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Evidence of the second plaintiff’s/primary beneficiary’s view
regarding the sale of the Box Hill Property (a step opposed
by the first
defendant) is relevant because it could rationally affect (directly or
indirectly) the assessment of the probability
of the existence of a fact in
issue in the proceeding (s 55). In particular, this evidence provides a rebuttal
of the first defendant’s
opinion about this matter and assists in an
assessment as to whether the first defendant is acting with “an entire and
view to the real purpose and object of the power” cf carrying out
some sinister object:
Duke of Portland
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection upheld.
Paragraph is in the nature of opinion and requirements for the
admission of lay evidence in s 78 of the Evidence Act not established.
Further this lay opinion of the primary beneficiary/second plaintiff (s 78)
- witness is deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise
perceived about the
events in issue and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the
plaintiff’s perception of the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to
limit the weight to be given to the evidence.
Paragraph 147 (entirety, including sub-paragraphs).
Relevance (s 56) (argument/submission/ conclusion); unqualified opinion (s
Evidence of the second plaintiff’s/primary beneficiary’s view
of the first defendant’s motive /state of mind is
relevant because it
could rationally affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the
probability of the existence of
a fact in issue in the proceeding (s 55). In
particular, this evidence assists in an assessment as to whether the first
is acting with “an entire and single view to the real purpose
and object of the power” cf carrying out some sinister
[1864] EngR 339
(1864) 11 ER 1242
Further this lay opinion of the primary beneficiary/second plaintiff (s 78)
- witness is deposing to what he saw, heard or otherwise
perceived about the
events in issue and this is necessary to obtain an adequate account of the
plaintiff’s perception of the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the weight to be given to the
Alternatively, s 136 applies to limit the evidence as having been
provided to or given in the presence of the first defendant.
Maintained. Witness’ state of mind/belief irrelevant to the fact in
issue identified. As to weight and s 136, see item 18.
Objection upheld.
Not relevant to whether the first defendant is
proposing to exercise the power of appointment bona fide and for proper
Lay opinion evidence does not satisfy the requirements of s 78
[2024] VSC 759
v Lin No. 4
Dated 31 October 2025.
Dated 3 November 2025.
Being the first
defendant’s submissions on objections filed 6 November 2025 (the
defendant’s submissions
); the eighth defendant’s submissions
regarding objections to evidence filed 6 November 2025; and the
plaintiff’s outline
of submissions on the first defendant’s
objections to evidence filed 6 November 2025 (the
plaintiff’s
submissions
Allstate Life Insurance Co
v ANZ Banking Group Ltd (No 3)
(1996) 64 FCR 55
Ashby v Commonwealth of
Australia (No 3)
[2012] FCA 788
(2012) 206 FCR 444
See generally
Lin v Lin No.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (573 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter