URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1579.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attard v Penspey Pty Ltd (Ruling) [2025] VCC 1579 (31 October 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
SERIOUS INJURY LIST
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-25-04384
JACOB ATTARD
PENSPEY PTY LTD
HIS HONOUR JUDGE PURCELL
DATE OF HEARING
16 October 2025
DATE OF RULING
31 October 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Attard v Penspey Pty Ltd (Ruling)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1579
Subject: ACCIDENT COMPENSATION
Catchwords: Medical panel referral – Whether a Medical Panel referral
should be made
Legislation Cited:
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
Cases Cited:
HIH Winterthur Workers’ Compensation (Vic) Ltd v
[1998] VSC 97
Greeves v HIH Winterthur Workers’
Compensation (Vic) Ltd
[2000] VSCA 68
[2000] 1 VR 344
Baumgartner v Victorian
Workcover Authority
[2022] VSCA 21
Ruling: Medical Questions are to be referred to a Medical
Panel pursuant to
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr A Ingram KC
Carbone Lawyers
For the Defendant
Hall & Wilcox
HIS HONOUR:
this proceeding, the plaintiff seeks a determination of “serious
injury” pursuant to s325 of the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
2013 (“the Act”).
18 August 2025, the defendant gave notice of intention to request that a medical
question be referred to a Medical Panel.
addition to the notice of intention to refer a medical question to a Medical
Panel, the defendant provided a notice of the questions
that it proposed that
the Court refer pursuant to s274 of the Act. The proposed medical questions are
as follows:
“1 What is the nature of the medical condition
(if any) of the Plaintiff’s:
(a) Left chest - pneumothorax; and
2 Does any medical condition of the ‘
left chest –
pneumothorax
’, as identified by the Medical Panel in answer to
Question 1(a), continue to result from, or be materially contributed to by,
injury sustained by the Plaintiff in the course of his employment on or about 11
August 2021?
3 Does any medical condition of the Plaintiff’s mind, as identified
by the Medical Panel in answer to question 1(b), result
from or is it materially
contributed by the Plaintiff’s ‘
left chest –
pneumothorax
’ injury sustained on or about 11 August 2021?
’ to Question 2 and/or 3, is any medical
condition of the Plaintiff’s:
(a) Left chest – pneumothorax; and
” meaning “
likely to last for, during
or through the foreseeable future
274 provides as follows:
“Medical questions
(1) In exercising jurisdiction under this Part, a court—
(a) may, on the court's own motion, refer a medical question to a
Medical Panel for an opinion under Division 3; or
(i) a party to the proceedings requests that a medical question be referred
to a Medical Panel; and
(ii) the party notified the court, no later than 14 days prior to the date
fixed for hearing of the proceedings, or another time determined
by the court,
of the party's intention to request that a medical question be so
the court must, subject to subsections (3), (4) and (5), refer a medical
question to a Medical Panel for an opinion under Division
(2) This section extends to, and applies in respect of, an application to the
County Court for leave under section
335(2)(d) of this
section 134AB(16)(b)
Compensation Act 1985
(a) so as to enable, in accordance with subsection (1)(a), the County Court
to refer a medical question to a Medical Panel for an
(b) so as to require the County Court, at the request of a party to the
application, to refer, in accordance with subsection (1)(b),
question (other than a medical
question referred to in paragraph (o) of the definition
of "medical question" in
to a Medical Panel for an opinion.
(3) If a request is made to a court under subsection (1)(b) to refer
question to a Medical Panel for an opinion, the court
may refuse to
refer the question if the court is of the opinion that the referral would, in
all the circumstances, constitute an
abuse of process.
(4) A court has the discretion, if a request is made under subsection (1)(b),
as to the form in which a medical
question is referred
to a Medical Panel.
(5) A court must not refer a medical
question if it appears to the court that the formation of an opinion by
a Medical Panel on the
question would depend substantially on the resolution of factual issues
which are more appropriately determined by the court
than by a Medical
plaintiff opposes the referral. In his written submission, the plaintiff
contended that the proposed referral amounts to an abuse
of process pursuant to
s274(3) of the Act.
primary reason why the plaintiff contended that the proposed referral was an
abuse of process was because a Medical Panel had
previously assessed the
plaintiff and answered medical questions in an Opinion dated 31 July 2024.
Relevantly, that Opinion was
“In the Panel’s
opinion Mr Jaros-Attard has a 1% whole person impairment resulting from the
accepted pneumothorax, left
chest, respiratory condition and surgical scarring
injury when assessed in accordance with the
the previous Medical Panel Opinion was provided in the context of a claim for
impairment benefits.
At a directions hearing held on
16 October 2025, the Court was informed that the previous Medical Panel referral
had in fact been
made by the plaintiff as part of a dispute about his impairment
benefit claim.
parties agree that the previous Medical Panel Opinion is not one that is binding
on the Court pursuant to s313(4) of the Act,
because it was not a referral
ordered by the Court in this proceeding.
contention of the plaintiff that the proposed referral is an abuse of process
really drills down to two propositions. First,
that there is no relevant
medical question to refer because a previous Medical Panel accepted a permanent
impairment from a compensable
injury. Second, that more recent medical evidence
does not support a finding that any injury as assessed by the previous Medical
Panel has resolved.
the other hand, the defendant contended that the plaintiff was assuming,
incorrectly, that there was no dispute between the parties
as to matters of
diagnosis and causation/contribution.
defendant contended that there was medical evidence to support the proposition
that the plaintiff no longer suffered any physical
condition relevant to the
accepted injury, over and above that of scarring. It highlighted how the
previous Medical Panel Opinion
found a whole person impairment relevant to
scarring only. It also highlighted that the plaintiff had a longstanding
asthma which had been disregarded for the purpose of assessing a
whole person impairment by the previous Medical Panel, raising issues
causation and impairment consequences from compensable injury.
defendant correctly contended that the proposed questions are relevant to the
live issue between the parties in the serious injury
proceeding.
defendant highlighted decisions such as
and more recently in
Baumgartner
where a dispute arises as to the existence or aetiology of an injury, that is a
sufficient ground to refer relevant medical
questions to a Medical Panel for
opinion, unless the referral is an abuse of process.
was said in
Baumgartner:
“The fact that, in a given
case, the defendant has medical evidence that supports the plaintiff’s
case, or is unable to
point to any medical evidence that refutes it, does not
mean that the issues in dispute are necessarily confined. It is not necessary
that there exist, at the time of the request, a conflict on the existing
evidence on that question. Indeed, a request may be made
early in the litigation
before the requesting party has obtained material of its own. The text of s 274
of the Act is not couched
in terms of resolving a dispute and, as was made plain
, the purpose of the referral is not to have the panel
arbitrate or adjudicate on competing opinions. In our view, as a matter of
construction, s 274 is not confined to those cases where the referring party can
affirmatively point to evidence that is in conflict
with the other party’s
Further, to impose a requirement that
there be some conflict in the evidence introduces an indeterminate criterion for
the exercise
of the referral power. It involves the judge making some assessment
as to the cogency of the evidence before the hearing of the proceeding.
case, the primary judge regarded a referral of a question touching the nature
and extent of the injury as ‘unnecessary’.
On the other hand, the
primary judge concluded that there was some qualification in the opinion of Dr
Shan as to work capacity and
that ‘it cannot be said that he has provided
an answer that rules out any dispute.
follows that there is nothing in the text of s 274 that limits the referral
power to those circumstances in which a factual dispute
between the parties on
the medical question has been
established.”
defendant accepted that the referral may not resolve all issues in dispute but
highlighted how the answer to the proposed medical
questions may narrow the
issues in dispute.
of the plaintiff's written contention focused on the “serious
injury” test for pecuniary loss, noting that the plaintiff
was under 26
years of age when he was injured. However, the legal test of “serious
injury” is not necessarily relevant
at all for the referral of medical
questions to a Medical Panel.
it is that the referral may not resolve all issues in dispute between parties,
but that is not uncommon and equally the referral
may narrow the issues in
dispute, based on the answer to medical questions by a Medical Panel that will
have specialist expertise
in answering such questions.
considered the material before the Court and the parties’ contentions, I
prefer those of the defendant on this occasion.
the fact that a previous Medical Panel provided a non-binding Opinion in the
context of a referral for an assessment of impairment
does not mean that in this
proceeding all relevant medical questions have been answered.
there is a basic dispute in this proceeding, namely whether the plaintiff has
identified “very considerable” consequences
from a compensable
injury. True it is that that the Medical Panel cannot decide the “serious
injury” issue, but equally
the Act provides for a system where relevant
medical questions can be referred to a specialist Medical Panel as part of the
injury” process. Seeking to refer questions about
causation or capacity is not an abuse of process.
the legal test for pecuniary loss serious injury is not relevant to the task of
the Medical Panel. That is an issue that is
ultimately for the Court. Even if
the plaintiff considers he has a very strong claim for “serious
injury” that of itself
is not a ground to refuse to refer medical
I prefer the defendant’s submissions because they focused on the fact that
there is a medical dispute for which medical
questions can properly be referred
to the Medical Panel. On the other hand, the plaintiff’s submissions
focused more on the
“serious injury” test, seek to rely on the
evidence in the previous Panel Opinion (which is not binding) and on a general
complaint that he has strong medical evidence in support of his application for
“serious injury”. None of those grounds
in isolation or even in
combination amount to an abuse of process.
also pause to note that at this stage I do not have access to all the relevant
medical evidence or other evidence that either party
seeks to rely on and am in
no position to accept that the plaintiff’s claim for “serious
injury” is as strong as
he submits. It would be an erroneous
consideration to act in such an assertion in the context of a Medical Panel
this is not a scenario where there is such a substantial factual dispute, or a
late application to refer, where it could
be said to be an abuse of process to
refer medical questions to a Medical Panel.
Accordingly,
s274(5) of the Act is not enlivened and it is appropriate to refer medical
questions to a Medical Panel.
are invited to prepare minutes of orders sought to give effect to this
Medical Panel Opinion dated 31
July 2024, page 1
HIH Winterthur
Workers’ Compensation (Vic) Ltd v Greeves
[1998] VSC 9
HIH Winterthur Workers’ Compensation (Vic) Ltd
[2000] VSCA 68
[2000] 1 VR 344.
Baumgartner v Victorian
Workcover Authority
[2022] VSCA 21.
Ibid at [75]-[77]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter