URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ballarat C249ball (PSA) [2025] PPV 41 (25 August 2025)
Ballarat Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
25 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Ballarat Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
25 August 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Ballarat Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball
City of Ballarat
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Ballarat Planning Scheme
Subject land
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Ballarat Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball
Common name
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
Brief description
Applies the Heritage Overlay (HO234) to the subject land
Subject land
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
Planning Authority and Proponent
City of Ballarat
21 November to 23 December 2024
Submissions
3 (1 opposed)
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair)
Directions Hearing
By video conference, 16 June 2025
Panel Hearing
Planning Panels Victoria and by video conference, 24 July 2025
Site inspection
Accompanied, 24 July 2025
Party to the Hearing
City of Ballarat represented by Charyn Symes, Strategic Planner Heritage,
who called expert evidence on architectural history from
Natica Schmeder of
Landmark Heritage
Ballarat PSA C249ball [2025] PPV
Date of this report
22 August 2025
Executive summary
In November 2023, the
City of Ballarat (Council) received a request pursuant to the
Building Act
to demolish all the outbuildings on 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
heritage (the subject land). Council supported the demolition
recording the outbuildings along the northern boundary. The following month,
Council received a request to demolish the
dwelling and all the outbuildings on
the subject land.
Council subsequently engaged heritage consultants to assess the heritage
significance of the subject land. After the heritage consultants
found it to be
of local heritage significance, Council exhibited Ballarat Planning Scheme
Amendment C249ball (the Amendment) which
seeks to apply the Heritage Overlay to
the subject land.
Council received three submissions, one of which was from the landowner who
did not object to the Heritage Overlay being applied to
the house but objected
to it being applied to the remaining land.
Key issues raised in the objecting submission include:
previous approval to demolish the outbuildings must be honoured.
It is unclear
what has changed since Council’s heritage adviser did not object to the
demolition request.
Applying the
Heritage Overlay will affect the ability to develop the Commercial 1 Zone land
in the future.
After considering all submissions, expert evidence
and observations at the accompanied site inspection, the Panel concludes:
the outbuildings on the subject land are significant to the heritage place
the Heritage Overlay should be applied to all the subject land.
Recommendation
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball (the Amendment) proposes to implement the
recommendation of the heritage citation titled
Heritage Advice: Assessment of
214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
(Landmark Heritage Pty Ltd, 26 April
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
permanently
apply the Heritage Overlay (HO234) to 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
(subject land)
incorporate the
HO234 Statement of Significance into the Ballarat Planning Scheme (the Planning
Scheme) through the Clause 72.04 Schedule.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to land shown in Figure 1.
A – Dwelling
B – Former Laundry
C – Former Stables
D – Motor House
Source: Explanatory Report
Subject land
Laundry viewed from the southwest
Front entrance of the house viewed from the front hall
Front fence detail
Stable viewed from the northwest
Motor garage front facade
Source: Ms Schmeder’s expert evidence
1.2 Background
1 provides details of the chronology of events.
Chronology of
Council received a request pursuant to the
Building Act 1993
demolish all the outbuildings on the subject land
Council supported the demolition subject to recording the outbuildings
along the northern boundary
Council received a request to demolish the dwelling and all the
outbuildings on the subject land
Council referred the demolition request to Council’ heritage adviser
and strategic planning department who conducted a site
inspection and further
Council engaged Landmark Heritage Pty Ltd and David Helms Heritage Planning
to assess the heritage significance of the subject land
Council made a request to the Minister for Planning to apply the Heritage
Overlay to the subject land on an interim basis, and advised
the demolition
permit applicant of the request
Council resolved to request authorisation from the Minister for Planning to
exhibit the Amendment
Interim Heritage Overlay (HO234) was applied to the subject land until 1
August 2025
[Amendment C247ball]
The Amendment public exhibition started
The Amendment public exhibition ended
The Amendment re-exhibition started (Re-exhibited due to an administrative
Council officers visited the subject land
The Amendment re-exhibition ended
Council considered submissions to the Amendment and sought further
clarification on the subject land’s significance
Landmark Heritage revised the heritage citation in response to a Council
request for further clarification on the significance of
the outbuildings
Council resolved to support post-exhibition changes to the Amendment in
response to issues raised in submissions and to request a
Interim Heritage Overlay (HO234) extended to 1 August 2026 [Amendment
1.3 The Panel’s approach
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel undertook a site inspection accompanied by Council and Ms Schmeder
on 24 July 2025. The Panel thanks the landowner for
enabling this
inspection.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from the site visit,
and submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions
and materials have been considered
by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
1.4 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Planning Policy Framework
15.03-1S (Heritage conservation)
- Clause 21.02-3
(Creswick Road Precinct (CBD fringe mixed use))
- Clause 21.06-2
Planning scheme provisions
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 46 (Strategic Assessment Guidelines)
Practice Note 1 (Applying the Heritage Overlay) sets out recognised heritage
criteria including:
Criterion A:
Importance to the course
or pattern of our cultural or natural history (historical significance).
Criterion B:
Possession of uncommon, rare or endangered aspects of
our cultural or natural history (rarity).
Criterion D:
Importance in demonstrating the principal
characteristics of a class of cultural or natural places or environments
(representativeness).
Note: Clauses 21.02-3 and 21.06-2 have been translated into the new format
Municipal Planning Strategy and Planning Policy Framework.
2 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
What is significant?
The house and outbuildings including the former laundry, stable, and garage
designed by Percy Richards in 1912 and 1913, and the iron
palisade front fence
at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central are significant. The 1912-14 form,
materiality and detailing of the buildings
and the iron palisade front fence
excluding the gate contributes to the significance of the place. Alterations and
additions to the
house are not significant.
How is it significant?
The house, fence and outbuildings at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
are of local historic and representative significance and
rarity value to the
City of Ballarat.
Why is it significant?
The garage or ‘motor house’ is historically significant as a
very early and rare example, which was built at a time when
very few people
could afford to own a motor vehicle. The garage and the adjacent stable
demonstrates the transition from horse to
motor transport in the early twentieth
(Criteria A and B)
The house is significant as a representative example of a substantial and
well-detailed Federation house that demonstrates the transition
from the Queen
Anne to Arts & Crafts style. This is demonstrated by the complex hip and
gable roof form embellished with terracotta
ridgecapping and finials, casement
windows with Art Nouveau leadlights as well as multiple bay windows, red
facebrick with smooth
render banding to walls and chimneys, and timber verandah
fretwork and eaves brackets in keeping with the Queen Anne style, and jointed
brickwork, roughcast render below the eaves, square-edged timber shingles to the
verandah gable, and heavy brick piers to the verandah,
in keeping with the Arts
& Crafts style.
(Criterion D)
The house is an excellent example of the work of prominent and prolific
local architect, Percy Richards, demonstrating his fine use
of detail and the
evolution of his style from highly embellished early Federation to the stronger
lines of the interwar era. The
house is distinguished by its very high level of
intactness, which includes original unpainted render, slate roof cladding and
embellishments, and the retention of all original brick outbuildings,
also designed by Richards, comprising the former laundry, stable
and garage.
(Criterion D)
The front fence is an unusual example of an iron palisade fence. While this
built in the
nineteenth century and first years of the twentieth, this fence was manufactured
with a very unusual integral cast-iron
plinth, in place of the typical bluestone
plinth. It is also unusual in its use of three-dimensional finials in the form
topped with an obelisk, as compared to the typical flat fleur-de-lys
spearheads.
(Criterion B)
2.1 Outbuildings significance
(i) The issue
issue is whether the outbuildings on the subject land are significant to the
heritage place.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
The landowner submission
Council has
approved the demolition of the outbuildings including the existing brick
building and garage behind the existing building.
heritage adviser did not object at the time.
The Commercial 1
Zone applies to the subject land, and any future development to the rear and
side should not be affected by applying
the Heritage Overlay to all the subject
Council submission
The Heritage
Overlay does not prohibit development, and it encourages adaptive reuse of
heritage places as appropriate.
landowner’s concern regarding potential future development of the subject
land is not relevant to the Amendment.
The issue is
whether the Heritage Overlay should be applied to all the subject land including
the outbuildings, laundry and rear service
The landowner
invited Council officers to inspect the subject land on 11 February 2025
including Council’s heritage adviser.
Council engaged
Landmark Heritage Pty Ltd to undertake a full review of the exhibited heritage
citation, Statement of Significance
and recommendations regarding additional
controls as required.
Heritage revised the heritage citation and provided a new Statement of
Significance (dated 21 March 2025) which:
- demonstrates
the importance of the palisade iron fence, dwelling, laundry, outbuildings,
south facing garden area and rear service
- confirms the
interrelationship of heritage elements, including Osborne House, and its
outbuildings, fence and L-shaped former garden
area, contribute collectively to
the significance of the place
- concludes the
complex of elements is a highly intact heritage place due to retaining all
original outbuildings around a rear services
courtyard, designed with an
uncommonly high level of architectural expression.
Council resolved
to support the post-exhibition revised citation and Statement of Significance
prepared by Landmark Heritage at its
14 May 2025 meeting.
Schmeder’s expert evidence
The freestanding
- should be
considered fundamental to the residential component of the subject land
- was designed
as a simplified version of the house and designed with the same brickwork,
exposed rafter ends to the southern eaves,
and simplified version of the capped
and banded chimneys
- appears to be
largely intact, retaining a double-hung sash windows, and ledged timber
- demonstrates
the separation of noxious activities (key domestic functions such as clothes
washing and toilets) from residential
buildings at that time.
because the combined obelisk and urn motifs could not be found in
Ballarat’s many surviving heritage iron palisade
- may have been
pre-fabricated for a cemetery or church because a different version of an urn
topped with an obelisk are found at
the Old and New Ballarat
cemeteries.
- is the only
known surviving pre-1920s domestic motor garage to survive in Ballarat and its
- should be
reflected in the heritage citation as the oldest residential motor garage
- adopted the
Edwardian Baroque style commonly seen in commercial and civic architecture of
the early decades of the twentieth century.
Garages were
commonly constructed with new houses by the mid-1920s, but rarely before
The stable:
- shares common
materials with the other outbuildings and house, with pressed red brick and
unpainted cement-render dressings
- was accessed
off the side road (Trench Street)
original doors on the north side elevation removed when the wall was demolished
during an addition to the building’s
sheltered yard through its conjoined form with the garage
traditional nineteenth century form which contrasts the Edwardian Baroque form
used later for the garage.
The garage and
stable are extremely rare as the only surviving pair of two such pairs built at
the same time.
(iii) Discussion
Ms Schmeder has provided compelling reasons why the
outbuildings are significant to the heritage place. They are original buildings
sufficiently intact to appreciate the subject land as one place. The architect
carefully designed the outbuildings to have a uniform
theme while contrasting
the garage with its own style. The outbuildings, while not all built with the
original house, explain the
story associated with the family that resided in the
house. They are significant to the heritage place.
The Panel agrees the overall complex comprising the suburban house in its
functional setting with what appears to be Ballarat’s
only surviving
domestic motor garage achieves heritage Criterion B (Rarity).
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
outbuildings on the subject land are significant to the heritage place.
2.2 Heritage Overlay curtilage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Heritage Overlay should be applied to the land beyond the
residential building to enable development opportunities
on the subject
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council and Ms Schmeder stated that applying the
Heritage Overlay to all the subject land is consistent with guidance in Planning
Practice Note 1. This includes:
The Heritage Overlay applies to both the listed heritage item and its
associated land. It is usually important to include land surrounding
a building,
structure, tree or feature of importance to ensure that any development,
including subdivision, does not adversely affect
the setting, context or
significance of the heritage item. The land surrounding the heritage item is
known as a ‘curtilage’
and will be shown as a polygon on the
Heritage Overlay map. In many cases, particularly
in urban areas and
townships, the extent of the curtilage will be the whole of the property (for
example, a suburban dwelling and
Review the heritage study documentation and ask the question ‘What is
significant?’.
The polygon should capture those elements of the place
that are significant.
If there are multiple elements that are widely
dispersed on the property, one option may be to have multiple polygons which
the same Heritage Overlay
The landowner submission
The Heritage
Overlay should only apply to the existing dwelling and not the remaining
Applying the
Heritage Overlay beyond the existing dwelling will affect future development on
the subject land.
Council submission
Applying the
Heritage Overlay to only to the dwelling would result in a loss of integrity and
intactness of the heritage place as
The curtilage
should remain as proposed because an appropriate curtilage ensures the setting
and context are retained as stated in
Planning Practice Note 1.
The current
allotment provides an uncomplicated and easily recognised boundary.
The Statement of
Significance explains how the dwelling was sited on an angle to allow for two
visible elevations from the street,
in addition to views of the south facing
development is to occur on the subject land, these are the types of
considerations that must be factored into the assessment
of a planning permit
application.
Ms Schmeder’s expert evidence
Some heritage
places in the municipality with the Heritage Overlay mapped only to the
significant building footprint:
- do not cover
its setting (or outbuildings, where they exist)
historical anomaly
represent current practice as defined by Planning Practice Note
Applying the
Heritage Overlay to only part of a site does not allow the consideration of the
impact of changes to the setting may
have on the heritage value of the
(iii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council’s and Ms
Schmeder’s reasons for applying the Heritage Overlay to all the subject
The Panel has concluded the outbuildings are significant to the heritage
place. Applying the Heritage Overlay to the whole property
enables Council,
when assessing any future permit application proposing to develop land around
the house, to understand how it will
impact existing heritage fabric. The
heritage curtilage needs to include all the subject land because the
outbuildings, as significant
elements, are important in explaining the
relationship between them, the house and the overall complex.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
Heritage Overlay should be applied to all the subject land.
2.3 Statement of Significance and heritage citation
(i) The issue
issue is whether changes proposed to the Statement of Significance following
exhibition are appropriate.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council referred to post-exhibition changes to the
Statement of Significance and heritage citation (both dated March 2025) that
supported by Council at its 14 May 2020 meeting. Ms Schmeder proposed
further changes after the Panel’s accompanied site inspection
included her observations. Both sets of changes are summarised in
Statement of Significance post-exhibition changes
Ms Schmeder
Statement of Significance
What is significant?
The house and outbuildings including the former laundry, stable, and garage
designed by Percy Richards in 1912 and 1913, and the iron
palisade front fence
at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central are significant.
The residential complex comprising Osborne
ouse and its outbuildings including the former
laundry, stables, and garage designed by Percy Richards in 1912 and
the iron palisade
front fence
L-shaped garden area
at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central,
significant.
The 1912-14 form, materiality and detailing of the buildings and the iron
palisade front fence excluding the gate contributes to the
significance of the
The 1912-14 form, materiality and detailing of the buildings, and the iron
palisade front fence (excluding the gate),
and their interrelationship on the
contributes to the significance of the place.
Alterations and additions to the house are not significant.
Alterations and additions to the house
and stables
significant.
How is it significant?
The house, fence and outbuildings at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat Central
are of local historic and representative significance and
rarity value to the
City of Ballarat.
The house, fence and outbuildings
at 214 Creswick Road,
Ballarat Central
of local historic and
representative significance and rarity value to the City of Ballarat.
garage may be of State-level significance.
The house, fence and outbuildings complex at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat
Central are is of local historic and representative significance
value to the City of Ballarat. The garage
State-level significance.
Why is it significant?
The garage or ‘motor house’ is historically significant as a
very early and rare example, which was built at a time when
very few people
could afford to own a motor vehicle. The garage and the adjacent stable
demonstrate
the transition from horse to motor transport in
the early twentieth century. (Criteria A and B)
The garage or ‘motor house’ is historically significant as a
very early and rare example
of its kind
, which was built at a time when
very few people could afford to own a motor vehicle
, and even fewer had a
purpose-built structure to house it
. The garage and the adjacent
demonstrate
the transition from horse to motor
transport in the early twentieth century.
The relative importance of the
garage at the time is demonstrated by its architecturally expressed front
façade addressing
Creswick Road.
(Criteria A and B)
The house was designed to be appreciated while approaching from the
south, which was made possible by the L-shaped garden. The laundry
behind the house and was designed to complement it, using the same red facebrick
and a chimney employing the same cornice
moulding and render band as the
house’s chimneys.
The overall complex is rare in its retention of a suburban house in its
functional setting, comprising a services courtyard to the
rear of the house.
These outbuildings and their interrelationship illustrate how a substantial
residence was run in the early twentieth
century, as well as the traditional
sense of hierarchy between “front” and “back” of house
still characteristic
at the time. (Criteria A and B)
Site plan replaced with new plan and caption
‘Figure 9: Site
Site plan new caption
‘Site Plan: Heritage Overlay curtilage
(red), outbuildings and fence (blue)’
The heritage citation (Post-exhibition version) tracked changes:
“3. Connecting Victorians by transport and communications: 3.4 Linking
Victorians by road in the 20th century”
to the thematic context
described Figures 1 and 2
added details
services courtyard to the rear (east),
and the stables
Comparative analysis:
- referred to
the setting (including fencing) of Federation houses
- added a new
title ‘Services courtyard’ to relevant content and added
- noted the
spears in the front fence are individually set in the stone
changes made to the Statement of Significance.
Ms Schmeder’s
further tracked changes to the heritage citation:
noted that Percy
Selwyn Richards’ two large homesteads that he designed while employed at
Brezanor are both in Southern Grampians
recognised the
house’s surrounds feature the same combination of curved brick specials
terminating in stop chamfers, which are
repeated in the three outbuildings
Description:
- recognised the
painted window sills were made of bluestone
- noted the
roughcast render and chimney render are coated only with remnant limewash
“The simple cornice, or hood, rests upon profiled brick corbels and
scotia moulding (both overpainted).”
Comparative analysis:
- noted the
Laundry’s brickwork and an unusually decorative chimney
- referred to
the front fence of Erindale, 39 Webster Street, Ballarat Central (in HO166) as
another example of a full fabricated
- referred to
the iron fence at the subject site as appearing to be ‘almost’
At the Hearing, Mr Schmeder stated that other
Statements of Significance in Ballarat refer to sites of State-level
significance.
(iii) Discussion
The exhibited Statement of Significance included
content relevant to local heritage. In response to Mr Schmeder’s
recommendation,
Council proposed to refer to the garage on the subject land as
being of potential State-level significance. The Panel does not consider
to be appropriate because commenting on a building or land not yet assessed or
found to be of State-level significance may result
in confusion and unrealistic
expectations.
The Panel has made no formal recommendation regarding changes proposed for
the heritage citation because this document will not form
part of the Planning
Scheme. Having said that, the Panel sees no issue with any of those proposed
All other changes are appropriate because they reflect new information
discovered through further research and the site inspection.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
The Statement of
Significance should not refer to the garage at 214 Creswick Road, Ballarat
Central being of potential State-level
significance.
Council should
apply a different process to document the garage’s potential State-level
significance.
appropriate to include all other changes proposed to the Statement of
Significance since the Amendment’s exhibition.
recommends:
Ballarat Planning Scheme Amendment C249ball as exhibited subject to revising the
Statement of Significance to include changes
except for reference to the garage
being of potential State-level
significance.
Appendix A Document list
Description
Provided by
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Planning Panels Victoria
Expert report – Natica Schmeder
City of Ballarat
Council submission
City of Ballarat
Revised heritage citation with tracked changes
City of Ballarat
Revised Statement of Significance with tracked changes
City of Ballarat
Council emphasis
Ms Schmeder’s
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter