URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/261.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mulcahy & Co Accounting Services Pty Ltd v Porter [2025] VSCA 261 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2024 0041
CO ACCOUNTING SERVICES PTY LTD (ACN 105 360 325) &
(according to the attached Schedule)
TIMOTHY NORMAN PORTER & ORS
(according to the
attached Schedule)
Respondents
S EAPCI 2024 0051
TIMOTHY NORMAN PORTER & ANOR
(according to the attached
Cross-Applicants
MULCAHY & CO ACCOUNTING SERVICES PTY LTD
(ACN 105 360 325) & ORS
(according to the attached
Cross-Respondents
S EAPCI 2024 0056
CHRISTOPHER GERARD CONHEADY
BFMM INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 625 266 891)
KENNEDY, ORR and RICHARDS JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
6–7 August 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
29 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 261
JUDGMENT APPEALED
[2021] VSC 572 (Delany
[2024] VSC 6 (Delany
[2024] VSC 171 (Delany
CONTRACT – Causation – Where
retainers for accountant to provide advisory services in relation to purchase of
– Where accountant found to have breached retainers –
Where breach of one of the retainers (the ‘Porter retainer’)
to misuse of confidential information after termination of retainer –
Scope of breach – Breach constituted by
misuse of form and contents of
earlier conditional offer – Where judge unable to say that earlier offer
provided to accountant
prior to making successful unconditional
‘cash’ offer – Where further information available from other
included more recent conditional offer and highly attractive valuation
– Causation not established – Leave to appeal
granted – Appeal
Alexander v Cambridge Credit Co Ltd
(1987) 9 NSWLR 310
Amaca Pty Ltd v Booth
[2011] HCA 53
(2011) 246 CLR 36
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Lewis v Australian Capital
(2020) 271 CLR 208, discussed.
Construction – Whether implied obligation of good faith or obligation not
to improperly use position as advisor
survived termination of Porter retainer
– Not reasonable or necessary for terms to survive termination –
Notice of contention
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Incompetency – Application for proposed ground of appeal to be struck out
as incompetent –
Where proposed ground seeks to set aside
‘findings’ in judge’s reasons as to accountant acting
dishonestly and
fraudulently in breach of procedural fairness – Whether
findings constituted ‘determination[s]’ within the meaning
Supreme Court Act 1986
– Concept of
‘determination’ in
does not extend to findings made
– Proposed ground of appeal incompetent – Accountant had adequate
notice in any event
O’Bryan v Lindholm
[2024] VSCA 130
(2024) 74 VR 496
Barnes v Addy
[1874] UKLawRpCh 20
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244
[2017] NSWCA 114
(2017) 94 NSWLR 518
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
, discussed.
EVIDENCE – Fresh
evidence – Application to adduce further evidence pursuant to
r 64.13(1) of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
– Where judge found that account of profits capable of doing full justice
and refused constructive trust remedy – Whether
parties shared
‘common assumptions’ that corporate trustee defendant would not be
insolvent – Whether ‘common
assumptions’ falsified by
subsequent liquidation – No evidence that parties shared common
assumptions – Assumptions
misconceived and not ‘falsified’ in
any event – Application refused in exercise of discretion –
(2007) 62 ACSR 576
Apostolidis v Kalenik
[2011] VSCA 307
(2011) 35 VR
, considered.
EQUITY – Fiduciary duty – Whether fiduciary
relationship in addition to contractual relationship – Lack of necessary
undertaking and vulnerability – No fiduciary duty owed –
Applications for leave to cross-appeal refused –
Hospital Products Ltd
v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
Chameleon Mining NL [No 2]
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
ABN AMRO Bank NV v
Bathurst Regional Council
[2014] FCAFC 65
(2014) 224 FCR 1
, discussed.
Applicants in S EAPCI 2024 0041/First and second cross-respondents in
S EAPCI 2024 0051:
Mr P Solomon KC with Mr M Nguyen
First and second respondents in S EAPCI 2024 0041/Cross-applicants in
S EAPCI 2024 0051/Applicant in S EAPCI 2024 0056:
Mr P G Cawthorn KC with Mr P H Caillard
Third respondent in S EAPCI 2024 0041/Third cross-respondent in
S EAPCI 2024 0051/Respondent in S EAPCI 2024 0056:
No appearance
Interveners in S EAPCI 2024 0051 & S EAPCI 2024 0056:
Mr S J Maiden KC with Ms R McCarthy
Applicants in S EAPCI 2024 0041/First and second cross-respondents in
S EAPCI 2024 0051:
Kennedys (Australasia) Partnership
First and second respondents in S EAPCI 2024 0041/Cross-applicants in
S EAPCI 2024 0051/Applicant in S EAPCI 2024 0056:
Nevetts Lawyers
Third respondent in S EAPCI 2024 0041/Third cross-respondent in
S EAPCI 2024 0051/Respondent in S EAPCI 2024 0056:
Interveners in S EAPCI 2024 0051 & S EAPCI 2024 0056:
Piper Alderman
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART A: INTRODUCTION 1
PART B: CHRONOLOGY 5
PART C: CAUSATION AND
MR PORTER’S LOSS 12
PART D: WHETHER ADVERSE FINDINGS
MADE IN BREACH OF PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS 32
PART E: CROSS-APPLICATIONS
PART F: CONCLUSION 55
RICHARDS JA:
PART A: INTRODUCTION
& Co Accounting Services Pty Ltd (‘Mulcahy & Co’) provides
accounting and business advisory services.
Mr Mulcahy is a director and
shareholder of Mulcahy & Co (Mulcahy & Co and Mr Mulcahy will
together be referred to as the
‘Mulcahy parties’).
Debono Pty Ltd, trading as Chris’s Body Builders (‘CBB’), is a
business that manufactures tipping bodies and
tipping trailers (the
‘Business’). Prior to 1 July 2018, CBB was owned by Mr Chris
Debono and his brother.
is the founder of Porter Excavations Pty Ltd, a plant hire and civil
construction business, which formed part of a group
of entities known as Porter
Group. Porter Group was a long term customer of CBB. Mr Conheady is an
accountant. At the relevant time,
he was the chief financial officer of Porter
2017, Mr Porter and Mr Conheady became interested in obtaining a
controlling interest in the Business. Each of Mr Conheady
Mr Porter retained the Mulcahy parties to act for them in relation to
obtaining such an interest.
from the end of 2017, Mr Mulcahy engaged in negotiations to obtain a
controlling interest in the Business for himself and
some co-investors. A
Supreme Court judge found that ‘the deal’ for Mr Mulcahy and
his consortium to purchase a controlling
interest in CBB was in fact
‘done’ on 18 December
In the result, by way of a
share sale agreement entered into in 2018, a trustee company incorporated by
Mr Mulcahy and his business
partners, BFMM Investments Pty Ltd
(‘BFMM’), purchased a controlling interest in the Business.
and Mr Conheady brought proceedings against the Mulcahy parties, as well as
BFMM. They claimed that the Mulcahy parties
breached the terms of each retainer,
as well as breaching fiduciary duties. They also claimed that BFMM
‘knowingly assisted’
in breaching fiduciary duties. They sought
damages, equitable compensation and an account of profits. They also sought
relief against
BFMM, being a declaration that the shares owned by BFMM in CBB
were held for them on a constructive trust.
judge ‘split’ the issues of liability and quantum and delivered
three sets of reasons:
Porter v Mulcahy & Co Accounting Services Pty
(‘Liability
Mulcahy & Co Accounting Services Pty Ltd [No 5]
Mulcahy & Co Accounting Services Pty Ltd [No 6]
(‘Further Relief
relation to Mr Porter, the judge relevantly found:
(a) there was a retainer with Mr Porter on foot from 29 June 2017
until 15 November 2017 (the ‘29 June 2017
Retainer’);
(b) while there was no breach of that retainer prior to its ending on 15
November 2017,
the Mulcahy parties
had breached ongoing confidentiality obligations which persisted after that
In their agreed facts, the
parties described that breach as occurring when Mr Mulcahy ‘used
Mr Porter’s offer of 14 September
2017 in making an oral offer for
CBB on 18 December 2017 and then a formal written offer on 25 January
However, as will be
seen below, the precise nature of the breach found is in dispute; and
(c) the Mulcahy parties did not owe fiduciary duties to
relation to Mr Conheady, the judge relevantly found that the Mulcahy
parties breached the retainer with Mr Conheady, which was
in existence from
16 November 2017 to 6 March 2018
(the ‘Conheady Retainer’) by usurping the opportunity to acquire a
controlling interest in the
They also thereby
breached fiduciary duties owed to
Mr Conheady.
to the claims made against BFMM, the judge found:
(a) BFMM was the ‘corporate creature, vehicle, or alter ego’ of
Mr Mulcahy, who ‘used BFMM to secure the profits
of and to inflict
the losses occasioned by his breach of fiduciary duty’ and Mr Mulcahy
was also the agent of BFMM;
(b) Mr Mulcahy ‘engaged in a dishonest and fraudulent design’
and ‘BFMM knowingly assisted in that
the making of an election by Mr Conheady, on 10 April 2024, the judge made
the following relevant orders (exclusive of costs):
1. The [Mulcahy parties] pay [Mr Porter] the sum of $4,832,445.50,
together with interest of
$812,910.01.
2. The [Mulcahy parties] pay [Mr Conheady] the sum of $4,832,445.50
together with interest of
$812,910.01.
3. [BFMM] pay [Mr Conheady] the sum of $11,862,693 together with interest
of $3,095,987.
damages in respect of both Mr Porter and Mr Conheady were damages for
loss of a commercial opportunity and were awarded on the
Mr Porter and Mr Conheady would have purchased an 80 per cent
controlling interest in the Business (with each to own 40
judge rejected Mr Conheady’s claim for a constructive trust
Mulcahy parties originally sought leave to appeal the judge’s orders on
three proposed grounds.
only two of those grounds were
Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady in turn sought an extension of time to file a notice of
objection to competency in relation to proposed
ground 2, and also filed a
notice of contention.
the result, the following questions arose in relation to the Mulcahy
parties’ application for leave to appeal:
(a) Did the judge err:
(i) in concluding that the applicants’ wrongful use of a letter of offer
by Mr Porter dated 14 September 2017 caused Mr Porter’s
(proposed ground 1); and/or
(ii) in making findings that Mr Mulcahy acted dishonestly or fraudulently
without according procedural fairness (proposed ground
(b) Should Mr Porter and Mr Conheady be granted an extension of time
to contend that proposed ground 2 is incompetent?
(c) If the answer to question (a)(i) is ‘yes’, should the judgment
be affirmed on the ground that the Mulcahy parties
breached two further terms
(as alleged in the notice of contention of Mr Porter and Mr Conheady)?
reasons given below, we have found that the answer to each of questions (a)(i)
and (b) is ‘yes’, while the answer
to each of questions (a)(ii) and
(c) is ‘no’. Thus, although we have ultimately determined that
proposed ground 2 is
incompetent and fails, we have found that proposed ground 1
is established and that the notice of contention should be rejected.
is that the Mulcahy parties’ application for leave to appeal will be
granted and the appeal will be allowed.
of Mr Porter and Mr Conheady also filed cross-applications for leave
The sole proposed ground of Mr Conheady’s cross-application was that
the judge erred in finding that an account of profits
was capable of doing full
justice such that a constructive trust ought not be imposed. Mr Porter
raised a similar ground to Mr Conheady
(proposed ground (b)). Both also
sought orders that this Court declare a constructive trust, alternatively that
the question of whether
a constructive trust should be imposed be remitted to
the trial judge. In order to obtain a declaration that there be a constructive
trust, Mr Porter also needed to (and did) advance a further ground that the
judge erred in concluding that the Mulcahy parties did
not owe him a fiduciary
duty (proposed ground (a)).
order to challenge the judge’s refusal to grant a constructive trust,
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter also made an application
to adduce evidence
which was not before the judge.
Their submissions in support of this application were put in various ways, but
essentially arose from the fact that, since the judge
made his orders, BFMM has
gone into liquidation such that an ‘assumption’ about its solvency
had subsequently been ‘falsified’
pursuant to the principles in
Foody v Horewood
The result was that Mr Conheady might not recover the amount awarded as an
account of profits against BFMM. Although BFMM generally
took no active role in
any of the applications before this Court, the unit holders of the trust of
which BFMM was trustee
also recorded as creditors) then sought leave to intervene in order to oppose
the orders being sought by Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady. They also sought
to adduce further evidence which was not before the judge in doing so.
as acknowledged by senior counsel for Mr Porter and Mr Conheady, it
was a precondition to challenging the refusal to grant
the constructive trust
remedy that they be permitted to adduce fresh evidence, the key question which
ultimately arose was whether
the fresh evidence ought to be adduced. For the
reasons detailed below, we have found that the answer to this question is
It follows that the application to adduce fresh evidence must
be refused with the result that both cross-applications also failed
they alleged that the judge erred in failing to declare a constructive
left Mr Porter’s cross-application insofar as it challenged the
judge’s finding that no fiduciary duty was owed to
him (proposed ground
(a)). We have rejected this ground insofar as it was necessary to consider
Accordingly,
we now detail our reasons for our answers to the questions identified. In order
to do so, it is necessary first to provide
a chronology of relevant
B: CHRONOLOGY
Preliminary
2005 and 2018, Mulcahy & Co acted as tax agent and provided services to
Mr Conheady in his personal capacity and to entities
Mr Conheady, including his family trust. From early 2016, Mulcahy & Co
also provided services to the Porter
2016, Mr Debono retained Mulcahy & Co to value the Business and to
prepare a business profile with a view to selling it to
an overseas purchaser,
though no sale eventuated at that
The profile prepared by
Mulcahy & Co contained a value range of between $12.6 million and
$14.7 million, with $14 million being
a ‘guide’ to a
purchase price.
30 May 2017, Mr Mulcahy, with Mr Debono’s permission, contacted
Mr Porter about the possibility of Mr Porter acquiring the
Mr Porter told Mr Mulcahy of his interest in doing so and said that
Mr Conheady would be the contact for the receipt of
information.
23 June 2017, Mr Porter signed a confidentiality agreement prepared on
behalf of Mr Debono in relation to the potential
acquisition.
Mr Conheady
then began a due diligence
during the 29 June 2017 Retainer
29 June 2017, Mr Conheady and Mr Mulcahy engaged in a phone
conversation relating to a proposed acquisition of the Business by
Mr Porter, or an entity associated with him. Mr Conheady told
Mr Mulcahy that he knew that Mr Matthews had excused himself from
due to a conflict of
Mr Mulcahy gave
Mr Conheady an assurance that he was not acting for the vendor and was able
to act for Mr Porter. Mr Conheady then
sought, and was given, advice
from Mr Mulcahy concerning the form of any purchase by Mr Porter
(assets or shares) and the warranties
that would be required on a share
judge found that this marked the beginning of the 29 June 2017 Retainer,
which was constituted by what was discussed that day,
by what was to be implied
from the previous and ongoing dealings between the parties, and from what
happened on and after 29 June
2017 until 15 November 2017. Although it was a
retainer to provide advice on such aspects of the proposed purchase on which
was sought, as events transpired, no further advice was
3 August 2017, Mr Porter and Mr Conheady obtained a valuation from
Munday Wilkinson, which valued the Business at between $18.34
million and $20.96
million, that is, a maximum of approximately $21 million (the ‘MW
valuation’).
16 August 2017, Mr Conheady sent an email to Mr Debono seeking certain
information, which was copied to Mr Matthews. At this time,
and through to
at least November 2017, Mr Conheady dealt directly with Mr Matthews in
relation to the proposed
28 August 2017, Mr Porter made a formal written ‘conditional
offer’ to purchase 70 per cent of the shares in CBB for
$8.4 million
(based on a total value of $12 million) with settlement ‘no earlier
than’ 15 November 2017. Settlement was
made conditional on the purchaser
obtaining bank finance, and the offer was also subject to entry into a formal
share sale agreement
by 15 November 2017. The offer included terms about
adjustments; warranties; the lease; and an option to purchase the remaining
It provided for a vendor restraint of seven years and that the Debono
brothers would continue to be employed part-time for two years
settlement.
8 September 2017, Mr Conheady, Mr Porter and Mr Debono met and
reached an ‘in-principle agreement’ on the terms of
sale, which
included agreeing to extend the completion date to 2 January
14 September 2017, Mr Porter sent a revised offer to Mr Debono (the
‘Porter offer’).
This offer was similar to the earlier August offer being also made subject to
bank finance, but the settlement date was moved to
2 January 2018.
September 2017, Fordham Business Advisors Pty Ltd (‘Fordhams’) was
formally retained to advise Mr Porter about the
acquisition.
August and October 2017, Mr Conheady and Mr Mulcahy had a large number
of conversations concerning CBB. The judge found that
these were to provide
‘updates’ to Mr Mulcahy about conversations Mr Conheady
was having with the vendor.
October and November 2017, Mr Porter received bank funding proposals from
Westpac and NAB; these did not provide the necessary
finance to satisfy
Mr Porter’s wish to finance the purchase completely with
2 November 2017, a meeting took place at the Lake View Hotel wherein
Mr Debono, Mr Matthews and Mr Conheady were present. The judge
found that the contract for Mr Porter’s proposed purchase was
discussed at this meeting.
judge also found that, at some point before 15 November 2017, Mr Conheady
told Mr Mulcahy that there was a shortfall in funding;
there was a
discussion about how the shortfall might be funded; and Mr Mulcahy
suggested that he and Mr Matthews would be interested
in taking up an
equity position, but the conversation went no
were negotiations and draft contracts prepared during November 2017, but no
contract was signed.
November 2017, Mr Porter decided to put the proposed acquisition on hold.
Mr Porter and Mr Conheady agreed that Mr Conheady
could pursue
the opportunity for
indicated already, the judge found that the 29 June 2017 Retainer therefore
terminated at this
after termination of the 29 June 2017 Retainer
judge found that on 16 November 2017, Mr Mulcahy and Mr Conheady met
for lunch at the Ballarat Yacht
The judge accepted
Mr Conheady’s evidence about what he told Mr Mulcahy at this
lunch which included:
(a) details about the MW valuation, that is, that
Munday Wilkinson had valued the Business at between $18 million and $21
(b) that he wanted Mr Mulcahy ‘by his side’ to help him in
relation to the proposed purchase, to which Mr Mulcahy
(c) that his extensive due diligence had revealed
(d) that he intended to put a ‘terms’ purchase proposal to
(e) that Mr Mulcahy told him to ‘go for
meeting marked the start of the Conheady
The judge found that
information provided at the meeting was confidential to Mr Conheady. It was
‘further confidential information’
to the confidential information
Mr Conheady had shared in the course of the 29 June 2017
The judge also found
that after the lunch, Mr Conheady ‘went for it’. Thus, on 16
November, Mr Conheady telephoned and
emailed Mr Debono offering to
purchase a controlling interest in CBB. The email proposed the purchase of 70
per cent of the equity
in CBB for $8.4 million plus adjustments (based on a
total value of $12 million). It also proposed the inclusion of additional
to Mr Conheady.
Importantly the provision of vendor finance was a condition of sale. The judge
considered that this was ‘the difference’
between the Conheady offer
and the Porter offers.
accepted that Mr Conheady called Mr Mulcahy the next day to advise him
that he had made the offer and to inform him of
20 November 2017, Mr Conheady proposed revised terms for the proposed
purchase of CBB. The revised terms included increasing the
equity to be
purchased from 70 per cent to 80 per cent, funded by a mix of vendor
finance and bank debt. Mr Conheady and Mr Debono
also discussed
further revised terms on 21 November 2017, wherein the interest rate on the
vendor finance component was
The judge accepted
Mr Conheady’s evidence that Mr Debono conveyed
‘agreement’ to his proposal at around that
the judge found that Mr Conheady did not tell Mr Mulcahy the details
of the revised terms agreed,
considered that the offer to buy a 70 per cent interest ‘on terms’,
as well as the ‘in principle’ acceptance
by Mr Debono on 20 and 21
November 2017, was confidential ‘price information’ in respect of
Mr Conheady.
23 November 2017, Mr Porter agreed to join Mr Conheady in the proposal
to acquire an 80 per cent interest in CBB, with each to
30 November 2017, Mr Conheady told Mr Mulcahy that he and
Mr Porter would be proceeding with ‘the
On 4 December 2017,
he told Mr Mulcahy that he and Mr Porter had agreed terms, part cash,
part vendor finance, with Mr Debono and
that they would be acquiring 80 per
cent of the Business.
judge considered that the fact that Mr Debono was willing to sell a
controlling interest in the Business based on a value of $12
million via a
share sale was confidential information. As was the information that
Mr Conheady had a ‘deal’ to buy a
controlling interest on
‘vendor terms’.
also found that this information was improperly used by Mr Mulcahy to
secure the opportunity for himself in breach of the Conheady
Importantly,
as will be seen below, the judge also thereby accepted that Mr Mulcahy knew
that Mr Conheady and Mr Porter had not secured
funding for their
proposal given that they required vendor finance.
14 and 18 December 2017, conversations took place which involved
Mr Mulcahy, Mr Matthews and two other business associates,
Mr Broadbent and Mr Ford, about investing in
December 2017 meeting
18 December 2017, Mr Debono, Mr Matthews and Mr Mulcahy met and
discussed the sale of CBB. The judge found that Mr Mulcahy told
Mr Debono that he did not have to worry about Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady, and that he and Mr Matthews would step in and ‘take
this point, it is convenient to record some of the judge’s critical
findings surrounding this meeting. Thus, the judge found:
During the meeting Mr Debono conveyed his frustration with [Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady]. No matter the extent of those frustrations,
before the meeting,
[they] were the only potential purchaser. They had completed due diligence, and
on 21 November 2017 Mr Debono
had agreed to sell 80% of the business
to Mr Conheady.
What happened at the 18 December 2017 meeting fundamentally changed the
position. Mr Mulcahy and Mr Matthews asked Mr Debono about
selling a controlling interest in the Business to them for cash, instead of
selling to Mr Conheady on terms. The proposal they put
was the same as the
14 September 2017 Porter proposal, but with a July 2018 settlement
Honour also found:
On 18 December 2017 Mr Mulcahy made a cash offer to Mr Debono when he
knew there was a ‘deal’ for Mr Debono to sell
on vendor terms
to Mr Conheady. He knew about that deal, and that it involved terms because
of the ‘further confidential information’
and the ‘price
information’ shared with him by Mr Conheady. When he put the cash
proposal to Mr Debono on 18 December
2017, Mr Mulcahy took
advantage of confidential information about his ‘competitors’ for
the opportunity. He knew that
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter had not
secured funding for the proposal he put to Mr Debono, the proposal
Mr Debono was ‘keen to
19 December 2017, Mr Mulcahy emailed Mr Broadbent, Mr Ford and
Mr Matthews, stating that Mr Debono was ‘keen to progress
discussions’.
said that Mr Debono was interested in selling a 70 per cent share in CBB to
them based on a $12 million valuation with
a proposed July 2018 settlement
date. The email proposed that each would hold 17.5 per cent of the shares in
CBB. It also stated
that CBB had been independently valued at
$21 million.
indicated already, the judge made a finding that the ‘deal’ for
Mr Mulcahy and his consortium to purchase a controlling
interest in CBB was
‘done on 18 December 2017, as reported in the 19 December 2017
after 18 December 2017 meeting
20 December 2017, Mr Conheady informed Mr Mulcahy that he had
organised a line of credit to fund any adjustments in respect of
acquisition. As requested, Mr Mulcahy sent a letter to ANZ on
Mr Conheady’s behalf later that day confirming that the line
credit was for ‘business reasons’ and stating that Mulcahy & Co
acted for Mr Conheady and his wife. Mr Mulcahy
did not inform
Mr Conheady before he sent the letter that he and others had been moving to
secure a controlling interest in CBB for
themselves.
21 December 2017, Mr Conheady called Mr Debono and told him that it
was unlikely that he and Mr Porter would obtain finance by
the January
settlement date.
4 January 2018, Mr Mulcahy visited the CBB factory with Mr Matthews,
Mr Broadbent and
a series of communications between the four men during January, on 25 January
2018, Mr Mulcahy sent Mr Debono a signed formal
offer to purchase 70
per cent of the shares in CBB.
The judge found that this formal written offer was made on the same terms as had
been made verbally on 18 December
ie, on the basis of an
acquisition of 70 per cent of the shares in the company at $8.4 million
(based on a $12 million valuation).
judge also found that Mr Mulcahy drafted this
Its contents were similar
to the Porter offer in a number of respects and the judge found that ‘the
structure and content of
the 25 January 2018 offer’ was so similar
that it was clearly ‘modelled on one of the earlier Porter
He also found
that the January 2018 offer very closely reflected ‘both the terms and the
language of the 14 September 2017
were some differences, including that the restraint was for a period of five
years (not seven) and that the Debonos would continue
to work for the Business
for a longer period (of over three years). However, the critical difference was
that the offer was not made
conditional on the purchaser obtaining bank finance.
It appears that this unconditional aspect led the judge to describe this offer
as a ‘cash offer’, below, in considering how Mr Mulcahy came to
know of the Porter offer, and whether Mr Porter retained
confidentiality in
that offer:
Mr Mulcahy gave evidence that he knew 2 January 2018 was the last date for
settlement of the sale to Mr Porter. That date was specified
in the 14 September
2017 offer. I do not agree that Mr Porter did not retain confidentiality in the
14 September 2017 offer. It was
an express term of the [Porter] offer that
it was confidential. There is no evidence Mr Porter or Mr Conheady
provided a copy of
that offer to Mr Mulcahy. If Mr Mulcahy did not see
or have access to the 14 September 2017 [Porter] offer, he must have an
sixth sense. The contents of the 24 January 2018 letter which he
prepared and which when approved by his co-investors was sent by
Mr Debono on 25 January 2018 bore an uncanny resemblance to the 14
September 2017 Porter offer.
The knowledge of the precise terms of the 14 September 2017 Porter offer was
confidential information that a person who knew about
it could use to prepare
and to make a cash offer to Mr Debono, likely more attractive to him, as
was the Porter offer, compared to
a terms offer. The 14 September 2017 offer was
known to Mr Debono to whom it was made. It must be the case its contents
to Mr Matthews, the solicitor charged by Mr Debono with
preparation of contract documents intended to give effect to it. I infer
was Mr Matthews who provided a copy of the 14 September 2017 offer to
Mr Mulcahy. He may have done so in advance of the meeting
Mr Debono on 18 December 2017 or he may have done so after that meeting.
What is clear is that Mr Mulcahy used the 14 September
2017 offer to
prepare the 24 January 201[8] letter, finalised on 25 January 2018 and sent to
30 January 2018, Mr Mulcahy and Mr Conheady met at
Mr Mulcahy’s office for the purpose of discussing advice given by
on 4 December 2017 in relation to Mr Conheady’s
proposed acquisition. Mr Mulcahy did not tell Mr Conheady that he had
the opportunity to purchase the Business for himself and had made a
formal written offer five days
8 February 2018, Mr Porter and Mr Conheady received a formal proposal
from Westpac to fund the
acquisition.
19 February 2018, ignorant of what was occurring in parallel, Mr Porter
signed the funding proposal from Westpac. On the same day,
Mr Matthews
emailed Mr Debono a draft share sale agreement for the purchase of CBB,
with BFMM shown as the intended vehicle for the
6 March 2018, Mr Debono told Mr Conheady that he had withdrawn CBB
from the market.
27 March 2018, BFMM was incorporated. The shareholders were interests associated
with Mr Mulcahy, Mr Matthews, Mr Broadbent and
9 April 2018, Mr Matthews paid a deposit of $400,000 on behalf of BFMM for
the purchase of shares in CBB. Neither Mr Matthews nor
Mr Mulcahy,
before this time, informed Mr Porter and Mr Conheady that they were
personally pursuing the opportunity to acquire a
controlling interest in the
share sale agreement between BFMM and the vendors dated 30 June 2018 was signed
on 2 July 2018, with effect from 1 July
It provided for the sale
of 66.67 per cent of the shares in the Business at a price of $8 million (based
on a total valuation of
$12 million). The balance of the purchase price was
paid shortly
C: CAUSATION AND MR PORTER’S LOSS
ground 1 of the Mulcahy parties’ application for leave to appeal reads as
The primary judge erred in concluding that the [Mulcahy parties’]
wrongful use of a letter of offer by [Mr Porter] dated 14
September 2017
caused [Mr Porter] to suffer loss: Relief Reasons at [308]–[313].
reasons concerning causation
considering the judge’s findings about causation, it is necessary to have
regard to some of the findings we have already
cited. It is also important to
consider two aspects of the judge’s findings. First, his precise finding
as to breach insofar
as it concerned Mr Porter, rather than
Mr Conheady; secondly, any other findings which concerned causation.
terms of breach, the Liability Reasons contain the subheading: ‘Was there
a breach of retainer?’
judge found that there was no evidence of breach of the 29 June 2017
Retainer prior to it coming to an end, but that the position
was different
concerning the Conheady Retainer. It was also different concerning the use of
confidential information ‘shared
during the currency of the 29 June
2017 Retainer’.
finding that each of the alleged breaches of the Conheady Retainer (with the
exception of the obligation to act in the best
interests of Mr Conheady)
was made out, the judge dealt briefly with the narrower scope of breach of the
Porter 29 June 2017 Retainer.
His key finding was contained at [544] as
In the case of the 29 June 2017 Retainer I find there was a breach of the
ongoing confidentiality obligations, to keep confidential
and not to use such
information when at the Lake View Hotel on 18 December 2017 Mr Mulcahy put
a proposal that reflected the 14 September
2017 Porter offer and then made that
offer in formal terms on 25 January 2018 knowing that Mr Porter had been
unable to finance an
offer in those terms as he had wished.
a separate section entitled ‘Was there a breach of fiduciary duty?’,
the judge next proceeded to consider whether there
was a breach of fiduciary
duty in relation to Mr Conheady (only). In this context, BFMM had argued
that there was no breach of fiduciary
duty for a number of reasons. The third
reason was that the confidential information was not relevant to the CBB
transaction.
In rejecting this
third argument the judge said at [549]:
As to the third matter submitted on behalf of BFMM, the confidential
information was relevant to the transaction. Knowledge of the
earlier Porter
offers and the inability to secure funding for those offers on a basis
acceptable to Mr Porter, and of the Conheady
‘deal’ to purchase
80% on terms enabled Mr Mulcahy to craft a cash offer matching the 14
September 2017 Porter offer.
The independent valuation of the Business at $21m
was confidential information which Mr Mulcahy communicated to his
co-investors
in a successful bid to ‘pique’ their interest and to
secure their involvement in BFMM.
later summarising his responses to relevant questions, the judge gave the
following answer as to whether the Mulcahy parties breached
the 29 June
2017 Retainer:
The Mulcahy parties breached the ongoing confidentiality obligations owed to
Mr Porter pursuant to the 29 June 2017 Retainer as
found at paragraph
to causation, although the initial trial was directed to liability and causation
the Liability Reasons
contained relatively limited reference to causation. However, the judge rejected
a submission made by the Mulcahy
parties that they were not liable because the
opportunity was not really available to Mr Conheady and Mr Porter.
This was said to
be because Mr Debono told Mr Mulcahy on 18 December
2017 that he would not sell to
I agree with the [Mr Porter and Mr Conheady’s] submissions that
the idea Mr Debono would not have sold to them on 18 December
thereafter is wrong and misconceived. The only reason Mr Debono did not
sell to them is because a new purchaser, Mr Mulcahy,
came along, undermined
the ‘deal’ Mr Conheady had already made with Mr Debono and
secured the opportunity for himself
and for BFMM. If Mr Mulcahy, together
with Mr Matthews, had not orchestrated the meeting at the hotel on 18
December 2017 and had
not ‘white anted’ Mr Conheady,
Mr Debono would have sold an 80% interest in the Business to
Mr Conheady and to Mr Porter
on terms previously agreed.
Mr Debono was ‘ready to retire’. Absent intervention on the
part of Mr Mulcahy, there was
only one potential purchaser, [Mr Porter
and Mr Conheady], who were going to buy a controlling interest in the
Business and to facilitate
Mr Debono’s
retirement.
judge returned to the issue of causation in his Relief Reasons. He extracted the
following principles as to causation outlined
by Glass JA in
Alexander v
Cambridge Credit Co Ltd
4. It is irrelevant to inquire whether the defendants’ default was the
dominant, effective or real cause of the plaintiff’s
loss. If the evidence
is suggestive of multiple causation, the inquiry to be made is whether the
defendants’ default was
cause of the plaintiff’s loss.
5. The test of causation poses the question whether the plaintiff’s loss
would not have been suffered but for the defendants’
default. The question
is to be answered by applying that test in a practical commonsense way.
6. If the defendants’ conduct is in this sense a cause of the
plaintiff’s loss, the existence of another concurrent
cause which combines
to produce the loss is of no
judge next summarised his earlier findings as to breach as follows, citing [544]
of his Liability Reasons:
The breach involved the use of a letter dated 14 September 2017, being a
detailed offer to purchase a controlling interest in CBB
sent by Mr Porter
to Mr Debono. The letter and the terms of the offer within it was
confidential information that was wrongly used
to formulate an offer put to
Mr Debono on 25 January 2018, which was
judge rejected a submission that there was no evidence that Mr Mulcahy saw
the Porter offer. He found that it was clear that Mr
Mulcahy had used that
offer to prepare the 24 January 2018 letter, finalised on 25 January 2018. He
cited [468], [544] and [549]
of his Liability Reasons to support this
conclusion.
a section entitled ‘Causation’, the judge next summarised the
submissions of both parties. This included the submission
of the Mulcahy parties
to the effect that the misuse of confidential information produced no
consequence because the wrongdoer already
information.
rejected this submission, saying:
The difficulty with that submission is that it fails to engage with the finding
made at paragraph 549 of the liability reasons reproduced
above concerning the
use of the detailed letter and its contents to craft the offer that was
successful in securing a controlling
interest in the business for BFMM. The
precise terms of the 14 September 2017 offer, information derived from the
letter, were reflected
in the 25 January 2018 offer. As I found in the liability
[The judge next extracted relevant parts of [467] and [468] of his Liability
Reasons which we have set out
It is important to remember that when it comes to causation it is sufficient
for Mr Porter to establish that the breach was
cause of the loss
even if there may have been other concurrent
I accept the information that Mr Debono was willing to sell based on a
valuation of $12 million and that Mr Porter was prepared
to buy 70% of the
business is information that was available to the Mulcahy parties from other
sources. However, that is not the
case concerning the 14 September 2017 offer
and its terms.
The use of the letter and its contents was ‘a
cause’ of Mr Porter’s
parties’ submissions
Mulcahy parties highlighted that the judge found that the breach in respect of
Mr Porter had caused him to suffer a loss of the
opportunity to acquire a
40 per cent interest in CBB valued at $4.8 million. They submitted that
that this finding was erroneous.
Mulcahy parties submitted that, while it has often been said that the issue of
causation at common law is to be approached as
a matter of ‘common
proposition is not a test or a universal legal
Rather, it reflects a
recognition that a counterfactual ‘but for’ analysis — ie,
whether the defendant’s
wrong was a necessary condition of the
plaintiff’s loss — is not always an exhaustive or comprehensive
test. The non-exhaustiveness
of the ‘but for’ test does not deny the
value of that test as a ‘negative criterion of
causation’.
submitted that, exceptional cases aside, if the wrong is not a necessary
condition of the loss, causation will generally not
Mulcahy parties submitted that the reasons the judge found that Mr Mulcahy
had breached the ongoing confidentiality obligations
he owed to Mr Porter
were, first, that Mr Mulcahy used ‘the terms and the language
of’ the Porter offer when formulating
the Mulcahy
and, secondly, that
‘[t]he [14 September 2017] letter and the terms of the offer within it was
confidential
information’.
argued that that conduct was the sole basis identified by the judge as
constituting a breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer, and
thus the sole
identified basis for the award of damages to Mr Porter.
Mulcahy parties submitted that, contrary to the judge’s findings, there
was no basis for concluding that the use of the
Porter offer was a necessary
condition of Mr Porter’s loss. On his Honour’s own findings,
the information that the Mulcahy
parties needed in order to recognise the
existence of the opportunity to acquire a controlling interest in CBB, and to
make the successful
offer, had (by January 2018) been obtained
In particular, the
judge found that:
(a) on 16 November 2017, Mr Conheady divulged to Mr Mulcahy
information which included the MW valuation of CBB of $21 million;
(b) at the same time, Mr Conheady divulged that his due diligence had not
revealed anything untoward about the Business;
(c) in December 2017, Mr Conheady indicated to Mr Mulcahy that
Mr Debono was willing to sell a controlling interest in CBB (as opposed
the whole of the business) on the basis of a valuation of $12 million;
(d) on 18 December 2017, Mr Mulcahy (and Mr Matthews) met with
Mr Debono, who responded positively to Mr Mulcahy’s oral offer
to acquire a 70 per cent interest on the basis of a $12 million valuation
and was ‘keen to progress’ the proposed transaction.
That oral offer
was, in turn, reflected in Mr Mulcahy’s ‘formal written
offer’ on 25 January 2018.
Mulcahy parties highlighted that the conduct above was found to be in breach of
the Conheady Retainer and the fiduciary duties
that the Mulcahy parties owed to
Mr Conheady. But, they submitted, it also illustrated that the use of the
information in the Porter
offer was not a necessary condition of any loss
suffered by Mr Porter. They argued that Mr Mulcahy, even without
knowledge of ‘the
terms and the language of’ that offer, would have
been able to make (and would have made) the very same offer, albeit there
have been some differences in its precise ‘terms’ or
‘language’.
submitted that the identified breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer did not,
and was not found by the judge to, satisfy the ‘but
for’ test. To
the contrary, his Honour acknowledged that ‘the information that
Mr Debono was willing to sell based on
a valuation of $12 million and
that Mr Porter was prepared to buy 70 per cent of the business is
information that was available to
the Mulcahy parties from other
further submitted that Mr Debono’s willingness in December 2017 and
January 2018 to sell a controlling interest in CBB
based on a valuation of
$12 million was not information that could have been discerned from the
Porter offer alone, which merely
recorded terms on which Mr Porter had been
willing to acquire an interest in CBB. Thus, the judge made no findings to the
that, without using that offer, Mr Mulcahy would have been unable to
reduce his oral offer of 18 December 2017 to written form. Nor
was there any
finding that some specific aspect of the drafting was decisive (or even
material) in Mr Debono’s acceptance of
the Mulcahy offer. The
findings went no further than the bare fact that Mr Mulcahy used the format
of the Porter offer when drafting
Mulcahy parties submitted that the judge was incorrect to find causation when
there was no finding that the relevant breach was
a necessary condition of
Mr Porter’s loss. They argued that his Honour erred by
misinterpreting, and incorrectly applying,
the decision of Glass JA in
. In their submission, Glass JA’s statement did not
support the primary judge’s approach of setting a ‘but for’
analysis at naught, in favour of a bare assertion that the breach was
cause’. To the contrary, Glass JA emphasised that
‘[t]he test of causation poses the question whether the plaintiff’s
loss would not have been suffered
the defendants’
that Glass JA was making was that ‘[i]f the defendants’ conduct is
in this sense
a cause of the plaintiff’s
it would be no
answer for the defendants to say that some other factor also satisfied the same
test. The Mulcahy parties submitted
that, far from justifying an opaque
assertion that the identified breach was ‘
cause’, the
principles explained in
merely reinforce the error in
the Mulcahy parties submitted that if his Honour was purporting to decide that
Mr Mulcahy’s use of the Porter offer
caused Mr Porter’s
loss despite it not being a necessary condition of the loss, there was no basis
for that step. A judge determining
the issue of causation is not authorised to
reason ‘by reference to unstated
No theory of
causation was articulated in his Honour’s reasons which could have led to
the result.
submissions
counsel for the Mulcahy parties took the Court in some detail through the
chronology and findings of the judge, highlighting
that it was important to
precisely focus on the judge’s reasons insofar as they concerned
Mr Porter, as compared with whether
they related to Mr Conheady
(including the offers made by Mr Conheady and Mr Porter from 16
November 2017).
also highlighted that there was no finding that, at the time of the making of
the oral offer on 18 December 2017, Mr Mulcahy knew
of the contents of the
Porter offer. At [468] of the Liability Reasons, the judge found that
Mr Matthews had provided a copy of the
Porter offer to Mr Mulcahy
either in advance of the meeting on 18 December 2017 or after that meeting.
Senior counsel submitted that
the breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer could not
be causative of Mr Porter’s loss if the relevant information only
Mr Mulcahy after the cash offer was made on 18 December 2017.
the course of the hearing, this Court also sought further clarification about
the precise scope of the breach or breaches of
the 29 June 2017 Retainer as
found by the judge.
submitted that the judge had found a single breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer.
That breach comprised the misuse of the form
and content of the 14 September
2017 Porter offer. The breach had occurred in a particular factual context,
namely in circumstances
where Mr Mulcahy knew that Mr Porter had been unable to
obtain finance. Counsel submitted that [544] of the Liability Reasons, which
contained the finding of breach, should be read as conveying the
In the case of the 29 June 2017 Retainer I find there was a breach of the
ongoing confidentiality obligations, to keep confidential
and not to use such
information when,
knowing that Mr Porter had been unable to finance an
offer in those terms as he had wished,
at the Lake View Hotel on 18 December
2017 Mr Mulcahy put a proposal that reflected the 14 September 2017 Porter
offer and then made
that offer in formal terms on 25 January 2018.
submitted that the judge’s subsequent reference in [549] of the Liability
Reasons to ‘[k]nowledge of the earlier
Porter offers
inability to secure funding for those offers on a basis acceptable to Mr
as enabling Mr
Mulcahy to craft his cash offer, did not mean there were two separate breaches
concerning two separate pieces of confidential
information. In so submitting he
highlighted that:
(a) [549] of the Liability Reasons was concerned with the breaches of fiduciary
duty owed to Mr Conheady and was, at least in part,
(b) the Relief Reasons supported the proposition that there was only a single
breach, particularly at [313], in which the judge spoke
of ‘the use of the
letter and its contents’ as a cause of Mr Porter’s loss;
(c) the judge’s summary of his finding of breach of the 29 June 2017
Retainer at [611(6)] of the Liability Reasons cross-referenced
only [544];
(d) at [311] of the Relief Reasons the judge emphasised the use of the Porter
offer letter insofar as he made reference to [549]
of the Liability Reasons.
the alternative, counsel submitted that even if more than one breach was
specified in [544], the judge found that only the breach
which related to the
use of the Porter offer actually caused the loss, that is, there was no finding
that any ‘breach’
concerning use of the information that
Mr Porter was unable to obtain finance caused the relevant loss. He relied
on the Relief Reasons
at [311] and [313] for this proposition.
and in the alternative, he submitted that, by reason of the offer made by
Mr Conheady in November 2017, which Mr Porter ultimately
the inability of Mr Porter to obtain finance in relation to his earlier
offer ceased to be causative of loss.
relation to the finance issue, his submission was that, in light of the further
matters that occurred after 16 November 2017, the
judge should not have
concluded, on the balance of probabilities, that ‘but for’ the
knowledge that Mr Porter had not
obtained finance for his earlier offer,
Mr Mulcahy would not have proceeded to make the cash offer of 18 December
2017 followed by
the written offer of 25 January 2018. He also emphasised that
this matter had never been put to his client.
respect to the use of the Porter offer, he also emphasised that the BFMM
interests made an oral offer in December 2017 and that
the judge made no finding
that this was informed by any particular feature of the Porter
submission was ultimately that the judge was required to engage in a
counterfactual which he did not engage in and he maintained
that the judge was
wrong in his finding of causation. He submitted that the judge did not conclude
that ‘but for’ the
breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer
(howsoever construed) the Mulcahy interests would not have made the cash offer
they made on 18
December 2017, which was followed up with a written offer on 25
January 2018.
Mr Porter’s
submissions
submitted that the Mulcahy parties overstate what is required by their
contention that unless an act is a necessary condition
of a plaintiff’s
loss, causation is not established. He submitted that it is sufficient for a
plaintiff to establish that the
cause of the loss even if
there may have been other concurrent causes. He cited, inter alia,
in support of this proposition. He also cited certain
observations made by Dixon J in this Court in
Gunnersen v Henwood
which suggested that a test of ‘material contribution’ was
appropriate.
highlighted that confidential information disclosed to Mr Mulcahy in the
course of the 29 June 2017 Retainer included the
price Mr Porter was
prepared to pay, and what had been negotiated about WIP on a sale and
opportunities to expand/improve the performance
submitted that knowledge of the precise terms of the Porter offer was
confidential information that a person who knew about
it could use to prepare
and to make a ‘cash offer’ to Mr Debono, likely more attractive
to him compared to a terms
He cited [549] of the
Liability Reasons and submitted that knowledge of the earlier 29 June 2017
Retainer and the Porter offer; of
the inability to secure funding for
‘those offers’ on a basis acceptable to Mr Porter; and of
Mr Conheady’s ‘deal’
to purchase 80 per cent on terms,
were all there said to enable Mr Mulcahy to craft a cash offer matching the
Porter offer.
emphasised that the judge found that the Porter offer was confidential
information used by Mr Mulcahy to prepare the 24
January 2018 letter, which
was in breach of the 29 June 2017
In that context,
Mr Porter submitted that what occurred satisfied the test for causation
cause of loss, as the trial judge found. He also
submitted that the judge had expressly ‘excluded’ the terms of the
offer from information known from other
next addressed the Mulcahy parties’ submission that, without knowledge of
‘the terms and the language of’ the
Porter offer, Mr Mulcahy
would have been able to make (and would have made) the very same offer, albeit
there may have been some
differences in its precise ‘terms’ or
‘language’. Mr Porter submitted that, contrary to that
contention,
there is no evidence that, without knowledge of ‘the terms and
language of’ the Porter offer, Mr Mulcahy would have been
make substantially the same offer and secure the purchase of CBB for himself.
Rather, the available evidence suggests otherwise.
He highlighted that his
earlier offer with the same core features but with different ‘terms and
language’ had not been
accepted by Mr Debono.
submitted that Mr Mulcahy’s inside knowledge and use of the terms and
language of the Porter offer gave him a unique opportunity
to edge out the
individuals who were his clients and, unwittingly, his competitors. The Porter
offer gave Mr Mulcahy the blueprint
for a successful offer to purchase CBB.
It, coupled with his knowledge of his clients’ inability to finance the
transaction,
enabled him to craft an offer with only minimal
‘sweeteners’ to secure the opportunity for himself.
also submitted that the Mulcahy parties’ argument that breach of the
29 June 2017 Retainer must have been a ‘necessary
condition’ of
Mr Porter’s loss creates a focus solely on the fact that they had
‘used the terms and the language
of’ the Porter offer when
formulating the Mulcahy offer. However, the breach was not simply the way in
which the Mulcahy parties
worded their offer — by using the terms and the
language of the Porter offer — but included the act of making a competing
offer at all given the existence of the 29 June 2017 Retainer. Mr Porter
submitted that the judge found that, but for the intervention
of the Mulcahy
parties, Mr Conheady and Mr Porter would have purchased the interest
in CBB. He pointed to the judge’s findings
at [609] of the Liability
Reasons in support of this
submission.
submitted that the Mulcahy parties’ use of information confided in them
therefore caused the loss of an opportunity
to purchase an interest in CBB even
on a ‘but for’ analysis.
submissions
comparing the Porter offer and the Mulcahy offer, senior counsel for
Mr Porter accepted that the fact that the Mulcahy offer was
‘cash’ (or unconditional) was highly significant. But he also
highlighted that the Mulcahy offer contained a lesser restraint
(five years
versus seven years).
submitted that the breach was constituted by the misuse of two pieces of
confidential information — the Porter offer and
the inability to finance.
In so doing he highlighted the judge’s references to
Mr Porter’s inability to obtain finance
in other parts of the
judgment dealing with breach of fiduciary duty (at [549] and [562]).
terms of causation principles he submitted that the test was one of
‘material contribution’ rather than ‘necessary
condition’, ie, the ‘but for’ test was inapplicable. In
particular, he submitted that the ‘but for’
test did not apply where
there were multiple causes. In so saying he cited a passage from the High
Court’s decision in
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
’) which referred to the earlier decision of the High
Amaca Pty Ltd v Booth
submitted that of the confidential information that was misused, the only
information that was available from other sources
was that Mr Porter was
prepared to buy 70 per cent of the business based on a valuation of
$12 million. The confidential information
that was misused went further and
included information that his offer was conditional, as well as the inability to
otherwise submitted that the judge’s reasoning at [311]–[312] of the
Relief Reasons was
an action for breach of contract, it is for the plaintiff to establish that
their loss is caused by the defendant’s breach.
traditional approach is that the cause of a particular occurrence is a question
of fact to be resolved by applying ‘common
However, the
reference to some ‘common sense’ notion of causation has been the
subject of criticism and it has been doubted
whether it may provide a useful, or
universal, legal norm.
to certain qualifications, the common law ‘but for’ test continues
to have an important role to play, at least
as a ‘negative
criterion’ of
In other words, it
may be said to be necessary, but not always sufficient, for a plaintiff to prove
that the plaintiff’s loss
would not have been suffered ‘but
for’ the defendant’s breach of
decision of
is not to contrary effect. As the passages cited by
the judge make clear, Glass JA expressly identified the ‘but for’
test as the relevant test.
His Honour recognised that if ‘in this sense’ the defendant’s
conduct is a cause, other concurrent causes are of
do the remarks of Dixon J in
suggest otherwise. His Honour
simply recognised that there may be qualifications and limitations associated
with such an approach.
decision in
in particular highlighted that the criterion might be
troublesome where multiple acts lead to an injury, in which case a test of
‘material contribution’ may be
sufficient.
decision in
was concerned with a very different context where there
were multiple incidents of asbestos exposure which led to injury. In any
we do not consider this to be a case concerning concurrent causes. Rather, as we
explain below, the current case turns on
whether there is a requisite causal
relationship between the misuse of specific confidential information and the
loss of opportunity
to acquire a controlling interest in the Business. This
question arises in a particular factual context, having regard to the relevant
knowledge the Mulcahy parties already possessed.
such a context, the recent remarks of two members of the High Court are
Although causation was once described in this Court as a concept of
‘common sense’, it has since, and repeatedly, been
emphasised that
the concept of common sense should be eschewed when applying the principles of
causation. In the law of contract,
the principles related to causation begin
with a counterfactual, or ‘but for’,
Lewis v Australian Capital Territory
, Edelman J also explained the
‘but for’ test as follows:
[T]he test for causation of loss asks whether the wrongful act was necessary
for the loss. The ‘but for’ or counterfactual
‘directs us to change one thing at a time and see if the outcome
changes’. The change is the removal of the
wrongful act. If the loss would
lawfully have occurred but for the wrongful act then the wrongful act was not
necessary for the loss.
The counterfactual approach thus involves a hypothetical
question where no other fact or circumstance is changed other than those
constituted the wrongful act.
Consideration
with the way the matter was approached by the parties, we have conducted a
‘real review’ of the evidence and
reasons of the judge, making due
allowance for the fact that we have not seen or heard the
number of Mr Porter’s submissions may be dealt with at the
the finding at [609] of the Liability Reasons dealt with a separate submission
of the Mulcahy parties that they were not liable
because Mr Debono would
not have sold to Mr Porter and Mr Conheady anyway. It does not engage
with the critical issue of whether
the specific breach of the 29 June 2017
Retainer as found caused the loss of the commercial opportunity to purchase a
controlling
interest in the Business. It certainly does not deal with the issue
as to whether, but for the breach, the loss would still have
although the judge made findings to the effect that the Porter offer was used in
order to prepare the January 2018 letter, this
again does not engage with
whether the breach as found caused the relevant loss. This is particularly so
given the judge found that
the ‘deal’ for Mulcahy to purchase a
controlling interest in the Business had been done earlier, on 18 December
precise identification of breach is more significant. We accept that it is
critical to properly identify the precise breach found
in relation to
Mr Porter — as distinct from those found in respect of
Mr Conheady. In other words, it is necessary to identify
with precision the
nature of the information that was confidential to Mr Porter that was found
to have been misused. In that regard,
it is true that there is reference to
Mr Mulcahy’s knowledge of Mr Porter’s inability to finance
the Porter offers at
[549] and [562] of the Liability Reasons. However, three
matters are significant. First, those references are all made in the context
whether there was a breach of a fiduciary duty owed to Mr Conheady. They do
not purport to identify a specific contractual breach
concerning Mr Porter.
Secondly, although there is reference to general ‘knowledge’ about
various items of confidential
information in both those paragraphs, mere
knowledge of confidential information, without more, does not constitute breach.
as [549] purports to identify a misuse, the focus is also on the misuse
of the Porter offer. Hence, [549] records that the confidential
information
enabled Mr Mulcahy to craft a cash offer ‘matching the 14 September
2017 Porter offer’. This is also consistent
with the judge’s summary
of his conclusions. Thus, thirdly and importantly, in his summary at [611(6)],
the judge identifies
that the Mulcahy parties breached the ongoing
confidentiality obligations owed to Mr Porter pursuant to the 29 June 2017
‘as found at paragraph [544]’.
is therefore important to again extract the critical finding made at
In the case of the 29 June 2017 Retainer I find there was a breach of the
ongoing confidentiality obligations, to keep confidential
and not to use such
information when at the Lake View Hotel on 18 December 2017 Mr Mulcahy put
a proposal that reflected the 14 September
2017 Porter offer and then made that
offer in formal terms on 25 January 2018 knowing that Mr Porter had been
unable to finance an
offer in those terms as he had wished.
considering the scope of this finding, the following matters are
significant.
there is the use and placement of the phrase ‘knowing that Mr Porter
had been unable to finance’ at [544]. Given
its placement, the phrase is
naturally read as supplying factual context for the breach that has already been
identified in the previous
part of the paragraph. The use of the word,
‘knowing,’ is also significant given that, as we have already
stated, mere
knowledge of confidential information, without more, does not
constitute breach. There would need to be some ‘use’ of
information in some specific way. The reference to some ‘knowledge’
that Mr Porter had been unable to finance an
offer ‘in those
terms’ does not identify any relevant misuse. It is also somewhat
ambiguous in circumstances where Mr
Porter was party to a more recent offer
by 18 December 2017. This may be compared with the unequivocal finding that the
confidential
information in the Porter offer was misused given a proposal was
made that ‘reflected’ that offer.
the judge uses the singular, in terms of the reference to ‘a’
breach. On an ordinary reading of the paragraph,
that breach is naturally
referable to Mr Mulcahy putting a proposal ‘that reflected the 14
September 2017 Porter offer’.
there is the language used in the Relief Reasons. Although [311] makes reference
to [549] of the Liability Reasons, the judge
records the relevant finding as
concerning ‘
of the detailed [Porter offer] letter and its
contents’ to make an offer that was successful in securing a controlling
in the Business.
extracts from the Liability Reasons provided then focus solely on the Porter
offer (at [467] and [468]). There is no suggestion
that the information about
the earlier inability to finance was ‘used’ in any particular way at
all. Consistent with
this, the only breach which is found to cause a loss is
misuse of the form and contents of the Porter offer. Thus, the judge’s
ultimate finding is that the ‘use of the [Porter offer] letter and its
” of Mr Porter’s
there is also the commercial context. Thus, it may be readily understood that
knowledge about a conditional offer, such as
the Porter offer, might be
‘misused’ so as to make a superior unconditional offer. It is less
clear how knowledge about
an offeror’s inability to finance some earlier
offer in time might also be misused. On one view, a competitor’s
longstanding
liquidity problems might even reduce the urgency and delay the
making of a competing offer. In any event, given Mr Mulcahy already
that Mr Porter and Mr Conheady had not secured funding for their most
recent offer (or ‘deal’), it is unsurprising
that the judge would
make no finding that Mr Mulcahy had cause to, or did, actually misuse
confidential information about some earlier
inability to finance.
then, we consider that the relevant breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer
identified by the judge is the use of the form and
contents of the Porter offer,
and that the reference to Mr Mulcahy ‘knowing’ about
Mr Porter’s earlier inability
to finance is factual context
further consider (consistent with the finding at [313] of the Relief Reasons)
that it was this single breach which the judge found
to be causative of the loss
of opportunity to purchase a controlling interest in the Business, ie, the
misuse of the form and contents
of the Porter offer letter. There is no
suggestion at all that the judge considered that Mr Mulcahy’s
‘knowledge’
of the inability to finance that offer, considered on
its own, or otherwise, caused the relevant loss.
for the following reasons, we consider that the judge erred in finding that
Mr Mulcahy’s use of the form and contents
of the Porter offer caused
Mr Porter to lose the opportunity to obtain a controlling interest in the
will be recalled that the judge found that the Mulcahy parties made the cash
offer to purchase a controlling interest in the Business
on 18 December 2017
based on a $12 million valuation. Further, that this ‘fundamentally
changed the position’ and that
the deal was ‘done’ at this
time. Although the formal offer was not made until January 2018, the judge also
the successful formal offer was made ‘on the same terms’
as those made verbally on 18 December
The judge made no
finding that any particular feature of the Porter offer (misused) was material
to Mr Debono in January 2018. The
only aspect of the letter which the judge
focused upon was that it enabled the Mulcahy consortium to make a
‘cash’ offer.
As indicated already, this was apparently intended to
refer to an offer that was unconditional, and not subject to finance. However,
the ‘cash offer’ had already been made on 18 December 2017.
is an insurmountable hurdle to a finding of causation in such circumstances.
This is because the judge did not positively find
that the Porter offer was
provided to Mr Mulcahy prior to the 18 December 2017 meeting. Instead,
he expressly acknowledged that it
might have been provided ‘after that
circumstances, it cannot be said that any misuse of the form or contents of the
Porter offer made any contribution (material
or otherwise) to the relevant
actions of Mr Mulcahy in making the ‘cash’ offer on 18 December
2017 that secured a controlling
interest in the Business. For this reason alone,
the breach of the 29 June 2017 Retainer could not have caused the relevant
even if the Porter offer was provided to Mr Mulcahy prior to 18 December
2017, the result does not change. This is because,
by the time of making the
offer on 18 December 2017, the Mulcahy consortium had the following
information available to them from
(a) the MW valuation, that is, that Munday Wilkinson had valued the Business at
between $18 million and
$21 million;
(b) extensive due diligence had revealed ‘nothing
(c) in November 2017, Mr Conheady had made an offer to purchase 70 per cent
of the Business for $8.4 million plus adjustments —
being at a total
value of $12 million — and which involved the provision of vendor
(d) by 4 December 2017, Mr Porter had joined a proposal to purchase 80 per
cent of the Business, also at least partly on the basis
(e) Mr Debono had ‘agreed’ with the joint proposal and hence
was willing to sell a controlling interest in the business
based on a value of
$12 million, partly on the basis of vendor
(f) Mr Conheady and Mr Porter had been unable to secure funding in
respect of their proposal,
(together, the ‘further information’).
of this further information was highly significant and undoubtedly contributed
to the decision to make the successful cash offer
in December 2017, which was
subsequently formalised in January 2018. Importantly, this information included
the fact that the most
recent joint offer was being made on the basis of vendor
finance, which might be readily beaten by the making of an unconditional
‘cash’ offer. As the judge himself recognised, the MW valuation was
also highly significant. Hence, although it was ‘obvious’,
expressly recorded that such a valuation made the purchase of a controlling
interest based on a value of $12 million ‘very
attractive’.
rejecting certain evidence of Mr Matthews that the $21 million
valuation was not specifically relevant, the judge also stated
that this defied
the ‘commercial reality of the opportunity to purchase a business for $12m
which was known to have been independently
light of the further information in the possession of the Mulcahy parties, we
are simply not satisfied that knowledge of the form
and contents of the Porter
offer could have materially contributed to the making of the offer at the
meeting in December 2017, as
formalised in January 2018. We are certainly not
satisfied that, absent misuse of the form and contents of the Porter offer, the
result would have been any different. The judge himself made no such
also consider that no different result follows even if, contrary to our earlier
conclusions, the relevant breach is extended to
also include the use of the
information that Mr Porter was unable to finance the Porter offer and the judge
had made a finding that
this breach also caused the relevant loss. The
commercial realities suggest that the Mulcahy consortium were highly attracted
the opportunity to purchase the Business based on a total value of
$12 million, in circumstances where it had been independently
$21 million. By December 2017, the Mulcahy consortium knew that
Mr Porter and Mr Conheady could not obtain funding for
their recent
joint offer. In such circumstances, we are unable to be satisfied that some
(unidentified) ‘misuse’ of information
inability to finance an earlier offer could have materially affected
Mr Mulcahy’s actions. When consideration
is given to all the further
information available to Mr Mulcahy, we are in fact well satisfied that he
would have proceeded in the
same way even without misusing such
information.
these circumstances proposed ground 1 is established, subject to the notice of
contention.
of contention
notice of contention, Mr Porter contended:
that the decision of the Court below should be affirmed on the ground that it
did not determine that the [Mulcahy parties’]
a. an implied term of [Mr Porter’s] retainer that the Mulcahy
parties would act in good faith; and/or
b. an implied term of [Mr Porter’s] retainer that the Mulcahy
parties would not improperly make use of their position as trusted
gain an advantage for themselves or to cause detriment to [Mr Porter],
caused [Mr Porter] to suffer loss.
submissions supporting the contention were somewhat confused in circumstances
where the conduct amounting to a ‘breach’
of the implied terms was
not properly identified. Thus, at one point, senior counsel appeared to rely
upon the misuse of the Porter
offer as constituting the breach relied upon.
Nevertheless, there was also reference to the judge’s finding at [609] of
Liability Reasons to the effect that the Mulcahy parties had secured the
opportunity for themselves in December 2017 and thereby
anted’ Mr Conheady (and therefore Mr Porter).
short answer to the notice of contention is that, if the breach was constituted
by the misuse of the form or contents of the Porter
offer, then the contention
should be refused by reason that it lacks utility. This is because no different
result would arise on
causation principles even if the misuse of that
information was also characterised as a breach of the two further obligations
in the notice of contention (the ‘two further
obligations’).
even if this is incorrect and/or Mr Porter is relying on the actions of
Mr Mulcahy in usurping the opportunity to purchase
the Business in December
2017, it was critical that Mr Porter establish that the two further
obligations had operation after 15 November
termination of the 29 June 2017 Retainer.
order to consider this contention it is therefore necessary to first identify
the judge’s reasons insofar as they considered
the existence and scope of
the two relevant obligations, as well as the obligations concerning the misuse
of confidential information.
judge found that that there was an implied retainer to provide advice to
Mr Porter and his interests concerning the proposed purchase
controlling interest in the
He also accepted
that the provisions of the
Compiled APES 110 Code of Ethics for Professional
Accountants
be implied into the 29 June 2017
The Code includes sections dealing with integrity, confidentiality and
professional behaviour. Fundamental principles include that
a member shall be
straightforward and honest in all professional and business relationships and
shall respect the confidentiality
of information acquired as a result of such
relationships. Integrity is expressly stated to imply fair dealing and
truthfulness.
There is an obligation not to disclose any confidential
information to third parties without proper and specific authority and not
use such information for the personal advantage of the member or third
The Code imposes an obligation on members to refrain from using confidential
information acquired as a result of professional and
business relationships to
the personal advantage of the member, or to the advantage of third parties.
Members are required to maintain
confidentiality of information disclosed by a
prospective client. The need to comply with the principle of confidentiality
after the end of relationships between a member and a
considering relevant authority, the judge concluded that an obligation to act in
good faith would not be implied in all commercial
However, such an
obligation might be factually
In the case of
informal contracts, he considered that the implication of such a term must be
‘necessary for the reasonable
or effective operation of the
In the case of the Conheady Retainer and the 29 June 2017 Retainer,
professional practice represented by the provisions of the Code
dealing with
integrity, confidentiality and professional behaviour, including the requirement
for fair dealing, establish that a
term of good faith is to be implied. The
implication of such a term flows naturally from the obligation of the accountant
the client the full benefit of performance of the accountant’s
obligations pursuant to the retainer where the scope of work
to be performed
includes the provision of advice and where confidential information is provided
by the client pursuant to the retainer.
In this case the implication of the term
flows naturally from the obligations in the Code that apply to the contractual
relationship.
In the case of the 29 June 2017 Retainer, the good faith obligation is to
be implied from the Code, from the ongoing provision of
advice to Porter Group
in circumstances of confidence concerning Project Tonka and from the
conversation on 29 June 2017 in which
Mr Mulcahy confirmed he
‘could’ and then did act for Mr Porter providing advice on two
issues on that day and agreeing
to do so as requested thereafter about
‘any part of the deal’. I accept that it was a term of the Conheady
Retainer and
also of the 29 June 2017 Retainer that the Mulcahy parties
would act in good faith.
judge rejected the suggestion that there was also an implied obligation to act
‘in the best interests of the client’,
noting that there was nothing
in the Code to support the existence of such a
he considered that a term that Mr Mulcahy not ‘improperly make use of
his position as advisor’ was consistent
with the fundamental principles in
cls 100.5(a) and (d) of the
terms of the obligation of confidentiality, he observed that the obligation to
keep information imparted in the course of the retainer
confidential was an
incident of the accountant/client relationship and was recognised by cls 100.5,
140.1(b), 140.3 and 140.6 of
The obligation not to improperly use confidential information obtained in the
course of a client/accountant relationship may be
said to be so obvious that it
goes without saying. It is an obligation expressly addressed by the Code. As
provided for in the Code,
it is an obligation that continues after the end of
the accountant/client
relationship.
recorded already, the judge subsequently found that there was no evidence of any
breach of any of the terms of the 29 June 2017
Retainer prior to that
retainer coming to an end on 15 November 2017 (at [525] of the Liability
Reasons), but that there was a breach
of the ‘ongoing confidentiality
obligations’ (at [544]).
Mr Porter’s
submissions
submitted that if the Mulcahy parties were successful in respect of proposed
ground 1, then the judgment should be affirmed
on the basis of his notice of
contention, ie, his notice of contention did not need to be determined if
proposed ground 1 was dismissed.
submitted that the two further obligations continued after the end of the
29 June 2017 Retainer. He contended that this
was apparent from various
passages in the judge’s
also submitted that the duty to not improperly use information mirrored
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and that ‘such
duties’ continued after the relevant engagement ended, citing
Courtenay Polymers Pty Ltd v Deang
highlighted above, Mr Porter also cited the finding at [609] of the
Liability Reasons.
submitted that this finding suggested that the Mulcahy parties breached a term
of the 29 June 2017 retainer that they act in good
faith and not improperly
make use of their position to gain an advantage for themselves. He then asserted
(without authority) that
these two further obligations were ‘continuing
obligations’ and that their breach resulted in him losing the opportunity
to purchase a controlling interest in the Business.
oral submissions, counsel did not identify any reason why the two further
obligations were ongoing, but reiterated that the judge
had actually made a
finding that the obligations continued, citing, in particular, the Liability
Reasons at [430]
Consideration
the outset, we reject the submission that the judge made any finding that the
two further obligations extended beyond the termination
of the 29 June 2017
Retainer. Thus, [49] of the Liability Reasons merely identified the terms as
alleged; [430] and [433] dealt with
the obligation concerning confidential
information; while [534] related to Mr Conheady. Moreover [430] (as well as
[402]) highlight
that the obligation regarding confidential information is a
separate discrete obligation which continued after the end of the relationship
by reference to the express provision made for its continuation in the Code. No
such finding was made in relation to the two further
obligations. At [540], the
judge was also careful to identify that the only obligations which were ongoing
were those contained in
the Conheady Retainer, as well as the obligation
‘of confidence’ contained in the 29 June 2017 Retainer.
Accordingly,
the judge only found the obligation of confidence to be ongoing by reference to
the terms of the Code and can be taken
to have (implicitly) found that the two
further obligations did not continue.
then to whether the judge ought to have found that the two relevant (implied)
terms did continue in this particular case,
the only authorities cited in
support of the further obligations continuing do not assist Mr Porter. The
were concerned with the extent to
which fiduciary or statutory duties might continue after termination of the
relationship giving
rise to them. They say nothing about the survival of
contractual obligations.
the starting point is that, generally speaking, no contractual right or
obligation survives termination, though this will
be subject to some contrary
objective intention (as, for example, with a liquidated damages
Insofar as this case
involves implying terms, in
Hawkins v Clayton
, Deane J stated that a
term may be implied in an informal contract if it is ‘necessary for the
reasonable or effective operation
of a contract of that nature in the
circumstances of the
However, his
Honour also observed that this was subject to the qualification that a term may
be implied by ‘established mercantile
usage or professional
practice’ or by ‘a past course of
As recently
emphasised by the High Court, the overall question is what reasonable people
with knowledge of the background circumstances
known to both parties would be
taken to have agreed.
reasonable person would readily expect that an accountant’s obligations in
relation to confidential information would ordinarily
continue, even after
termination of the contractual relationship. It might be readily seen as
necessary for the effective operation
of an accountant’s retainer that a
client can communicate confidential information securely. In this case, as
highlighted above,
the judge also placed significant reliance upon the
provisions of the Code in defining the content of the confidentiality
obligations
in the 29 June 2017 Retainer. Such provisions may be taken to
reflect relevant professional practice. These provisions included cl
which read:
The need to comply with the principle of confidentiality
continues even
after the end of relationships between a Member and a client or employer
When a Member changes employment or acquires a new client, the Member is
entitled to use prior experience. The Member shall not,
however, use or disclose
any confidential information either acquired or received as a result of a
professional or business
relationship.
obligation to act in good faith is in a different category. While a reasonable
person would understand that such an obligation
might subsist during the course
of a relationship, it is not necessary that this should continue to be the case
once that relationship
is terminated. This is also consistent with the
provisions in the Code, which are generally directed to laying down standards of
conduct ‘in’ a
relationship.
Hence, pursuant
to cl 110.1, the principle of integrity is said to impose an obligation on
all Members to be straightforward and
honest ‘in all professional and
business relationships’. Critically, unlike cl 140.6, the Code made
no provision for
any ongoing good faith obligation to a former client once the
relevant contractual relationship was terminated.
such circumstances, it was neither necessary nor reasonable for the effective
operation of the 29 June 2017 Retainer that the obligation
of good faith
should continue to apply to a former client.
similar reasons, there is also no reason to extend the operation of the
obligation on Mr Mulcahy not to make improper use of his
position as advisor. It
would in fact be unreasonable that such an obligation be extended since a person
cannot ‘improperly
use a position’ once no such position is
judge was therefore correct to find that the two further obligations did not
continue after termination of the 29 June 2017 Retainer.
It follows that
the notice of contention must be rejected.
result is that leave to appeal will be granted in respect of proposed ground 1
and the appeal will be
PART D: WHETHER ADVERSE
FINDINGS MADE IN BREACH OF PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
ground 2 reads as follows:
The primary judge erred in making findings that [Mr Mulcahy] acted
dishonestly or fraudulently, in circumstances where dishonesty
and fraud had not
been raised by the pleadings or in the conduct of the trial, and thereby failed
to accord procedural fairness to
[Mr Mulcahy]: Liability Reasons at [535],
[598], [603].
the application for leave to appeal sought orders to set aside relevant orders
made by the judge, this was consequent on
success on proposed grounds 1 and
The only relief sought
which was consequential on a successful outcome on proposed ground 2 was that
identified in paragraph 7(4)
of the application as follows:
It be declared that the findings of dishonesty or fraud in [535], [598] and
[603] of the judgment of Delany J dated 13 September
2021 were made without
according [Mr Mulcahy] procedural fairness.
relevant findings cited in the proposed ground were as follows (the
‘relevant findings’):
(a) at [535]:
Mr Mulcahy’s actions fundamentally undermined the services the
Mulcahy parties had agreed to provide and, from 16 November
ostensibly providing pursuant to the Conheady Retainer. These were not the
actions of Mr Mulcahy standing ‘by the
Mr Conheady. These were actions taken in breach of the good faith
obligation calculated to undermine the benefit of
Mr Conheady’s
retainer of the Mulcahy parties. They were dishonest actions, deliberately
undertaken by Mr Mulcahy without fidelity
to the Conheady
(b) at [598]:
Applying the authorities discussed by Sifris J in
Mr Mulcahy engaged in a ’dishonest and fraudulent design’. His
actions went well beyond trivial breaches of fiduciary
duty. As I have found,
they were not motivated by altruism for the Business or for Mr Debono, they
were not well-intentioned. The
conscious awareness on the part of
Mr Mulcahy that what he was doing was wrong is evident from his concealment
of his actions from
his client and from the ‘awkwardness’ he felt
when he received the email from Mr Debono on 9 February 2018. There
by Mr Mulcahy, what Leeming JA described in
Hasler v Singtel
Optus Pty Ltd
as a ‘plain transgression of ordinary standards of
honest behaviour. No honest [accountant] would do such a thing without having
first obtained the consent of his or her [client]’. Such conduct is
clearly sufficient to answer the description of a dishonest
and fraudulent
(c) at [603]:
I find that Mr Mulcahy, who owed a fiduciary duty to Mr Conheady,
engaged in a dishonest and fraudulent design and that BFMM knowingly
assisted in
that design. BFMM having knowingly assisted Mr Mulcahy to usurp the
opportunity to acquire a controlling interest in
the Business is liable
accordingly.
to competency
Mr Conheady
and Mr Porter sought an extension of time to file an objection to
competency which relied on the following grounds:
1. Ground 2 ... seeks to set aside or affect findings or reasons, and not
2. Since success on ground 2 will not lead to the orders made by the learned
trial judge being set aside, the application for leave
to appeal on proposed
ground 2 is not in respect of a determination within the meaning of
Supreme Court Act 1986
and the proposed appeal is
incompetent.
point was a short one and relied on a recent decision of this Court in
O’Bryan v Lindholm
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter contended that
that an application for leave to appeal will be incompetent if it is against
‘reasons for judgment’; and/or does
not relate to a
‘determination’ and/or other operative decision that affects rights,
duties, or liabilities.
therefore submitted that proposed ground 2 fell squarely within
and should be dismissed as incompetent.
Mulcahy parties raised two substantive submissions in response.
they sought to distinguish
on the basis that the applicant
in that case did not seek leave to appeal from any orders below and that the
application was exclusively
directed to certain findings made by the judge. The
decision therefore did not speak to circumstances where the Court’s
was already invoked — as in this case where the Mulcahy
parties seek to set aside orders made by the judge. Their submission
ground of appeal was not of itself either competent or incompetent, but was
merely a contention as to why the appeal should
succeed, citing
Wines Pty Ltd v Registrar of the Workers Compensation Commission (NSW)
they submitted that the Court has an inherent power to grant declaratory relief
and that declaratory relief ought be granted
here given the issue was not
hypothetical and that Mr Mulcahy had a real interest in seeking relief
because of the reputational consequences
of the dishonesty findings. They
submitted that declarations were routinely made in substitution and
independently of orders below,
Lo v Russell
Gardiner v Hughes
oral submissions, senior counsel relied upon
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice
and submitted that the Court has an inherent power to grant declaratory relief.
He contended that there was a real or substantial
interest concerning
Mr Mulcahy’s reputation which arose out of the findings of
dishonesty. Further, the denial of procedural
fairness constituted the
‘controversy’ that underpinned the relief sought.
Consideration
the decision of
, the applicant sought to challenge a range
of serious adverse findings made by a judge in seven paragraphs of his reasons,
no challenge to any orders made by the judge.
Court found that
Supreme Court Act 1986
conferred a
right to appeal a determination of the trial division of this
which was to be
construed having regard also to
relevantly provides as follows:
(1) The Trial Division constituted by a Judge of the Court may hear and
determine all matters, whether civil or criminal, not required
by or under this
or any other Act or the Rules to be heard and determined by the Court of
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this or any other Act, an appeal
lies to the Court of Appeal from any determination of
the Trial Division
constituted by a Judge of the Court.
Court considered whether the ‘findings’ contained in the relevant
paragraphs constituted ‘determinations’
within the meaning of
In finding that
they did not, the Court stated:
These authorities, while supporting the proposition that the word
‘determination’ is to be construed broadly, are also
consistent with
that term having a meaning directed to the resolution of a dispute, rather than
particular factual findings that
are made along the way to the resolution.
and (2) together, then, the obvious purpose of
is to provide for the crystallisation of a right to appeal after a
‘matter’ has been finalised. The concept of a ‘matter’
will include a proceeding, or some part of a proceeding. It may
also extend to a justiciable controversy requiring the determination
court, including an interlocutory determination. However, any such controversy
would involve a controversy over some right,
duty, or liability so as to be
appropriate for the determination of the court. It would not extend to the
making of findings of fact
preliminary to the making of an operative
Critically, then, as the High Court explained, an appeal is not against reasons
for judgment. Moreover, there is nothing in the
text, or context of
predecessor, which would suggest that an appeal right should extend to a right
to separately challenge individual findings
made in reasons given by a judge.
We also agree with the respondent that an examination of potential consequences
supports the construction that we have reached.
Consistent with the concerns
Lake v Lake
, it is unclear what consequences would flow if any
one of the findings in the relevant paragraphs was to be ‘set
The ability to attack individual findings would also considerably
increase the volume of appeals (and potentially remittals) without
justification. Such fragmentation undermines principles of finality and should
not be adopted absent express and clear words.
Having regard, then, to the text, context and purpose, together with the
relevant authorities, we consider that a ‘determination’
the finalisation of a matter or other operative decision that affects rights,
duties or liabilities. It would not include
the making of findings of fact prior
to the making of an operative decision of that kind. It is otherwise unnecessary
the precise parameters of a ‘determination’. Whatever its
precise scope, it does not extend to the findings made in the
paragraphs that the applicant seeks to
ground 2 does not seek to challenge any ‘determination’ of the trial
division, but rather seeks only to challenge
certain findings made in the
reasons of the judge. On the basis of the principles identified in
proposed ground 2 is incompetent.
as Mr Mulcahy seeks to distinguish
by reference to
other cases, they also do not assist.
insofar as he relied upon
, the relevant passage is as
A ground of appeal is a statement of contention one wishes to make in the
course of an appeal,
as a reason why the appeal should
although there might be a challenge made to findings, this is only so as to
advance a reason as to why the appeal should succeed,
ie, so as to affect some
operative decision or ‘determination’. The
provides no justification for a jurisdiction to challenge findings of
themselves.
decisions in
also do not assist Mr Mulcahy
since both clearly involved challenges to ‘determinations’, and not
just to passages from
a judge’s reasons:
, the judge had rejected the applicant’s application for a
declaration that he had validly terminated a contract and had dismissed
There was hence
clearly a ‘determination’ made by the judge that was amenable to an
(b) The decision in
concerned a challenge to a preliminary
determination that an applicant lacked
There was therefore
a justiciable controversy which gave rise to an interlocutory
‘determination’ of the court as referred
suggestion that
should be distinguished because proposed
ground 2 is contained within an application that otherwise invokes jurisdiction
without merit. Such a proposition would enable the principles in
to be avoided and undermined. A challenge to reasons alone,
without corresponding effect on a ‘determination’, is incompetent.
Such a result is unaffected by the fact that such a challenge is incorporated
into an application that does correctly invoke jurisdiction
(as in the present
although it is true that, consistent with
, individual judges in
superior courts have inherent power to grant declaratory relief, an appeal is a
creature of statute.
reasons we have given, the relevant statute conferred no right to appeal based
on proposed ground 2.
notice of objection to competency was served some 7 months
in circumstances where
the relevant 14 day time period was overlooked. However, three matters are of
significance. First, and most
significantly, the objection concerns a question
of jurisdiction which cannot be affected by the position of the parties;
the Mulcahy parties were put on notice of the issue raised by the
notice of objection to competency relatively early, in the written
case of the
respondents dated 27 May
and thirdly, the sole
basis for opposition to the extension of time was that it was futile because the
notice of objection was misconceived.
There was no suggestion of prejudice, or
even opposition, referable to the delay alone.
all the circumstances, we therefore consider that it is appropriate to grant an
extension of time to file the notice of objection
under r 64.35 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
For the reasons given above, we uphold that objection.
breach of procedural fairness in any event
our conclusions on the competency of proposed ground 2, it is unnecessary to
consider its merits. However, in our view, the
proposed ground would fail in any
event. Our short reasons for this conclusion follow.
parties’ submissions
Mulcahy parties submitted that to determine a civil case on a basis other than
that set out in the pleadings, without hearing
the parties, will ordinarily
constitute a denial of procedural fairness. Further, that dishonesty and/or
fraud must be pleaded distinctly
and with particularity, citing the decision in
Nadinic v Drinkwater
submitted that Mr Porter and Mr Conheady did not plead their claims at
trial against either the Mulcahy parties or BFMM by reference
to dishonesty or
fraud; nor did they make submissions inviting findings of dishonesty or fraud.
Therefore, by determining liability
based on the relevant findings, the judge
failed to afford the Mulcahy parties procedural fairness.
Mulcahy parties acknowledged that the judge evidently made findings of fraud and
dishonesty in terms of the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
, which requires
assistance in a ‘dishonest and fraudulent
However, they
submitted that no such case was ever actually put, highlighting four matters.
First, while Mr Porter and Mr Conheady
used the label of
‘knowing assistance’, they did not expressly plead that BFMM
assisted in a ‘dishonest and fraudulent
design’. Secondly, the case
against BFMM was put on the basis that it was the ‘alter ego’ of
Mr Mulcahy, alternatively
that Mr Mulcahy was acting as agent for BFMM
— both bases being distinct from
Barnes v Addy
and neither
requiring fraud or dishonesty. Thirdly, in his closing address, senior counsel
for Mr Porter and Mr Conheady did not
Barnes v Addy
Fourthly, Mr Porter and Mr Conheady only referred to dishonesty or
fraud once at trial (in written closing submissions), though
this statement was
necessarily qualified by their senior counsel’s submission in his opening
address that dishonesty or fraud
were not ‘required ... in this
oral submissions, senior counsel’s key submission was that Mr Porter
and Mr Conheady had relied upon the ‘alter ego’
liability which — as recognised in
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL [No
— was a separate
and different basis for liability from the second limb of
Consideration
is convenient first to consider the relevant findings at [598] and [603] of the
Liability Reasons. In both those passages, the
judge uses the expression,
‘dishonest and fraudulent design’.
considering the issue of procedural fairness, it is also useful to revisit Lord
Selborne LC’s well known statement in
Barnes v Addy
[S]trangers are not to be made constructive trustees merely because they act as
the agents of trustees in transactions within their
legal powers, transactions,
perhaps of which a Court of Equity may disapprove, unless those agents receive
and become chargeable
with some part of the trust property, or unless they
assist with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent design
on the part of
the trustees.
italicised passage has come to be known as the ‘second limb’ of
Barnes v Addy
. The critical issue is therefore whether the Mulcahy
parties had adequate notice that the trial judge might make findings pursuant
the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
considered the various passages cited by the Mulcahy parties, it is fair to say
that there might have been some confusion as
to the way the matter was
ultimately left with the trial judge. Hence some of those passages do suggest
that Mr Conheady and Mr Porter
ultimately chose to focus their
arguments for liability on the ‘quite different’ manifestation of
participatory liability
based on a third party being an ‘alter ego’
of the wrongdoer, or based on
the fundamental question raised by proposed ground 2 is antecedent to the
ultimate consideration by the judge — it
is rather whether the Mulcahy
parties had adequate notice that a ‘dishonest and fraudulent design’
have been a basis upon which the judge could decide the case, such
that they had the opportunity to respond to it.
our view, they plainly did.
and critically, paragraph 53 of the amended statement of claim alleged that BFMM
‘knowingly assisted in breaches of fiduciary
duties’ by the Mulcahy
parties by usurping the opportunity to acquire the Business. The phrase
‘knowingly assisted’
is common shorthand for the second
Barnes v Addy
. Moreover, a breach of trust or
fiduciary duty in which a third party ‘knowingly assisted’ must be
dishonest and fraudulent
in order for liability to be found pursuant to the
second limb of
Paragraph 53 of the
amended statement of claim is naturally read as invoking the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
were similar references in a range of other documents filed by Mr Conheady
and Mr Porter as follows:
(a) issue 9 of the agreed list of issues raised whether BFMM did
‘knowingly assist a breach of a fiduciary duty or duties’;
(b) in opening submissions, they alleged that BFMM ‘knowingly assisted a
breach of fiduciary duty’; and
(c) in opening submissions and closing submissions, they cited both
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
for the proposition that a third party will be liable if it ‘knowingly
assisted’ a breach of fiduciary duty. In closing
submissions, they also
answered ‘yes’ in response to the question as to whether the Mulcahy
parties did ‘knowingly
assist’ a breach of a fiduciary duty and, as
acknowledged by the Mulcahy parties, referred to a ‘dishonest and
fraudulent’
circumstances where all parties were represented by experienced legal
practitioners, we consider that these references clearly
put the Mulcahy parties
on notice that a ‘dishonest and fraudulent design’ could become an
issue at trial and, in turn,
become a subject of the primary judge’s
findings. In fact, insofar as the Mulcahy parties were put on notice about the
basis for liability, the corporation’s own wrong is
characteristically under one or other of the two limbs of
(a) in their written closing submissions, the Mulcahy parties cited a passage
containing a detailed discussion of the meaning of the phrase
‘dishonest and fraudulent
(b) BFMM made detailed written closing submissions about accessorial liability,
including submissions as to the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
express mention of ‘dishonest and fraudulent design’.
all the circumstances, then, we consider that the Mulcahy parties were
sufficiently put on notice that the relevant findings at
[598] and [603] of the
Liability Reasons might be made.
impugned finding at [535] that Mr Mulcahy engaged in ‘dishonest
actions’ may be dealt with more expeditiously.
and Mr Conheady expressly pleaded that the Mulcahy parties ‘failed to
act in good faith’. The list of issues
also included an issue as to
whether the fiduciary duties owed extended to an obligation to act in good
that a contractual obligation of good faith encompasses a duty to act
the allegation of
bad faith squarely put Mr Mulcahy on notice that his honesty might be
called into question.
notice also fortifies our earlier findings, since it provided further notice of
a possible finding of a ‘dishonest’
design for the purposes of the
relevant findings at [598] and [603].
also does not assist the Mulcahy parties. First, that was a case where the trial
was expedited and proceeded without any pleadings.
Second, and more critically,
for reasons already given, the Mulcahy parties were on notice of the relevant
allegations, including
by way of pleadings in this case.
judge therefore did not fail to accord procedural fairness in making the
relevant findings and proposed ground 2 would fail even
if there was
E: CROSS-APPLICATIONS
Constructive
trust and application to adduce fresh evidence
sole proposed ground of Mr Conheady’s cross-application for leave to
appeal reads:
The learned primary judge erred in finding that an account of profits was
capable of doing full justice such that a constructive
trust ought not be
ground (b) of Mr Porter’s cross-application was in similar
we have already identified, it was a precondition to success on these grounds
that Mr Conheady and Mr Porter be permitted to adduce
fresh evidence. It is
accordingly necessary to resolve the application to adduce fresh evidence.
However, before doing so, we will
outline the judge’s reasons insofar as
they related to his refusal to grant a constructive trust remedy.
judge observed that there were two issues in relation to the claim for a
declaration that there be a constructive trust. First,
whether the constructive
trust remedy was available against a person who assisted in breach of fiduciary
duty under the second limb
Barnes v Addy
. Secondly, whether a
constructive trust should be imposed in this
noting the competing submissions of the parties as to the availability of the
remedy, the judge ultimately determined that it
was unnecessary to resolve this
controversy. This was because the claim could be disposed of by reference to the
second issue. The
judge then proceeded to set out the submissions of the
parties. More particularly, the judge recorded the submissions of BFMM as
BFMM submitted that the constructive trust is a ‘second order
remedy’ and should not be imposed if alternative orders
are capable of
doing full justice between the parties. The courts have held that an account of
profits, rather than a declaration
of a constructive trust over part of a
business, may be more appropriate to be ordered if the latter would
‘thrust the parties
into a continuing business relationship where it was
clear that there was no confidence or comity between them’. The same
where a constructive trust might involve an innocent third party being
in an unwanted relationship with the plaintiff.
BFMM submitted that in circumstances where the ordinary order is sufficient to
do justice between the parties and a constructive
trust will unfairly prejudice
Mr Conheady over other unsecured creditors of BFMM, a constructive trust
cannot, and should not, be
imposed as an exercise of
discretion.
judge recorded that BFMM also cited the decisions of
Alexander’s Clubs Pty Ltd v White City Tennis Club Ltd
the judge found:
, the High Court made it clear that before a court imposes a
constructive trust as a remedy it should first decide whether there are
means available to quell the controversy. In this case there are other means. As
against BFMM, Mr Conheady is entitled to equitable
compensation and to an
account of profits.
I agree with BFMM
that this is not an appropriate case for a declaration
that BFMM holds its shares on constructive trust for Mr Conheady. Adopting
the language in
John Alexander’s Clubs
, an account of profits is
‘capable of doing full justice’ in this case. In those
circumstances, a constructive trust
ought not be imposed. I will not grant the
declaratory relief sought.
Preliminary
application to adduce further evidence which had not been before the judge was
dated 6 June 2024 and sought to adduce an affidavit
from a Mr Remington of
4 June 2024 (the ‘4 June Remington Affidavit’). Mr Conheady and
Mr Porter submitted that the Court
ought receive that evidence because
‘the fact’ that an account of profits would not be an adequate
remedy was ‘not
known’ at the time the judge made his orders.
response to this application, the unit holders sought leave to intervene. They
opposed the application to adduce further evidence,
as well as the
cross-applications, and also sought to file ‘fresh evidence’
themselves. This in turn led to the filing
of even more ‘fresh
evidence’ by both Mr Conheady and Mr Porter, as well as the unit
holders. Mr Porter, Mr Conheady
and the unit holders also sought to
file amended applications, and submissions which purported to respond to each
was all done without obtaining leave, and without any clear indication of the
basis on which any further evidence ought be received
by this Court. Such an
approach obfuscated the real issues in dispute.
this somewhat unfortunate context we made a number of preliminary
determinations.
we granted the unit holders leave to intervene as non-parties at the outset of
the hearing. In so doing we had regard to the
principles identified by this
Bauer Media Pty Ltd v
In particular, we
had regard to the following three matters. First, although challenge was made to
the circumstances in which the
unit holders became creditors of BFMM, they were
recorded as creditors in the company’s books and hence held a relevant
Second, the liquidator did not take part in the applications. Third,
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter consented to BFMM being granted leave
we extended an opportunity to counsel for Mr Conheady and Mr Porter to
identify and define the precise ‘fresh evidence’
which was actually
the subject of the fresh evidence application. The evidence which was identified
by junior counsel is set out
below. We have otherwise not considered the other
extensive evidence filed without leave, including that filed by the interveners.
A significant part of this evidence appeared to be sought to be adduced on the
hearing of the cross-applications in the event that
the fresh evidence
application was successful.
For reasons explained below, that application has not been successful.
we have considered the application of Mr Porter and Mr Conheady
‘at its highest’ on the basis of the most recent form
of submissions
they sought to rely upon.
have also considered the most recent form of applications sought to be filed,
which critically included that the remedy of remittal
was now being sought. In
the result, this was in fact the primary relief sought. As a result of our
approach, it has not been necessary
to consider the submissions filed by the
interveners.
light of these preliminary matters, we turn to Mr Conheady and Mr Porter’s
fresh evidence application.
fresh evidence application
indicated already, Mr Conheady initially sought orders that the 4 June
Remington Affidavit be received as ‘further evidence’.
at the hearing, junior counsel identified two further items of ‘fresh
evidence’ sought to be included in the
fresh evidence
application:
(a) the fact that BFMM had been placed into liquidation subsequent to the making
of the judge’s orders; and
(b) two parts of a liquidator’s report dated 20 June 2024.
then, first, to the 4 June Remington Affidavit, it was sworn by
Mr Remington who is a solicitor at Nevetts Lawyers, who act
on behalf of
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter in the applications before this Court. His
(a) annexed the orders of the judge made on 10 April 2024, which were stayed
until 1 May 2024;
(b) stated that he gave instructions for the service of a statutory demand which
was served on BFMM on 7 May 2024, and which sought
payment of the judgment debt
on behalf of Mr Conheady;
(c) annexed an email from his colleague, Mr Staley, dated 24 May 2024 which
asked for confirmation as to when the funds due to Mr
Conheady would be
(d) annexed a further email received later on the same day from BFMM’s
solicitors which attached by way of service a notice
of BFMM that it did not
intend to respond or contest the application for leave to appeal; and
(e) stated that, given BFMM’s failure to comply with the orders; the
statutory demand; and the lack of response to the request
for confirmation as to
when the funds due to Mr Conheady would be paid, Mr Conheady was
‘concerned about the respondent’s
ability to satisfy the
next to the liquidator’s report, the two parts sought to be adduced were
as follows:
(a) part of Appendix A of the report wherein the liquidator reported a meeting
with Ms Hardwick (solicitor for the directors of BFMM)
on 18 April 2024
suggestion made by the interveners that
the service of the statutory demand
caused BFMM to be wound up; and
(b) part of the text under heading 5.2 of the report, which contained a table
giving an estimate of the financial position of BFMM
as at 6 June 2024 as a
deficiency of $19,287,802 after the liability under the judge’s orders was
included. The only asset
of value shown was the shares in CBB (at $4,892,313).
This was adduced to demonstrate that it was unlikely that Mr Conheady would
recover anything from BFMM.
Submissions
of Mr Conheady and Mr Porter
written submissions, Mr Conheady and Mr Porter contended that they
should be permitted to adduce this fresh evidence because a
assumption’ below had been ‘falsified by subsequent events’,
and relied on the principles in
written submissions, however, were unclear about the precise
‘assumption’ which was relied upon. For example, at one
point there
was said to be an erroneous assumption that the account of profits ‘was
capable of doing full justice’. However,
there was also reference to the
parties proceeding on the basis that ‘no issues of insolvency
oral submissions, counsel was therefore pressed about the precise ‘common
assumption’ that he relied upon. In the result,
he relied upon three
common assumptions which were said to have been ‘falsified’ as
(a) that the account of profits was capable of doing full justice;
(b) that BFMM was not insolvent; and
(c) that BFMM would not be insolvent as a result of the relief granted.
sought to highlight a number of features which suggested that BFMM was not
insolvent at the time of the judge’s consideration.
He submitted that just
because BFMM’s liabilities were greater than its assets this did not mean
that it was insolvent. In
particular, he sought to rely upon paragraphs 33 and
34 of a further affidavit of Mr Remington sworn on 30 April
which stated:
(a) that there were grounds to challenge the loans and security interests given
to the unit holders which were created after the
liability hearing and judgment
(13 September 2021) and executed during the quantum hearing (24 March
(b) that the Business was profitable and the value of the CBB shares held by
BFMM was $11,517,514.
and Mr Conheady also made reference to BFMM’s submissions in the
proceeding below on double recovery, including BFMM’s
written submissions
dated 29 February 2024, where it submitted:
In the present matter, if the Court were to order without limitation
the proposed forms of relief which Mr Conheady purports to elect (as
against the Mulcahy parties and BFMM), Mr Conheady will necessarily
more than the ‘whole of his loss’ (to adopt the language Lord
Nicholls in
Tang Man Sit
Equity will by injunction restrain a plaintiff receiving double satisfaction
for an amount which a plaintiff has already successfully
Accordingly, notwithstanding that the compensation comes to Mr Conheady in
the form of an account of profits, it performs the function
of compensating him
entirely for loss and damage he sustained as assessed by the
contended that these submissions proceeded on the basis of an assumption that
there may be an amount recovered which might
need to be the subject of an
injunction. He also made reference to various other submissions made by BFMM to
the effect that an award
of equitable compensation or an account of profits
would ‘do justice’.
counsel also acknowledged the following:
(a) that senior counsel for Mr Conheady had submitted at trial that the
only substantial creditor was NAB, and that there was ‘no
evidence’ about creditors or what their status was, such that the
consideration of creditors was a ‘neutral consideration’;
(b) that Mr Porter and Mr Conheady had also submitted at trial that
there was ‘no evidence’ before the Court in relation
defendants’ ‘ability or willingness’ to comply with orders,
such that it was ‘speculative and hypothetical’
to consider the
possibility of double satisfaction; and
(c) that senior counsel also said the following about the issue of ‘double
payment’ at the relief hearing:
We submit until there has been recovery the issue really doesn’t arise.
We don’t know whether this could be —
we expect there’ll be
recovery but we don’t know whether there will be, Your Honour. We would
hope there would be, and
that’s when the issue arises.
Critically,
counsel also accepted that, on the basis of a table of relevant financial data
prepared by Mr Conheady and Mr Porter’s
own expert,
Mr Meredith,
not pay the judgment sum awarded unless it obtained funds from somewhere else
(including by drawing down on the NAB facility).
However, he submitted they
‘could have drawn upon their own resources [or] resources from the
bank’. Further, that the
judge might have adopted the report of the other
expert, Ms Wright, in which case there would have been enough to pay the
award (because
the award would not have been as much).
Consideration
Rule 64.13(1)
relevantly provides that, unless this Court orders
otherwise, evidence which was not before the court whose decision is sought to
be appealed, or is being appealed, shall not be relied upon.
Rule 64.36(3)
relevantly provides as follows:
Subject to Rule 64.13, the Court of Appeal has power to receive further
evidence upon questions of fact—
(a) by oral examination in court;
(b) by affidavit; or
(c) by deposition taken before an examiner.
question of whether to admit fresh evidence is a matter of discretion. However,
different considerations may apply depending on
whether the evidence sought to
be adduced is of matters that were in existence before the trial, or of matters
that arose after the
this case, the fresh evidence related to matters that arose after trial, hence
the principles in
have application. In the decision of this Court
Apostolidis v Kalenik
Apostolidis
’), the Court
referred to
As Chernov JA observed in
Foody v Horewood
, the question of whether to
admit fresh evidence is largely one of discretion and degree bearing in mind the
public interest in finality
of litigation and, at the same time, the
requirements of justice of the case in hand. Generally speaking, fresh evidence
to be admitted when it bears upon matters falling within the field or
area of uncertainty in which the trial judge’s estimate
has previously
been made. Exceptionally, however, it may be admitted, if some basic assumption,
common to both sides, has been falsified
by a subsequent event. More precisely,
as Lord Wilberforce observed in
Mulholland v Mitchell
, courts will allow
fresh evidence where to refuse it would affront common sense, or a sense of
justice, always keeping in mind that
it should be an exceptional
indicated already this application was made on the basis that some ‘basic
assumption, common to both sides’, had been
‘falsified’.
the application was misconceived on a number of levels.
there was simply no evidence that any of the so-called common assumptions
as Mr Conheady and Mr Porter are concerned it is sufficient to
highlight the statements of their senior counsel, above, that
‘no evidence’ about BFMM’s ability or willingness to comply
with orders; further that they ‘[didn’t]
know’ whether there
would be recovery, but only ‘hope[d]’ there would be. Such
statements are not surprising. Given
counsel was pressing for a declaration that
there be a constructive trust, is unlikely that he would concede that monetary
would necessarily occur. Mr Conheady and Mr Porter should not be
permitted to resile from statements made by their counsel in open
court to now
suggest there was some other assumption to the effect that recovery was
statements were also appropriate on the basis of the objective evidence. In
particular, the evidence of Mr Conheady and Mr Porter’s
(as extracted at [264] of the Relief Reasons) showed the current value of the
units at only some $2,061,569 after allowing
for debts owed. Although the
ultimate question of insolvency might be a complex one, this evidence suggested,
as junior counsel appropriately
conceded, that BFMM could not pay the judgment
sum awarded unless it obtained the funds from somewhere else. In such
circumstances,
it could only be ‘hoped’ that it would occur and
there is simply no basis to infer that some contrary assumption might
have been held.
then, that the highest one might describe the state of belief of
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter was that there was some ‘hope’
of recovery, the application must fail at the outset. A ‘hope’ did
not demonstrate that they held an assumption that
insolvent as a result of the relief granted’.
assumption about the capacity of an account of profits to do ‘full
justice’, and even the assumptions about ‘insolvency’,
misconceived for other reasons we explain below, but to the extent it was
suggested that these assumptions incorporated an assumption
that there would be
recovery, such assumptions also cannot stand in the face of the statements made
by counsel as well as the objective
is unnecessary to go further. However, for the sake of completeness, we do not
consider that the submissions made by BFMM below
support the proposition that it
held any of the ‘assumptions’ identified (which were said to be held
in ‘common’).
Rather, a fair reading of the submissions suggests
that BFMM was addressing the nature of the remedies themselves in terms of what
they made provision for, rather than whether there might or might not be actual
recovery at the execution stage.
also consider that the ‘assumptions’ do not readily lend themselves
to objective ‘falsification’ in any
the so-called assumption that the account of profits was ‘capable of doing
full justice’ is not necessarily shown
to be false simply because there is
no ultimate recovery or satisfaction. Even if impecuniosity may be
the authorities
cited by the judge make it clear that the concept encompasses wider ranging
considerations, including the interests
The fact that the
judge cited those authorities, and further that he ‘agree[d] with
BFMM’ (who also relied on such
considerations),
that the judge took a wider range of considerations into account.
current difficulties with recovery do not, of themselves, ‘falsify’
any ‘assumption’ that the account
of profits was capable of doing
full justice.
cross-applications in relation to the judge’s refusal to grant a
constructive trust appeared to be premised on the basis
that a different result
would necessarily follow given the subsequent failure to recover. However, a
proper understanding of the
concept of ‘capable of doing full
justice’ means this does not automatically follow at all. In fact, the
extensive material
sought to be adduced by both Mr Conheady and Mr Porter and
the interveners (including the position of NAB as a creditor) tends to
underscore the broader nature of the inquiry which might be undertaken.
concept of whether a company is ‘insolvent’ at a particular time
also turns on an inference drawn from a consideration
of the company’s
financial position considered as a whole and at a particular
rather than from some
readily demonstrable single ‘fact’ which may be rendered
‘false’. Moreover, the future
prospects of recovery will usually
fall ‘within the field or area of uncertainty’ in which a trial
judge’s estimate
is commonly
It is hardly
‘exceptional’ that there might ultimately not be recovery.
current case is hence distinguishable from some of the other cases cited where
the basis for an assumption was readily demonstrated
to be false by discrete
objective evidence. In the case of
Apostolidis
subsequent amended
tax assessments clearly demonstrated that a tax estimate relied upon by the
judge for making a valuation was inaccurate.
The magnitude of the variation was
also important to the Court.
Warr v Santos
, the basis upon which an award of damages was made was
similarly destroyed (that a wife would give ongoing support) by the fresh
evidence of a marriage break
therefore do not consider that Mr Conheady and Mr Porter have
demonstrated that some basic assumption, common to both sides, has
falsified by subsequent events, more particularly by the fact that BFMM is now
in liquidation. Nor do we consider that it would
‘affront common sense, or
a sense of justice’ to refuse the admission of the further evidence.
would add that, generally, as a matter of discretion we do not consider that it
is appropriate to admit the further evidence. Having
particular regard to the
overarching purpose
public interest in the finality of litigation, it would be a most undesirable
outcome. As we have already observed, non-recovery
‘exceptional’ in commercial litigation, particularly when conducted
against a corporate (trustee) defendant. It
was also clearly perceived to be a
risk in this case. It would be highly undesirable for Mr Conheady and
Mr Porter to be entitled
to reagitate for a constructive trust remedy by
way of remittal, on further evidence, simply because this acknowledged
possibility
was realised. It is certainly not appropriate for this Court to
conduct a further inquiry on an appeal.
fresh evidence application is thereby refused.
also follows that Mr Conheady’s cross-application for leave to appeal
must be refused. Subject to one further matter, Mr
cross-application will also be refused.
Mr Porter was owed a fiduciary duty
ground (a) of Mr Porter’s cross-application alleges that the judge
‘erred in concluding that the [Mulcahy parties]
did not owe
[Mr Porter] a fiduciary duty’.
the hearing in this Court, senior counsel for Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady conceded that the only reason for pursuing this ground
order to pursue a constructive trust remedy. Given that the constructive trust
remedy must fail, it is unnecessary to consider
whether a fiduciary duty was
owed to Mr Porter. However, for completeness, and to assuage any notion
that Mr Porter may still seek
some monetary relief by reason of a breach of
a fiduciary duty, we will explain why the judge was correct to find that the
parties did not owe a fiduciary duty to Mr Porter.
so doing it is first necessary to identify relevant findings that the judge made
first to Mr Porter, the judge found that:
(a) Mr Porter first dealt with the Mulcahy parties in 2016 when one of his
companies retained Mulcahy & Co to carry out a review
of back office
(b) Mr Porter looked to Fordhams for accounting, taxation and financial
Fordhams were tax
agents and ASIC agents for Mr Porter and his companies, as well as being
specifically engaged to advise him in
relation to the proposed acquisition of
(c) Mr Porter did not ask for Mr Mulcahy’s advice or views about
making any offers for CBB and did not pass on any copies of
He was unaware of
Mr Conheady’s contact with Mr Mulcahy about
(d) the 29 June 2017 Retainer was not a general retainer to provide
accounting taxation and financial advice. The judge observed
that such a
retainer did not reflect either the pre-existing relationship or what occurred
subsequently;
(e) the 29 June 2017 retainer was confined to the giving of advice on
29 June 2017 about two discrete issues. Although there was
an opportunity
to seek other advice, in the result no such advice was ever sought or
In this respect
communications between Mr Conheady and Mr Mulcahy were by way of
‘updates’ only.
relation to Mr Conheady, however, the judge found that:
(a) Mr Mulcahy was Mr Conheady’s personal
accountant.
Mulcahy & Co
had also provided services since 2005 to Mr Conheady personally, as well as
to entities in which Mr Conheady had
(b) The Conheady Retainer generally covered accounting, taxation, structuring
and financial advice in relation to the proposed acquisition.
This continued the
‘full suite of services relationship’ that had existed for over a
(c) Mr Conheady had come to trust Mr Mulcahy ‘implicitly’
and ‘absolutely’ and told him ‘everything
that might be
relevant to his business
(d) when Mr Conheady began pursuing CBB for himself on 16 November 2017, he
asked Mr Mulcahy to be ‘by his side’ to help
‘do the tax and accounting work’, which Mr Mulcahy undertook to
When he asked whether he
should proceed, Mr Mulcahy told him to ‘go for
finding that the Mulcahy parties owed a fiduciary duty to Mr Conheady from
16 November 2017,
judge also gave reasons which included:
(a) that the Conheady Retainer was not a limited or narrow retainer.
Mr Mulcahy, and his firm, agreed to be ‘by [Mr Conheady’s]
side’ for the
transaction;
(b) that the retainer sat within the ‘full suite of services
relationship’ that had been in place for over a
(c) that Mr Conheady trusted Mr Mulcahy ‘implicitly’ as
his advisor and Mr Mulcahy knew that Mr Conheady trusted him
accountant. On 16 November 2017 when Mr Conheady provided the
‘further confidential information’ to Mr Mulcahy,
because he trusted and relied on him absolutely to protect his interests in
relation to the proposed
transaction;
(d) that when he agreed to stand ‘by Mr Conheady’s side’,
Mr Mulcahy assumed a responsibility to Mr Conheady as
would reasonably
entitle Mr Conheady to expect that he would act in the interest of
Mr Conheady (on and from 16 November 2017) to
the exclusion of his own
or a third party’s
is in the context of all these findings that the judge then gave three reasons
for not finding the existence of a fiduciary duty
in respect of Mr Porter,
as follows:
While the Mulcahy parties owed fiduciary duties to Mr Conheady, I do not
consider that to be the case concerning Mr Porter. That
is so for the
following reasons. First, Mr Porter did not repose the same degree of trust
and confidence in Mr Mulcahy as did Mr
Conheady. Mr Porter did
not tell Mr Mulcahy about and nor did he pass on copies of either of his
offers to purchase to Mr Mulcahy.
He did not ask Mr Mulcahy if he
should make either of those offers. By way of contrast, Mr Conheady relied
on Mr Mulcahy who advised
him to ‘go for it’ before he made his
offer on 16 November 2017. He told Mr Mulcahy about his offer on 17
November and
then about the ‘deal’ he had reached with
Mr Debono. Mr Porter did not do any of these things and
Mr Conheady did not
do any of them on his behalf. Second, while their
business relationship, relevantly constituted by the 29 June 2017 Retainer,
one for the provision of advice from time to time, (and included a good
faith obligation, obligations of confidentiality and not
to be in a position of
conflict, and terms implied by the Code), within that retainer advice was in
fact sought only about two issues
and then only on one day. This was not a
‘by my side’ engagement that saw Mr Porter seek and obtain
advice along the
way, after 29 June 2017 as the proposed transaction
progressed. Third, there was not the necessary relationship of dependence on
part of Mr Porter that there was with Mr Conheady. Mr Porter and
his interests were separately looked after by Fordhams from
August/September
2017. When Mr Porter re-entered as a purchaser together with
Mr Conheady of an 80% interest in the Business, the
relevant financial
information was provided to Fordhams so that Mr Porter could obtain advice
Although Mr Porter’s interests were exposed because of the
confidential information about the opportunity shared with the
Mulcahy parties,
and because of that he was vulnerable, the relationship between him and those
parties was not a fiduciary relationship.
Mr Porter’s relationship
with the Mulcahy parties fell short of bringing about a ‘factual fiduciary
relationship’
where a reasonable expectation that one party should
subordinate their interests in a particular matter to the interests of another
Mr Porter’s
submissions
submitted that the judge should have found that, as trust was reposed by
Mr Porter in Mr Mulcahy, the Mulcahy parties owed
fiduciary duties to
counsel for Mr Porter conceded that the judge set out the correct test for
whether a fiduciary duty is owed. His contention
was that the judge erred in
applying that test.
first addressed the judge’s finding that he did not repose the same degree
of trust and confidence in Mr Mulcahy as
did Mr Conheady. He submitted
that this finding fails to take into account that, prior to 15 November 2017,
Mr Conheady was dealing
with Mr Mulcahy on behalf of Mr Porter;
further, that Mr Conheady, on behalf of Mr Porter, did not embark on a
discussion concerning
the opportunity until he first satisfied himself that
Mr Mulcahy could act for Mr Porter and that the subject matter was of
importance’ to him and to Mr Porter. Moreover, the
judge’s statement that Mr Porter did not tell Mr Mulcahy about,
did he pass on copies of, either of his offers to purchase to
with his earlier finding that Mr Conheady (on behalf of Mr Porter)
updated Mr Mulcahy about Mr Porter’s conditional
then addressed the judge’s finding that, prior to the proposed acquisition
of an interest in CBB, Mr Porter only sought
advice about two issues, and
only on one day. Mr Porter submitted that while it may be the case that
Mr Conheady sought advice in
his own right more often than he did for
Mr Porter, it does not follow that Mr Mulcahy did not owe
Mr Porter a fiduciary duty. He
submitted that a fiduciary duty is not
dependent on matters such as frequency of contact.
Mr Porter addressed the judge’s finding that Mr Porter and his
interests were separately looked after by Fordhams from
August/September 2017.
Mr Porter submitted that this finding fails to take into account that
reliance can be placed on — and
fiduciary duties owed by — more than
one advisor. Seeking advice from Fordhams did not preclude the Mulcahy parties
fiduciary duties to Mr Porter. The judge’s finding that
the conduct of Mr Mulcahy was consistent with being viewed by
Mr Conheady
— who was acting on behalf of Mr Porter in his
dealings with Mr Mulcahy at that time — as a ‘trusted advisor’
is therefore critical to the existence of a fiduciary relationship.
Mr Mulcahy’s client was Mr Porter until 15 November
Consideration
with the submissions of both parties, the judge provided a detailed and accurate
summary of the principles relevant to
whether a fiduciary relationship
It is sufficient to
extract part of the judge’s helpful summary as follows:
There is no single definition that can be given to identify a fiduciary
relationship. In
Hospital Products
, Mason J set out an important
statement of principle concerning fiduciary duties:
The accepted
fiduciary relationships are sometimes referred to as relationships of trust and
confidence or confidential relations
... viz., trustee and beneficiary, agent
and principal, solicitor and client, employee and employer, director and
company, and partners.
The critical feature of these relationships is that the
fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf of or in the interests
another person in the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect the
interests of that other person in a legal or practical
sense. The relationship
between the parties is therefore one which gives the fiduciary a special
opportunity to, exercise the power
or discretion to the detriment of that other
person who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of his position.
expressions ‘for’, ‘on behalf of’, and ‘in the
interests of’ signify that the fiduciary acts
‘representative’ character in the exercise of his responsibility, to
adopt an expression used by the Court of Appeal.
It is partly
because the fiduciary’s exercise of the power or discretion can adversely
affect the interests of the person to
whom the duty is owed and because the
latter is at the mercy of the former that the fiduciary comes under a duty to
exercise his
power or discretion in the interests of the person to whom it is
A relationship will be a fiduciary one when it involves one of trust, and where
confidence is reposed in the fiduciary. In
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL [No
, Finn, Stone and Perram JJ said:
As to who is a
‘fiduciary’, while there is no generally agreed and unexceptionable
definition, the following description
suffices for present purposes: a person
will be in a fiduciary relationship with another when and insofar as that person
has undertaken
to perform such a function for, or has assumed such a
responsibility to, another as would thereby reasonably entitle that other to
expect that he or she will act in that other’s interest to the exclusion
of his or her own or a third party’s interest.
ABN AMRO Bank NV v Bathurst Regional Council
, Jacobson, Gilmour and
Gordon JJ summarised the principles of fiduciary relationships:
‘critical feature is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or
on behalf of or in the interests of another
2. It is the
element of undertaking (from the point of view of the fiduciary) or obligation
(for and on behalf of the beneficiary)
that has the consequence that equity
insists that the principal must act in the ‘interests of’ or
‘for the benefit
of’ the beneficiary rather than in the
principal’s own
does not automatically follow from the fact that Mr Porter’s
circumstances could be distinguished from Mr Conheady that Mr
did not owe Mr Porter a fiduciary duty. However, the absence of many of the
features of Mr Mulcahy’s relationship with
Mr Conheady were
legitimate matters to be taken into account.
number of submissions made also did not assist Mr Porter.
the fact that Mr Conheady was dealing with Mr Mulcahy ‘on behalf
of’ Mr Porter and on matters of ‘importance’
prior to 15
November 2017 does not mean that any fiduciary relationship was established. As
highlighted above, the retainer with
Mr Porter was a very limited one where
advice was only sought on one occasion on 29 June 2017 about two topics.
The fact that the
relationship was mediated through someone who did have a close
relationship with Mr Mulcahy does not foreclose the necessity to look
relationship between Mr Porter and Mr Mulcahy. The fiduciary duty owed
to Mr Conheady also did not commence until 16 November
2017 in any
is also wrong to suggest that the judge’s finding rested on a tallying of
the ‘frequency of contact’ between
Mr Porter and the Mulcahy
parties. The judge’s observation that Mr Porter sought advice under
the 29 June 2017 Retainer ‘only
day’ was clearly to emphasise that, although that retainer —
‘for the provision
of advice from time to time’ — may sound
broad, the relationship was confined in practice. The degree of
Mr Porter’s
trust and vulnerability was limited in turn, and was not
what one would expect of a fiduciary relationship.
is also important to consider what did not occur, as much as what did.
Significantly, there was no suggestion that the Mulcahy
‘undertook’ or agreed to act exclusively for or on behalf of
Mr Porter (in the relevant sense) when exercising
powers and discretions
affecting his interests.
was appropriately compared to the situation with Mr Conheady wherein
Mr Mulcahy undertook to stay ‘by his side’.
also do not accept that the judge may be taken to have found that fiduciary
duties cannot be owed by more than one advisor. However,
the judge found that
Mr Porter looked to Fordhams for accounting, taxation and financial advice
and specifically engaged Fordhams
to advise on the structure of the proposed
acquisition of CBB.
decisive, it was a clearly relevant factor which weighed against any finding
that Mr Porter was ‘vulnerable to abuse
by’ or ‘at the
mercy of’ the Mulcahy
we consider that the judge correctly applied the principles having regard to the
detailed factual findings he made. It was
clearly correct to conclude that no
fiduciary relationship arose between Mr Porter and the Mulcahy
Mr Porter’s
cross-application for leave to appeal should thereby be
F: CONCLUSION
respect of the application for leave to appeal of the Mulcahy parties, we have
concluded that:
(a) an extension of time will be granted to Mr Conheady and Mr Porter
to file the notice of objection to competency in respect of
proposed ground 2
and the objection will be upheld;
(b) leave to appeal will be granted on the basis of proposed ground 1; and
(c) the appeal will be allowed and order 1 of the judge’s orders dated 10
April 2024 will be set aside.
relation to each of the cross-applications for leave to appeal of
Mr Conheady and Mr Porter, we have concluded that:
(a) the fresh evidence application will be refused; and
(b) the cross-application will also be refused.
S EAPCI 2024 0041
CO ACCOUNTING SERVICES PTY LTD (ACN 105 360 325)
JAMES EDWARD
TIMOTHY NORMAN
CHRISTOPHER
GERARD CONHEADY
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 625 266 891)
S EAPCI 2024 0051
TIMOTHY NORMAN
cross-applicant
CHRISTOPHER
GERARD CONHEADY
cross-applicant
CO ACCOUNTING SERVICES PTY LTD (ACN 105 360 325)
cross-respondent
JAMES EDWARD
cross-respondent
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 625 266 891)
cross-respondent
S EAPCI 2024 0056
CHRISTOPHER
GERARD CONHEADY
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 625 266 891)
Chris Debono conducted all
relevant meetings and negotiations. References to Mr Debono are references
to Chris Debono and not to
his brother, Anthony: see
Porter v Mulcahy &
Co Accounting Services Pty Ltd
[2021] VSC 572
, [16] n 16 (‘Liability
Although the existence of a
retainer in each case was challenged at trial, their existence is no longer in
Liability Reasons, [257].
[2021] VSC 572.
[2024] VSC 6
(2024) 73 VR 348;
(‘Further Relief Reasons’).
Liability Reasons, [360].
Ibid [525].
Ibid [537], [544].
Citing ibid [544].
Ibid [522]–[523].
Ibid [361]–[392].
Ibid [526]–[543].
Ibid [547]–[567].
Ibid [594].
Ibid [603].
Damages for breach of
contract: Relief Reasons, [22], [479].
Damages for breach of
contract and equitable compensation: Ibid [24], [480].
As an account of profits:
ibid [25], [480].
Ibid [22], [24], [348],
Proceeding S EAPCI 2024
Proposed ground 3 of the
Mulcahy parties’ application for leave to appeal read: ‘The primary
judge erred in holding that
[Mr Conheady’s] remedies against the
applicants and against [BFMM] were cumulative: Further Relief Reasons at
[36]–[52].’
Senior counsel for the Mulcahy parties abandoned
proposed ground 3 given the concession made by senior counsel for Mr Porter
Mr Conheady that no different causation test was being pursued in
Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady together filed the cross-application for leave to appeal in
proceeding S EAPCI 2024 0051, though the application
is principally
relevant only to Mr Porter (and will therefore be referred to as
‘Mr Porter’s cross-application’).
Mr Conheady
separately filed an application for leave to appeal in proceeding S EAPCI
2024 0056 (although filed as an application
for leave to appeal rather than a
cross-application, for convenience we will refer to it as
‘Mr Conheady’s cross-application’).
An extension of time
to file Mr Conheady’s cross-application was granted on the papers on
20 December 2024.
Although the application was
only filed in Mr Conheady’s cross-application, we have treated the
application as being made by
both Mr Conheady and Mr Porter,
consistent with the way the matter was argued in this Court.
(2007) 62 ACSR 576
The unit holders were
entities associated with Mr Mulcahy and three business associates, being
Mr Matthews, Mr Broadbent and Mr Ford.
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [22], [82].
Ibid [93]–[94].
Mr Matthews was the founder, sole director and principal solicitor of
Mulcahy & Co Legal Pty Ltd, a company
related to Mulcahy & Co. Mulcahy
& Co Legal Pty Ltd had provided legal assistance to CBB since 2015:
Liability Reasons, [9]–[11].
Ibid [110].
Ibid [360].
Ibid [116].
Ibid [121].
Ibid [123].
Ibid [126].
Ibid [124].
Ibid [132]–[133].
Ibid [145], [148].
Ibid [165].
Ibid [168].
Ibid [29]–[30],
Ibid [360], [525].
Ibid [31], [182].
Ibid [172], [186],
Ibid [184], [186].
Ibid [184], [383]
Ibid [186].
Ibid [184].
Ibid [386].
Ibid [442], [611(3)].
Ibid [187].
Ibid [187].
Ibid [188].
Ibid [194], [197],
Ibid [199].
Ibid [456], [611(3)].
Ibid [442].
Ibid [200].
Ibid [205].
Ibid [211].
Ibid [460].
Ibid [536], [543].
Ibid [219]–[228].
Ibid [234].
Ibid [528]–[529]
(citations omitted).
Ibid [536].
Ibid [239].
Ibid [240].
Ibid [257].
Ibid [251].
Ibid [252].
Ibid [256].
Ibid [263]–[264].
Ibid [531].
Ibid [264]–[265].
Ibid [265].
Ibid [531].
Ibid [467]–[468]
(citations omitted).
Ibid [269].
Ibid [271].
Ibid [273].
Ibid [279].
Ibid [284].
Ibid [286].
Ibid [45], [286].
Ibid [524].
Ibid [525].
Ibid [546].
Ibid [611(6)].
Ibid [605].
Ibid [609] (citations
(1987) 9 NSWLR 310
(Glass JA) (emphasis in original) (citations omitted)
’), quoted in Relief Reasons, [301].
Relief Reasons,
Ibid [307]. See [
Relief Reasons,
The judge cited, inter
alia, the decision of
(1987) 9 NSWLR 310
, 315 (Glass JA)
for this proposition.
Relief Reasons,
[311]–[313] (emphasis altered) (citations generally omitted).
Minister of Community Welfare
[1992] HCA 27
(1992) 176 CLR 408
, 412–13 (Mason CJ,
Deane and Toohey JJ);
[1992] HCA 27
Australia Insurance Ltd v GSF Australia Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 26
(2005) 221 CLR 568
596–7 [96]–[97] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ);
[2005] HCA 26
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR 467
479 [42] (French CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Nettle JJ);
Woolworths Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
(2012) 246 CLR 182
, 190 [18] (French CJ, Gummow,
Crennan and Bell JJ);
[2012] HCA 5
March v E &
MH Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
, 515–16 (Mason CJ);
March v Stramare
[1992] HCA 27
(1992) 176 CLR 408
412–13 (Mason CJ, Deane and Toohey JJ);
[1992] HCA 27
Amaca Pty Ltd v
[2011] HCA 53
(2011) 246 CLR 36
, 56 [48] (French CJ), 91 [149] (Heydon J);
[2011] HCA 53
Citing Liability Reasons,
[265], [531], [549]; Relief Reasons, [311].
Citing Relief Reasons,
Citing Relief Reasons,
Quoting ibid [311],
(1987) 9 NSWLR 310
, 315 (Glass JA) (emphasis added).
Ibid (emphasis
Citing James Edelman,
‘Unnecessary Causation’
(2015) 89(1)
Australian Law Journal
Emphasis added.
Referring to Liability
Reasons, [468], [529].
Although filed on behalf
of both Mr Conheady and Mr Porter, we will refer to these submissions
as Mr Porter’s submissions
given they only pertain to his
[2011] VSC 440
Citing Liability Reasons,
Citing ibid [468].
Citing ibid
[466]–[468], [430]–[431], [525], [537], [540], [544].
Citing ibid [468]; Relief
Reasons, [311], [313].
[2012] HCA 5
, 194 [27] (French CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Bell JJ);
[2012] HCA 5
(2011) 246 CLR 36
[2011] HCA 53.
March v Stramare
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
, 515–16 (Mason CJ, Toohey J agreeing at 524,
Gaudron J agreeing at 525);
[1991] HCA 12.
[2005] HCA 26
, 596 [96]–[97] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ);
[2005] HCA 26
Travel Compensation Fund v Tambree
[2005] HCA 69
(2005) 224 CLR 627
, 642–3 [45]
(Gummow and Hayne JJ);
[2005] HCA 69
Tapp v Australian Bushmen’s
Campdraft and Rodeo Association Ltd
[2022] HCA 11
(2022) 273 CLR 454
, 487–8 [101]
(Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ);
[2022] HCA 11
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
, 231–2 [60] (Gordon and Edelman
[2023] HCA 31
March v Stramare
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
, 515–16 (Mason CJ, Toohey J agreeing at 524, Gaudron J
agreeing at 525);
[1991] HCA 12
[1992] HCA 27
(1992) 176 CLR 408
(Mason CJ, Deane and Toohey JJ);
[1992] HCA 27
[2012] HCA 5
246 CLR 182
, 190 [18] (French CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Bell JJ);
[2012] HCA 5.
Agricultural Land
Management Ltd v Jackson [No 2]
[2014] WASC 102
(2014) 48 WAR 1
(Edelman J);
[2014] WASC 102.
, 315 item 5 (Glass JA).
Ibid 315 item 6.
[2011] HCA 53
(2011) 246 CLR 36
[70] (Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ);
[2011] HCA 53.
[2023] HCA 31
, 231–2 [60] (Gordon and Edelman JJ) (citations omitted);
See also James Edelman, ‘Unnecessary Causation’
(2015) 89(1)
Australian Law Journal
[2020] HCA 26
(2020) 271 CLR 192
[178] (citations omitted);
[2020] HCA 26.
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129
, 148–9 [55] (Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Liability Reasons,
Relief Reasons, [311]
(emphasis added).
Ibid [313] (emphasis
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [468].
Although such information
may have been obtained in breach of obligations owed to Mr Conheady, this
does not assist Mr Porter: and
Cheall v Association of Professional
Executive Clerical & Computer Staff
[1983] 2 AC 180
, 189 (Lord
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [246].
Liability Reasons,
Accounting Professional
& Ethical Standards Board,
Compiled APES 110 Code of Ethics for
Professional Accountants
(at November 2013) (‘Code’). The judge
also referred to the successor Code applicable from 1 January 2018: Liability
Reasons, [50]. The relevant clauses remain unaltered between the two
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [401]–[402],
citing Code, cls 110.1, 100.5, 140.1(b), 140.3 and 140.6, respectively.
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [415].
Ibid [416], citing
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539, 573 (Deane J);
[1988] HCA 15.
Liability Reasons, [418],
Ibid [423].
Ibid [427].
Ibid [429].
Ibid [430] (citations
Although the notice of
contention and submissions were filed by both Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady, they only affected Mr Porter’s
Citing Liability Reasons,
[49], [430], [433], [540].
[2005] VSCA 27
(2005) 12 VR 513
536–8 [56]–[59] (Phillips JA, Winneke P agreeing at 516 [1], Charles
JA agreeing at 516 [3]);
[2005] VSCA 27.
[2005] VSC 318
[88]–[91] (Whelan J).
At [535] of the Liability
Reasons, the judge made findings about the duties owed to Mr Conheady under the
Conheady Retainer, and
Re Dingjan; Ex parte
(1995) 183 CLR 323
, 341 (Brennan J);
[1995] HCA 16
Casale v Artedomus (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 172
(2007) 73 IPR 326
344–6 [91]–[100] (Campbell JA, McColl JA agreeing at
[2007] NSWCA 172.
(1988) 164 CLR 539, 573;
[1988] HCA 15.
Realestate.com.au Pty
Ltd v Hardingham
[2022] HCA 39
(2022) 277 CLR 115
, 126 [15] (Kiefel CJ and Gageler
J), 135 [47] (Gordon J), 156 [115], 158 [122] (Edelman and
Steward JJ);
[2022] HCA 39.
Code, cl 140.6.
See, eg, Code,
cls 100.5(a), 110.1, 320.5, 340.3.
The order sought at
paragraph 7(3) of the application for leave to appeal was: ‘Paragraphs 1
and 4 of the order of Delany J
made on 19 April 2024 be set aside and, in
their place, it be ordered that [Mr Porter] pay [the Mulcahy
parties’] costs of
and incidental to the proceeding but limited to
[Mr Porter’s] claim against them.’ The order sought at
paragraph 7(5)
was: ‘It be declared that, in respect of paragraphs 2 and 3
of the order of Delany J made on 19 April 2024, [Mr Conheady] is
entitled to recover any amount in excess of the amount payable pursuant to
paragraph 3’. The former applied in relation
to proposed ground 1 while
the latter applied in relation to proposed ground 3.
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [598] (citations
Ibid [603].
(2024) 74 VR 496
Citing ibid 516–17
[94], [96] (Kennedy, Walker and Macaulay JJA).
[2007] NSWCA 149
(2007) 4 DDCR 607
623 [75] (Campbell JA, Hodgson JA agreeing at 609 [1],
Handley AJA relevantly agreeing at 632–3 [117]);
[2007] NSWCA
[2016] VSCA 323
(Warren CJ, Tate and McLeish JJA) (‘
[2017] VSCA 167
(2017) 54 VR 394
419 [97] (McLeish JA, Tate JA agreeing at 396 [1], Kyrou JA agreeing
at 396 [2]);
[2017] VSCA 167
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
(Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
[1992] HCA 10.
[2024] VSCA 130
(2024) 74 VR 496
, 510 [68] (Kennedy, Walker and Macaulay JJA);
514–15 [88]–[89].
Ibid 510 [70].
Ibid 512 [79],
514–15 [89], 516–17 [94]–[96] (citations
[2007] NSWCA 149
, 623 [75] (Campbell JA, Hodgson JA agreeing at 609 [1], Handley AJA
relevantly agreeing at 632–3 [117]) (emphasis added);
[2007] NSWCA
[2016] VSCA
, [13], [18]–[19] (Warren CJ, Tate and McLeish JJA).
[2017] VSCA 167
, 397 [13] (McLeish JA, Tate JA agreeing at 396 [1], Kyrou JA
agreeing at 396 [2]);
[2017] VSCA 167.
[2024] VSCA 130
(2024) 74 VR 496
, 514–15 [89] (Kennedy, Walker and Macaulay JJA);
[2024] VSCA 130.
Dwyer v Calco Timbers
(2008) 234 CLR 124, 128 [2] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and
Heydon JJ);
[2008] HCA 13.
The application for leave
to appeal was served on the first and second respondents in April 2024. The
notice of objection to competency
was not filed until 18 December 2024.
Rule 64.33 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
’) provided that a respondent must file
any notice of objection to competency of an appeal or application within 14 days
being served with an application, including for leave to appeal, or being
served or being deemed to be served with a notice of appeal.
We note that since
the hearing, the
have been replaced by the
Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
but r 64.33, and those
discussed below, remain unchanged.
The written case stated:
‘An appeal is from the judgment, order or other determination of a Court
— there is no appeal
from the reasons. The underlying findings of breach
of fiduciary duty are not challenged. It is rightly not sought to have a new
trial as even if the impugned “findings” were set aside there would
be no different result’ (citations omitted).
Rule 64.35 provides
that this Court may extend or abridge any time fixed by or under
[2017] NSWCA 114
(2017) 94 NSWLR 518
530 [48], 542 [102], 543–4 [109],
544–5 [114]–[115] (Leeming JA, Beazley P agreeing at
520 [1]), 553 [153] (Sackville
[2017] NSWCA 114.
[1874] UKLawRpCh 20
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244
251–2 (Lord Selborne LC).
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
357 [243] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ);
[2012] FCAFC 6
[1874] UKLawRpCh 20
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244
251–2 (emphasis added). See also
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, 140 [111] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon
and Crennan JJ);
[2007] HCA 22
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
, 357 [243] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ);
[2012] FCAFC 6.
, 164 [179]–[180] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and
Crennan JJ);
[2007] HCA 22.
A similar conclusion was
Hasler v Singtel Optus Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 266
(2014) 87 NSWLR 609
621 [47] (Leeming JA, Barrett JA agreeing at 612 [2],
Gleeson JA agreeing at 613 [6]);
[2014] NSWCA 266.
(2007) 230 CLR 89
[2012] FCAFC 6
200 FCR 296
, 357 [244] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ);
[2012] FCAFC 6.
(2007) 230 CLR 89
164–5 [178]–[184] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan
[2007] HCA 22.
Masters Home
Improvement Pty Ltd v North East Solution Pty Ltd
[2017] VSCA 88
(2017) 372 ALR 440
465–6 [99] (Santamaria, Ferguson and Kaye JJA);
[2017] VSCA 88
Macquarie International Health Clinic Pty Ltd v Sydney South West Area Health
[2010] NSWCA 268
(2010) 383 ALR 577
, 583 [12] (Allsop P);
[2010] NSWCA
Proposed ground (b) read:
‘The learned primary judge erred in finding that equitable compensation
and an account of profits
were capable of doing full justice such that a
constructive trust ought not be imposed.’
Relief Reasons,
Relief Reasons,
[471]–[472] (citations omitted).
(1999) 196 CLR 101
[1999] HCA 10.
(2010) 241 CLR 1
John Alexander
’); Relief Reasons,
[473]–[475].
Relief Reasons,
[477]–[478] (emphasis added), citing
Bathurst City Council v PWC
Properties Pty Ltd
[1998] HCA 59
(1998) 195 CLR 566
, 585 [42] (Gaudron, McHugh,
Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
[1998] HCA 59
John Alexander
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
, 45 [128] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Heydon and Kiefel JJ);
[2010] HCA 19.
[2018] VSCA 68
, [7] (Tate
and Beach JJA).
For example, at the close
of his reply submissions, senior counsel for Mr Porter and Mr Conheady sought to
rely on an affidavit of
a Mr Staley so as to detail correspondence with
solicitors for NAB, a creditor, about the cross-application. This affidavit had
been identified as part of the evidence within the scope of the fresh
evidence application.
Though we have focused
only on the parts of those submissions which related to the fresh evidence
application.
(2007) 62 ACSR 576
[2007] VSCA 130.
Even though this was not
the subject of the fresh evidence application.
Emphasis in original.
Citations omitted.
As extracted at [264] of
the Relief Reasons.
Carroll v Goff
[2021] VSCA 267
, [54] (Maxwell P, Kennedy and Walker JJA).
[2011] VSCA 307
(2011) 35 VR 563
581–2 [56] (Nettle, Ashley and Tate JJA) (citations omitted);
[2011] VSCA
Apostolidis
SE Vineyard Finance
Pty Ltd (recs and mgrs apptd) v Casey
[2011] VSC 403
(Habersberger J).
[1998] HCA 59
(1998) 195 CLR 566
, 585 [42] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
[1998] HCA 59
John Alexander
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
, 45–6 [129] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ);
[2010] HCA 19.
Relief Reasons,
See generally
[2021] VSCA 205
(2021) 64 VR 319
, 332–7 [42]–[63] (Kyrou, Kennedy and
Walker JJA);
[2021] VSCA 205.
Apostolidis
[2011] VSCA 307
, 581–2 [56] (Nettle, Ashley and Tate JJA);
[2011] VSCA 307.
Ibid 584–5 [63]
(Nettle, Ashley and Tate JJA).
[1973] 1 NSWLR 432
436–7 (Moffitt AP), 441 (Hutley JA).
Civil Procedure Act
Liability Reasons,
[12]‑–[13].
Ibid [351], [353],
Ibid [351].
Ibid [522].
Ibid [354].
[345]–[346].
Ibid [347], [391].
[349]–[350].
Ibid [365].
Ibid [11], [365].
Ibid [504]–[505].
See also at [366], [510].
Ibid [509].
Ibid [184].
Ibid [173].
Ibid [514].
Ibid [504].
Ibid [505].
Ibid [509].
Ibid [511].
[522]–[523].
Although the
cross-application for leave to appeal was made by both Mr Porter and
Mr Conheady, we will refer to the submissions for
this proposed ground as
being Mr Porter’s alone, given they affect only his interests.
Liability Reasons,
Ibid [132].
[484]–[502].
Ibid [484]–[502],
Pavan v Ratnam
[1996] NSWSC 571
(1996) 23 ACSR 214
, 223–4 (Beazley JA,
Meagher JA agreeing at 220);
Hospital Products Ltd v United States
Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
, 96–7, 141–2
[1984] HCA 64
Hospital Products
[1995] HCA 63
(1996) 186 CLR 71
, 82 (Brennan CJ);
[1996] HCA 57
v Duke Group Ltd
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
, 196–7 [70]–[71]
(McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
[2001] HCA 31
Rousetty & Co (WA) Pty Ltd
[2007] WASCA 40
(2007) 33 WAR 321
[124]–[129] (Buss JA, Wheeler JA agreeing at 325 [1],
McLure JA agreeing at 325 [2]);
[2007] WASCA 40
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
, 345 [177] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ) ;
ABN AMRO Bank NV v Bathurst Regional Council
[2014] FCAFC 65
(2014) 224 FCR 1
210 [1066] (Jacobson, Gilmour and Gordon JJ);
[2014] FCAFC 65.
Hospital Products
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
, 96–7 (Mason J);
[1984] HCA 64
[2010] HCA 19
(2019) 241 CLR 1
, 35 [88] (French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ);
[2010] HCA 19.
Liability Reasons, [12],
[351], [353], [522]–[523].
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
, 96–7 (Mason J);
[1984] HCA 64.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.62 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter