URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greater Bendigo C282gben(PSA) [2025] PPV 33 (25 June 2025)
Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Amendment C282gben
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Strategy
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
25 June 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Amendment C282gben
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Strategy
25 June 2025
Michaael Ballock, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Background Report
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy Background Report
Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct
Commercial Zone Schedule 2
Comprehensive Development Zone
Greater Bendigo Council
Department of Transport and Planning
Farming Zone
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy June 2024
General Residential Zone
Greater Bendigo Industrial Development Guidelines, 2024
Industrial Zone Schedule 1
Industrial Zone Schedule 3
Municipal Planning Strategy
Public Conservation and Resource Zone
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Victorian Planning Authority
Victoria Planning Provisions
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Amendment C282gben
Common name
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Strategy
Brief description
Amendment C282gben partially implements the
Greater Bendigo Industrial
Land Development Strategy 2024
and introduces the
Greater Bendigo
Industrial Development Guidelines 2024
Subject land
Industrial land in the City of Greater Bendigo
The Proponent
City of Greater Bendigo
Planning Authority
City of Greater Bendigo
Authorisation
18 July 2024, with conditions
24 May to 7 July 2023
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 13 Requested changes: 6
Refer to Appendix A
Panel process
Michael Ballock, Chair
Directions Hearing
By video, 14 April 2025
Panel Hearing
Galkangu/GovHub 195-229 Lyttleton Terrace, Bendigo, 20 May 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 19 May 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Refer to Appendix B
Greater Bendigo PSA C282gben [2025] PPV
Date of this report
25 June 2025
Executive summary
Greater Bendigo Planning
Scheme Amendment C282gben (the Amendment) seeks to partially implement and give
the Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy, June
(GBILDS) and incorporate the
Greater Bendigo Industrial Development
Guidelines, 2024
, (Guidelines) into the Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme.
Key issues raised in submissions included:
the forecasted
amount of industrial land needed for a 30 year supply pipeline outlined in the
GBILDS and the need for the extent of
industrial land identified for both the
Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct (BREP) and the Marong Business Park
the modelling
and assumptions underpinning the GBILDS in regards to forecasted industrial land
consumption rates and the demand for
the need for an
independent peer review of the economic analysis that underpins the Amendment to
ensure that the policy is responsive
to current market conditions and
rezoning of 16
Manallacks Road, Kangaroo Flat from Farming Zone to an Industrial Zone Schedule
3 (INZ3) as an extension of the Kangaroo
Flat West industrial precinct
rezoning of 2-10
Howard Street, 187, 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom from Industrial Zone 1
(INZ1) to Commercial Zone 2 (C2Z)
exhibited Clauses 02.03-7, 02.04, 15.01-1L-02, 17.03-1L and
In response to submissions, Council made a number of changes
to the exhibited documents which were incorporated in the Day 1 versions.
Panel generally agreed with these changes but did not support all other
amendments proposed in submissions.
The GBILDS, the
Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy
Background Report 2024
(Background Report) and other supporting documents
provide an appropriate strategic justification for the Amendment, by addressing
the key policy objectives in the relevant provisions of the Greater Bendigo
Planning Scheme including Clauses 15.01-1L-02and 17.03-1L.
The Panel concludes:
The changes in
the Council Day 1 version of Clause 02.03-7 are appropriate.
changes in the Council Day1 version of the GBILDS extract are appropriate.
The further
changes to the GBILDS requested in submissions are not appropriate.
The changes in
the Council Day 1 version of Clause 02.04 are appropriate.
The changes
proposed by Submitter 6 with respect to the property at 16 Manallacks Road,
Kangaroo Flat are not appropriate.
The changes in
the Council Day 1 version of Clause 15.01-1l-02are appropriate.
The Guidelines
should apply to the BREP.
The changes in
the Council Day 1 version of Clause 17.03-1L are appropriate.
strategy should be located in the Municipal—Strategies section of Clause
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
the exhibited Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Amendment C282gben with the
following changes:
a) Amend the Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy as shown in
the Panel recommended version in Appendix E.
b) Amend the text under Figure 2 on page 10 of the Greater Bendigo Industrial
Development Guidelines to read as follows:
These guidelines apply to BREP, unless a subsequent and site
specific set of guidelines is prepared for any part or all of the BREP
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Clause 02.03-7 as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix
d) Amend Clause 02.04 as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix
e) Amend Clause 15.01-1L-02 as shown in the Panel recommended version in
Appendix H.
f) Amend Clause 17.03-1L as shown in the Panel recommended version in
Appendix I.
g) Relocate the following text from Clause 02.03-7 to the
‘Municipal—Strategies’ section in Clause 17.03-1L:
Plan for large scale industrial land and regional employment opportunities
in Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in short-medium
h) Amend Clause 74.02 to:
“The Industrial Land Strategy and Good Design for Industry”
“A review of the Commercial Land and Activity Centre Strategy
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Amendment is to partially implement the
Greater Bendigo
Industrial Land Development Strategy,
(GBILDS) and
introduce the
Greater Bendigo Industrial Development Guidelines
(Guidelines) as a policy document in the Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme
(Planning Scheme).
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
rezone 21.27
hectares of land at 1029 Calder Highway, Maiden Gully from Industrial 1 Zone
(INZ1) to Public Conservation and Resource
Zone (PCRZ)
rezone 1.25
hectares of land in the road reservations adjoining 1029 Calder Highway, Maiden
Gully, from Industrial 1 Zone to Farming
amend Clause
02.03-7 (Economic development) of the Municipal Planning Strategy
amend Clause
02.04 (Strategic framework plans) of the Municipal Planning Strategy
amend Clause
14.01-1L (Protection of agricultural land—Greater Bendigo)
amend Clause
15.01-1L-02 (Urban Design in industrial areas—Greater Bendigo) of the
Planning Policy Framework
amend Clause
17.03-1L (Industrial land supply - Greater Bendigo) of the Planning Policy
Schedule to Clause 72.08 (Background documents)
Schedule to Clause 74.02 (Further Strategic Work).
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to all industrial zoned land
within the City of Greater Bendigo as shown in
. Industrial land is primarily
concentrated within or near the Bendigo urban area, with additional precincts in
the townships of
Marong, Heathcote and Goornong. The Amendment also applies to
two significant areas of land the Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct
and the Marong Business Park (MBP) which are also identified in the Figure 1
Industrial land in the City of Greater Bendigo
1.2 Background
2015, Council prepared Amendment C161 to facilitate the use and development of
313 hectares of land approximately 500 metres north-west
of the Marong township
for a large industrial precinct known as the MBP. This Amendment proposed to
rezone the privately owned land
from FZ to the Comprehensive Development Zone
(CDZ), apply the Development Plan Overlay and Public Acquisition Overlay to the
The site was rezoned without the Public Acquisition Overlay because Council
was advised that the owners had no intentions for its
development for any
purposes other than farming.
In 2019, the Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Review recommended a review and
update of the Bendigo Industrial Land Strategy 2002 which
Council commenced in
partnership with the Victorian Planning Authority (VPA) that year. In addition,
Council commissioned REMPLAN
to undertake a detailed economic analysis including
the current context of the industrial sectors in Bendigo, key industry trends
and the impact on future industrial land supply requirements. The analysis and
recommendations were produced in the final report
Bendigo Industrial Land
Review—Strategic Economic Inputs
(REMPLAN, January 2019) which
informed the development of the GBILDS.
The draft GBILDS sought to assess the future supply and demand of industrial
land and development for the next 30 years within Greater
Bendigo and
consultation on the draft GBILDS and Background Report took place between June
and August 2019 with 16 submissions received.
Council adopted GBILDS and the
Background Report in June 2020.
The GBILDS identified a significant expected shortage of industrial land
supply, particularly of large and medium lots. In response
Council undertook a
detailed needs assessment and site selection process to identify a new
industrial precinct within the municipality.
This process identified a 294
hectare area south of the Marong township as a future investigation area to
accommodate industrial
growth. This investigation area is now known as the
The BREP area was adopted by Council as a preferred location to establish a
new industrial precinct and as part of an active development
facilitation role,
Council purchased 155 hectares of land within the investigation area. At the
request of Council, in February
2022, the Minister for Planning appointed the
VPA as the planning authority for the rezoning and associated planning of the
Amendment C263gben sought to implement the Marong Township Structure Plan and
was exhibited between 24 May and 7 July 2023. The Amendment
includes the
rezoning of land identified as Precinct 21 in the GBILDS, and the MBP from INZ3
to Mixed Use Zone which Council submitted
was consistent with the
recommendations of GBILDS.
The Marong Township Structure Plan identifies the BREP investigation area and
acknowledges that any future planning scheme amendments
for BREP will be subject
to a separate planning process.
In April 2024, the Panel supported the proposed inclusion of references to
the BREP Investigation Area in the Scheme and the Amendment
C263gben was
submitted for approval on 2 July 2024. At the Hearing Council advised C263gben
had been approved by the Minister for
Planning and gazetted on 29 May 2025.
In 2022, Council commissioned SGS Economics and Planning to consider the
impact of the MBP and the BREP on the future industrial land
supply. As a
result, the GBILDS was amended to include the details of BREP and other minor
changes to ensure the strategy reflected
the state of industrial land supply for
Greater Bendigo in 2024. The updated GBILDS was adopted Council in June
The Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme Review identified the need for the
Greater Bendigo Good Design Guide for Industry 1997
to be reviewed and
updated. In early 2019 Council commenced the review and rewrite of this
document. . On 24 June 2024, Council
resolved to exhibit the final draft
version of the resultant Guidelines as part of Amendment C282gben. Because the
Guidelines had
not undergone previous public consultation Council proposed to
incorporate them into the Planning Scheme as a policy document.
GBILDS recommends that Precinct 17 (Rowe Lane, Maiden Gully) is rezoned from
IN1Z to PCRZ with a planning scheme amendment undertaken
within 1 to 2 years.
In August 2022, Council undertook further strategic work to determine the future
of Precinct 17 and concluded
that the land was no longer suitable for industrial
use and development and should be rezoned to PCRZ and has provided for this
through the Amendment.
Chronology of
19 February to
2 April 2015
Exhibition of Amendment C161 to facilitate the use and development of 313
hectares of land approximately 500m northwest of the Marong
township for a large
industrial precinct (MBP)
31 August, 2017
Amendment C161 was gazetted without the proposed Public Acquisition Overlay
for the MBP
19 June, 2019
Council approved the draft GBILDS and Background Report for
consultation
June to August
Consultation on the draft GBILDS and Background Report took place with 16
submissions received
17 June, 2020
Council adopted the updated GBILDS and Background Report
15 November, 2021
Council resolved to fast track the delivery of the BREP and request the
Minister for Planning to appoint the VPA as planning authority
for the proposed
6 February, 2022
The Minister appoints the VPA as the planning authority for the BREP
7 July 2023
Amendment C263gben which seeks to implement the Marong Township Structure
Plan is exhibited
24 June, 2024
Council resolved to:
- adopt the
revised GBILDS 2024
Authorisation from the Minister for Planning to prepare and exhibit Amendment
- endorse the
draft Guidelines for public exhibition as part of Amendment
2 July, 2024
Amendment C263gben was submitted for approval
31 October to
6 December 2024
Amendment C282gben was exhibited in accordance with the PE Act. Council
received 13 submissions (including four late submissions)
17 March, 2025
Council resolved to request the Minister to appoint a Planning Panel to
consider submissions.
1.3 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
the forecasted
amount of industrial land for a 30 year supply pipeline outlined in the GBILDS
and the need for the extent of industrial
land identified for both the BREP and
the modelling
and assumptions underpinning the GBILDS in regards to forecast industrial land
consumption rates and the demand for
the need to
obtain an independent peer review of the economic analysis that underpins the
Amendment to ensure that the policy is responsive
to current market conditions
rezoning of 16
Manallacks Road, Kangaroo Flat from FZ to INZ3 as an extension of the Kangaroo
Flat West industrial precinct
rezoning of 2-10
Howard Street, 187, 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom from INZ1 to C2Z
exhibited Clauses 02.03-&, 02.04, 15.01-1L-02, 17.03-1L and
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles
of net community benefit and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision-making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. It has had to
be selective in referring to the more
relevant or determinative material in the
report. All submissions and materials have been considered by the Panel in
reaching its
conclusions, regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned
in the report.
This report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Greater Bendigo
Industrial Land Development Strategy
Changes to the
Planning Policy Framework
1.4 Versions of the Amendment
Panel directed Council to circulate a ‘Day 1’ version of the
Amendment documentation before the commencement of the
Hearing. Council
circulated Day 1 versions of:
Clause 02.03-7
Economic development
Clause 02.04
Strategic Framework Plan
Clause 15.01-1L
Urban design in industrial areas—Greater Bendigo
Clause 17.03-1L
Industrial land supply—Greater Bendigo
C282gben Explanatory Report
Greater Bendigo
Industrial Land Development Strategy (extract)
Greater Bendigo
Industrial Development Guidelines (extract)
Review of Future
Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo.
The Day 1 version incorporated a
number of post exhibition changes as well as those in response to
submissions.
Except where stated otherwise, the Panel supports the changes in the Day
1versions, which provide greater clarity and improve the
operation of the
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
highlights key imperatives of
relevant provisions and policies with a summary included in Table 2.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
Planning Policy Framework
11.01-1S (Settlement), 11.01-1R (Settlement—Loddon Mallee South), 11.02-1S
(Supply of urban land)
12.01-1S (Protection of biodiversity)
13.02-1S (Bushfire planning), 13.05-1S (Noise management)
14.01-1S (Protection of agricultural land)
15.01-2S (Building design)
17.03-1S (Industrial land supply)
- Clause 18
(Transport)
Other planning strategies and policies
Victoria 2025
- Pillar 2, Maps 6 and 8, Action 8
Mallee South Regional Growth Plan
Greater Bendigo—Integrated Transport and Land Use 2015
Greater Bendigo - Economic Development Strategy 2020-2030
Planning scheme provisions
- Comprehensive
Development Zone
- Industrial
Zone Schedule 1
- Industrial
Zone Schedule 3
Conservation and Resource Zone
Planning scheme amendments
- Amendment
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction: The Form and Content of Planning Schemes
- Ministerial
Direction1: Potentially contaminated land
- Ministerial
Direction 11: Strategic assessment of amendments
- Ministerial
Direction 15: The planning scheme amendment process
- Ministerial
Direction 18: Victorian Planning Authority advice on planning scheme
- Ministerial
Direction 19: Amendments that may result in impacts on the environment, amenity
and human health
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 46: Strategic assessment guidelines, September 2022
Practice Note 64 - Local planning for bushfire protection
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Submissions
submitted that the Amendment is required to partially implement the
recommendations of the GBILDS by making changes to the
Municipal Planning
Strategy, Planning Policy Framework and Operational Provisions of the Greater
Bendigo Planning Scheme. The GBILDS
contains two types of recommendations:
the general
recommendations in section 3 which largely fall outside the scope of the
Planning Scheme
precinct-specific
recommendations in section 4, some of which are implemented by the
While the Amendment applies to all industrial zoned land
within the municipality and land identified for the MBP and the BREP, the
precinct-specific recommendations and actions the Amendment proposes to
implement includes:
(Goornong), through amending the local policy under Clause 17.03-1L to support
the precinct as a location for rural industry.
7(Bendigo East), in part by amending the local policy under Clause 17.03-1L to
support the establishment of a business park
at Bendigo Airport.
(Charleston Road), in part by amending the local policy under Clause 17.03-1L to
discourage industrial intensification
or subdivision for industrial
Precinct 17
(Rowe Lane, Maiden Gully), through the proposed rezoning of 1029 Calder Highway,
Maiden Gully from the INZ1 to PCRZ.
Council submitted that a number
of the other precinct recommendations and actions are being fully or partially
implemented through
other planning scheme amendments and Council projects.
Council added that both the GBILDS and Background Report:
...provides a strategic framework and roadmap to identify a 30 year pipeline
of future industrial land to meet the needs of current
and future industry in
the municipality. The strategy provides clear directions for all of Greater
Bendigo’s existing and future
industrial precincts to increase land
supply, ensure industrial land is suitably located and utilised, and to minimise
land use conflicts.
The implementation of the strategy will ensure that the municipality and the
wider region is well-placed to meet the existing and
future industrial land
needs of industries and businesses over the next 30 years while better managing
land use conflicts.
Submitter 9 challenged the accuracy of the modelling and assumptions
underpinning the GBILDS in relation to land consumption rates
and demand for
large lots.
Council submitted that the forecast demand was based on the findings of thew
Bendigo Industrial Land Review—Strategic Economic Inputs 2019
(Document 9k) and the
Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo
(Document 9l). Council added, both reports concluded that larger lots
are in short supply and it was not possible to precisely predict
the take up of
large and very large lots. Nevertheless, it considered the forecast consumption
rates reasonable.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel notes that the GBILDS contains precinct
specific recommendations with an implementation time frame that ranges from
to 5 - 10 years. In the Panel’s view, Council’s approach of
implementing the GBILDS through a number of amendments is
appropriate given the
magnitude of the task in front of it. The GBILDS is a sound strategic document
based on a vision and eight
principes that define objectives, precinct specific
recommendations and actions with specific timelines.
The GBILDS, Background Report and other supporting documents provide an
appropriate strategic justification for the Amendment, by
addressing the key
policy objectives in the relevant provisions of the Greater Bendigo Planning
Scheme including Clauses 15.01-1L-02and
17.03-1L which are discussed in more
detail in this Report.
The Panel agrees that the Amendment through partial implementation of the
GBILDS delivers a net community benefit and sustainable
development as required
by Clause 71.02-3.
(iii) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
3 Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the changes in
the Council Day1 version of the GBILDS extract are appropriate
further changes
to the GBILDS request in submissions are appropriate.
(ii) Submissions
Submitter 3 challenged the GBILDS assessment that to
meet demand Greater Bendigo will need an additional 170 to 270 hectares of
land in addition to the existing supply over the next 30 years. The
submission noted that the 2024 land supply figure is substantially
less than in
earlier versions of GBILDS and questioned the analysis and data on which the
2024 update is based.
Council submitted the 2020 version of GBILDS identified that in addition to
the remaining 100 hectares of available industrial land,
an additional 170
hectares of supply would be needed over the next 30 years. Some of the updates
to the GBILDS, informed by the
Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in
, were undertaken to assess the impact of the MBP and BREP on
Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo
also identified
a number of land supply constraints including land banking, proximity to
existing residential development, vegetation
cover and accessibility that would
reduce supply and concluded between 170 and 270 hectares of land supply would be
needed over the
next 30 years. That conclusion was adopted by the 2024 GBILDS.
Council submitted that the 170 to 270 hectares was not in addition
inclusive of inclusive of the existing 100 hectares of supply. In response
Council agreed to amend the GBILDS to clarify
these figures. This change was
included in the Day 1 version of the GBILDS extract (Document 14 Attachment
Submitter 3 stated that the BREP and MBP, as identified in the GBILDS, would
provide a combined area of 607 hectares (294 and 313
hectares respectively) of
industrial land which was well in excess of what is required to meet future
industrial land demand.
Council acknowledged that the BREP and MBP could create more industrial land
than is required to meet forecasted demand in the “
short to medium
.” However, it submitted that a long term pipeline of industrial
land is justified because Greater Bendigo faces significant
challenges in the
provision of large sites and by the time the land is development ready it is
likely 20 years will have elapsed.
Council added that having:
...a clear pipeline of unconstrained, suitable industrial land is critical to
encourage future investment and the growth of industry
and manufacturing in the
region and to remain competitive.
Submitter 3 argued that there will be more than enough land within BREP to
“transitional uses (i.e. residential or complimentary employment
uses for buffer purposes)”
can be considered in the detailed planning
of the precinct to ensure that the objective of the Marong Township Structure
be met. The submission added the GBILDS does not place enough
importance on the protection of existing and future residential areas
close to the BREP.
Council submitted that the detailed planning of the BREP is not in the scope
of the Amendment. The planning for the BREP is being
led by the VPA and is a
separate process. The Amendment:
...introduces broad strategic support for BREP to the Municipal Planning
Strategy (MPS) and local policy and it would be inappropriate
and premature to
include precinct level detail regarding the planning for BREP as part of this
In addition, Clause 17.03-S already addresses buffer requirements between
industrial and other adjoining uses.
Submission 5 was made in respect of 1.8 hectares of land in Holdsworth Road,
Long Gully in Precinct 13 the Long Gully industrial precinct
Industrial Precinct 13 (Long Gully)
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 2 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The submitter expressed concern that the GBILDS does not recognise
manufacturing uses with existing use rights and the potential for
conflicts between residential and industrial uses. The strategy should provide
for the expansion of these industrial areas
explore alternative,
more suitable land uses for residential zoned land immediately adjacent to the
industrial precinct.”
The submission sought changes to the GBILDS to support the rezoning of
residential land to industrial where:
residential
zoned land is fragmented
the underlying
zone is industrial or commercial
the rezoning
would assist in addressing legacy issues or complaints about long established or
important industries
key planning
issues such as traffic and access, interfaces and amenity can be adequately
Council submitted that the GBILDS broadly recognises the issue of land use
conflicts in objective 2A which guides the precinct specific
recommendations.
The Long Gully recommendations are focused on retaining the INZ3 and
“encouraging appropriate low impact uses including warehousing, service
industry and retail.”
In response to the submission, Council proposed to amend the GBILDS
recommendation for Precinct 13 to support the rezoning of some
residential land
stating that this change was:
... made on the basis that it would seek to resolve legacy issues around a
sensitive area of residential zoned land to the north of
9-11 Wood Street and
could provide support for an extension on the industrial zoning north up to
Holdsworth Road. This would however,
depend on further strategic work needed to
justify any change in zoning in future.
Council proposes to add a further recommendation for Precinct 13, being
Investigate potential zoning changes and planning controls both within the
Precinct and to residential zoned land immediately adjoining
the Precinct, to
reduce land use conflicts.
Council proposes to add a new action for Precinct 13, being
Consider potential changes to zoning and planning controls through
Council-led and private planning scheme amendments, as appropriate,
timeframe of 1-4 years.”
These changes were included in the Day 1 version of the GBILDS.
To provide a strategic vision for dispersed and fragmented industrial areas,
Submitter 5 also sought to insert the following strategic
direction into Clause
Consider potential zone changes to areas of fragmented residential zoned land
where this would address conflicts with established
industrial areas, and where
issues relating to traffic, access, interfaces and amenity can be adequately
The submission also sought the addition of a new strategic direction in
Clause 74.02 to ensure industrial and commercial land remains
a priority over
the next 1 to 4 years:
Review secondary
and local industrial areas, as identified on the Industrial Strategic Framework
Plan including a review of:
− interface
and amenity issues
uses and separation distances
− redevelopment
opportunities
Industrial Strategic Framework Plan.
Council’s Commercial Land and Activity Centre Strategy
In response Council submitted that it did not support the
additional proposed strategic direction for Clause 02.03-7 because it would
the effect of applying to all industrial land. However, it agreed that the
amended recommendation and action for Precinct 13,
as generally outlined above,
should be added to the strategy for the Long Gully industrial area in Clause
17.03-1L to read as follows
(additional text underlined):
Retain land for industry and other uses including warehouses, service
industry, trade supplies and restricted retail premises in the
industrial area
and consider support for rezoning of adjoining fragmented
residential land where it can be demonstrated that traffic, access, interfaces
and amenity can be adequately addressed.
Council opposed the suggested amendment to Clause 74.02 because, given
current work plans it could not commit to the four-year timeframe.
Council agreed to insert the following into Clause 74.02:
A review of the Commercial Land and Activity Centre Strategy 2015.
Submitter 9 considered the modelling and assumptions which underpin the
GBILDS, the
Bendigo Industrial Land Review
Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo
was not reflective of current
market conditions. The submission argued that an independent peer review of the
economic analysis
underpinning the Amendment, particularly around consumption
rates for industrial land and the demand for large and very large lots,
be undertaken. The submission recommended inserting the following text in
Clause 74.02:
A further review of industrial land markets and consumption rates in Greater
Bendigo; and an update to the Greater Bendigo Industrial
Land Development
Strategy as required to reflect findings of this review.
In response, Council submitted that the forecast demand for industrial land
that informs the recommendations in GBILDS, is based on
the findings of the
independent reports
Bendigo Industrial Land Review—Strategic Economic
Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo
both of which were undertaken by reputable consultants.
Both reports considered the availability of large and very large industrial
lots, concluding that larger lots are evidently in short
supply. While it is
not possible to precisely predict the take up of large and very large lots, the
forecasted consumption rates
were, in Council’s view,
reasonable indication of the likely demand.”
Submitter 9 said the GBILDS, as a reference document, would effectively
create categories for industrial lot sizes. In the absence
of a definition of
lot sizing in the Planning Scheme these new categories may differ from historic
assumptions around lot sizes contrary
to market demand.
Council submitted that the GBILDS generally refers to larger lot sizes as
in the order of 1-5 hectares”
which does not
contradict historic consumptions around industrial lot sizes.
Submitter 12 said the regional significance of BREP should be clarified in
the GBILDS, particularly under section 4.2.
Council agreed with Submitter 12 and proposed the following change to the
Executive Summary of GBILDS, replacing the last paragraph
on page 10 with the
As part of prioritising the new industrial business park(s)
Regional Employment Precinct in the short-medium term,
it is proposed that
MBP, the 313 hectares of land zoned CDZ, to the west of Marong not progress in
the short term due to the land
currently being used for farming.”
In addition, Council proposed amending Precinct 23’s ‘Role and
function’ in hierarchy column (see Appendix E) on
page 46 to replace the
text with the following:
significant future employment precinct.
regional freight and employment hub.
These changes were included in
the Day 1 of the GBILDS.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel accepts Council’s response to the
issues raised by Submitter 3. The changes to the GBILDS are appropriate and
the quantum land required over the next 30 years. The Panel is
satisfied that the 170 to 270 hectares is based on the work undertaken
detailed analysis in wo independent reports.
The Panel also accepts Council’s submission that the MRP and BREP will
not be development ready for some time and that providing
for a pipeline of
available industrial land is a sound long term strategy. The concept of
providing for transitional uses in the
BREP is discussed later in this report.
However, the Panel agrees with Council that any planning of the BREP is beyond
of this Amendment. The Panel is aware that Amendment C263gben, which
incorporated the Marong Structure Plan into the Planning Scheme,
gazetted. The Marong Structure Plan area includes BREP while it identifies the
north east corner of the site as “Proposed
land subject to
investigation”, it acknowledges the master planning will be undertaken by
the VPA as part of a separate planning
process. With respect to the BREP, the
Marong Structure Plan states:
The Precinct could be expected of accommodate between 2,000—3,000 new
jobs for the Greater Bendigo area and provide local employment
opportunities the
growing Marong township.
A mix of industrial land uses should be accommodated in this Precinct, with a
particular opportunity for land uses that require larger
parcels of land that
cannot be situated elsewhere in the City.
In areas that interface with highways and the Potential Marong Western
Freight Corridor, a sensitive design response is needed. The
design response
should focus on achieving a smooth transition of rural to urban character into
the Marong township. Larger setbacks,
service roads or internal perimeter roads,
and land uses that compliment highway and township activity can assist in
achieving this.
The Panel agrees with Council that it would be premature to earmark part of
the BREP for unspecified uses.
The Panel acknowledges the interface issues raised by Submitter 5 and accepts
Council’s proposals to address the submission.
The Panel agrees with
Council that the addition to Clause 02.02-7 would inappropriately apply to all
industrial land and its proposal
is far better targeted as is the changes
proposed to the Precinct 13 recommendations.
Submitter 9 did not provide any data other than the anecdotal experience of
its client to support its submission of errors in the
modelling and assumptions
and there was no further submission made by the submitter at the Hearing. In
support of its submission
Council provided the Panel with copies of the
Bendigo Industrial Land Review—Strategic Economic Inputs
9K) and the
Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo
In the Panel’s view both these documents provide a detailed analysis
which support the recommendations made and provide appropriate
inputs into the
GBILDS. Consequently, the Panel accepts Council submission that a further review
of industrial land markets is unnecessary.
The Panel agrees with Council that
it is appropriate identify a review of the commercial land strategy as part of
future strategic
The Panel acknowledges the regional significance of the BREP and accepts the
changes agreed with Council and submission 12.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
changes in the Council Day1 version of the GBILDS in response to submissions
are appropriate.
further changes to the GBILDS requested in submissions are not
appropriate.
The Panel recommends:
Amend the Greater Bendigo Industrial Land
Development Strategy as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix
Amend Clause 74.02 to insert “A review of the Commercial Land and
Activity Centre Strategy 2015”.
4 Changes to the Planning Policy Framework
4.1 Clause 02.03-7
(i) The issue
issue is whether the changes in the Council Day 1 version of Clause 02.03-7 are
appropriate.
(ii) Submissions
Submitter 12 requested an amendment to Clause
02.03-7 by replacing the exhibited text in the third dot point of the strategic
for economic development with the following text:
Plan for large
scale industrial land and regional employment opportunities in Bendigo Regional
Employment Precinct in short-medium
Council advised that it
accepted this post exhibition change and included it in its Day 1 version of the
clause (Document 14 Attachment
Submitter 3 sought a further change to the clause by adding the following
additional dot point to the strategic directions for economic
development:
Plan for large
scale industrial employment land to the south of the Marong township that
incorporates appropriate land uses at and
proximate to sensitive interfaces with
existing and planned residential areas.
The basis of the submission
was, given the scale of the BREP and its interfaces to the north with
residential areas in the Marong,
it was appropriate to allow for
“transitional land uses,
” in order to protect the amenity of
future residential development.
Council did not support the additional changes to Clause 02.03-7 because it
would be premature to include planning scheme policy relating
to precinct level
planning of the BREP given detail planning of the area is yet to be undertaken
and will occur through a separate
planning process.
(iii) Discussion
Given the BREP is identified in the GBILDS, the
Panel agrees with Council that the proposed change proposed by Submitter 12 is
appropriate
because it emphasises the regional significance of the land.
The Panel agrees with Council that it would be premature to designate
potential uses and areas in advance of the development of detailed
plans for the
BREP. Furthermore, the meaning of the term ‘transitional uses’ is
unclear and Submitter 3 was unable to
provide any clarification of what it
involves beyond industrial, commercial and retail land uses. In the
Panel’s view this
is too broad and the strategic directions in Clause
02.03-7 should not introduce uncertainty.
(iv) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes the changes in the Council Day 1
version of Clause 02.03-7 are appropriate.
The Panel recommends:
Clause 02.03-7 as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix F.
4.2 Clause 02.04
(i) The issue
issue is whether the changes in the Council Day 1 version of Clause 02.04 are
appropriate.
(ii) Background
The Day 1 version of Clause 02.04 (Document 14
Attachment 2) amends the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan by making the
relocating the
Industrial Strategic Plan from Clause 17.03-1L to Clause 02-04 Strategic
Framework Plans
deleting the
existing INZ3 area in Marong from the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan
amending the
- clarify the
order of the industrial hierarchy areas
- show BREP as a
regional employment precinct at the top of the order
- identify the
MBP as the ‘Marong Business Park Review Area’.
(iii) Submissions
Council accepted changes to the legend of the
Industrial Strategic Framework Plan as proposed by Submitter 12 and included
the Day 1 version of Clause 02.04.
Submitter 3 considered that together the BREP (294 hectares) and the MBP (313
hectares) would result in an oversupply of industrial
land in Bendigo. In
addition, the GBILDS excluded the land provided by the MBP from future supply
forecasts. Therefore, to accommodate
this additional land it was appropriate to
broaden the specific purpose of the BREP from ‘employment’ to
include the
potential for other land uses, such as transitional land uses.
Consequently, the submission proposed a change to the legend of the
Strategic Framework Plan in Clause 02.04 from
by adding “and
Investigation Area”
Proposed Bendigo Regional Employment
Council did not support the additional text in the legend because:
A key reason why this is referred to as an employment precinct, rather than
an industrial precinct, is to ensure that the detailed
planning for the Precinct
is undertaken to confirm the appropriate zone. The inclusion of “and
Investigation Area” creates
unnecessary confusion.
Council noted that it had agreed to update the description of the BREP land
as ‘Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct’
in response to Submitter
Submitter 9 proposed that, to improve clarity, the Industrial Strategic
Framework Plan at Clause 02.04 should be amended to include
an additional legend
identifying all industrial precincts referenced under Clause 17.03-1L. It added
that an alternative would be
to only reference the industrial hierarchy areas
listed on the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan and remove reference to
industrial precincts under Clause 17.03-1L.
Council submitted that the proposed Industrial Strategic Framework Plan at
Clause 02.04 provided an appropriate level of detail for
a Strategic Framework
Submitter 6 proposed that the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan be amended
to include land at 16 Manallacks Road, Kangaroo Flat
as a secondary industrial
area. As shown in
adjoins the secondary industrial area of Kangaroo Flat West, is 8.09 hectares in
area and within four kilometres of the
Bendigo CBD. The submission argued that
the site would be a logical extension of the Precinct 19 (Kangaroo Flat
industrial area).
Industrial Precinct 19 and the property at 16 Manallacks
Road, Kangaroo Flat
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 3 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The submission stated that the land was in the FZ and would form a direct
extension of the Precinct 19 (Kangaroo Flat West) to the
west. In addition, the
land could provide a range of lot sizes for emerging industries and provide
appropriate separation from residential
areas and not encroach into a rural
area. The submission considered that Council had not supported the proposal
because of the bushfire
risk and site access.
In support of the proposal the submitter had undertaken a bushfire assessment
which concluded that development of the land could meet
the objectives of Clause
13.02 (Document 16 Appendix A). The submitter also provided an agreement with
the adjoining landowner to
the north to provide access from 16 Manallacks Road
to Fairview Road from the north (Document 16 Appendix B). The submission
acknowledged
that it would also be necessary to amend Clause 17.03-1L to include
the site within the Urban Growth Boundary and Precinct 19.
Council did not support the inclusion of 16 Manallacks Road, Kangaroo Flat as
a secondary industrial area in the Industrial Strategic
Framework Plan at Clause
02.04 or future rezoning of the land from FZ to an industrial zone. The entire
site is covered by a Bushfire
Management Overlay and Council provided an extract
City of Greater Bendigo Potential Growth Areas Final Bushfire
Assessment 2023 (Document 25)
City of Greater Bendigo Bushfire
Assessment of Potential Growth Areas 2024
(Document 26) in support of its
view that the site was unsuitable for any development. Council added that this
approach was reinforced
by the findings of its Managed Growth Strategy.
Council submitted that the access to the north proposed by the submission was
also constrained by an area of dense native vegetation
and bushfire risk and
Extensive work previously undertaken to consider bushfire risk has identified
most of the subject site as in a high-risk area...
The Bushfire Assessment does not consider the risk posed by the vegetation
within the subject site along the waterway, which elsewhere
in Submission 6 has
been described as being retained and “incorporated into the estate
(iv) Discussion
The issue of enabling transitional uses in the BREP
has been discussed in the previous section of this report. Nevertheless, the
Panel agrees with Council that the addition of the words ‘investigation
area’ in the legend has the potential to create
some confusion given the
planning of the BREP is yet to be finalised.
Whether the site at 16 Manallacks Road, Kangaroo Flat should be included in
the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan in Clause 02.04
is beyond the scope of
the Amendment. This proposal has not been ventilated through an exhibition
process and not only involves
a change to the plan but also requires the
redrawing of the Urban Growth Boundary.
However, in reviewing the material before it, the Panel makes the following
observations. The bushfire assessment report from Submitter
6 was provided to
the Panel by way of submission and not evidence. While the same can be said of
Council’s two reports they
have undergone some scrutiny as background
documents to the community engagement process for the
Managed Growth
Nevertheless, the Panel is not able to make an
informed decision about either report but acknowledges that the site is wholly
a Bushfire Management Overlay which triggers the provisions of Clause
13.02. Because Clause 13.02 prioritises the protection of
human life any
assessment of the bushfire risk should be thoroughly explored with the authors
and experts available to present and
explain their conclusions.
Furthermore, while Submitter 6 assessed the site against the criteria for the
identification of future industrial land sites detailed
in the Background
Report, the Panel notes that the site, when assessed against these criteria, has
limitations by way of its land
area, proximity to a PCRZ, the presence of a
watercourse and Environmental Significance Overlay and a Land Subject to
Consequently, the Panel agrees with Council’s submission that the
changes proposed by Submitter 6 are inappropriate to be further
considered as
part of this Amendment.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
changes in the Council Day 1 version of Clause 02.04 are appropriate.
changes proposed by Submitter 6 with respect to the property at 16 Manallacks
Road, Kangaroo Flat are not appropriate.
The Panel recommends:
Clause 02.04 as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix G.
4.3 Clause 15.01-1L-02
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the changes in
the Council Day 1 version of Clause 15.01-1l-02are appropriate
the Guidelines
should apply to the BREP.
(ii) Background
The Amendment introduces the Guidelines by updating
local planning policy at Clause 15.01-1L-02 and removing references to the
City of Greater Bendigo Good Design Guide for Industry
(iii) Submissions
Submitter 9 supported the introduction of updated
industrial development guidelines and proposed minor amendments to improve
The submission proposed moving the following text from subdivision
strategies to landscaping strategies:
Design landscape buffers in industrial areas to include screen planting and
noise attenuation measures such as mounding.
The submission also recommended adding the following text at the end of the
landscaping strategies:
... where required to protect the amenity of surrounding uses.
The submission argued that the strategy relates to landscape design and not
subdivision and some interfaces may not require screening
or mounding.
On the basis that the Guidelines should not necessarily exclude the BREP, in
the absence of any site specific guidelines, Submitter
12 recommended that the
following policy application be applied to this Clause 15.01-1L-02:
This policy applies to all industrial subdivision and development that
requires a permit under the Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme.
Council supported both these requests and incorporated them into the Day 1
version of Clause 15.01-1L-02 (see Appendix H).
Submitter 3 said the Guidelines should also apply to the BREP and it was
unclear why they would exclude the BREP. The submission
considered that having
the Guidelines apply to the BREP would provide greater certainty for surrounding
uses with the same requirements
applying to all industrial area.
Submitter 12 proposed that Council seek advice from Development Victoria to
ensure the Guidelines “
are aligned with market needs and will allow for
deliverability.”
Council advised that it had consulted with Development Victoria as suggested
Development Victoria advised Council that the guidelines should not
necessarily exclude BREP, unless a subsequent and site specific
guidelines is prepared for any part or all of BREP.
Council Submitted that it proposed to amend the Guidelines to make it clear
they will apply to BREP in the absence of any precinct
specific design and
development guidelines.
(iv) Discussion
With the adoption of the Guidelines it is no longer
necessary to include the Industrial Land Strategy and Good Design for Industry
as further strategic work in Claus 74.02. The Panel accepts Council’s
proposed changes which provide clarity on the operation
of the Guidelines.
The Panel accepts Council’s submission and agrees that, in the absence
of any precinct specific guidelines, it is appropriate
that the Guidelines apply
to the BREP. The Panel notes that the Day 1 version of the Guideline
replacement text included “
to the satisfaction of the City of Greater
.” The Panel agrees with the inclusion of this text because it
provides an approval mechanism. However, given this is a reference
document in
the Planning Scheme, references to the ‘City of Greater Bendigo’
should be replaced by the ‘Responsible
Authority’.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
changes in the Day 1 version of Clause 15.01-1L-02are appropriate:
Guidelines should apply to the BREP.
The Panel recommends:
Clause 15.01-1L-02 as shown in the Panel recommended version in Appendix
Amend the text under Figure 2 on page 10 of
the Greater Bendigo Industrial Development Guidelines to read as
These guidelines apply to BREP, unless a
subsequent and site specific set of guidelines is prepared for any part or all
of the BREP
to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Amend Clause 74.02 to delete ‘The Industrial Land Strategy and Good
Design for Industry’.
4.4 Clause 17.03-1L
(i) The issue
issue is whether the changes in the Day 1 version of Clause 17.03-1L are
appropriate.
(ii) Background
Clause 17.03-1S Industrial land supply provides a
strategic framework for future industrial land supply that seeks to ensure a
supply of industrial land into the future and to protect and
strengthen employment opportunities to contribute to maintaining and
growing the
local and regional economy.
The associated strategies include:
industrial development to areas shown on the industrial strategic framework
industrial subdivisions that provide a variety of lot sizes to support different
industry types
supporting the
redevelopment of older and underutilised industrial areas for newer types of
industry to make more effective use of
existing infrastructure
environmentally compatible and ecologically sustainable industry
existing industrial uses from encroachment by non-industrial uses
supporting the
revitalisation and renewal of older industrial areas.
(iii) Submissions
Submitter 9 said the MBP is a unique area in the
Industrial Strategic Framework Plan and consequently the following strategy
be moved from the ‘Strategies—Municipal’ to a new
Marong Business Park section in Clause 17.03-1L as follows:
Retain land to the north-west of Marong zoned CDZ for future industrial use
and development for the municipality and broader region
in the longer term to
support the demands and growth of industry.
The submitter recommended replacing the following strategy under the
‘General’ heading:
Avoid fragmentation of land in undeveloped industrial areas and retain land
in large lots until it is required for development
with the following text:
Avoid subdivision of large and very large vacant industrial landholdings
until it is required for use and development or unless it
demonstrated the
land is not suitable to service the needs of large industrial
landholdings.
The submitter also requested changes to Clause 17.03-1L to only reference
the hierarchy areas listed on the Industrial Strategic
Framework Plan.
Council submitted that precinct level detail provided for the proposed
strategies under Clause 17.03-1L was appropriate. Nevertheless,
clarity, the Day 1 version of Clause 17.03-1L included a map showing the
location of all industrial precincts (Document
14 Attachment 4).
Council explained that the only reason the MBP is labelled separately in the
Framework Plan is because it is in a CDZ, not an industrial
zone. Both the
GBILDS and the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan included the MBP at the
municipal level and consequently, the
appropriate location for the strategy
relating to the MBP is in the municipal section of Clause 17.03-1L.
Council supported amending the strategy under the ‘General’
heading as proposed by Submitter 9 because it would improve
clarity and the
change had been included in the Day 1 version of Clause 15.02-1L (Document 14
Attachment 4).
Submitter 10 noted that the wording of Clause 17.03-1L did not fully
incorporate the precinct level recommendations of the GBILDS
for the Epsom area
because reference was only made to encouraging ‘additional
warehouses’ and not extending to ‘larger
retail’ uses. The
submitter recommended amending the strategy in the Strategies—Secondary
Encourage additional warehouses and larger format retail uses in the Epsom
Industrial Area.
Council supported the proposed change but did not support the use of the term
larger format retail uses. Instead it used the defined
term restricted retail.
This change was included in the Day 1 version of Clause 17.03-1L.
Submitter 3 sought the introduction of a strategy related specifically to the
BREP. This was because the BREP is not identified
as a Specialised Area
within Clause 17.03-1L or in the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan in
Clause 02.04. Consequently there was a lack of strategic
support in Clause
17.03-1L for the BREP. The submitter proposed the following:
Strategies—Proposed Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct and
investigation area
Support a range of suitable lot sizes to meet the forecasted demands of
existing and emerging industries in areas located away from
existing and planned
residential areas of Marong. Support other transitional land uses in areas
adjoining and with proximity to existing
and planned residential areas of Marong
to protect the character and amenity of Marong.
Council did not support this change because it was appropriately captured as
a strategic direction for BREP in Councils ‘Day
1’ version of Clause
(iv) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges and supports the changes to
Clause 17.03-1L agreed to by Council in response to submissions. This leaves
matters for the Panel’s consideration, whether the strategy relating
to the MBP should be in a separate section and whether
there is a need for a
separate strategy for the BREP.
The Panel accepts Council’s submission that both the GBILDS and the
Industrial Strategic Framework Plan include the MBP in the
municipal level and
there appears to be little benefit in adding an additional separate category.
In the Panel’s view the
strategy for the MBP is appropriately included in
the municipal level of the industrial land hierarchy.
As pointed out by Submitter 3 there is no BREP strategy in Clause17.03-1L
while there is one for the MBP. Council acknowledged this
and argued that it is
captured in Clause 02.02-7 and DTP had advised it to avoid duplication in the
Planning Scheme. The Panel agrees
with this approach in principle but also
agrees with Submitter 3 that the absence of a BREP strategy in Clause 17.03-1L
is a concern.
However, the Panel does not support the wording proposed by
Submitter 3 and particularly the use of the term transitional uses as
The Panel notes that while the BREP is specifically referenced in the
Industrial Strategic Framework Plan, the MBP is also referenced.
argued that the relevant BREP strategy is located in Clause 02.03-7 which
considers economic development. However, in the
Panel’s view the
appropriate location for the BREP strategy is with the other industrial
precincts, including the MBP in Clause
17.03-1L. For this reason the Panel
recommends that the following provision in Clause 02.03-7 be removed and
inserted under the
‘Municipal—Strategies’ heading in Clause
Plan for large scale industrial land and regional employment opportunities in
Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in short-medium
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
changes in the Day 1 version of Clause 17.03-1L are appropriate.
BREP strategy should be located in the Municipal—Strategies section of
Clause 17.03-1L.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Clause 17.03-1L as shown in the Panel
recommended version in Appendix I.
Relocate the following text from Clause
02.03-7 to the ‘Municipal—Strategies’ section in Clause
Plan for large scale industrial land and
regional employment opportunities in Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in
short-medium
5 Other matters
5.1 2-10 Howard Street and 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom
(Precinct 4)
(i) The issue
issue is are whether it is appropriate to rezone the land at 2-10 Howard Street
and 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom to a Commercial
(ii) Background
Precinct 4 Epsom (
) is within the INZ1 which has
been developed for a range of uses including industry, warehousing, retail,
trade supplies and rural
store. There is potential for further development in
the Precinct.
Industrial Precinct 4 (Epsom)
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 4 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
(iii) Submissions
Submitter 10 requested that the land at 2-10 Howard
Street, 191 and 193 Midland Highway Epsom (
) be rezoned from INZ1 to C2Z as
an expansion of the surrounding commercial area to allow for warehousing and
larger retail.
The land at 2-10 Howard Street, 191 and 193 Midland Highway
Epsom (blue outline)
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 5 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Alternatively, the submitter proposed that Clause 17.03.1L be amended to
specifically support the rezoning.
Council opposed the suggested rezoning because there was a demonstrated
shortage of industrial land. In addition, the land is relatively
unconstrained
by sensitive used and identified in the GBILDS as suitable for industrial use
and development. Council added:
...that once further strategic work is undertaken in future in relation to
commercial floorspace demands and the Epsom Structure Plan,
its position on the
requested rezoning can be reviewed.
(iv) Discussion
The submission to rezone the land at 2-10 Howard
Street and 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom to a Commercial 2 Zone lacks any
justification and is inconsistent with the recommendations of the
GBILDS. In addition, the submission is not a formal proposal that
has undergone
detailed assessment or public exhibition. For these reasons the Panel accepts
Council’s submission and does
not support the rezoning of the land.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes that it is not appropriate to
rezone the land at 2-10 Howard Street and 191 and 193 Midland Highway, Epsom to
a Commercial 2 Zone as part of this Amendment.
A Submitters to the Amendment
Environment Protection Authority
North Central Catchment Management Authority
YourLand Development
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Tideways Classic Pty Ltd
Manallacks Road Pty Ltd
Heritage Victoria
Dja Dja Wurrung
Invicta Estate (previously Wellsford Estate)
The owner of 2-10Howard Street and 187, 191 and 193 Midland Highway,
Department of Transport and Planning
Victorian Planning Authority
Goulburn-Murray Water
Appendix B Parties to the Panel Hearing
Represented by
Greater Bendigo City Council
Richie Dean, Strategic Planner
Tideways Classic Pty Ltd
Raph Krelle of Centrum Town Planning
Manallacks Road Pty Ltd
Gerard Gilfedder of Townify
YourLand Developments
Sal Lennon of Hall & Wilcox
Appendix C Document list
Description
Provided by
Referred documents
Council report seeking amendment authorisation
Greater Bendigo Council (Council)
Authorisation letter from DTP
Amendment documents:
Explanatory
Instruction
Council report considering submissions and
Request for a Panel
Submissions (13)
Tabled documents
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Map of submitters locations
Documents directed to be provided:
02.03_gben Strategic Directions track changes Exhibition
Strategic Framework Plans track changes Exhibition
Agriculture track changes Exhibition
Built Environment track changes Exhibition
Industry track changes Exhibition
Schedule Background Documents track changes Exhibition
Schedule Further Strategic Work track changes Exhibition
Document Greater Bendigo Industrial Development Guidelines 2024 Draft
Document Greater Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy June 2024
Background Report Addendum 2024
Information Bendigo Industrial Land Review - Strategic Economic Inputs
21-01-2019 Exhibition
Information Review of Future Industrial Land Supply in Bendigo 24-02-2023
Bendigo GBILDS Background Report May 2020
Council Part A submission
Hearing Timetable v2
Tideways Classic Pty Ltd
Yourland Developments
Part B submission
PowerPoint summary of Part B submission
Manallacks Road Pty ltd
PowerPoint summary of submission
Manallacks Road Pty ltd
Part C submission Amendment C263gben
Amendment C263gben Panel Report
Proposed Clause 17.03-1L wording change
Manallacks Road Pty ltd
Part C submission
Clause 11.03-6L-04 Marong
Greater Bendigo C263gben Explanatory Report Adoption
Marong Township Structure Plan City of Greater Bendigo June 2024
City of Greater Bendigo Potential Growth Areas Final Bushfire assessment
Terramatrix 2023
City of Greater Bendigo Bushfire Assessment of Potential Growth Areas
Proposed drafting changes
Yourland Developments
Email from Hall & Wilcox concerning the gazettal of Greater Bendigo
Yourland Developments
D Planning context
D:1 Planning
policy framework
Council submitted that the Amendment is
supported by various clauses in the Planning Policy Framework, which the Panel
has summarised
Victorian planning objectives
The Amendment will assist in implementing the
following State policy objectives set out in section 4 of the PE Act by:
a) To provide for the fair, orderly, economic and sustainable use and
development of the land
This objective
is implemented through the strategy that seeks to provide sufficient industrial
land supply in appropriate locations
to facilitate employment growth and
sustainable development of future industry in the municipality.
This objective
is further implemented by providing a clear hierarchy of the various industrial
precincts to help to minimise land
use conflicts while helping to facilitate the
delivery of additional industrial land.
b) To provide for the protection of natural and man-made resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic diversity.
This objective
is implemented through the strategy that seeks to minimise detrimental
environmental impacts by ensuring land is appropriately
zoned and by directing
industrial use and development into suitable locations. The rezoning of land
with high biodiversity values
from an inappropriate zone provides protection to
the natural environment.
ensure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreational
environment for all Victorians and visitors to Victoria.
This objective
is implemented through the strategy that seeks to minimise existing and future
land use conflicts and to provide higher
built environment standards of which
carry through benefits to the public realm.
Clause 2 (Municipal Planning Strategy)
The Amendment supports the MPS by:
Settlement - through avoiding industrial development in
bushfire prone areas and protecting agricultural land and high
environmental areas from development.
Clause 02.03-3
Environmental risks and amenity - by seeking to promote
sustainable land
use and development and the sustainable development
principles for
industrial development outlined in the draft Guidelines.
Clause 02.03-5 -
Built environment and heritage - by seeking to facilitate a
comfortable and visually appealing urban environment in
Clause 02.03-7
Economic development - by facilitating the expansion of
generating industries, making well located employment land
available and
planning for the future growth of the industrial sector
through the
provision of industrial zoned land in appropriate locations.
Clause 11 (Settlement)
The Amendment supports Clause 11 by:
Clause 11.01-1S
Settlement - through the provision of appropriately located industrial land, and
by supporting employment and growth
in the regional city of Bendigo in
accordance with Plan Melbourne 2017-2050.
Clause 11.01-1R
Settlement - Loddon Mallee South - by supporting Bendigo as the economic growth
hub for the region through the growth
of industry in accordance with the Loddon
Mallee South Regional Growth Plan.
Clause 11.02-1S
Supply of urban land - through the identification and provision of appropriately
located and serviced industrial land
supply across Greater Bendigo to meet
forecast demand and the growth of industries.
Clause 12 (Environmental and Landscape Values)
The Amendment supports Clause 12 by:
Clause 12.01-1S
Protection of biodiversity - by seeking to avoid the potential detriment of
important areas of biodiversity from future
industrial land use and development
and more specifically through the actions of the proposed rezoning of 1029
Calder Highway, Maiden
Gully from IN1Z to PCRZ.
Clause 13 (Environmental Risks and Amenity)
The Amendment supports Clause 13 by:
Clause 13.02-1S
Bushfire planning - through risk-based planning that prioritises the protection
of human life from identified bushfire
risk in relation to the location of
future industrial land.
Clause 13.05-1S
Noise management - by minimising the impacts of noise exposure from industrial
uses to surrounding sensitive land
Clause 14 (Natural Resource Management)
The Amendment supports Clause 14 by:
Clause 14.01-1S
Protection of agricultural land - by discouraging inappropriate industrial use
and development in rural areas.
Clause 15 (Built Environment and Heritage)
The Amendment supports Clause 15 by:
Clause 15.01-2S
Building design - by including a new local policy to implement guidelines that
encourage higher urban design standards
for industrial built environment areas
including measures for safety, human health and functionality. The Amendment
also proposes
to insert new strategies that encourage buildings to better
respond to the local context, the public realm and that support environmentally
sustainable development.
Clause 17 (Economic Development)
The Amendment supports Clause 17 by:
Clause 17.03-1S
Industrial land supply - by providing a strategic framework for future
industrial land supply that seeks to ensure
a sufficient supply of industrial
land into the future and to protect and strengthen employment opportunities to
contribute to maintaining
and growing the local and regional economy.
Clause 18 (Transport)
The Amendment supports Clause 18 by:
Transport - by implementing the strategy through including a new local policy
that seeks to minimise the impacts of freight
movements on urban and residential
relevant planning strategies and policies
for Victoria 2025
Plan for Victoria sets the statewide vision
for how Victoria will grow over time including:
(Accessible jobs and services) is focused on making sure Victorians have good
access to facilities and good jobs.
The BREP is
identified on Map 6: Victoria’s Economic Strengths and Map 14: Bendigo in
the Future.
Action 8 of Plan
for Victoria is to ensure new industrial and commercial land is ready for
development.
Mallee South Regional Growth Plan
The Loddon Mallee South
Regional Growth Plan provides broad direction for land use and development
across the Loddon Mallee South
region, as well as more detailed planning
frameworks for the key regional centres of Bendigo.
Council submitted that the Amendment supports the Loddon Mallee South
Regional Growth Plan because:
Mallee South Regional Growth Plan is the strategic 30 year plan for the Loddon
Mallee South region to guide land use, growth
and change.
As a regional
city, Bendigo is a key driver of economic growth for the region where industry
and manufacturing play a key role in
terms of economic output and
employment.
The Growth Plan
outlines that having adequate industrial zoned land is critical to attracting
and maintaining manufacturing businesses
and industries in the region. More
broadly, the Growth Plan supports the growth of Bendigo as the major employment
hub for the region
and to service a growing population.
The Amendment
responds to the Growth Plan with an industrial land development strategy that
seeks to facilitate the growth of industry
and employment for Bendigo and the
local region.
Greater Bendigo—Integrated Transport and Land Use 2015
ITLUS is Council’s long term integrated land use
and transport plan structured around five key objectives.
One of the five objectives is ‘Moving Greater Bendigo’ and is
focused on using the capacity of existing networks to more
effectively move
people and goods. It sees Bendigo further developing as a freight hub and
identifies the need to mitigate the impacts
of increased freight on residential
GBILDS and its implementation through the Amendment responds to ITLUS through
proposed planning scheme policy support for the BREP.
As a proposed large
master planned business park along with the future Marong Western Freight
Corridor, this would see the bypassing
of heavy vehicles from the Marong
township and its residential areas.
Greater Bendigo - Economic Development Strategy 2020-2030
Council’s economic development strategy, A Stronger Greater Bendigo seeks
to build better and more sustainable jobs with
a focus on opportunity and
inclusivity. A Stronger Greater Bendigo identifies the need for the region to
provide serviced, suitably
located and zoned land to accommodate growing demand
for employment and expansion of business and industry.
The Amendment is supportive and consistent with A Stronger Greater Bendigo in
its objectives to increase the supply of industrial
land and grow industry and
employment opportunities.
D:3 Planning
scheme provisions
A common zone and overlay purpose is to
implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
land is in the Industrial 1 Zone. The purposes of the Zone are:
To provide for
manufacturing industry, the storage and distribution of goods and associated
uses in a manner which does not affect
the safety and amenity of local
communities.
The land is in the Industrial 3 Zone. The purposes of
the Zone are:
To provide for
industries and associated uses in specific areas where special consideration of
the nature and impacts of industrial
uses is required or to avoid inter-industry
To provide a
buffer between the Industrial 1 Zone or Industrial 2 Zone and local communities,
which allows for industries and associated
uses compatible with the nearby
To allow limited
retail opportunities including convenience shops, small-scale supermarkets and
associated shops in appropriate locations.
To ensure that
uses do not affect the safety and amenity of adjacent, more sensitive land
The land is in the Public Conservation and Resource Zone. The
purposes of the Zone are:
To protect and
conserve the natural environment and natural processes for their historic,
scientific, landscape, habitat or cultural
facilities which assist in public education and interpretation of the natural
environment with minimal degradation of the
natural environment or natural
To provide for
appropriate resource based uses.
The land is in the Farming Zone.
The purposes of the Zone are:
To provide for
the use of land for agriculture.
To encourage the
retention of productive agricultural land.
To ensure that
non-agricultural uses, including dwellings, do not adversely affect the use of
land for agriculture.
To encourage the
retention of employment and population to support rural communities.
To encourage use
and development of land based on comprehensive and sustainable land management
practices and infrastructure provision.
To provide for
the use and development of land for the specific purposes identified in a
schedule to this zone.
D:4 Ministerial
Directions, Planning Practice Notes and guides
Ministerial Directions
The Explanatory Report discusses how the Amendment
meets the relevant requirements of Ministerial Direction 11 (Strategic
of Amendments) and
Planning Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment
, August 2018 (PPN46). That discussion is not repeated here.
ouncil submitted the Amendment has been prepared in accordance with
following relevant Ministerial directions:
Ministerial
Direction: The Form and Content of Planning Schemes
Ministerial
Direction 1: Potentially contaminated land
Ministerial
Direction 15: The planning scheme amendment process
Ministerial
Direction 18: Victorian Planning Authority advice on
planning scheme
Ministerial
Direction 19: Amendments that may result in impacts on
the environment,
amenity and human health.
Planning Practice Notes
Council submitted the Amendment has been prepared in
accordance with the following planning practice notes:
Practice Note 46: Strategic assessment guidelines
Practice Note 64: Local planning for bushfire protection.
Practitioner’s Guide
A Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian
Planning Schemes Version 1.5,
April 2022 (Practitioner’s Guide) sets
out key guidance to assist practitioners when preparing planning scheme
provisions.
The guidance seeks to ensure:
the intended
outcome is within scope of the objectives and power of the PE Act and has a
sound basis in strategic planning policy
a provision is
necessary and proportional to the intended outcome and applies the VPP in a
proper manner
a provision is
clear, unambiguous and effective in achieving the intended
Appendix E Panel
recommended version of changes to the Greater Bendigo Industrial Land
Development Strategy
Panel added changes
Panel deleted changes
land, a maximum of 11 years supply , and only a
handful of large sites more than one hectare remaining in Greater Bendigo.
A comprehensive review of the City’s industrial land has identified
that it is:
Fragmented in
numerous locations and precincts
constrained in the types of uses that can be supported or allowed by proximity
to sensitive uses such as residential
Often difficult
to access because it relies on transport routes through residential areas
constrained by a range of environmental factors
In terms of growth
and development of industrial land needs and the provision for future
employment:
Bendigo will
need an increase of over 3,300 jobs in industry to 2036 to match population
growth and servicing needs
Without the
provision of future industrial land Bendigo will start to forgo industrial jobs
as early as 2025
already at a severe competitive disadvantage in comparison to other comparable
Victorian regional centres which can offer
large, unconstrained
‘greenfield’ industrial estates
Replace above text with:
Based on the above, in order to meet industry needs particularly in larger
lots, there is a need to plan for a pipeline of 170-270
hectares of vacant
industrial land supply over the next 30 years, which includes the current supply
of less than 100 hectares.
Based on the above, in addition to the existing industrial land supply, in
order to meet industry needs particularly in larger lots,
there is a need to
plan for a pipeline of at least an additional 170-270 hectares of industrial
land supply over the next 30 years
over and above the current supply of less
than 100 hectares
Bendigo is the major employment industrial hub in northern Victoria. It is a
growing, vibrant, creative, and culturally enriched regional
centre serving much
of northern Victoria and southern NSW.
Industry is a major employer in Greater Bendigo. Advanced manufacturing is
strong and diverse. A wide range of industries, businesses
and employers are
seeking to expand or relocate and need large, well located, serviced, accessible
sites not constrained by nearby
sensitive uses.
Current population growth trends indicate that Greater Bendigo’s
population will grow from around 124,000 people to over 200,000
people over the
next 30 years
Employment relating to the City’s industrial areas and precincts is
expected to provide for about 3,300 new jobs over the next
15 years, bringing
total jobs relating to industrial precincts to nearly 12,000 by
The City’s significance as an economic hub has been further
strengthened by the recent completion of the Bendigo Airport redevelopment
project (Stage 2) and the introduction of daily scheduled direct flights to
Sydney and the prospect of further flights and routes
being initiated.
The recent development of major gold deposits at Fosterville to the east of
Bendigo and the identification of significant potential
deposits north east of
Bendigo by Minerals Development Victoria, and the calling of expressions of
interest for substantial mineral
exploration licences as a prelude to full scale
mining, further boost Greater Bendigo’s industrial development and
prospects. Gold deposits worth approximately $200 Billion have
potentially been identified. Realisation of that asset would significantly
increase employment in mining engineering, advanced manufacturing and service
industries.
To enable employment growth to occur and to provide certainty for industry,
there is a need to plan for a future 30-year pipeline
of industrial land. As it
stands, there is currently less than 100 hectares of available
Executive Summary
were required, in principle support from landowners was sought prior to these
investigations taking place.
Following detailed investigations, the City identified 294 hectares of land
south of the Marong Township near the intersection of
the Calder, Calder
Alternative and Wimmera Highways. This site is referred to as the Bendigo
Regional Employment Precinct (BREP).
The delivery of this precinct would meet
many of the long term industrial land needs in Greater Bendigo. The Victorian
Planning Authority
(VPA) was appointed as the planning authority for the
rezoning and associated planning of the proposed BREP.
With Greater Bendigo having had a limited industrial land supply for a number
of years, it is difficult to ascertain the amount of
development which has not
occurred due to a lack of available land. It may be that as industrial land
supply increases industrial
development may occur faster than originally
forecast. Therefore, given the inherent difficulty in predicting how fast this
up might be and how hard it is to identify suitable land for industry, the
City will continue to regularly review the industrial
land supply to meet short,
medium and long term needs.
As part of prioritising the new industrial business park(s), it is proposed
that Marong Business Park, the 313 hectares of land zoned
Comprehensive
Development Zone (CDZ), to the west of Marong not progress in the short
These objectives are proposed to be actioned through the
‘general’ and ‘precinct-specific’ actions included
the tables at Section 3 and Section 4 respectively.
The first and major objective of the GBILDS is to provide 30 years of
industrial land supply in Greater Bendigo.
The focus on this objective
reflects the fact that the City has nearly run out of serviced, zoned industrial
land and is unable to
meet a range of short and longer term demands for land to
support industrial expansion and new jobs.
The key action to achieve this objective is to identify appropriate site(s)
for new industrial land supply via a rigorous, transparent
and independent
public selection process further detailed at Section 7 of the Background
Greater Bendigo does not have the benefit of large parcels of Crown or other
government owned land which may be suitable for industrial
development nor is
there the potential to suitably expand any of the existing precincts to meet
medium to longer term industrial
Therefore, investigations centered around the potential for land under
private ownership, generally farming zoned land, which may
be suitable for
rezoning to enable industrial uses.
A large number of sites were investigated through this process with many
being ruled out due to infrastructure, environmental or other
constraints. When
more detailed investigations
term due to the land currently being used for farming. Instead it is
recommended that the local planning policy be changed to reflect
this land as
potentially meeting the longer term needs of the region. It is proposed to
review the strategy in five years to provide
time to better understand the take
up of land once the delivery of a new business park(s) has commenced.
In addition to the need for further land, the remaining actions seek to
create or otherwise retrofit well-designed, high amenity,
sustainable, and
functional industrial places in line with the vision statement. In some
instances, these precincts will be considered
as part of the future preparation
of a Managed Growth Strategy for the City covering all land use needs to
The implementation of the GBILDS will ensure Greater Bendigo and the wider
region is well-placed to meet the existing and future industrial
land needs of
industries and businesses over the next 30 years while better managing land use
Replace boxed text with
As part of prioritising the new industri‑al business park(s) such
as Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in the short-medium
term, it is proposed
that Marong Business Park, the 313 hectares of land zoned Comprehensive
Develop‑ment Zone (CDZ), to the
west of Marong not progress in the
Precinct number
Role and function in hierarchy
Recommendation
Implementation Timeframe
Support the rezoning of the precinct to the Mixed Use Zone through the
implementation of the Marong Township Structure Plan (MTSP).
Undertake a planning scheme amendment to implement the Marong Township
Structure Plan.
Approximately 1-2 years (subject to the amendment to implement the
Marong West
Long-term future
employment precinct.
farming land zoned Comprehensive Development Zone.
Review land supply and long term need for the Business Park.
Further review when updating the GBILDS in 5 years.
Review planning controls to ensure longer term industrial land potential
only, once other land is developed.
Update planning controls as required to indicate the longer term potential
for industrial land only.
6-12 months
future employment precinct.
Replace deleted text
significant future employment precinct
regional freight and employment hub
Support the rezoning of the land to enable industrial uses.
Support the VPA to progress the planning for the precinct.
employment hub.
5. Future industrial land precincts
7 Review of Future Land Supply in Bendigo SGS ECONOMICS AND PLANNING 2023
8 REMPLAN 2024
Wimmera and Calder Alternative Highways for a potential future employment
The ultimate development of this precinct would unlock land to meet the
medium and longer term industrial land needs of existing and
new businesses to
Greater Bendigo. It is expected that the proposed BREP will deliver 6,000 direct
and indirect jobs for the region.
The Victorian Planning Authority has been appointed as the planning authority
for this precinct and is working closely with the City
to prepare a planning
scheme amendment to deliver the precinct.
Replace boxed text sentence with:
Based on a consumption rate of between 9 and 11 hectares per year, at a
minimum there will need to be a supply pipeline of between
170 and 270 hectares
of vacant indus‑trial land over the next 30 years (inclusive of the
existing 100 hectares of vacant land).
billion over the eight years from 2015 to 2023, Manufacturing currently
comprises 18.2% of the economic output for Greater Bendigo,
with construction
and transport, postal and warehousing comprising a further
. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that
without a pipeline of serviced and available industrial land, Greater Bendigo is
likely to become more uncompetitive with other regional cities leading to a
potential slowdown in employment and possibly population
While the City currently has 313 hectares of land that was zoned
Comprehensive Development Zone in 2016 and appropriate for industry
to the west
of Marong, this land is currently not serviced and unavailable for industrial
development given the land is under private
ownership and being utilised for
farming. However, given the potential long‑term suitability for this land
to be used for industry
(should the take up of industrial land be greater than
forecast) it is proposed to retain this land within the Comprehensive
Development
Given the unavailability of the current zoned land in Marong for industrial
development, the City has been going through a comprehensive
selecting a future site(s) for a business park(s). Further details around the
selection process are included in the GBILDS
background report.
Following extensive investigations, the City has identified 294 hectares of
land to the south of the Marong Township at the intersection
There is currently less than 11 years of industrial land in Greater Bendigo
assuming near perfect utilisation, with the majority (74%)
of sites being less
than 0.5 hectares. Only 11% of sites are over one hectare.
Based on a consumption rate of between 9 and 11 hectares per year, at a
minimum there will need to be an additional supply of between
170 and 270
hectares over and above the existing supply over the next 30 years (based on
having 100 hectares of
vacant land)
. This does not
consider that by having
more available, useable and buffered industrial
land, Greater Bendigo will become more attractive as a destination for
and therefore consumption of land is likely to increase over and
above initial forecasts. Further it does not consider the potential
future to better utilise some of the existing industrial precincts for a
commercial or other more suitable zone based on their
locational or other
attributes (Section 4).
Currently compared to other regional cities of a similar size existing
industrial land precincts are generally small in size, limiting
the potential
for similar businesses to congregate in a single location. There is also no
large business park unlike many other larger
regional cities such as Ballarat,
Geelong and Wodonga. This makes it more difficult to control design outcomes and
to take a precinct
wide approach to development.
Greater Bendigo has been experiencing strong economic growth in recent years
growing by $4.3
Appendix F Panel recommended version of Clause
Panel added changes
Panel deleted changes
02.03-7 Economic development
11/03/2022—/--/----
Greater Bendigo has the highest annual growth rate in gross
regional product among Victoria’s major regional cities, and the
City’s economy has outperformed the rest of Victoria in several key
sectors. Bendigo is the key regional city and economic
growth hub for the Loddon
Mallee South region.
As well as its significant retail and industrial base, other important
elements of the economy include tourism, education, finance,
agriculture, and
earth and energy resources industries (mining). In recent years Bendigo has
become a hub for many non-retail anchors
including health facilities, tertiary
education, regional sporting facilities and arts and cultural facilities.
Significant demand for commercial floor space is expected until 2035. Where
this should be located has been identified on the urban
strategic framework
plan, Rural strategic framework plan and urban area activity centre hierarchy
plan in Clause 02.04.
Traditionally industry
Industry is a major employer in
Greater Bendigo
has been located within the Bendigo urban area and
focused on manufacturing and engineering. These sectors remain important to the
economy. New industries such as food manufacturing and information technologies
have recently experienced growth
and the wide range of industries
and businesses that make up the industrial sector provide a significant
contribution to the local
and regional economy
. The Bendigo Livestock
plays an important role in supporting the agricultural
sector regionally.
At present there is inadequate industrial land to
meet the expected long term demand.
Many of the areas set aside for industrial use, particularly in
Existing industrial areas are dispersed and fragmented across
the Bendigo urban area,
are not suitable to the needs of modern industry
due to small lot sizes and adjoining incompatible land uses, as shown on the
strategic framework plan in Clause 02.04
often adjoining
incompatible land uses. There is an increasing shortage of well located
industrial land with a range of suitable lot
sizes to meet the forecasted
demands of existing and emerging industries. In contrast to other large regional
Victorian cities such
as Ballarat and Geelong, Bendigo lacks a large, dedicated
business park.
Greater Bendigo is an important visitor destination in the centre of
Victoria’s Goldfields region, recognised for its significant
value, as a City of Gastronomy, its contemporary and cultural offerings and as
Victoria’s regional events capital.
Greater Bendigo’s tourism
industry is supported by a mild climate, heritage buildings, parks and gardens,
impressive streetscapes,
well established wineries and national, state and
regional parks.
The Bendigo Library, the Bendigo Art Gallery, Ulumbarra Theatre, and the
major performing arts venue The Capital Theatre provide Bendigo
with non-retail
anchors that are driving visitation and contributing to the lifestyle and
opportunities that are available to residents
and visitors alike. The strategic
directions for economic development are:
and expand employment generating industries.
well located affordable employment land available.
commercial growth to activity centres.
adequate supply of suitably located industrial land to meet the forecasted
demands of industry and to improve the regional
competitiveness of Greater
the future growth of the industrial sector by providing zoned land in
appropriate locations and lot configurations large
scale industrial land and
regional employment opportunities in Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in
short-medium term.
redevelop land in the existing industrial areas to meet industry needs in the
short term.
Improve the
function, design and amenity of new and existing industrial
Appendix G Panel recommended version of Clause
Panel added changes
Panel deleted changes
Industrial strategic framework plan
Appendix H Panel recommended version of Clause
15.01-1L-02
Panel added changes
Panel deleted changes
15.01-1L-02
Proposed C282gben
Urban design in industrial areas - Greater Bendigo
Policy application
This policy applies to all industrial subdivision and development that
requires a permit under the Greater Bendigo Planning Scheme.
Subdivision strategies
Provide separation and landscape buffers between industrial areas and adjacent
residential, rural and sensitive environmental areas
to minimise potential
amenity impacts.
Design landscape buffers in industrial areas to include screen planting
and noise attenuation measures such as mounding.
Site layout strategies
Provide space to accommodate canopy trees around new industrial buildings.
Built form strategies
Minimise detrimental impacts on the visual amenity of the built environment by
designing industrial buildings using contemporary,
high quality finishes and
avoiding excessive use of unfinished precast concrete facade walls.
Landscaping strategies
Encourage high quality, attractive landscaping using low maintenance and durable
species that positively contribute to the streetscape,
particularly within front
setbacks of industrial areas.
Provide well located, integrated areas of attractive outdoor space that
contribute to an activated public realm with weather protection,
lighting and
seating for staff and visitors.
Ensure front boundary treatments contribute positively to the appearance of the
streetscape and clearly delineate the public and
private realms.
Enable passive surveillance of car parks, streets and the surrounding public
realm using transparent and secure front fencing, integrated
as a coordinated
design element within the site.
Design landscape buffers in industrial areas to include screen planting and
noise attenuation measures such as mounding where required
to protect the
amenity of surrounding uses.
Services and infrastructure strategies
Provide external lighting sufficient for security and navigation that does not
impact on the amenity of nearby residential properties.
Policy document
Consider as relevant:
Bendigo Industrial Development Guidelines
(City of Greater Bendigo,
Appendix I Panel recommended version of Clause
Panel added changes
Panel deleted changes
Proposed C282gbe
Industrial land supply - Greater Bendigo
Policy application
This policy applies to applications for use and development in the industrial
areas shown on the Industrial Strategic Framework Plan
at Clause 02.04.
Strategies- General
Direct industrial uses and development to the municipal, secondary, local and
specialised industrial areas identified on the Industrial
Strategic Framework
Plan at Clause 02.04.
fragmentation of land in undeveloped industrial areas and retain
land in large lots
subdivision of large and very large vacant
industrial landholdings
until it is required for
development
use and development or unless it is demonstrated the land is not
suitable to service the needs of large industrial landholdings.
Strategies - Municipal
Support industrial subdivisions in municipal industrial areas that provide a
variety of lot sizes to support different industry types.
Retain land to the north-west of Marong zoned Comprehensive Development Zone for
future industrial use and development for the municipality
and broader region in
the longer term to support the demands and growth of industry.
Encourage a variety of uses including industry, warehouses, restricted retail
premises and offices in the Bendigo East industrial
area in the short term.
Support the redevelopment of the railway workshop in the Bendigo East industrial
area for locomotive maintenance and manufacturing.
Support the establishment of a business park at the Bendigo Airport for the
development of industrial and commercial uses compatible
with the operations of
the airport.
Plan for large scale industrial land and regional employment opportunities
in Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct in short-medium
Strategies - Secondary
Maintain secondary industrial areas for a range of industrial uses that do not
impact on nearby sensitive uses.
Avoid the expansion of industrial use and development close to abutting
residential areas within the Bendigo North industrial area.
Encourage additional warehouses
and restricted retail premises
Epsom Industrial Area.
Support a suitable mix of small-scale industry and other uses including service
industry, trade supplies, limited retail premises
and associated offices in the
Golden Square/Golden Gully industrial area to protect adjoining residential
Provide a mix of industry and other uses including service industry and limited
retail premises in the existing Kangaroo Flat West
industrial area.
Strategies - Local
Support small-scale industrial uses and associated businesses in local
industrial areas with limitations on industrial uses that
require substantial
threshold distances.
Retain the existing function of the western part of the California Gully
industrial area for demolition and construction waste recycling
interface with the Eaglehawk Landfill.
Limit the expansion and intensification of industrial uses in the Charleston
Road, East Bendigo industrial area to protect surrounding
land uses sensitive to
off-site industrial effects.
Support light industry, warehouses and materials recycling in the Epsom North
industrial area.
Consolidate the Epsom South industrial area with the Epsom Activity Centre over
Support manufacturing and warehouses in the western part of the Epsom South-West
industrial area.
Support industrial development, warehouses and limited retail at the Depot Road
industrial area in Heathcote.
Encourage the expansion of warehouses in the Kangaroo Flat East industrial
Retain land for industry and other uses including warehouses, service industry,
trade supplies and restricted retail premises in
the Long Gully industrial area
and consider support for rezoning of adjoining fragmented residential land
where it can be demonstrated that traffic, access, interfaces
and amenity can be
adequately addressed.
Strategies - Specialised
Limit expansion and support a limited range of industrial uses in specialised
industrial areas. Support a mix of industry and warehouses
within the Big Hill
industrial area.
Retain a mix of industry and other uses including warehouses, materials
recycling, service industry, trade supplies, limited retail
and associated
offices in the Eaglehawk industrial area.
Provide for rural industries, warehousing and rural stores in the Goornong
industrial area.
Support diversification and further development of the Huntly industrial
Support small-scale industry and limit industrial use and development with
potential for adverse amenity impacts close to the eastern
boundary of the
Junortoun industrial area where it abuts residential land.
Policy guideline
Consider as relevant:
Providing local
species of vegetation as part of any approved landscaping plan in the Goornong
industrial area.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Bendigo Industrial Land Development Strategy
(City of Greater Bendigo, June
strategic framework
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (17.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter