URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Holey Moley Australia Pty Ltd at Holey Moley Crown Casino premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 27 (7 September 2021)
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
In the matter of an application by Holey Moley Australia Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act
for an internal
review of a decision refusing to grant a variation to an on-premises licence in
respect of the premises trading as
Holey Moley, situated at Shop 121-124 &
127, Crown Casino, Southbank.
Commission:
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell, Deputy Chair
Mr Des Powell AM, Commissioner
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
9 April 2021
Date of Decision:
7 September 2021
Date of Reasons:
7 September 2021
Appearances:
Mr Daniel Robinson of Counsel, instructed by BSP Lawyers,
for the Applicant
Mr Paul Davies as Counsel Assisting the Commission
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, vary the licence.
Deirdre O’Donnell PSM
Deputy Chair
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. Holey Moley Australia Pty Ltd (
the Applicant
) holds an on-premises
liquor licence no. 32351897 (
the Licence
) issued under the
Control Reform Act 1998
which applies to the
premises located at Shop 121-124 & 127, Crown Casino, Southbank (
), trading as Holey Moley.
2. The Licence permits the supply and consumption of liquor on the Premises
between the following trading hours:
Good Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 1 am the following day
On any other day Between 10 am and
1 am the following day
3. On 13 November 2019, the Applicant applied to the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
the Commission
) to vary the Licence by
increasing the trading hours on Friday and Saturday nights until 2 am. All other
conditions of the licence
were to remain unchanged (
the Application
4. In accordance with section 33(3), a copy of the Application was served on
Victoria Police (
) and the Melbourne City Council (
Victoria Police advised the Commission that it did not object to the grant of
the Application. No objection was received from the
Council in response to the
Application.
Decision of the Delegate
5. An authorised delegate of the Commission (
the Delegate
the Application and determined that it was necessary to consider the
decision-making guidelines titled “Applications
for liquor licences to
trade after 1.00 am” dated 16 July 2015 (
, when deciding to
grant or refuse the extension to the trading hours at the Premises. On 1 July
2019, the Guidelines were extended
for another two years, until 30 June 2021, by
the Honourable Marlene Kairouz, the then Minister for Consumer Affairs, Gaming
Liquor Regulation.
6. On 29 January 2020, the Application was refused by the Delegate (
Original Decision
) on the basis that it did not meet the requirements of the
Guidelines. The Delegate stated in his reasons for decision that the Premises
not a venue that offers live music entertainment, rather, the predominant
activity at the Premises was considered to be indoor
golf, escape rooms and the
provision of karaoke entertainment. The Delegate therefore determined that the
Premises did not fall under
a category of venue that is required under paragraph
B (1) of the Guidelines.
7. The Delegate further determined that he was not satisfied that the grant
of the application would provide an economic and social
benefit that outweighs
the potential detrimental impact to the amenity of the area in which the
Premises is located.
Application for internal review
8. On 25 February 2020, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the
Delegate’s decision to refuse the Application (
Application
9. On 21 July 2021, the Commission wrote to the Applicant for the avoidance
of doubt to inform it that, in the event the Review Application
was granted,
this would also result in a variation of licence category, from an on-premises
licence to a late night on-premises licence.
The Commission provided the
Applicant with an opportunity to confirm that it still wished to proceed with
the Review Application
in those circumstances.
10. On the same day, the Applicant responded to the Commission and confirmed
that it still wished to proceed with the Review Application.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK AND THE TASK BEFORE THE COMMISSION
Legislative Framework
11. Under the Act, an application to vary a
licence may be contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an
uncontested application
relevantly includes “
an application for the
grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO permit in respect
of which no objection is received
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period
set out in that Division for that objection (or that period as extended under
12. Given that no objection was received by the Commission under Division 5
of Part 2 of the Act, the Application was, and remained,
an uncontested
application.
13. The Review Application is made pursuant to section 153 of the Act. The
Original Decision made by the Delegate is a reviewable
decision and the
Applicant is an eligible person under Division 2 of Part 9 of the Act.
14. On receipt of an application for internal review under section 153, the
Commission is to make a fresh decision that:
(a) affirms or varies the reviewable decision; or
(b) sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers appropriate.
15. In effect, the Commission, on internal review, stands in the shoes of the
original decision maker and makes a fresh decision with
respect to the
Application. In doing so, it must consider all the information, material and
evidence before the original decision
It may also consider
further information, material or evidence as part of making its
Conduct of an inquiry
16. Section 34 of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
) provides that subject to that Act,
gambling legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may conduct any
inquiry in any manner
it considers appropriate. Relevant provisions governing
the conduct of an inquiry by the Commission in this matter are:
(a) section 33 of the VCGLR Act, which provides, inter alia:
“(1) The Commission may conduct an inquiry for the purposes of
performing its functions or duties, or exercising its powers
under this Act,
gambling legislation or liquor legislation.
(3) When conducting an inquiry for the purposes of performing its
functions under section 9(1)(a), (b), (c) or (d) the Commission
is taken to be a
board appointed by the Governor in Council and Division 5 of Part I (including
section 21A) of the
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
force immediately before the repeal of that Division, applies
accordingly.”
(b) section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act, which
“In performing a function or duty the
Commission—
(a) except when exercising a power under Division 5 of Part I of the
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
, is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit;
(b) is bound by the rules of natural justice.”
(c) section 44(4) of the Act, which provides that
before granting or refusing an uncontested application under subsection (1), the
Commission may:
“(a) in respect of an uncontested
application, have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant;
(b) may make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate but is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the
application.”
Determination of an uncontested
application
17. Where an application is an uncontested application, pursuant to section
“Subject to Division 3, the Commission must grant or refuse an
uncontested application at any time after the expiry of the period
for objection
under Division 5 (or that period as extended under section 174).”
18. In exercising its discretion to either grant or refuse an uncontested
application under section 44(1), the Commission must have
regard to the
objects of the Act and any Ministerial decision-making guidelines issued
pursuant to section 5 of the VCGLR Act.
19. Section 9(3) of the VCGLR Act provides that:
“The Commission must, when performing functions or duties or
exercising its powers under the Gambling Regulation Act 2003, the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
Casino Control Act 1991
Racing Act 1958
or any other
Act, have regard to the objects of the Act conferring functions on the
Commission.”
20. The objects of the Act are set out in
section 4(1)
, which provides:
“(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
Section 4(2)
further provides
“It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by this
Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol.”
22. Section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act provides that the Commission must, when
performing functions or duties or exercising its powers
under gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, have regard to any decision-making guidelines
issued by the Minister under section
5 of that Act.
23. On 16 July 2015, the Minister for Consumer Affairs, Gaming and Liquor
Regulation (
the Minister
) issued the Guidelines under section 5 of the
VCGLR Act in relation to the grant of liquor licences trading beyond 1 am within
municipalities of Melbourne, Stonnington, Yarra and Port Phillip. The
Guidelines were revoked and replaced by the Guidelines dated
27 June 2019, that
apply to applications made to the Commission after 30 June 2019 and before
midnight on 30 June 2021.
24. In respect to the grant or variation of a late night (on-premises)
licence for trading beyond 1 am in the affected municipalities,
the Guidelines
requires that:
Accommodation and licences allowing consumption on the
(1) the premises is, or will be, used as:
accommodation hotel, being a hotel whose primary purpose is providing
accommodation and where the supply of alcohol is ancillary
to that purpose;
venue that supplies liquor for consumption on the premises provided that food is
available at the venue at all times when alcohol
can be supplied;
(2) the applicant can satisfy the commission
(a) it has in place, or will put in place, a Venue Management Plan in the
form required by the commission; and
(b) the economic and social benefit of granting the licence will outweigh the
impact of the licence on alcohol misuse and abuse and
the community amenity;
(c) the patron capacity of the premises or proposed premises does not, or
will not, exceed 200 persons.”
Music Entertainment
(1) the premises is, or will be, used as a venue that regularly provides
live music entertainment; and
(2) the applicant can satisfy the commission that:
(a) it has in place, or will put in place, a Venue Management Plan in the
form required by the commission; and
(b) the economic and social benefit of granting the licence or permit will
outweigh the impact of the licence or permit on alcohol
misuse and abuse and
community amenity; and
(c) the patron capacity of the premises or proposed premises does not, or
will not, exceed 500 persons at any time;
(d) the impact of the venue on harm and
amenity is low.
25. The Commission considers that the Guidelines are a relevant consideration
in determining the Review Application and that the Commission
must have regard
to the Guidelines.
26. It was submitted by the Applicant that the Review Application seeks to
extend trading hours within the public bar / performance
area and within some
private karaoke rooms from 1 am to 2 am on Friday and Saturday nights only.
It was further submitted by the
Applicant that the proposal is in accordance
with both Paragraph A and Paragraph B of the Guidelines. That is:
The Premises is
a venue with food available at the venue at all times when liquor can be
supplied (Paragraph A of the Guidelines);
or, and in the alternative,
The Premises is
a venue that regularly provides live music entertainment (Paragraph B of the
Guidelines).
It was the Applicant’s submission that the proposal sufficiently meets
the additional requirements under both Paragraphs A and
27. The Applicant submitted that, in the statement of reasons, the Delegate
erred in finding that the venue must have provision of
live music as its
‘core business or function’ and that the Guidelines do not contain
any such language that would invite
the Commission to construe Paragraph B(1)
more narrowly than it has been written. It was therefore the Applicant’s
that, for the purposes of the Application, and in order to satisfy
paragraph B(1), the Commission need only be satisfied that the
Premises provides
‘live music entertainment’ and does so ‘regularly’.
28. The Applicant has in place for the Premises a Venue Management Plan in
the form required by the Commission.
29. With respect to Paragraph A(2)(b) of the Guidelines, the Applicant
engaged Ratio consultants to prepare an economic and social
impact assessment
that relevantly concludes:
(a) The minor increase in operational hours will be negligible in the context of
the complex, and therefore the amenity impacts will
be similarly negligible;
(b) The benefits of the proposal include increased employment, expenditure,
supply contracts and tourist expenditure;
(c) Patron egress will be safe given the access to late-night transport
(d) The quality of the venue is attractive to visitors and tourists;
(e) The venue management plan provides adequate measures to ensure orderly
patron behaviour and compliance with the reduction in
patron capacity;
(f) The application will not result in detrimental amenity outcomes;
(g) The application will have a positive result on cultural and recreational
impacts; (and)
(h) The application complies with the Guidelines, including with respect to the
impact of the venue on harm and amenity.
30. The Applicant submitted that it would ensure patron capacity is reduced
from 400 to 200 patrons from 1 am, through operational
and management practices,
including closing the following facilities prior to 1 am:
of the mini-golf courses;
least five of the ten private karaoke rooms; and
four escape rooms.
This will ensure that the capacity of the Premises after 1 am will not exceed
200 patrons. This submission was not a part of the material
put before the
Delegate in the original application.
31. Pursuant to section 44(2) of the Act and relevantly for this Review
Application, the Commission may refuse to grant an uncontested
application on
any of the following grounds, where it considers the Application would:
“... detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in
which the premises to which the application relates are situated
44(2)(b)(i))
... be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol
(section 44(2)(b)(ii))
32. For the purposes of the Act, the amenity of
an area is defined as being the quality that the area has of being pleasant and
Pursuant to section
3A(2) and (3), a list of non-exhaustive factors that may be taken into account
in determining whether a proposed
grant, variation or relocation would detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment; and
(f) any other prescribed matters.”
33. Pursuant to section 3AA, the Act further
provides that for the purposes of that Act:
evidence of any of the following factors, which may occur
inside, or a place outside a licensed premises that is sufficiently proximate
to, that premises, are taken to constitute evidence of detraction from, or
detriment to, the amenity of the area in which the licensed
premises is
(a) violent behaviour;
(b) drunkenness;
(c) vandalism;
(d) using profane, indecent or obscene language;
(e) using threatening, abusive or insulting language;
(f) behaving in a riotous, indecent, offensive or insulting
(g) disorderly behaviour;
(h) causing nuisance;
(i) noise disturbance to occupiers of other premises;
(j) obstructing a footpath, street or road;
(k) littering.
34. The Act does not define the meaning of the term “
misuse or abuse
”, nor specify factors that constitute evidence of that
which would be “
conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of
35. Where an application is granted, the
Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant of an
application, including
a condition that the grant is not effective until any
requirements specified in the grant have been
Section 16 of the Act provides
that it is a condition of every licence and BYO permit (other than a pre-retail,
limited and major
event licence) that the use of the licensed premises does not
contravene the planning scheme that applies to the licensed premises
Planning and Environment Act 1987
MATERIAL BEFORE THE COMMISSION & PUBLIC HEARING
36. The Commission, on review, had before it and considered all of the
information, material and evidence before the Delegate, including:
(a) an application to vary an existing licence or permit dated 21 October
(b) a Late Night Liquor Licence Supplementary Forms Kit, dated 21 October
(c) Submissions On Behalf of The Applicant, prepared by BSP Lawyers, dated
15 January 2021
(d) Social & Economic Impact Assessment prepared by Ratio Consultants, dated
15 January 2021
(e) Holey Moley, Jukes Karaoke & Red Herring Crown House Policy, received 8
(f) Witness statement of Niall O’Doherty, Chief Performance Officer of
Funlab Group dated 8 April 2021
(g) Witness statement of Sarah Jayde Macdonald, Venue Manager of Holey Moley,
Jukes Karaoke and Red Herring at Crown Casino dated
8 April 2021
(h) Document – response to the Commissioner's further queries, received 21
(i) a Venue Management Plan, dated 22 May 2019
(j) a copy of the Holey Moley Crown Melbourne food menu, received 8 April 2021;
(k) a VCGLR Compliance History Report.
37. The Commission also had regard to the Delegate’s Statement of
38. On 9 March 2021, a site visit was arranged at the Premises attended by
the Commissioners and Counsel Assisting to observe the
Premises which was also
attended by Venue Manager Ms Sarah MacDonald and Chief Performance Officer Mr
Niall O’Doherty.
39. On 9 April 2021, the Commission conducted a public hearing to consider
the Review Application. The Applicant was represented by
Mr Daniel Robinson, and
Ms Sarah MacDonald and Mr Niall O’Doherty gave evidence for the Applicant.
DETERMINATION OF THE REVIEW APPLICATION
40. In detailing the reasons for its determination of this Review
Application, the Commission addresses the issues before it by reference
general questions:
(a) first, whether the Commission is satisfied that the relevant requirements of
the Guidelines are met; and
(b) secondly, having regard to the Guidelines, whether the Commission considers
it should grant or refuse the Review Application
given the grounds for refusal
set out in the Act, and the objects of the Act.
Are the relevant requirements of the Guidelines met?
41. In considering whether or not the Commission is satisfied that the
relevant requirements of the Guidelines are met by the Application,
Commission finds that the Premises is a multi-faceted indoor recreation and
entertainment venue, and does not provide accommodation.
Hence, the Premises is
not a venue that falls within the scope of Paragraph A(1)(a) of the Guidelines.
Based on the material put
forward by the Applicant, the first issue to be
addressed is whether the Premises is, or will be, used as:
(a) a venue that regularly provides live music entertainment (Paragraph (1)(b));
or alternatively
(b) a venue that supplies liquor for consumption on the premises provided that
food is available at the venue at all times when liquor
can be supplied
(Paragraph (1)(c)).
Live music entertainment
42. The business operates three distinctive areas, being:
(a) Holey Moley miniature indoor golf;
(b) Jukes Piano and Karaoke Bar; and
(c) Red Herring Escape Rooms.
43. The peak times in Jukes Piano Bar are after 8:00pm on Fridays and
Saturdays and this accords with the ordinary times when live
music is provided
on the Premises. Live music is a point of difference between the Premises and
other bars. Mr O’Doherty explained
to the Commission that, “...live
entertainment, the way we envision it... is professional live entertainers
bringing the crowd
along on the journey and them getting involved.” The
concept for Jukes, specifically the piano bar, is to bring the fun of
karaoke rooms into the main bar space, allowing people to unwind and engage with
each other.
44. Professional entertainers are sourced through “Muso”, a
gig-booking website / app, that connects professional entertainers
Staff may also perform as a complementary addition to the professional
entertainers and patrons are also encouraged to
join in with singing provided.
However, Mr O’Doherty explained to the Commission at the hearing that it
is “More akin
to a concert when the artist may open the chorus up to the
crowd to sing and then takes back ownership”.
45. Live music commences in Jukes from between 7 and 8 pm on Friday and
Saturday nights and continues until half an hour before closing
Applicant submitted that if the Application was granted, the Applicant would
commit to only trading past 1 am if the Premises
is regularly providing live
music entertainment by engaging a professional musician(s) in the form of a
pianist or similar.
46. Upon questioning by the Commission, Mr O’Doherty noted that if the
Application was granted, “we will bring back live
entertainment in a
different format, not with a purpose of engaging customers as soon as we want,
(but) more like a quiet piano bar...
and have a pianist in there playing a
slightly different set of music which is still live entertainment...”
47. The Applicant submitted that in its view the Premises regularly provides
live music entertainment in accordance with the Guidelines
and that this is an
aspect of the business that will be further developed and enhanced moving
48. In determining this issue, the Commission
considered the wording that is used in the Guidelines and the Act. While the
references “live music entertainment”, a term that is
statutorily undefined, the Act utilises the term “live music
which is defined in section 3 as:
at which takes place the creation or manipulation of sound for artistic,
cultural or religious purposes, and which is performed to
49. “Regularly” is undefined by both
the Guidelines and the Act. Tribunal consideration of the term
‘regularly’
has focussed on its ordinary meaning of ‘a normal,
habitual or planned occurrence, that happens often’.
50. In order to satisfy the Commission that it regularly provides live music
entertainment, the Commission is of the view that an
applicant must demonstrate
that there is a bona fide intention of the venue to provide live music for the
enjoyment of guests. This
is to be contrasted with providing a musician to play
at background level in a large venue, if the patrons would not be able to hear
the musician.
51. The Commission does not consider that the difference between
“event” and “entertainment” is relevant to
this matter,
as the predominant issue that the Commission must determine is whether the
Applicant ‘regularly’ provides
live music entertainment.
Accordingly, the Commission considers it appropriate to interpret
‘regularly’ in the Guidelines
consistently with the ordinary meaning
given in paragraph 49 and, on that basis, is satisfied that the premises will be
venue that regularly provides live music entertainment for the
purposes of Paragraph B(1) of the Guidelines.
52. It follows from the Commission’s determination that the venue
regularly provides live music entertainment, that the Applicant
then meets the
live music entertainment exemption under Paragraph B(1) of the Guidelines. The
Commission must now consider whether
the remaining criteria under paragraph B(2)
of the Guidelines have been met and notes that it does not need to consider
whether the
requirements of Paragraph A of the Guidelines have been met.
Venue management plan
53. Paragraph B(2)(a) of the Guidelines further requires an applicant to
provide a venue management plan in a form required by the
Commission. Following
the Commission’s comments at the hearing, the Applicant submitted a copy
of its Venue Management Plan
(dated 22 May 2019) as part of the Review
Application. The Venue Management Plan included strategies on dealing with the
issues that
were identified during the inquiry, being:
(a) the Licensee’s approach to responsible
service of alcohol;
(b) hours of operation and late trading;
(c) security and crowd control arrangements; and
(d) Amenity of Neighbourhood.
The Commission is satisfied that the Applicant has a sufficiently detailed
Venue Management Plan in place.
Economic and social benefits
54. In the Original Decision, the Delegate found that the economic and social
benefits of approving the Application did not outweigh
the negative impacts of
the misuse and abuse of alcohol and community amenity; therefore failing to meet
the requirement as set out
in Paragraph B(2)(b) of the Guidelines.
55. The Applicant, for the purposes of the Application, engaged Ratio
Consultants to prepare an assessment that relevantly concludes
(a) The minor increase in operational hours will be negligible in the context
of the complex, and therefore the amenity impacts will
be similarly
negligible;
(b) The benefits of the proposal include increased employment, expenditure,
supply contracts, and tourist expenditure;
(c) Patron egress will be safe given the access to late-night public
transport services;
(d) The quality of the venue is attractive to visitors and tourists;
(e) The Venue Management Plan provides adequate measures to ensure orderly
patron behaviour, and compliance with the reduction in
patron capacity;
(f) The application will not result in detrimental amenity outcomes;
(g) The application will have a positive result on cultural and recreational
impacts; and
(h) The application complies with the Guidelines, including with respect to
the impact of the venue on harm and amenity.
56. Based on the evidence from Ratio Consultants it is the Applicant’s
submission that the economic and social benefit of granting
the licence or
permit will outweigh the impact of the licence or permit on alcohol misuse and
abuse and community amenity, and that
the impact of the venue on harm and
amenity is low, thereby satisfying Paragraph B(2)(b) of the Guidelines.
57. The Commission accepts the assessment provided by Ratio Consultants that
the economic and social benefits of granting the application
will outweigh the
potential negative impact on alcohol misuse and abuse and community amenity.
Patron capacity
58. A final requirement of the Guidelines as provided in Paragraph B (2)(c)
is that, where the Commission is satisfied the premises
is, or will be, used as
a venue that regularly provides live music entertainment, the premises in
question must not have a maximum
patron capacity that exceeds 500 persons. The
Commission notes that the Premises currently has an overall maximum patron
of 400 persons as specified on the Licence.
59. In addition, the Applicant in respect of the Review Application has
proposed to limit the total patron capacity of the premises
to 200 patrons after
1:00am on Friday and Saturday. This was not a factor that formed part of the
material before the Delegate in
the original application.
60. Further, Ms Macdonald indicated at the hearing that security will track
the venue’s capacity at all times and activities
such as Holey Moley
miniature golf and some of the karaoke rooms will close. Ms Macdonald said that
Holey Moley and Red Herring escape
rooms, ‘have their own entrances and
can very much be sectioned off, especially with this new curtain being
installed... we
have a lot of flexibility and how we manage that capacity and we
currently do anyway. I don’t think that we would have any
getting to that number (200) and maintaining that...’
61. Following the hearing and in response to further enquiries by the
Commission about how the Applicant would operationalize capacity
management, as
per Ms Macdonald’s evidence, the Applicant submitted:
(a) External Security Crowd Controllers are on the premises from 5pm until 30
minutes after close on Friday and Saturday evenings.
(b) A minimum of 3 guards are present at these times and are positioned at
the Jukes and Holey Moley entries as well as a guard roaming
the premises.
(c) During this time the guards continually monitor the ingress and egress of
all patrons via counters that are linked, which provides
capacity numbers at all
(d) At 12:30am on Friday and Saturday evenings, the curtain between the Holey
Moley and Jukes Bar will be drawn and the roaming guard
will be static at the
curtain, preventing patrons from internal movement between the two zones.
(e) From 12:30am the following activities will be closed: Holey Moley Bar,
one (1) 9-hole Mini Golf Course, five (5) Karaoke Rooms,
and the Escape
If there are too many patrons in the premises to operate both Holey Moley and
Jukes after 1:00am, then:
(f) At 12:30am at the Holey Moley bar, last drinks will be called and the
Holey Moley bar will be closed from 1am.
(g) From 12:30am the Holey Moley entrance will be used as egress only, and at
1am the Holey Moley entry will be closed entirely.
(h) Between 12:30am and 1:00am no new patrons will be able to play a game of
Holey Moley, this ensures that by 1am the Holey Moley
Bar and Mini Golf course
are vacated entirely.
(i) From 12:30am the Jukes entry will be the only entrance and capacity will
be limited to a maximum of 200 patrons.
(j) The Jukes Bar itself, when operated alone, due to its size does not
accommodate greater than 200 patrons, and consequently it
is always possible to
reduce the patron capacity to 200 patrons by closing the remaining activities in
the premises.
(k) Staff and security will be aware of bookings for the Mini Golf Course or
Karaoke Rooms which could affect patron capacity after
1am and will be able to
then limit walk-ins accordingly to ensure that the patron capacity is not
62. Accordingly, the Commission finds that the requirements of Paragraph B
2(c) of the Guidelines have also been met. In this case,
the Commission is
satisfied that the capacity of the wider premises will not exceed 500 patrons.
The Commission also notes the intention
of the Licensee is to not exceed 200
patrons after 1am. It is noted, however, that the physical separation between
Holey Moley Bar,
the 9-hole Mini Golf Course, five Karaoke Rooms, and the Escape
Rooms, in addition to the Jukes entry being the only entrance point
12:30am, are a key aspect to acceptance by the Commission of the
Licensee’s ability to reduce numbers to 200 patrons from
Commission would be unlikely to have confidence in the Licensee’s ability
to reduce patron capacity to 200 or less
after 1am (i.e. to meet the patron
capacity requirement of the Guidelines) where the specific area continuing to
trade was not distinctly
separable from the wider premises, as the Commission
has previously determined
conclusion, the Commission finds that all of the requirements of Paragraph B of
the Guidelines have been met and accordingly the
granting of the variation
sought by the Review Application would be consistent with the Guidelines.
Provision of food
63. On the basis of the Commission’s above findings, the Commission
does not need to determine whether the Premises complies
with the requirement
that food is available at the venue at all times when alcohol can be supplied
for the purposes of Paragraph
A(1)(b) of the Guidelines. However, the Commission
refers to and relies on its above findings relating to the provision of food as
part of the Licensee’s submission.
64. Having met the exemption, it remains for the Commission to decide whether
to exercise its discretion to vary the existing licence,
having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act and the impact of the venue on harm and amenity.
Should the Commission grant or refuse the Review Application, given the
grounds for refusal set out in the Act, and the objects of
65. The role of the Commission on review is to stand in the shoes of the
original decision-maker and make a fresh decision. Pursuant
to section 9(4) of
the VCGLR Act, the Commission must take into account any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister when
performing its functions or duties or
exercising its powers under the gambling legislation or the Act.
66. However, the Commission is not bound to refuse an application on the
basis that it does not meet the requirements provided in
the decision-making
guidelines. Rather, the decision-making guidelines are an additional element
that the Commission must give regard
to when it is determining whether to
exercise its discretion to grant or refuse an application. In exercising this
discretion, the
Commission must consider relevant grounds for refusal, as well
as the objects of the Act as provided in section 4(1), particularly
of harm minimisation.
67. To this end, the Commission considered that the Premises is located
within the Crown complex and provides a multi-faceted entertainment
recreation venue where live music occurs on Thursday, Friday and Saturdays and
there is emphasis placed on patrons participating
in various activities whilst
also being provided with a substantial food offering (and seated dining options)
when liquor is being
served. The VCGLR’s Compliance History Report further
supports this view, in that no complaints or breaches are recorded against
Premises for any amenity-related or regulatory compliance issues.
68. The Commission accepts that there is a risk that an extension to trading
hours granted to any licensed premises to operate beyond
1 am will give
rise to potential issues associated with impacts on amenity and the misuse or
abuse of alcohol, such as anti-social
behaviour and alcohol fuelled violence.
The VCGLR’s Compliance History Report again demonstrates that there have
been no breaches
identified at the Premises which relate to drunken or
disorderly patrons.
69. Further, having regard to the objects of the Act, the Commission must not
base its determination regarding the potential risks
associated with the misuse
and abuse of alcohol on site-specific evidence alone. It must also have regard
to general evidence of
harm and locality evidence. Moreover, in considering the
risks of misuse and abuse of alcohol, it is not simply an issue of whether
Premises is responsible for anti-social behaviour, but rather, whether
late-night trading at the Premises would, in fact, contribute
to the harm that
arises from the misuse and abuse of alcohol. In this matter, the Commission is
aware that neither the Council nor
the Police objected to the Application at
first instance or during the Review Application.
70. Further, the Commission considers that the approval of the Application
would benefit the community by facilitating the responsible
development of the
liquor and licensed hospitality industries, reflecting community expectations as
provided in the Act. The venue
provides an attractive option for visitors and
tourists, due to its proximity to public transport and given that it is part of
Crown Melbourne complex.
71. Finally, the Commission is satisfied that the Premises regularly provides
live music entertainment in accordance with the Guidelines
and that the
Applicant is in a position to put in place relevant measures to limit the total
patron capacity of the premises to 200
patrons after 1:00am on Friday and
Saturday, as set out in paragraph 60.
72. For the reasons stated above, the Commission
has determined to set aside the decision of the Delegate, grant the Review
Application
and vary the Licence to permit the supply and consumption of liquor
on the Premises between the following trading hours:
Good Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 1 am the following day
Sunday to Thursday Between 10 am and 1 am the following day
Friday and Saturday Between 10 am and 2 am the following day
The preceding seventy two (72) paragraphs is a true copy of the Reasons
for Decision of Ms Deirdre O’Donnell (Deputy Chair),
Mr Des Powell AM
(Commissioner) and Ms Danielle Huntersmith (Commissioner)
All references to
legislation are references to the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
stated otherwise.
paragraphs 23 and 24 of these reasons for further information on the
Guidelines.
Conversely, a “contested
application” is defined in
section 3(1)
an application
for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO permit in
respect of which any objections are
received under Division 5 of
the period set out in that Division for those objections (or that period as
extended under
section 174)
Section 157(2).
section 157(3).
There are no objects specified
in the VCGLR Act itself.
Section 3A(1).
Section 49.
In the matter of the Open
Door Pub Co. Pty Ltd for premises known as the Duke of Wellington Hotel (Deputy
Chair Kennedy, Commissioners
Powell and O’Donnell), (Liquor-internal
review) [2015] VCGLR 46 (10 December 2015).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.06 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter