URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences in Victoria Consultation Paper [2024] VicSAC 1; (13 February 2024)
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences in Victoria
Consultation Paper
February 2024
Contributors
Octavian Simu, Dr Paul McGorrery, Zsombor Bathy, Melanie Hull
Sentencing Advisory Council
: Professor Marilyn McMahon
Deputy-Chair
: Lisa Ward
Council Directors
: Fiona Dowsley, Anoushka Jeronimus, Dan Nicholson,
Anne O’Brien, Paul Smallwood, Wendy Steendam, Nathan Watt
Chief Executive Officer
: Dr Paul McGorrery
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank various agencies including
Court Services Victoria, WorkSafe Victoria and Fines Victoria for so generously
providing the data that supports so much of this consultation paper. We are
grateful to each of the many individuals and organisations
who made the time to
meet with us during preliminary consultations and share their experiences and
invaluable insights in helping
us identify the issues and potential reforms.
One and all, our stakeholders have been generous with their time and
uniformly committed to ensuring sentencing standards are capable
of contributing
to safer workplaces in Victoria.
The Sentencing Advisory
Council is an independent statutory body established in the
Sentencing Act
(Vic). Our mission is to bridge the gap between the community, the
courts and the government by informing, educating and advising
on sentencing.
Our functions include:
statistical information
on sentencing;
on sentencing and sharing it with interested persons;
public opinion
on sentencing matters; and
advising the
Attorney-General
on sentencing matters.
A note on terminology
For simplicity, in this
consultation paper, we use the term
to broadly refer to
all non-natural persons, including companies registered under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), incorporated and unincorporated
associations, public entities and charitable organisations.
Call for submissions
We are seeking
submissions on the sentencing of occupational health and safety offences in
Victoria, especially in response to the
19 questions posed in this consultation
paper. Your submissions are intended to inform the recommendations in our final
welcome and encourage submissions from legal stakeholders, employers
and their representatives, employees and their representatives,
as well as the
broader community.
The deadline for submissions is
Friday 31 May 2024
. Submissions can be
emailed to contact@sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au.
When making a submission, please identify how you would like your submission
to be treated based on the following three categories:
Public submission:
we may publish and refer to your submission, and
name you as the source of the submission in any publications.
Anonymous submission:
we may publish and refer to your submission, but
will not identify you as the source of the submission in any publications.
Confidential submission:
we will only use the submission to inform us
generally in our deliberations. We will not publish or refer to the submission,
the submission to any third parties.
We reserve the right not to publish any submission that we consider
potentially defamatory or offensive.
As additional or alternative opportunities for you to share your views with
us, we will also be running a survey via the Engage Victoria
website, and
hosting a series of community consultations in regional Victoria and suburban
and central Melbourne. You can access
the Engage Victoria page at
engage.vic.gov.au/sentencing-ohs-offences-in-victoria
Terms of reference
On 5 January 2024, we
received the following request for advice pursuant to
section 108C
Sentencing Act 1991
The Sentencing Advisory Council (the Council) is asked to review and report on
the sentencing of offences contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
and make any recommendations for reform that it considers appropriate.
In undertaking this review, the Council should:
current sentencing practices for occupational health and safety offences in
with stakeholders and the broader Victorian community in relation to any issues
associated with the sentencing of occupational
health and safety offences,
whether current sentencing practices align with community expectations,
the role of injured workers and the families of deceased workers in the
sentencing of occupational health and safety offences,
the enforcement of sentencing orders, especially court fines.
have been asked to deliver our final report by 31 December 2024.
Executive summary
All Victorians have the
right to be safe at work, and for their loved ones to be safe at work. Ensuring
appropriate sentencing practices
for occupational health and safety (OHS)
offences is an important part of the broader regulation of workplace health and
Our state’s dedicated workplace health and safety regulator, WorkSafe
Victoria, uses a broad range of tools to ensure workplaces
are as safe as
possible. First and foremost, WorkSafe encourages a positive and proactive
approach by employers and anyone else with
health and safety responsibilities,
through the delivery of educational programs and campaigns, and by offering
advice and support.
WorkSafe also undertakes tens of thousands of workplace
inspections each year, gives informal warnings, and issues various improvement
and prohibition notices requiring remedial works. And in the worst cases,
WorkSafe can prosecute individuals and companies for OHS
In order for the criminal justice system to play its small but important role
in ensuring workplace health and safety standards in
Victoria, it’s
critical that the sentencing of OHS offences – the how, the what and the
why – is fit for purpose.
If sentencing standards are too inconsistent
with community expectations, if injured workers and their loved ones feel
excluded from the process, or if fines for unsafe work practices are
just ‘the cost of doing business’, then the system
The sentencing of OHS offences in Victoria and
Australia has been the subject of a number of reviews over the last 30 years or
By and large, the findings and recommendations of these reviews have been
consistent: that fines for OHS offences are too low to
change companies’
behaviour, that sentencing orders other than fines should be available and used
in a wider range of OHS cases,
and that there should be some improved guidance
for courts about the sentencing of OHS offences.
Our aim in this consultation paper is to explore afresh potential reforms to
improve the sentencing of OHS offences in Victoria.
Our project is directed at the sentencing of all offences in the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) and the associated
regulations. To that end, we have examined all sentencing outcomes from the
commencement of that Act in July
2005 through to 30 June 2021, giving us a
16-year reference period. However, while our remit is broad, our primary focus
breach of duty offences, which collectively made up 78% of all OHS
offences sentenced in that reference period. Especially, employer
breaches of
their duties to employees and the public made up 66% of all sentenced OHS
offences. Similarly, while we are exploring
the sentencing of OHS offences
committed by both individuals and companies (including public entities and
not-for-profit organisations),
we are primarily focusing on the sentencing of
companies (as opposed to individuals), which made up 83% of 1,197 OHS offenders
the reference period.
To assist with our project, we have collected quantitative and qualitative
data from multiple sources (Victorian courts, WorkSafe
Victoria, Fines Victoria
and the Australasian Legal Information Institute (AustLII)) and presented that
information in a separate
statistical report
which is published
alongside this consultation paper. That data has allowed us to examine the
number and types of OHS offences sentenced,
the scenarios leading to
prosecution, the types of sentences imposed, the success rates of sentence
appeals, and payment rates for
fines imposed in OHS cases. The data shared or
made public by those organisations has been crucial in identifying some key
for consideration, and we hope that the data will also be of use to those
who make submissions. We also undertook preliminary consultation
with dozens of
individuals and organisations to better understand the topics that we should be
exploring. Stakeholder insights have
been instrumental in framing our
understanding of the key issues.
Relevant factors in sentencing OHS cases
Sentencing in Victoria is governed by the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic). That legislation specifies five purposes of
sentencing: deterrence, rehabilitation, denunciation, protection of the
and just punishment. Victorian courts are required to balance these
five purposes in deciding an appropriate sentence in all cases,
it’s a driving offence, a homicide committed by an individual or an OHS
offence committed by a company. We are interested
in stakeholder views about
which of these purposes should usually be the most important in sentencing OHS
There are then two primary categories of factors that courts consider in
deciding an appropriate sentence: objective factors, which
are related to the
seriousness of the offending; and subjective factors, which are specific to the
We are first seeking feedback about what the most important
factors should be when courts are determining an appropriate sentence in OHS
). A matter of particular interest is whether the fact
that someone has been harmed or killed as a result of an OHS offence should
an aggravating factor in sentencing, requiring a more severe sentence
). This is an important question. While case law in Victoria
says that the fact of a death or injury in an OHS case should be of little
relevance to sentencing, our statistical findings clearly indicate that the fact
someone has died almost always significantly increases
the value of the fine
We are also interested to hear what should ordinarily be the most important
factors courts should consider in determining an appropriate
sentence, such as pleas of guilty, good corporate citizenship, prior
and remedial actions since the relevant incident or, if there was no incident,
since identification of the risk (
One factor in particular that warrants further discussion is the extent to
which the size of the company should be relevant in setting
the value of any
fine imposed, and if so, how to measure the size of a company (
Questions 5
). In order to achieve the purposes of sentencing, a fine needs to have
a ‘real sting’ to it, and arguably the only way
to achieve that
sting is for larger companies to receive larger fines.
We also heard in our preliminary consultations some scepticism about whether
companies should be entitled to mitigation based on their
character’, especially when donations seem to sometimes be made to local
charities soon after a relevant workplace
incident. We are seeking views about
the role that good character should play in determining the appropriate sentence
in an OHS case
Victims and their loved ones in OHS cases
OHS breach of duty offences occupy a relatively
unique space in criminal law. They are sometimes referred to as
‘risk-based’
offences, because the offences are constituted by
someone failing to take reasonable steps to ensure the health and safety of
person (or, sometimes, themselves). The offence occurs regardless of
whether someone is injured. The problem with not having causation
built into the
offences is that there are then barriers to victims and their loved ones
participating in subsequent criminal proceedings.
We have found OHS cases where
causation was questionable yet victim impact statements were admitted, and
conversely, cases where
causation was more apparent but victim impact statements
were refused. We are seeking views on whether there is a need to broaden
clarify when a victim impact statement should be admitted in an OHS case
We also heard from both employee and employer representatives that there is a
desire for restorative justice conferences to be made
available in OHS cases,
especially where someone has died. Restorative justice conferences would likely
run parallel to the sentencing
process, and enable a measure of healing to occur
and relationships to potentially begin to be repaired. We’d therefore want
to hear from interested persons and organisations about the potential use of
restorative justice conferences in OHS cases (
The availability of diversion in OHS cases
We are also exploring whether there are any
opportunities to increase or improve the use of court-ordered diversion in OHS
Question 10
). If a defendant acknowledges responsibility for the
alleged offending, the prosecution consents to the diversion, and the court
considers that a diversion plan would be an appropriate outcome, the court can
adjourn proceedings for up to 12 months to enable
the defendant to complete
certain conditions. The benefit of diversion to the defendant is that if they
complete those conditions
to the satisfaction of the court, then the criminal
proceedings come to an end and no finding of guilt is recorded. We heard during
preliminary consultation that this could be very appealing to the many defendant
companies that are keen to avoid a finding of guilt.
For the relevant industry
and organisation, diversion would also likely be more effective than most fines,
because the conditions
of the diversion plan could cost more than a fine (at
their current levels), while also improving safety.
Unfortunately, detailed consideration of enforceable undertakings (which
function similarly to diversion) is beyond the scope of this
Enforceable undertakings involve a defendant proposing that they do certain
things (typically projects related to improving
health and safety in both their
own organisation and in the wider industry) and WorkSafe agreeing to not proceed
with prosecution.
There have been 70 enforceable undertakings entered into since
2012 (less than 10 a year). We have been told that developing a proposed
enforceable undertaking for consideration by WorkSafe is an expensive endeavour
and therefore only truly available to larger companies,
the process can be quite
involved, and there is no guarantee that an enforceable undertaking will be
accepted. Given that enforceable
undertakings are two steps removed from
sentencing – in that the defendant is not found guilty,
decision is made by the prosecuting agency, not the courts – we have
decided that they are beyond our remit. We do, however,
summarise the
enforceable undertakings that have been entered into, as they offer very useful
illustration of the types of behavioural
conditions that could be utilised more
frequently in diversion plans, health and safety undertakings, and adjourned
undertakings.
Is there a need to change sentencing practices?
the remainder receive an adjourned undertaking (better known as a ‘good
behaviour order’), with the only optional condition usually being to make
some sort of charitable donation, which is functionally
very similar to a fine.
Under 2% of OHS offences receive another type of sentence, including diversion,
imprisonment, and community
There may, however, be good reason to consider increased use of alternative
sentencing orders in OHS cases. We heard from a number
of stakeholders that
imprisonment should be a more realistic option for individuals for a wider range
of OHS offences (
Questions 11 and 12
). And we heard that there can be
significant value in defendant companies in particular being ordered to
undertake certain works
or programs via health and safety undertakings (a
specific sentencing order available in OHS cases) and/or being made to publicise
the nature and consequences of their offending, especially in forums that will
deter others from engaging in similar conduct (
Question 13
We are also interested in better understanding the implications for companies
of having a conviction recorded in OHS cases (
Question 14
). The only two
consequences we could identify were a (possible) limitation on their ability to
engage in government work and the
perceived damage to their reputation.
Turning next to the values of fines imposed for OHS offences, this was
perhaps the most significant cause of concern in all our preliminary
consultations. For defendant companies in particular, court fines for OHS
offences should not be so low that they are just ‘the
cost of doing
business’, or cheaper than implementing appropriate remedial works. We are
therefore seeking views from stakeholders
and the broader community about
whether there is a need to increase the values of fines for OHS offences, and if
so, the best mechanisms
to achieve that increase (
Questions 15 and 16
Fine payment rates in OHS cases
One of the topics that we have specifically
investigated is the rate of payments for fines imposed in OHS cases. This is
because it is difficult to argue that fines have much punitive effect
if they are not, in fact, paid. We found that 67% of all fines
were fully paid
(263 of 392 cases sentenced in the 4.5 years to 30 June 2021), and 61% of the
total values of fines imposed in those
cases was paid ($12,982,080 of the total
$23,871,305 imposed in those 392 cases). There are then 27% of offenders who
never pay their
fines at all, amounting to over $2.3 million a year in unpaid
fines. Some of this is explained by fines imposed on companies already
their way to, liquidation (some of these may be what are often described as
‘phoenix’ companies, which involve
the same people, plant and
functions re-emerging under a new name). We are seeking views on whether there
are opportunities to improve
payment rates of fines imposed in OHS cases
Question 17
We are also asking whether there may be opportunities to improve or simplify
the process for paying fines imposed in OHS cases (
Question 18
because, at the moment, a fine can be paid in the court registry on the day, a
fine can be referred to Fines Victoria for
enforcement, or sometimes WorkSafe
can directly invoice offenders. And if fines are paid to the court registry or
Fines Victoria,
the courts may send the funds to WorkSafe directly, or WorkSafe
may send an invoice to Fines Victoria. There are also some cases
where the court
retains the role of monitoring and enforcing a fine, rather than referring the
fine to Fines Victoria. There also
seems to be alternating approaches to whether
the monies paid to Fines Victoria and the courts are sent to consolidated
are given to WorkSafe. While it is helpful for offenders to have
multiple avenues to pay their fines, there does not appear to be
any one agency
with holistic oversight of fine payment rates nor a shared understanding of the
intended destination of funds from
Other issues
Finally, it is important to note that these are the
key issues that we have identified. However, there may be other relevant issues
that we have not covered. Our final question asks if there are any other issues
arising from the sentencing of OHS offences that
you think we should consider
Question 19
Where to from here?
Upon the joint release of this consultation paper and
the associated statistical report, in February 2024, we will be launching a
survey to seek community feedback via the Engage Victoria website, and inviting
written submissions to the various questions posed
throughout this consultation
paper. We’ll also meet with stakeholders interested in the sentencing of
OHS offences (employer
and employee representatives, lawyers, judicial officers
and government departments), and hosting regional and metropolitan community
consultation events to gauge community expectations around the sentencing of OHS
offences. Once our consultation phase is finalised,
we will develop draft
recommendations for reform, test them with stakeholders, make appropriate
revisions, and then deliver a final
report with recommendations.
List of consultation questions
We will consult with a
diverse range of stakeholders on issues arising from the sentencing of OHS
offences, and any options for reform.
The questions we are asking below are
broad in scope, with different questions being relevant to different
stakeholders. In responding
to these questions, feel free to address the
questions/issues relevant to you and/or your organisation. It is not necessary
to all questions.
Chapter 2: Purposes of sentencing in OHS cases
your view, what are the most important purposes of sentencing in OHS
Chapter 3: Assessing the seriousness of breach of duty
do you believe should ordinarily be the most important factors for courts in
assessing the seriousness of an OHS offence?
the sentencing of an OHS case, should the severity of the harm caused (such as
death or serious injury) be relevant to assessing
the seriousness of the
offence? If so, to what extent?
Chapter 4: Circumstances of the offender in OHS cases
factors specific to the offender do you believe should ordinarily be most
significant in sentencing an OHS offender?
imposing a fine on a company in an OHS case, should the size of the company be
relevant? If so, why? If not, why not?
the size of a company
be relevant to the choice of fine amount to
be imposed on a company in an OHS case, what are the best measures for courts to
the size of a company, and what are the best ways for courts to be
informed about the size of the company?
sentencing a company for an OHS offence, should ‘good character’ be
relevant to determining the most appropriate sentence?
If so, what matters
should ordinarily be most relevant to assessing a company’s good
Chapter 5: The role of victims in OHS cases
there a need to broaden or clarify the circumstances in which victim impact
statements can be made in OHS cases?
restorative justice conferences be appropriate and useful in OHS cases? If so,
what features of an OHS case would make it suitable
for restorative justice
conferences?
Chapter 6: The availability of diversion in OHS cases
there be an increased use of diversion in OHS cases? If so, in which types of
Chapter 7: The available sentencing orders for OHS offences: Do
sentencing practices need to change?
there any OHS offences that do not currently attract a maximum penalty of
imprisonment, but should? If so, which offences, in
what circumstances, and what
should the maximum prison term be?
the current maximum penalty of 5 years’ imprisonment for reckless conduct
endangering serious injury in a workplace (section
increased? If so, why and to what? If not, why not?
sentencing orders other than fines (for example, community correction orders,
adjourned undertakings, health and safety undertakings,
adverse publicity
orders) be used more frequently in OHS cases?
do you believe should ordinarily be the most significant factors for courts in
deciding whether or not to record a conviction
for an OHS offence?
Chapter 8: Fine amounts for OHS offences: Do sentencing
practices need to change?
your view, is there a need to increase fine amounts for OHS offences, either
generally or in specific types of cases? If so, why,
and in which types of
cases? If not, why not?
fine amounts for OHS offences should be increased, what would be the best way to
achieve that increase?
Chapter 9: Payment of fines in OHS cases
could be some opportunities to simplify or improve the process for paying fines
imposed in OHS cases?
could be some opportunities to improve fine payment rates for OHS
Other issues
there any other issues arising from the sentencing of OHS offences that you
think we should consider?
background and approach
2018, there were over 623,000 work-related injuries and illnesses in Australia,
costing the Australian economy about $28.6 billion,
$7.15 billion of which was
in Victoria.
And in 2021, there
were 169 work-related fatalities in Australia, 34 of which were in
There are significant
human and financial costs in failing to prioritise workplace health and safety.
One of the ways we as a society
demonstrate our commitment to workplace health
and safety is by maintaining a robust regulatory system in which we monitor and
compliance with both high-level principles and specific requirements. In
turn, one of the critical features of that robust regulatory
system is the
establishment of appropriate sentencing standards and processes.
1.2 On 5 January
2024, the Victorian Government provided the Sentencing Advisory Council with
terms of reference seeking its advice
Victoria. Those terms of reference are as follows:
The Sentencing Advisory Council (the Council) is asked to review and report on
the sentencing of offences contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
and make any recommendations for reform that it considers appropriate.
In undertaking this review, the Council should:
current sentencing practices for occupational health and safety offences in
with stakeholders and the broader Victorian community in relation to any issues
associated with the sentencing of occupational
health and safety offences,
whether current sentencing practices align with community expectations,
the role of injured workers and the families of deceased workers in the
sentencing of occupational health and safety offences,
the enforcement of sentencing orders, especially court fines.
Council has been asked to deliver its final report by 31 December 2024.
Sentencing Advisory Council is an independent statutory body established in 2004
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) (‘the
’). We are undertaking this project in line with our functions,
which are set out in legislation and include providing statistical
information
on sentencing, conducting research on sentencing, consulting with stakeholders
and the community about sentencing, and
advising the Attorney-General about
sentencing matters.
Aims of the project
aims of this project are to review sentencing practices in cases involving
occupational health and safety (OHS) offences in Victoria
for the 16-year period
from July 2005 to June 2021 (the reference
identify potential
opportunities for reform and make recommendations. Consistent with the terms of
reference, our focus is the offences
contained in the most recent Victorian OHS
legislation, the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
issues raised by the sentencing of these offences are, though, part of a broader
context, including the prosecution of offending
under other related regulatory
frameworks, such as those relating to dangerous
environment
the challenges of
prosecuting defendant companies; and the role of victims in sentencing. Where
appropriate, this consultation paper
will discuss the broader context in which
these issues arise.
Phases of the project
first stage of this project was preliminary consultation. In mid-2023, we met
with stakeholders – prosecutors, defence
lawyers, judicial officers,
employer representatives, employee representatives and people affected by OHS
incidents – to identify
the key issues relating to the sentencing of OHS
offences in Victoria. The process of identifying relevant stakeholders was
there were a number of meetings where the relevant organisation or
individual suggested further stakeholders with whom we should
meet. In total, we
met with 28 organisations and individuals between June 2023 and September 2023
(see Appendix 1).
analysis occurred alongside that preliminary consultation. That analysis
involved examining court data relating to all cases
where an OHS offence was
sentenced in Victoria during the reference period, and then linking that court
data with data provided by
WorkSafe (prosecution summaries and
County Court appeal outcomes); judgments published on AustLII; and fine
payment data from WorkSafe, Fines Victoria and the courts.
1.8 Following
preliminary consultation and data analysis, we have prepared two publications:
this consultation paper and a statistical
report. The two publications are
intended to be read in tandem, with the statistical report
evidence to enable interested persons to respond to the questions raised in this
consultation paper.
1.9 The release
of these two publications represents the beginning of the next phase of our
work: consultation on key issues. Over
the next few months, we will be inviting
written submissions in response to the consultation questions outlined in
consultation paper, including through the Engage Victoria website
(the Victorian Government’s online consultation platform).
We will also be
hosting various community forums in metropolitan Melbourne, suburban Melbourne
and regional Victoria to better understand
community expectations in relation to
the sentencing of OHS offences.
1.10 Once those
consultations are complete, we will then review the various submissions and
observations made during consultation,
develop draft recommendations for reform,
test those reforms with stakeholders, make appropriate revisions as required and
then deliver
a final report with recommendations.
consultation paper contains 19 questions that seek your views on a variety of
issues relating to the sentencing of OHS offences
in Victoria. These issues have
been identified through preliminary consultation as well as a review of the case
law and research
in this area. The consultation paper initially considers the
purposes of sentencing in OHS cases (Chapter 2), how to determine the
seriousness of an OHS offence (Chapter 3) and the relevant circumstances of an
OHS offender that might be relevant to sentencing
(Chapter 4). It considers the
role of victims in OHS cases (Chapter 5) and the pre-sentence option of
diversion in OHS cases (Chapter
6). It then considers whether sentencing
practices need to change, drawing on findings from the statistical report
released alongside this consultation paper. This includes the orders
available in sentencing OHS offences (Chapter 7) as well as the
appropriate
ranges of fines imposed (Chapter 8). In considering these issues and the
questions we raise, you may find it useful to
also refer to the findings in the
statistical report.
Data used in this project
project brings together data from a number of sources and organisations
including WorkSafe Victoria, Court Services Victoria,
the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, the County Court of Victoria and Fines Victoria. The project
team also reviewed publicly
available sentencing remarks and appeal judgments in
OHS cases on AustLII, unpublished County Court sentencing remarks provided to
on a regular basis by the higher courts, and WorkSafe prosecution summaries that
are available on WorkSafe’s
The findings from that
analysis are presented in the statistical report
Existing sentencing guidance for OHS offences in
Judicial College of Victoria’s
Sentencing Manual
detailed chapter on OHS offences, including a summary of the relevant matters to
be taken into account in sentencing OHS
The Judicial College
also maintains and updates a table of case summaries for OHS matters, covering
Court of Appeal and County Court
decisions dating back to 2015 and 2016
respectively.
Past reviews of the sentencing of OHS offences
have been at least half-a-dozen reviews in the last 30 years that have
indirectly touched on, or directly focused on, the sentencing
of OHS offences,
either specifically in Victoria or more generally across Australia. These have
included the 1995 Industry
occupational health and safety;
Maxwell Review
of OHS legislation in
OHS Act 2004
the 2008 national
review of model OHS laws;
2018 Senate Inquiry into Industrial
and the 2018 Boland
Review into the operation of model OHS
findings and recommendations of those various reviews have been very consistent
as they relate to sentencing. First, fine amounts
have remained stubbornly low
and are unlikely to deter unsafe work
Second, courts
largely do not use sentencing options other than fines in OHS cases, but
Third, there would be
utility in having specialist judicial officers dealing with OHS
Fourth, maximum
penalties for OHS offences should be increased
significantly.
And fifth, that
sentencing guidelines may improve consistency in sentencing OHS offences, as
well as address the low values of
1.16 We will be
exploring many of these same issues afresh in our review. But there is a unique
challenge in doing so: if 30 years
of reviews and recommendations have not yet
achieved the changes they’ve so consistently sought, what can be done
differently
that might actually make change
of sentencing in OHS cases
2.1 This chapter
considers the purposes of sentencing in OHS cases. It includes references to the
legislative purposes that sentencing
courts appear to have been prioritising in
OHS cases for which we had sentencing remarks.
sentencing someone for criminal offending – including OHS offences –
Victorian courts are required to balance
a number of specified legislative
purposes. Courts must try and ensure the sentence:
the offender and others from committing similar offences;
the offender in a just manner;
facilitates
the rehabilitation of the offender;
the behaviour that the offender engaged in; and
the community from the
these purposes will conflict, and sometimes they will be compatible. The task of
sentencing courts is to balance these purposes
as best they
are two components to the legislative objective of deterrence. The first is the
deterrence of others who might engage in
similar behaviour to the offender
general deterrence
). The second is the deterrence of the sentenced
offender from engaging in further offending (
specific deterrence
General deterrence
principle of general deterrence reflects an intent for sentences imposed in one
case to deter other would-be offenders from
engaging in similar behaviour. The
idea that general deterrence can be achieved through sentencing has fallen into
disfavour in recent
years, for a number of reasons.
deterrence of others is only possible if the potential misbehaviour is a product
of some rational choice,
truth many crimes are not, in fact,
like the people who don’t hear the proverbial tree falling in the forest,
the people intended to experience the deterrent
effect of sentencing are rarely
aware of sentences imposed. There are almost 100,000 cases sentenced in Victoria
and even those
working in the justice system would only be aware of the smallest fraction of
these. As the then President of the
Court of Appeal said in 2009: ‘If the
community is unaware of what sentences are being imposed, general deterrence is
a fiction’.
research has consistently shown that the
of a potential
punishment has relatively little deterrent
Instead, it is the
perceived risk of getting caught that best functions as an effective deterrent
of criminal behaviour. This is,
for example, why physical guardianship (such as
the presence of a dog)
symbolic guardianship (such as a ‘beware of dog’
can be effective
deterrents against burglary and property crime. It’s also why people slow
down when they believe a speed camera
Therefore, even if the
relevant offending was the product of rational choice and the intended group of
would-be offenders were fully
aware of current sentencing practices, it may not
matter how severe the penalties are when it comes to deterring their
said, there is a second dimension to general deterrence. The High Court has
observed that if sentences imposed fail to consistently
reflect community
expectations, this can damage the perceived legitimacy of the justice system and
reduce the community’s overall
In turn, this can, for
example, lead to legislative attempts to intervene in how courts exercise
judicial discretion, undermining
independence
It can even lead to
a reduced willingness to comply with the law. So while enhancing penalties may
not directly deter criminal behaviour,
allowing them to fall (or remain) too far
below community expectations can enable misbehaviour or, at the very least, risk
undesirable
legislative intervention in the exercise of judicial
discretion.
General deterrence in OHS cases
the growing disfavour of general deterrence more broadly, companies (who make up
the majority of OHS offenders) are arguably
more susceptible to being deterred
than individuals.
Corporations
are, by their very nature, ‘closer to ... “pure reason” than
any person’.
They are more
likely than individuals to undertake a cost–benefit
carefully examining
the financial and reputational implications of their
with individuals, companies (especially large ones) are more likely to be aware
of relevant prosecutions and penalties imposed.
For instance, 63% of 233 firms
surveyed in the United States reported changing their compliance behaviour in
response to learning
Further, while very
few summary jurisdiction prosecutions result in published sentencing
WorkSafe Victoria
maintains an almost exhaustive database of finalised prosecutions on its
which numerous
stakeholders told us is accessed often by OHS representatives in various
industries.
while, even for corporations, the certainty of being prosecuted is a more
effective deterrent than the likely
the severity of the
likely penalty can nevertheless be
For example, a recent
Canadian study found that while OHS inspections have a deterrent effect in their
own right, that effect is
enhanced when the inspections are accompanied by the
imposition of on-the-spot
is perhaps because of the inherent rationality of corporate entities that
Victorian courts have unwaveringly described general
deterrence as the most
important objective in sentencing OHS
instance, in the Court of Appeal:
The cases in this Court in relation to offences under the OHSA consistently
highlight the importance of general deterrence[.]
DPP v Heavy Mechanics
[2023] VSCA 69
[G]eneral deterrence is of particular importance in offending of this kind. The
sentences imposed need to draw attention to the importance
of workplace safety,
and to send a message to employers that failure to eliminate or mitigate safety
risks will attract significant
punishment.
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
[F]or offending of this kind, general deterrence is a consideration of great
importance. We respectfully agree with the view of the
Industrial Commission of
New South Wales in Court Session, that ‘the fundamental duty of the Court
in this important area of
public concern ... [is] to ensure a level of penalty
for a breach as will compel attention to occupational health and safety issues
so that persons are not exposed to risks to their health and safety at the
workplace’.
Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 82
The object of the legislative enactment upon which the charges were based is to
provide protection to employees in the workplace.
The exposure of individuals to
risk of death or injury as they earn their living is an extremely serious
matter. Not only should
this be reflected in the penalties imposed, but the
notion that it may be more cost effective to take the chance that nothing will
happen rather than incur the expense involved in removal of the danger, must be
DPP v Amcor Packaging Pty Ltd
[2005] VSCA 219
same is true in cases in the County
[G]eneral deterrence is of real significance here. It is important to send a
message to all employers that if they fail to eliminate
or mitigate risks to
health and safety, then they should expect to be charged and receive a
significant penalty.
DPP v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
In cases involving breaches of the OHSA, general deterrence is the predominant
sentencing consideration.
DPP v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
[I]n cases where a duty has been imposed to protect the lives and wellbeing of
those who may be affected by a breach, deterrence
as a sentencing consideration
is emphasised. In effect, the penalty ... must send a strong deterrent
message to employers who place
operational considerations ahead of safety or who
are simply complacent about implementing and enforcing safety policies and
procedures.
DPP v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
Superior courts have consistently emphasised the importance of general
deterrence in cases involving breaches of occupational health
legislation.
R v Barro Group Pty Ltd
[2009] VCC 1623
when the Sentencing Council for England and Wales consulted on its draft
sentencing guideline relating to health and safety
offences, 85% of respondents
said that deterrence and punishment should be the primary objectives in
sentencing these types of offences,
because ‘it should not be cheaper to
offend than to take the appropriate
precautions’.
said, despite persistent judicial commentary on the importance of general
deterrence in OHS cases, interviews with 16 New South
Wales and Victorian
judicial officers about a decade ago suggest that they may actually be more
sceptical about their ability to
achieve that deterrence than the case law
otherwise suggests.
researchers found:
In discussing general deterrence, almost all judges were concerned
that information about OHS cases was not reaching the community,
would-be offenders lacked knowledge of how they might be dealt with by the
courts. The popular media tended not to report
OHS cases, and when they did, the
media reported aspects of the case that did not provide impetus for safety
improvements.
sentencing practices may also play a role in limiting the deterrent value of
sentencing in OHS cases. We heard from numerous
stakeholders during preliminary
consultation that there are businesses, especially larger businesses, that
currently view potential
fines for OHS offences as ‘the cost of doing
business’, especially as businesses know the likely size of the fine that
could be imposed (based on current sentencing practices). The literature and
case law are rife with this same concern, that criminal
penalties may fail to
have any deterrent effect if they are low enough to be absorbed as ‘the
cost of doing
2.17 In effect,
general deterrence is the primary objective that both the community and judicial
officers want prioritised in the
sentencing of OHS offences. But there is also
good reason to be sceptical about just how achievable general deterrence is when
OHS offences, especially so long as fine amounts remain low enough to
be perceived as the cost of doing business.
Specific deterrence
trying to achieve specific deterrence, courts are trying to deter the defendant
from further offending. The most significant consideration
in deciding how much
weight should be afforded to specific deterrence in the sentencing exercise will
usually be the offender’s
Consistent with this,
courts in OHS cases tend to discuss the relevance of specific deterrence by
reference to the past OHS record
of the defendant. They do, though, also often
discuss the actions that the defendant had taken since the relevant incident or
identification.
most OHS cases in the higher courts, specific deterrence had ‘only a
modest role’ to play because the defendant had
a good prior safety
had actively taken
remedial steps in the intervening period since the
incident/risk,
For instance, in
Fergusson & Anor
, the court said:
In view of the salutary experience of this tragic accident, your lack of prior
convictions or subsequent matters, and the steps you
have taken to reduce risk
in the workplace, I need only place minimal weight on specific
deterrence.
Conversely,
there were some cases where courts considered that specific deterrence deserved
more weight because the defendant did
have relevant prior convictions. For
instance, in
DPP v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
, the court said that while the
company had ‘taken significant steps to improve its occupational health
and safety regimes since
these offences’, specific deterrence remained
relevant because of three past OHS
convictions.
The same was true
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
, where the court considered it
appropriate to ‘emphasise’ and ‘attach fairly significant
weight to’ specific
deterrence due to the various prior OHS convictions of
the company.
Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
, the Court of Appeal said that although
‘profound’ changes had been made since the workplace fatality in
that case –
including the company tripling the size of its OHS team,
implementing new processes and allocating a new OHS budget of $8 million
‘specific deterrence still had a role to play ... [given] the
company’s two prior convictions for breaches of
occupational health and
safety law’.
2.21 The size of
the company will also be a relevant consideration in determining the extent to
which specific deterrence is required,
because larger companies will invariably
be prone to a higher likelihood of risks, even if they have a commitment to
positive OHS
practices. As the court acknowledged in
DPP v Hungry Jacks &
Each of the defendant companies admitted their prior criminal records. However
... each of the defendant companies are large national
companies and as such, in
my view the prior offending must be viewed in the context of the size of the
company ... All three companies
have established health and safety systems and
although the risk in this instance was foreseeable, it is not an example of a
disregard to the safety of persons other than employees. Thus, in my
opinion, specific deterrence while relevant, carries less
is then a question about the relevance of specific deterrence in the context of
companies that no longer exist or are in the
process of being wound up. In
DPP v Specialised Concrete Pumping Victoria Pty Ltd
, the sentencing court
said that the fact that the company had gone into voluntary administration and
ceased trading meant ‘specific
deterrence has little or no part to play in
the sentencing exercise’.
Similarly, in
DPP v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
, the court said that because
a company had been wound up, ‘there is no risk that this Company will
reoffend and there is
for the sentence to really reflect specific
deterrence’.
v Eliott Engineering Pty Ltd
, the court said that the company’s prior
offending – ‘the company had only been before the Magistrates Court
than a year prior to this event’ – meant that despite having
been wound up, ‘specific deterrence is a relevant
consideration’.
conundrum about specific deterrence in OHS cases involving companies that have
been wound up was discussed in detail in
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty
Now I am told that liquidation is virtually certain and that this should reduce
the weight to be given to specific deterrence. I
am not so sure about that.
There is something of a fiction in seeking to deter a company. I suppose in
reality one is seeking to
deter those responsible for the running of the company
... I cannot know for certain if the company will cease to exist, but even
does the directors will continue on in life as individuals. Will they operate in
this area again? Will there be a corporate
structure again? Whether there is or
not, will they employ others? Will they manage or have any control over
workplaces? The potential
liquidation ... does not permit me to ignore the need
to deter specifically. I still believe some weight must be given to specific
deterrence given the gravity of this
2.23 Finally,
there were also two cases where it was not the offender’s prior or
subsequent OHS record that elevated the importance
of specific deterrence.
Instead, in
DPP v Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd
, the court said that specific
deterrence was important because of the defendant’s conduct
the proceedings, including a late plea of guilty and limited evidence of
Dotmar has no prior history of this type of offending and has taken steps to
ensure that safety measures are improved at the Dingley
premises. Despite that,
I consider specific deterrence needs to be given some weight in sentence. The
background to these offences,
the conduct of the committal proceeding and the
late plea of guilty, together with the matters set out in the Defence Reply and
submissions, lead me to conclude that the company has limited remorse and
that a sentence is required which serves to deter it from
future complacency or
inactivity in respect of employee safety
Just punishment
referred to as ‘just deserts’, the sentencing purpose of just
punishment requires courts to ensure the sentences
imposed ‘reflect the
community’s expectation that the offender will suffer punishment’;
this is because if sentencing
outcomes are perceived as unfairly lenient, then
‘public confidence in the courts to do justice would be likely to be
It is often via
this sentencing purpose that community expectations have a critical role to play
in sentencing. As society evolves,
so too do expectations around what
constitutes just punishment for certain types of offences, such as family
the context of OHS cases, courts appear to have often acknowledged that
‘just punishment [is] an
appropriate’,
significant’,
consideration, and that employers who place employees’ safety at risk
‘should know that they will be met with strong
punishment’,
punishment which is just in all of the
circumstances’.
v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
the Court of Appeal wrote
The sentences imposed need to draw attention to the importance of workplace
safety, and to send a message to employers that failure
to eliminate or mitigate
safety risks will attract significant
punishment.
2.26 In that
context, just punishment can be seen as important to maintaining community
confidence in the justice system, by ensuring
sentencing standards align with
community expectations.
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation
tends to play a less significant role in OHS cases. In the context of a
defendant company, rehabilitation has at times
been described as an
‘effectively meaningless’
proposition.
Indeed, the Law
Commission for England and Wales has actively recommended against rehabilitation
as a guiding purpose in sentencing
said, Victorian courts have often considered the offender’s prospects of
rehabilitation in OHS cases, especially the steps
taken since their offending to
remedy their OHS deficiencies and prevent future
Conversely,
an offender’s perceived prospects of rehabilitation have been considered
more limited if there was evidence of further
enforcement action by
Denunciation
2.30 Justice
Kirby of the High Court once described denunciation as follows:
A fundamental purpose of the criminal law, and of the sentencing of convicted
offenders, is to denounce publicly the unlawful conduct
of an offender. This
objective requires that a sentence should also communicate society’s
condemnation of the particular offender’s
conduct. The sentence represents
‘a symbolic, collective statement that the offender’s conduct should
be punished for
encroaching on our society’s basic code of values as
enshrined without our substantive criminal
Denunciation
is thus a somewhat communicative and symbolic purpose of sentencing, directed at
ensuring the process and language of
sentencing condemn the
But there is also a
substantive component to denunciation. As the court noted in
DPP v Resource
Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
, it also encourages the court to ensure the
sentence imposed is proportionate to the offending, because (in the context of
OHS offences)
‘[t]he penalty must reflect the denunciation of a civilised
and affluent society such as ours for such cavalier disregard for
courts made express note of denunciation in OHS cases, it tended to be mostly in
even if the court
described denunciation as ‘highly
significant’.
instance, in
DPP v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
, the court simply
noted that ‘[t]he sentence imposed must reflect denunciation of the [OHS]
the court said, ‘the sentence must properly denunciate
the offending’.
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
the court said, ‘I must
also denounce the company’s conduct and I
2.33 There were
no cases that elucidated precisely how denunciation affected the sentence
Protection of the community
Historically,
the sentencing purpose of protecting the community has been interpreted as
primarily meaning ‘incapacitation of
the offender for an appropriate
period’ (i.e.
imprisonment).
More recently, it
is increasingly accepted that one of the primary ways in which the community is
protected from further offending
is by rehabilitating the offender, thereby
reducing their risk of
recidivism.
the context of OHS offending, then, the community is often best protected when
the sentence imposed promotes improved safety practices
by the sentenced
offender. Community protection was the least discussed sentencing purpose in OHS
cases, likely because it is primarily
achieved through the objective of
rehabilitation, which itself was rarely relevant. For instance, in
Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
the court said that there was a
reduced need for community protection because the company had a good OHS record
and had ‘tak[en]
the matter very seriously’ since the incident that
prompted the
prosecution.
So why do we prosecute and sentence OHS offences?
2.36 Health
and safety in Victoria is governed by a complex regulatory system. For the most
part, employers and others are expected
to self-manage their own health and
safety standards and practices. There are numerous opportunities for employers
and others to
receive guidance and participate in collaborative and educative
processes to improve those standards and practices. In order to maintain
compliance with mandatory standards, there is a system of monitoring through
routine inspections. And in order to legitimise those
standards, there are
enforcement processes in place: prosecution and punishment. This is effectively
what has been described as ‘compliance-oriented
regulation’, which
the Australian Law Reform Commission has summarised as involving three key
and encouragement to voluntarily comply, nurturing the ability for private
actors to secure compliance through self-regulation,
internal management systems
and market mechanisms;
(and targeted) monitoring for non-compliance; and
necessary, enforcement in the event of
non-compliance.
this context, the role of sentencing in OHS cases is arguably to contribute to
the ongoing legitimacy of the system within which
workplace health and safety
practices are maintained. As Braithwaite and Grabosky argued in 1985, the
majority of companies are likely
to comply with their obligations, but only
‘if the threat of punishing the incorrigible 5 per cent is
convincing’.
Furthermore,
as noted above with respect to specific deterrence, for some offenders the
experience of prosecution itself, with a sentencing
date in view, can be a
powerful catalyst for profound change in approaches to safety. As just one
example, the prosecution of one
company led to a ‘concentrated
effort’ to improve its systems over the course of the three years between
the offending
and sentence, leading to a self-reported 50% reduction in the
frequency rates of recordable injuries and high-potential
Similarly, another
company showed significant improvement in its safety practices in the three
years between the offending and sentence,
resulting in its time-lost-to-injury
rates, WorkCover claims and insurance premium rates decreasing to around
‘one-third of
the industry
2.39 Notwithstanding,
the review of case law and evidence in this chapter suggests that (a) specific
deterrence often isn’t
particularly relevant because most companies
implement proper safety measures in response to incidents and do not reoffend,
(b) rehabilitation
and community protection are not common objectives in OHS
cases and (c) general deterrence, as it is often understood, may not be
easily achievable as the case law suggests. Instead, in a regulatory system
governed primarily through a self-management approach,
it may actually be
denunciation and just punishment that rise to the fore as the most justifiable
objectives in sentencing OHS offences.
This is because compliance depends on the
system as a whole being perceived as legitimate, thereby requiring sentencing
to have a high level of alignment with community expectations.
Further, given that the OHS regulatory system is more about fostering
health and safety practices than about ‘deterring’
conduct, appropriate penalties may be best understood as a means of
‘encouraging’ compliance.
Sentencing purposes in OHS cases
Question 1:
In your view, what are the most
important purposes of sentencing in OHS cases?
the seriousness of breach of duty offences
courts in Victoria are required to consider ‘the nature and gravity’
of an offence in deciding the most appropriate
This chapter considers
how courts evaluate the seriousness of an OHS offence, focusing especially on
breach of duty offences.
our review of sentencing remarks, we found that courts often assess the
seriousness of a breach of duty offence by reference to
two key factors: the
extent of an offender’s departure from their obligations and the level of
risk created by that departure.
In turn, assessing the level of risk requires a
court to consider the likelihood of an incident occurring and the seriousness of
the potential consequences of such an
of duties under the
are ‘risk-based’ offences,
meaning those offences criminalise failures to eliminate or reduce
to health and safety.
causing of actual harm through such failures is not an element of the offence.
This means that prosecutors do not have to establish
that the breach of duty
harm to a person and, in turn, sentencing courts have usually
focused on the breach itself, not its consequences.
Extent of departure from duty
considering how far the offender has fallen short of compliance with their duty,
courts sometimes assess the level of disregard
– for the safety of
employees and other people – demonstrated by the
This assessment can
be informed by factors such as:
what the person
knew, or ought to reasonably have known, about the hazard or risk, and any ways
of eliminating or reducing the risk;
the availability
and suitability of ways to eliminate or reduce the risk; and
cost of eliminating or reducing the
3.5 In some
cases, courts refer to whether the offender ‘treated the legislation in a
cavalier manner’ and simply hoped
for incidents not to occur, but
otherwise left the issue to chance.
assessment of objective seriousness has sometimes been determined by reference
to section 20(2) of the
, which provides five factors that must be
considered when determining what are ‘reasonably practicable’ steps
Level and likelihood of the risk
level of risk created by the offender’s breach is informed by matters such
as the number of persons exposed to the
and the extent to which the
risk of injury was foreseeable.
It will be an especially aggravating factor if the offender actually foresaw the
risk and did not implement adequate measures to
eliminate or reduce it (such as
after receiving an improvement or prohibition notice from WorkSafe).
The relevance of death or injury
that breaches of duties in the
are risk-based offences, the fact
that a risk results in actual harm (such as an injury or death) is not an
element of the offence.
Because of this, the current approach to sentencing
these offences is such that the fact that a risk did
cause harm does
not necessarily reduce the seriousness of the
and conversely, the
fact that a risk
cause harm does not necessarily increase the
seriousness of the offence. Instead, the fact that the breach in the particular
resulted in death ‘is relevant only in the sense that it might
manifest or demonstrate the degree of seriousness of the relevant
health or safety resulting from the
3.9 That said,
our findings in the statistical report
clearly highlight that the fact
that someone died as a result of an OHS offence tends to lead to quite stark
increases in the values
of fines imposed. There is therefore a clear
inconsistency in the sentencing of OHS offences: the case law seems to suggest
the fact that an OHS offence resulted in a death should play only a very
small role in the sentencing exercise, but sentencing practices
in both the
higher courts and the Magistrates’ Court make patently clear that the fact
of death is a very significant factor,
both in the choice of jurisdiction and in
the fine amount imposed. This inconsistency should be rectified.
3.10 As these
are risk-based offences for which the causing of harm is not an element, it may
be possible to reconcile the law and
practice by having death or injury
acknowledged in the sentencing phase of criminal proceedings. We are interested
in hearing from
stakeholders and the community as to whether courts in OHS cases
should more expressly be allowed to take into account the fact that
a risk-based
offence resulted in someone being injured or killed (so long as causation is
established).
New South Wales, for example, courts in OHS cases have found that the causing of
actual harm is an aggravating
In Western Australia,
the fact that an OHS offence caused death or injury increases the maximum fine
for the offence.
The same is
true in Scotland. In
HMA v Broomhall Ltd
, a case where an employee was
severely injured by a forklift, a
Scottish Sheriff Court said,
‘that there was a life-changing injury to an employee must weigh heavily
with the court –
although that is not a dominant feature for
sentencing’.
England and Wales, the sentencing guideline for health and safety offences
requires courts to consider whether an OHS offence
was a significant cause of
actual harm, and enhance the sentence imposed if it
Soon after that
sentencing guideline came into effect, the Court of Appeal said that:
a consistent feature of sentencing policy in recent years, reflected both in
statute and judgments of this court, has been to treat
the fact of death as
something that substantially increases a sentence, as required by the second
stage of the assessment of harm
at step one. Without more, we consider that the
fact of death would justify a move not only into the next category but to the
of the next category range[.]
Accordingly, the court found that the fact of a death raised the
sentencing range from £140,000 to around
3.12 In England
and Wales, there is recognition that, while OHS offences are risk-based
offences, the fact that harm occurred as a
result of that risk is nevertheless
relevant to sentencing. As Lord Justice Treacy said in discussing the
introduction of a sentencing
guideline for OHS offences:
Health and safety offences differ from many others as the offence is in creating
the risk of harm; harm does not need to have occurred
in order for an offence to
have been committed. The approach to assessing harm therefore needs to guide
sentencers in assessing the
likelihood of harm occurring – high, medium or
low – and then providing a mechanism to move up to a higher category or
substantially move within the category range if actual harm has
3.13 Accordingly,
the sentencing guideline for OHS offences in England and Wales provides that the
level of actual harm caused by
an offence informs the court as to whether to
move up in a category or harm range:
For ... reasons of principle and practicality, the Council has concluded that
the risk posed by the offender’s breach must
be considered foremost in
assessing harm. However, the Council still considers that the harm actually
caused by the offence is
to assessing seriousness for the
purposes of sentencing. Not only is this recognised in legislation but the
Council believes it is
important to recognise any harm suffered by victims as a
fundamental aspect of the seriousness of an offence. This is necessary to
reflect the impact that has been caused to victims of
Factors relevant to assessing seriousness
: What do you believe should
ordinarily be the most important factors for courts in assessing the seriousness
of an OHS offence?
The relevance of death or injury
: In the sentencing of an OHS case,
should the severity of the harm caused (such as death or serious injury) be
relevant to assessing
the seriousness of the offence? If so, to what extent?
Circumstances
of the offender in OHS cases
4.1 This chapter
discusses the circumstances specific to offenders (especially companies) that
are relevant to sentencing OHS offences.
These include the size of the company
and its financial circumstances, the good character of the offender, the
offender’s plea,
their criminal history and safety record, and their
post-offence conduct.
4.2 While we
discuss these topics in detail below, we would also be interested to hear about
which factors, in general, should ordinarily
be most relevant to sentencing an
OHS offender.
Factors specific to the offender
: What factors specific to the
offender do you believe should ordinarily be most significant in sentencing an
OHS offender?
The size of the company
sentencing an offender to a fine (for any type of offending), courts are
required by
Sentencing Act
to ‘take into account,
as far as practicable, the financial circumstances of the offender and the
nature of the burden that
its payment will impose’ in deciding ‘the
amount and method of payment of the
This requirement
exists in every Australian jurisdiction; courts must consider a
defendant’s financial circumstances before
although courts can
still fine someone if they can’t ascertain the person’s or
company’s financial
circumstances.
the available OHS cases, courts seem to have often taken into account each
company’s (and
) financial
circumstances,
so long as the
court was advised of such by the
Sometimes the
assessment of financial circumstances appears to have been relatively
straightforward. For instance, in
DPP v Mainline Developments Pty Ltd
the court ‘was simply told that in light of the company’s ongoing
work any fine I impose will be
In contrast, in
other cases the examination of the company’s financial circumstances was
more involved:
part of the defendant company’s outline of submissions ... were profit and
loss statements for the financial years 2014 through
to 2018, as well as a
profit and loss estimate for the financial year 2018/19. Over the years, the
company’s profit margin
has ranged from 3.3 per cent to 5.6 per cent ...
The consequent loss of work as a result of the cancellation of this contract,
significant strain upon the defendant company. Despite the financial
difficulties, the defendant company is still trading and ...
has no intention of
winding up.
highlighted in
DPP v De Kort
, the assessment of a company’s
financial circumstances can be especially difficult when it exists within a
complex corporate
I was provided in evidence with the balance sheet of the trust ... It shows the
trust has net assets of only $8,935.00 ... The balance
sheet does not ...
attempt to value the business of the company. The document which reports the tax
profit for the years 2016 to
2018 shows that profits per year on average exceed
around $200,000 ... One expense not shown is rent. I was told the facility where
De Kort operates the academy is owned by another company to which De Kort pays
rent. That is a related company to De Kort sharing
common shareholders and
directors. I do not know what the financial arrangements are between De Kort and
the company that owns the
land. I have concluded that ... De Kort is a
successful business capable of making appropriate arrangements to pay a
one case, rather than referring directly to the financial position of the
company, the court instead referred to the size of the
company, as measured by
the number of employees. For example, in
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
the court ‘factor[ed] in the defendant company’s size ... and the
number of Australian employees, being 15,194’,
before imposing a $1
million fine.
did, though, find numerous cases where there was no apparent evidence of –
or at least no discussion in the sentencing remarks
company’s financial circumstances or
It seems that courts
tend to interpret this as meaning that the company has capacity to pay whatever
fine is imposed.
4.8 But if a
company’s financial circumstances are known, what role should they play in
the sentencing exercise? It seems that
they have played a varied role.
the company is small and still functioning, or struggling financially, the
crippling effect of a substantial fine can mitigate
the sentence imposed. In
DPP v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
, the court said that it would reduce the fine to
a value that ‘would [not] force the company into liquidation’, in
to ensure the company could pay the
DPP v United
Access Pty Ltd
, the court said, ‘the aggregate fine I will impose on
this small family company will be much harder felt than if it were applied
bigger company or indeed a multinational such as “Hungry
Arthur’s Seat Scenic Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
, the Court of
Appeal reduced a $110,000 fine to $60,000 in part because the financial
information showed that the company had ‘suffered
substantial operating
losses’, to the point where ‘the chairlift is still
Tonto & Anor v The Queen
, the Court of Appeal reduced $480,000 in fines
imposed on ‘a modestly sized business’ and its sole director to
largely because ‘it is he who will suffer the financial penalty
imposed when the two fines are combined ... [because he] proposes
whatever fines are imposed, and continue to run his business ... [and not]
recommence trading through a phoenix
have, though, also said that even if a fine will have a ‘devastating
effect’ on a company and force it into liquidation,
that should not trump
the ‘paramount purpose’ of ‘general
deterrence’.
are, then, circumstances in which the company has already gone into liquidation.
In those cases, courts will often prioritise
general deterrence even more and
not reduce the fine despite the company’s inability to pay, because the
size of the fine is
thought to serve a primarily denunciatory and deterrent
For instance, in
v Kenneally & Anor
, the court said that the company’s:
lack of financial viability is not the primary consideration in determining the
level of the fine. General deterrence must ... be
given significant weight. The
message must be clear and consistent that breaches of this legislation placing
workers at risk will
not be tolerated and significant penalties will
contrast to these scenarios, though, where fines can be reduced in response to
the corporation’s financial circumstances,
rarely do courts
the fine imposed when the OHS offence was committed by a very large
organisation. For instance, in the 2018 case of
DPP v Hungry Jacks &
, the court imposed a $275,000 fine for an OHS breach that resulted in a
death. This is on par with fines imposed in similar cases
involving much smaller
companies, despite Hungry Jack’s having (at the time) an annual revenue in
excess of $1 billion and
eight-figure profit
Similarly, a company
with an annual turnover of $160 million in 2009–10 was sentenced to a
$500,000 fine (after a successful
DPP sentence appeal) in a case where ‘an
extremely dangerous work practice’ had led to an employee’s
4.13 Our finding
that there has been a compression of fine amounts in OHS cases, regardless of
the size of the company, is similar
to what the Sentencing Council in England
and Wales found in 2015. As Lord Justice Treacy explained at the time:
[T]he Council reviewed a sample of offences which all caused death and were
broadly comparable in terms of culpability. A micro company,
with a turnover of
around £1 million, was fined £50,000 following an early guilty plea
– the fine being five per
cent of its turnover. Whereas a very large
company, with turnover in the region of £900 million, was fined
£300,000 after
trial for a similar offence – the fine being just 0.03
per cent of its turnover. There was an unacceptable degree of compression
sentencing range.
The approach in England and Wales
Sentencing Council for England and Wales publishes a variety of sentencing
to assist courts
achieve consistency in sentencing. Those guidelines tend to set out the process
for deciding an appropriate sentence
for a particular offence, a comprehensive
and non-exhaustive list of relevant considerations, and sentencing ranges based
considerations.
While courts
are required to consider relevant sentencing guidelines, those guidelines are
not binding, and courts can move outside
the specified sentencing ranges if it
would be appropriate to do so. One of the many sentencing guidelines that the
Sentencing Council
has published covers how to sentence health and safety
offences, among other
are three criteria that the sentencing guideline uses to triangulate a suggested
sentencing range for OHS offending. First is
culpability
offender, based largely on how far below the requisite safety standard the
behaviour fell. Second is the level of
caused, with the most severe
category of harm being ‘level A harm’ (which includes death and
debilitating injury). And
third is the organisation’s annual
or equivalent
financial information. A number of sentencing guidelines offer the following
statement of principle, which was recently endorsed
by the Law Commission for
England and Wales: ‘[w]hen sentencing organisations the fine must be
sufficiently substantial to
have a real economic
illustrate these criteria, assume a company has committed an OHS offence that
resulted in a death, and its behaviour ‘fell
far short of the appropriate
standard’. This would mean that the company has exhibited high culpability
and caused level A
harm. Below are the initial category ranges courts would be
required to consider based on the annual turnover or equivalent of the
Micro (not more than £2
£150,000–£450,000
Small (between £2 million and £10
£300,000–£1,600,000
Medium (between £10 million and £50
£1,000,000–£4,000,000
Large (£50 million or
£2,600,000–£10,000,000
values of fines imposed on micro and large companies can therefore differ by a
factor of 20 or more, based solely on the size
of the company. The guideline
also acknowledges that there may even be ‘very large organisations’
(for example, large
multinationals), whose turnover or equivalent so very
greatly exceeds the threshold for large organisations that ‘it may be
necessary to move outside the suggested range to achieve a proportionate
again, courts retain discretion whether to do so in such
approach in England and Wales stands in stark contrast to the present approach
in Victoria. In England and Wales, the financial
position of the organisation is
a major contributing factor to the initial decision about the fine amount to be
imposed. This is
to ensure the fine is experienced similarly by each defendant
company and to account for the vastly different sizes of companies.
In Victoria,
fines in OHS cases involving a fatality were quite consistently between about
$200,000 and $400,000,
regardless of the size of the company.
Judicial College notes in the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
The amount of the fine must be sufficient to both punish the offender and deter
those who may consider committing similar offences.
It cannot be so low that it
becomes merely a tax on the illegal conduct. In order to be sufficiently
punitive and deterrent, the
fine must ‘have some real sting in it’
from the point of view of the
4.20 Similarly,
the County Court said in
DPP v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
in the specific context of OHS offences:
It is little deterrent or punishment if a fine is calculated so as to allow a
company to absorb it as just another cost of doing
may be worth considering whether this approach should be more expressly endorsed
in Victoria. The size of the company is arguably
most important
factor in the sentencing guideline for OHS offences in England and
it is a mandatory
consideration in the
and it is viewed as
one of the most important factors for consideration in sentencing corporations
more generally.
And while it
could be argued that different fine amounts for the same type of offending
undermine consistency in sentencing, it could
equally be said that ensuring the
size of the fine is proportionate to the size of the company would promote such
consistency.
Ascertaining an offender’s financial circumstances
the financial circumstances of an offender are to play a greater role in
sentencing for OHS offences, it is necessary to consider
how courts should be
apprised of each offender’s financial situation.
to the England and Wales sentencing guideline, courts can expect to be provided
with ‘comprehensive [financial] accounts
for the last three years, to
enable the court to make an accurate assessment of [the company’s]
financial status’.
those accounts are not forthcoming, ‘the court will be entitled to draw
reasonable inferences ... which may include ...
that the offender can pay any
Victoria, there are a number of potential options to facilitate providing courts
with detailed financial information about corporate
offenders. One option could
be to follow the approach in New South Wales, where legal representatives are
required to present an
affidavit to the court about their client’s
financial circumstances. Legislation could potentially require the provision of
that information in advance of any sentencing hearing. Another option could be
the introduction of a practice direction or similar
obligation requiring such
information to be provided to courts. While practice directions are not legally
binding, failing to comply
with a practice direction can result in the court
exercising its ‘case management and costs
Financial circumstances of the offender
: When imposing a fine on a company
in an OHS case, should the size of the company be relevant? If so, why? If not,
: If the size of a company should be relevant to the choice
of fine amount to be imposed on a company in an OHS case, what are the
measures for courts to assess the size of a company, and what are the best ways
for courts to be informed about the size of
the company?
Good character
nature of an offender’s character is often raised as a relevant factor in
sentencing, allowing a court to determine, on
a broader level, the nature of the
offender and their role in society. For individuals, this is often elucidated
through character
references. For corporations, good character has been inferred
from good corporate
citizenship,
and a previously
positive OHS
Good character of company directors
seems to be a level of inconsistency in how courts are taking into account
good character is relevant to sentencing a
company. In
DPP v Bilic Homes Pty Ltd
, the court took into account that
the company director ‘has been a good citizen’, in addition to and
separately from
the ‘company ha[ving] been a good corporate
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
, when assessing whether the
company was a good corporate citizen, the court took into account character
references tendered on behalf
of the sole director demonstrating his ‘good
character’ and personal
DPP v Saloon Park Pty Ltd
, the court said that character references
regarding the sole director of a company were ‘less’ relevant to the
task than those relating to the
Keilor-Melton Quarries Pty Ltd
, the court said that the directors were
‘people of impeccable good character’, but this was only taken into
a ‘very limited
Good character of companies
: In sentencing a company for an
OHS offence, should ‘good character’ be relevant to determining the
most appropriate
sentence? If so, what matters should ordinarily be most
relevant to assessing a company’s good character?
Guilty pleas and remorse
who plead guilty are entitled to a discount in their sentence. Through their
plea of guilty, they save the community the
expense of a trial and also spare
any witnesses and victims the need to testify at trial. To incentivise
defendants to plead guilty
when appropriate, courts in Victoria are required to
specify the sentence that would have otherwise been imposed had the defendant
not pleaded guilty. This has been in place since 1 July
The Attorney-General at
the time outlined the rationale for requiring courts to specify the extent of
guilty plea discounts:
Because the court does not normally identify the amount of any discount, the
extent to which a plea of guilty changed the sentence
that would otherwise have
been imposed is often not clear. This lack of transparency can reduce the
confidence of the victim and
the community in the sentencing process and can
fuel scepticism among defendants about whether an early plea of guilty will make
any difference to the sentence imposed on
requirement for courts to specify the discount that they applied makes it
possible to examine the level of discounts that companies
received for pleading
guilty in OHS cases.
July 2008, 43 companies sentenced in the higher courts for OHS offences have
received a discount in fine amounts after pleading
guilty, and the court has
specified the discount it applied due to that plea of
one case, there was no difference in the fine amounts that the court would have
imposed without a plea of guilty, but this was
because the court indicated that
it would have recorded a conviction had the defendant company not pleaded
the remaining 42 cases, the discount in fine amounts ranged from 12.5% to 50.0%,
with a median of 29.3%.
42 cases is a small sample size, these findings are very consistent with the
proportional discounts that people usually receive
in their prison sentences for
pleading guilty. We have previously found that the majority of discounts in
prison sentences (71.7%)
are between 20% and less than
and in the 42 OHS cases,
the majority of discounts in fine amounts (69.0%) were also between 20% and less
4.32 The 50%
discount was in a case involving an employee who fell from an improperly secured
ladder that had moved against an unlocked,
untagged lever, resulting in the
release of hot tallow (animal fat) that caused burns to the employee’s
body. The court in
that case said that it reduced the fine from $80,000 to
$40,000 because:
[t]he company has pleaded guilty to the charge and, whilst it did not do so at
the earliest possible opportunity, there having been
a contested committal
hearing, it is nonetheless entitled to a reduction in sentence. The plea of
guilty has saved the time and costs
of a trial. I also treat the plea of guilty
as evidence of remorse.
the case with the second highest discount (45.7%, from $700,000 down to
$380,000), the court said that the defendant company had
pleaded guilty
‘at the earliest opportunity’, its plea was ‘consistent with
remorse’ and that it had ‘a
plausible avenue of defence’ that
it did not pursue.
third highest discount (44.4%, from $450,000 down to $250,000) was in a case
where ‘the defendant was fully co-operative
with investigators and pleaded
guilty at the committal mention stage, which was an early stage to do so’
and the plea of guilty
‘is indicative of remorse and a willingness to take
responsibility’.
seems, then, that in addition to the timing of the plea and saving the justice
system and witnesses the ordeal of a trial, plea
discounts are highest when the
court views the plea of guilty – coupled with other factors – as a
genuine demonstration
of remorse.
smallest proportional discount (12.5%, from $200,000 to $175,000) was in a case
involving a forklift hitting and killing a man
because neither the forklift
driver nor the deceased could see each
The court indicated
that the company was entitled to the benefit of its plea of guilty, having
offered to plead to the most serious
aspect of the alleged offending at an early
opportunity. The next smallest proportional discount (13.3%, from $300,000 to
was in a case where a maintenance contractor had been
The court in that
case offered a detailed rationale for the limited discount applied:
I take into account that the company has pleaded guilty to this charge and is
entitled to some leniency in its sentence for doing
so. It does not attract as
much leniency as an early plea would have done. This plea of guilty was entered
on the second morning
of the refixed trial when empanelment of a jury was
scheduled to commence ... there had been a contested committal at which
suggestions
had been made that [the deceased] intended his own death. There has
been two days of pre-trial argument ... as part of which the
company alleged
that a WorkSafe inspector had used improper means to obtain some evidence ...
[there were] objection[s] to victim
impact statements being received ... [all of
which] greatly diluted what remorse might have been inferred from the fact of
of guilty ... the reduction in this case should be lower than it would
have been had it occurred much earlier and had there been
a more empathetic
attitude to which legal points to take, more reflective of
The offender’s history before the offending
offender’s safety record can be relevant to their moral culpability as
well as to the need for specific deterrence. A safety
record can include prior
convictions for OHS offences but also a broader consideration of the scale of
the offender’s operations
and the number of incidents that have arisen
over the offender’s
This is sometimes
expressed in terms of the number of work hours performed in the offender’s
workplaces.
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd,
the court noted that the company
had been in operation for 26 years with an ‘unblemished safety
court observed, was in contrast to cases where the company is aware of a risk
through previous ‘near misses’
or convictions and fails to act,
demonstrating that the company had not ‘wilfully disregarded the risk
[that was] the subject
accepted that the company’s exemplary safety record reduced the need for
specific deterrence as a sentencing
consideration.
safety record was observed in
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
, where the
court noted that the company’s 20 years of operation without conviction
demonstrated an ‘excellent safety
contrast, the court has emphasised the importance of specific deterrence as a
sentencing consideration where the offender has prior
convictions for similar
offending against the
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
the court said that the company’s prior convictions carried significant
weight in determining the relevance of specific deterrence
to the sentence
the court has also recognised the need to view prior offences against the
in the context of the size and nature of the
DPP v Roads
Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor,
the second defendant company,
Downer EDI, had three prior convictions in different jurisdictions for OHS
However, the court
found that the prior convictions, although relevant, did not hold significant
weight in determining culpability
when framed in the context of Downer’s
size and the type of activities it
undertakes.
The court took a
similar approach in
DPP v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[E]ach of the defendant companies are large national companies and as such, in
my view the prior offending must be viewed in the
context of the size of the
company, the number of employees and its general exposure to risk as a result.
All three companies have
established health and safety systems and although the
risk in this instance was foreseeable, it is not an example of a serious
to the safety of persons other than employees. Thus, in my opinion,
specific deterrence while relevant, carries less weight in the
discretion in this case[.]
Prior convictions and enforcement action
the previous
, it was possible for courts to impose
enhanced penalties on offenders found guilty of subsequent OHS offences if they
had previously
been found guilty of similar
This option was
removed in the 2004
. There was some criticism about this change
at the time, suggesting that it meant that it was ‘no longer possible to
account the historical record of occupational health and safety
compliance’ as relevant to
sentencing.
Far from that
being the case though, as the case law shows, a company or person’s
relevant prior history remains a critical
consideration required by the
Sentencing Act
in turn informs the need for the court to prioritise specific deterrence or the
court’s assessment of the offender’s
prospects of
rehabilitation.
convictions for OHS offences heighten the importance of specific deterrence,
which in turn tends towards a more severe sentence.
Prior enforcement action
taken by WorkSafe in the way of notices, including improvement and prohibition
notices, is sometimes advanced
by prosecutors to evidence the defendant’s
safety record. Such notices are, though, treated with more caution than prior
convictions.
The offender’s conduct after the offending
addition to the offender’s conduct before the offending, their conduct
the offending – including the level of cooperation with the
investigation, the steps taken to care for injured workers and
their loved ones,
the initiative shown to improve safety standards and any subsequent offending
– is all relevant to sentencing.
These matters are all relevant to
assessing the culpability of the offender, their level of remorse and the need
for specific deterrence
as a sentencing factor.
Cooperation with investigation
an offender has cooperated with an investigation, courts generally acknowledge
that as a mitigating factor.
Cooperation does not necessarily mean that the offender has pleaded guilty or
participated in an interview.
It may simply mean cooperating fully with the investigation by WorkSafe. In
DPP v AirRoad Pty Ltd,
the court noted the company’s cooperation
with the investigation as a mitigating factor, while also noting that such
in OHS cases ‘cannot produce a sentence which does not adequately
reflect the seriousness’ of the
Supporting victims
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
, the court referred to the efforts
of the company’s sole director in supporting the injured employee, noting
that the director
had shown ‘commitment’ to the victim’s
recovery and condition.
Similar references have been made in other cases where the court was presented
with evidence of the defendant’s efforts to
support the victim. In
v AirRoad Pty Ltd
the court referred to the defendant’s
‘supportive gestures’ as helping to alleviate some of the impact of
the employee’s
death on the employee’s immediate
Such support can be
especially relevant in indicating the defendant’s prospects of
rehabilitation and level of
Improvements to safety
the defendant has taken significant steps to eliminate or reduce the risk of
future offending, the courts may view this as a
mitigating factor, reducing the
need for specific deterrence.
For example, in
DPP v Melbourne Health
, the court placed little weight on
specific deterrence when sentencing the defendant, in part due to the efforts of
Melbourne Health
to eliminate the hazard that was the subject of the
are, however, other cases where the court has considered the post-offence steps
taken by the defendant to illustrate how easy
it would have been to avoid the
risk in the first place. In
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
, the defendant
submitted that it had expended significant time and resources to eliminate the
specific hazard relevant to the offence
and to improve overall safety in the
While the court
accepted that the company’s post-offence conduct was a factor in its
favour, it also noted that the relative
ease with which the company undertook
remedial measures demonstrated the ‘degree to which the defendant fell
short of its duty’
in the first
Similarly, in
Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
, the court commended the defendant
company for its significant efforts to improve workplace safety following the
offence, but also
stated that ‘the more impressive the evidence of the
steps taken to remedy the wrongs after the event, the more inexplicable
inexcusable the
court imposed fines on the company but declined to reduce the fines by the
amount that the company had spent to eliminate
Subsequent offending
absence of subsequent convictions, particularly for OHS offences, is generally a
matter that is favourable (or at least not unfavourable)
However, evidence
of subsequent enforcement activity by WorkSafe, such as the issuing of
improvement or prohibition notices, is not
to be equated with subsequent
offending, as those notices are based on an investigator’s reasonable
belief of a breach of the
Act, not a finding of guilt by a
role of victims in OHS cases
5.1 This chapter
considers the role of victims and their loved ones in OHS cases. This includes
consideration of the admissibility
of victim impact statements, especially when
causation may be in issue; the potential utility of restorative justice
conferences
in OHS cases; and the role of prosecutors in seeking compensation
orders on behalf of victims at sentencing.
Victim impact statements
of the most consistent concerns we heard from stakeholders was a perceived
inconsistency in whether, and to what extent, courts
are receiving, and taking
into account, victim impact statements in OHS cases.
What are victim impact statements?
Victorian courts have
been required to receive and consider relevant victim impact statements prior to
sentencing. Professor Edna
Erez describes a victim impact statement as follows:
A VIS is a statement made by the victim and addressed to the judge for
consideration in sentencing. It usually includes a description
of the harm in
terms of financial, social, psychological and physical consequences of the
crime. In some jurisdictions a VIS also
includes a statement concerning the
victim’s feelings about the crime [and] the
offender[.]
impact statements typically serve a dual purpose of informing the court about
the consequences of the crime and offering
victims a meaningful vehicle to
participate in criminal proceedings.
to the first purpose, in 2005 the
Sentencing Act
was amended to require
sentencing courts to consider ‘the impact of the offence on any victim of
the offence’, whether
or not the consequences of the crime were reasonably
foreseeable.
various ways that this consideration can be taken into account. If a victim
impact statement illustrates that the offending
has caused lifelong debilitating
injuries to a victim, the court may conclude that this renders the offending
more objectively serious
and thus justifies a more severe sentence than would
otherwise have been appropriate.
Conversely, a victim impact
statement may describe forgiveness of the offender and a plea to the court for a
more compassionate sentence,
potentially reducing the need for just punishment,
indicating better prospects of rehabilitation and/or having relevance to
the impact of the
That said, however
powerful a victim impact statement may be, its contents are not allowed to
‘swamp all other
considerations’.
Sentencing remains a delicate balancing exercise of many, often competing
considerations.
to their second purpose, victim impact statements intentionally operate very
in order to enable
their therapeutic objective. They can be made either under oath (if verbal) or
via statutory declaration (if
They can include
‘photographs, drawings or poems and other material that relates to the
impact of the offence on the
Since 2018,
courts can receive the entirety of a victim impact statement even if it contains
inadmissible material, and courts need
not specify which parts they considered
admissible or not.
impact statements can have a medical report annexed to
The victim can request
that their victim impact statement be read aloud in court by themselves, someone
of their choosing or the
prosecutor; however, what can be said aloud is limited
to only the admissible parts of the
And arrangements
can be made to facilitate the victim impact statement being read aloud, such as
allowing the victim to appear via
videolink, read the victim impact statement
from behind a screen or have a support person present, or limiting who is in the
5.7 There is,
however, one key criterion that must be met before the court will receive a
victim impact statement: a victim impact
statement can only be made by someone
meeting the definition of ‘victim’. And a ‘victim’ is
defined as:
a person who, or body that, has suffered injury, loss or damage (including
grief, distress, trauma or other significant adverse effect)
result of the offence, whether or not that injury, loss or damage was reasonably
foreseeable by the
offender[.]
5.8 As will
become apparent below, the need for the harm to be a ‘direct’ result
of the offending before someone qualifies
to make a victim impact statement has
proven troublesome in the context of OHS offending.
Victim impact statements in OHS cases
on the available higher courts sentencing remarks, it seems that victim impact
statements are regularly made, tendered and accepted
by courts in OHS
Of the 78 OHS cases
for which we had sentencing remarks, one or more victim impact statements were
tendered in 54 of them, and of
those, the victim impact statement was accepted
in 47 cases (87%) and rejected in 7 (13%).
heard, however, that there is often considerable uncertainty around the
admissibility of victim impact statements in cases where
the breach of duty is
alleged or proven to have caused actual harm, such as injury or
death. This is because of the requirement for a victim to have suffered
‘as a direct result’ of the
We were told that
because of this issue, victim impact statements are sometimes not prepared, are
objected to by defence counsel
or are refused by courts.
5.11 As the
Court of Appeal explained in
, whether a court will accept or
reject victim impact statements in OHS cases seems to turn on whether the OHS
offence was an operative
cause of a death or injury:
The obvious difficulty in sentencing for OHSA breaches is the one discussed
earlier, namely, that proof of a breach of the Act does
not require proof that
the breach led to injury or death ... While his Honour was correct that the
gravity of the offending did not
depend on whether death had been caused, it was
nevertheless a relevant sentencing factor ... the occurrence of death or injury
not have any bearing on the assessment of the objective gravity of the
offence, yet at the same time, it is a matter which must be
taken into account
in assessing victim impact[.]
identified a number of cases where courts refused to take victim impact
statements into account because of a lack of causation.
DPP v Hazelwood
Power Corporation Pty Ltd
, the Supreme Court refused to take 50 victim
impact statements into account because it had ‘not [been] established that
by HPC resulted in the mine
Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
the court said that a number of
people did not qualify as ‘victims’ and could not make victim impact
statements because
‘in respect of causation ... [t]he precise mode of
ignition ... was ... not precisely
identified’.
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
, the court took
victim impact statements into account in sentencing one co-offender whose
behaviour was causative of the death, but
not the other co-offender because
their behaviour was not.
some instances, courts have refused to even read the victim impact
Conversely,
there were many cases where courts did take victim impact into account, usually
(but not always
) via a victim
impact statement.
some of those cases, the court seems to have expressly accepted that the OHS
offence was causative of the death or
For instance, in
DPP v Fergusson & Anor
, the second floor of a construction site
collapsed, killing a man, and the court said, ‘the incident was
by the overloading of the second floor trusses with the three
packs of flooring’.
DPP v Frewstal
, the court took into account the impact of the offending
on the deceased’s widow and mother after noting that ‘the breaches
... collectively contributed to the fatal
Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
, the court described the OHS failure as
‘the immediate cause of the risk
eventuating’.
v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
, a snorkelling company ‘accept[ed] responsibility
for the failures ... and for the ultimate tragedy that
DPP v Melbourne Water Corporation
, the company conceded ‘that there
was a causal link between the missing, misplaced or unsecured grate and [the
deceased’s]
other cases, the court
accepted some form of causal link
between the OHS breach and the death or injury, despite no express statement to
that effect.
, for example, a girl sustained serious injury when she dived into a
pool that was below the required height for safe diving, and
the court accepted
victim impact statements from her
in a number of other cases, it is less clear on what basis the OHS breach
might have been considered causal of the person’s injury or
For instance:
DPP v Melbourne Health
, a company responsible for a psychiatric facility
pleaded guilty for not sufficiently addressing ‘the risk of ligature
and ligatures’ after a man died by
The court received
11 victim impact statements and said that it was ‘required to take into
account ... the impact on the
however, extremely unusual in criminal law to consider someone else’s
behaviour as causative of
so it is unclear on
what basis those victim impact statements were accepted;
DPP v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
, the court said that it was not
necessary to resolve a dispute over causation as it is not ‘relevant to
penalty as such’,
the court also accepted a victim impact
DPP v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
, the court acknowledged that there was
no deficiency in the company’s training or systems of work, only its
documentation,
which did not specify certain safety measures or
There was no
suggestion that deficient documentation led to the fatality in the case, yet the
court accepted a victim impact statement
of the worker’s
apparently common practice of accepting victim impact statements in the absence
of any express or even implied causal link seems
to run contrary to the need for
the prosecution to establish causation beyond reasonable
A person must have
been harmed as a ‘direct result of the offence’ in order for a
person to qualify to make a victim
impact statement. In other words, without
causation, there can be no victim impact statement.
the same time, there are forensic and strategic reasons why OHS offenders may
not object to the admissibility of victim impact
statements. In one case, the
sentencing court considered that such an argument undermined the
offender’s claims of remorse,
saying that ‘the objection to victim
impact statements being received [has], in my view, greatly diluted what remorse
have been inferred from the fact of the plea of
may be good reason to consider changing the preconditions under which courts
receive victim impact statements in OHS cases.
Perhaps there should be a lower
threshold – not requiring the harm to be a ‘direct result of the
for victim impact statements in those cases, as there is
in cases involving offences under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
Or perhaps there
are good reasons to maintain the current criteria, such as ensuring procedural
fairness for defendants by not allowing
inadmissible material to be presented at
their sentencing hearing.
5.20 We are
therefore interested in hearing from stakeholders and the broader community
statements should be admissible
in OHS cases.
further issue arises if victims wish to read their victim impact statement aloud
in court. Courts are allowed to accept the entirety
of a victim impact
statement, and are not required to state which parts are inadmissible and
disregarded for the purposes of sentencing.
However, if the victim impact
statement is intended to be read aloud in court, the court is required to make
sure that only the admissible
parts of the victim impact statement are read
aloud, meaning that the court may have to restrict what is contained in the
This scenario, and the distress it may cause some victims, does not
arise if the victim impact statement is tendered in writing
Victim impact statements
: Is there a need to broaden or
clarify the circumstances in which victim impact statements can be made in OHS
Restorative justice conferences in OHS cases
research has found that one of the strongest predictors of whether the
prosecution process will have a positive or negative effect
on victims is the
extent to which victims perceive there has been ‘procedural justice’
along the way, especially the
extent to which their views are
represented.
It is therefore
important to identify ways for the criminal justice process to meaningfully
acknowledge the views and interests of
those affected by crime, such as through
admitting victim impact statements in sentencing proceedings or enabling the use
of restorative
justice conferences.
5.23 During
preliminary consultations, a number of stakeholders expressed support for
restorative justice conferences in OHS prosecutions.
This would involve the
offender (if they are a person), or an appropriate representative of the
offender (if they are a company),
participating in a conversation with an
injured worker, an injured worker’s loved ones, or a representative of a
class of people,
to discuss the impact of the offending on others.
Victoria, restorative justice conferences are already utilised in certain cases
prosecuted in the Children’s
They recently became
available in some family violence
The Magistrates’
Court and County Court can defer sentencing in any case for a number of reasons,
including ‘to allow
the offender to participate in a program ... aimed at
addressing the impact of the offending on the
intended to be a reference to restorative justice
conferences.
And while not
yet used in this context, restorative justice conferences are available in
prosecutions under the
Environment Protection
Victorian Law Reform Commission has recommended, multiple times, that the
Victorian Government enact legislation ‘that creates
a clear and
comprehensive framework for delivering restorative justice’ and that
restorative justice conferences should be
available ‘for all indictable
Victorian Government also recently said that it ‘supports restorative
justice services’ in the context of workplace
sexual harassment (this was
in response to a recommendation by a ministerial taskforce specifically on
workplace sexual harassment);
however, the government also described those
processes as an ‘alternative ... [to] legal
processes’,
to an additional component of legal processes.
the growing use of, and interest in, restorative justice conferences in Victoria
generally, we want to hear from stakeholders
restorative justice conferences in the context of OHS prosecutions. Should they
be available in OHS
prosecutions? Are there any particular OHS cases they should
or shouldn’t be used in? Does there need to be a legislative framework
Are there unique
features of restorative justice conferences in an OHS context that should inform
those processes?
restorative justice conferences are made available in OHS cases, there are
perhaps some likely features, including the following:
would only occur
a person has pleaded
This is necessary to
ensure the fair trial rights of defendants.
supplement criminal justice processes, not replace them. While restorative
justice processes can facilitate healing for
both offenders and victims,
sentencing ensures community confidence in the justice system.
They would only
occur with the consent of both parties. This ensures full and proper
participation from everyone involved.
They would be
undertaken on the basis that nothing said could be admissible as evidence in
other legal proceedings. There may be current
or future civil proceedings,
especially workers compensation proceedings, that would otherwise inhibit the
offender or victim from
full participation.
2016, WorkSafe commissioned RMIT University’s Centre for Innovative
Justice to ‘identify opportunities for restorative
justice practices ...
in WorkSafe’s claims and enforcement
processes’.
The results
of that work are not currently publicly available, but the mere commissioning of
that work in itself highlights the potential
interest in developing appropriate
Restorative justice
: Would restorative justice
conferences be appropriate and useful in OHS cases? If so, what features of an
OHS case would make it
suitable for restorative justice conferences?
Compensation orders
sentencing someone, Victorian courts can impose what are known as ancillary
orders, which are orders made in addition to sentencing.
These can include, for
example, orders to produce a forensic sample for
orders excluding
someone from consuming
suspending or cancelling a person’s driver
can also order an offender ‘to pay compensation of such amount as the
court thinks fit’ if someone has ‘suffered
an injury as a direct
result of the offence’.
This is known as a compensation order, and it can include compensation for pain
and suffering, medical expenses, counselling expenses,
and any other expenses
reasonably incurred as a result of the
An application for
a compensation order can be made on the court’s own motion, by a person
who has suffered an injury, or on
that person’s behalf by the prosecutor
in the case.
5.32 We have
previously identified a number of advantages in compensation order applications
being made in sentencing submissions:
victims do not
need to establish their loss before a separate judicial officer;
victims do not
need to establish their loss to the criminal standard of proof (
reasonable doubt
), but rather can satisfy the civil standard (
balance of probabilities
victims do not
need to pay the costs associated with bringing a claim in a civil court; and
process is faster and more streamlined than bringing a separate claim for civil
5.33 Compensation
orders are, though, rarely sought or imposed in OHS cases. We could only
identify one relevant case from the higher
courts involving offences under the
OHS Act 2004
where compensation orders appear to have been made. In
DPP v Melbourne Health
, the court said:
Melbourne Health was receptive to any compensation claims and agreed to pay the
costs of [the deceased’s] funeral. Between
plea and sentence, the quantum
of compensation has been agreed between Melbourne Health and four of the
victims, and I will make
those compensation
were also two Court of Appeal judgments in the mid-2000s relating to
compensation orders for offending under the
OHS Act 1985
. In one case,
, it seems that the primary issue was whether a compensation order in
a criminal proceeding is appealed via the civil or via the criminal
route in the
Court of Appeal, so that judgment is not much of relevance
other case,
Energy Brix
, on the other hand, is more pertinent. The Court
of Appeal in that case increased compensation orders for two children of a man
had been killed at work. Neave JA (concurring) suggested the following
factors would be relevant in assessing damages for grief or
trauma in the
context of compensation orders in criminal proceedings: (1) the circumstances in
which the death occurred; (2) the
effect on the applicant on hearing of the
events that caused loss; (3) the closeness of the relationship between the
person seeking
compensation and the person who has been killed; (4) the age of
the person seeking compensation; (5) the extent of the grief and
psychological
suffering experienced as a result of the loss; and (6) in cases where the
primary victim is injured rather than killed,
changes to family life that occur
as a result of the
had initially considered whether it might be useful for WorkSafe prosecutors to
apply for compensation orders in a larger number
of OHS cases. The issue was
raised by a number of stakeholders, including representatives of injured
workers. However, WorkSafe pointed
section 371
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
(Vic), which effectively renders
such applications redundant. That provision states that a court must not make a
compensation order
in sentencing an offender if the compensation would be for an
injury or death where it appears that the claimant also has an entitlement
compensation, and the injury or death occurred as a result of an OHS
While we are mindful
that a number of people and organisations raised this issue when we met with
them, the complex interplay of
workers compensation legislation and ancillary
sentencing orders is beyond our appropriate remit and
availability of diversion in OHS cases
individuals and companies prosecuted for OHS offences, one option to avoid a
formal finding of guilt is to participate in a diversion
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) provides that if a defendant
acknowledges responsibility for an offence, the prosecution agrees to the
diversion and the court
considers diversion appropriate, the defendant can
participate in a diversion plan and comply with certain conditions over a period
of up to 12 months. If the defendant complies with those conditions, no finding
of guilt is recorded.
6.2 The aim of
this chapter is to explore the use of diversion in OHS cases and to consider
whether there might be opportunities to
increase the use of diversion in
appropriate cases. It begins with a discussion of enforceable undertakings,
which are outside the
scope of our review but provide practical examples of the
then discuss how diversion is currently being used in OHS cases, before
considering the potential advantages of increasing the
use of diversion.
Enforceable undertakings in OHS cases
any stage during an investigation or prosecution process, WorkSafe can accept
what is known as an
enforceable undertaking
The enforceable
undertaking is drafted in contractual form, and it typically specifies the
duration of the undertaking and the specific
actions that the defendant has
agreed to take. If WorkSafe accepts the enforceable undertaking, criminal
proceedings for the offending
behaviour are
The court is not
involved in whether WorkSafe agrees or not to an enforceable undertaking. An
enforceable undertaking is therefore
not a sentence and, in our view, is too far
removed from the court process to fall within our remit. Nevertheless, it is
instructive
to review the types of conditions often included in enforceable
undertakings as they could helpfully inform the types of conditions
be used in diversion plans.
How many enforceable undertakings have there
6.4 Between
2012 and 2021, there were 70 enforceable undertakings entered into, all by
corporate entities: 4 City Councils, 3 schools,
1 not-for-profit organisation
and 62 companies.
Conditions of enforceable undertakings
enforceable undertakings (56%) contained a commitment to donate a specified
amount to a designated organisation or entity.
This is consistent with the fact
that most adjourned undertakings imposed for OHS offences primarily require a
donation of some sort.
The donation amounts in enforceable undertakings ranged
from $2,000 to $133,000, with a median of $20,000.
were also 5 enforceable undertakings (7%) that required the defendant to sponsor
or fund certain community initiatives, such
as swimming lessons for members of
culturally diverse
communities,
trade training
for disadvantaged community
and educational
workshops and traineeships for local
6.7 It was also
common for the enforceable undertaking to include safety training for employees
(35, or 50% of enforceable undertakings).
Total cost of enforceable undertakings
Enforceable
undertakings commonly specify the amount of money expected to be incurred by the
entity in complying with the agreed conditions
(58, or 83% of enforceable
undertakings). Amounts ranged from $15,750 to $1,000,000. The largest
expenditure ($1,000,000) involved
a company committing to invest in plant and
engineering controls to manage risks arising from working with equipment at
donate to a community organisation; establish an intern program for
tertiary students; and produce an organisational learning seminar
awareness about relevant
Durations of enforceable undertakings
enforceable undertakings were 12, 18 or 24 months’ duration (73%
combined), with 18 months being the most common duration
(39%). There were also
some undertakings that, instead of specifying a particular duration or
operational period, simply indicated
that the enforceable undertaking would
cease once the conditions had been complied with. For instance, Mettle Pty Ltd
agreed to implement
new safety equipment, develop software for a safety
reporting application and deliver safety training to students in the
The operational
period of this undertaking was to ‘cease to operate after all three
undertakings are
completed’.
Court-ordered diversion in OHS cases
the 1,197 OHS cases sentenced during the reference period, a diversion plan was
imposed in 16 cases (covering 27 OHS offences),
involving 6 companies and 10
individuals. Diversion was therefore not an especially common outcome of
criminal proceedings for OHS
Prosecution Result Summaries
published on WorkSafe’s website
provide some examples of cases that resulted in a diversion plan, both for a
company and for
an individual (see Case Studies 1 and 2). Just like in adjourned
undertakings and enforceable undertakings, it seems that the most
condition in diversion plans is to make a
Case study 1: Diversion for a company
(section 21)
Two employees were photographed suspended from the
slings of a crane, and they were lifted from the second storey of a construction
site. No one was injured. The photographs were provided to WorkSafe by an
The company was charged with two offences against sections 21(1) and 21(2)(e)
for failing to provide the necessary supervision and
training to enable employees to perform their work in a safe manner.
The company was placed on a 12-month diversion plan, with conditions to
donate $3,000 to the Court Fund and write a letter of gratitude
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries and
Enforceable Undertakings’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2023)
Case study 2: Diversion for a director (section 23)
The defendant was the director of a printing
company. A new paper mill was being used for the first time in the workplace.
employee and an experienced paper maker were injured on the same day
using the paper mill. The director was charged with two offences
against section
23(1) of the
The director was placed on a 12-month diversion plan, which included a
condition to donate $2,000 to the Court Fund.
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries and
Enforceable Undertakings’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2023)
Advantages of court-ordered diversion in OHS cases
are a number of reasons to consider expanding the use of diversion in OHS cases.
6.13 First,
research suggests that for companies and individuals that have already been
successfully prosecuted for OHS offences,
the threat of
prosecution has a reduced deterrent effect. This means that diversion could be
useful to limit the number of cases that reach sentencing,
so long as the
circumstances of the case would make a diversion plan an appropriate outcome. As
Hopkins has observed:
First time prosecutions are a shock. They are threatening because they
...involve the unknown. In particular, the consequences in
terms of bad
publicity for the defendant company are unknown and, for that reason, feared.
Once the process is known, companies may
form the view that they have relatively
little to fear and may come to regard prosecution as just one more cost of doing
6.14 Second,
there simply aren’t enough resources in a properly functioning regulatory
system to prosecute all identified OHS
risks. The ability to funnel cases out of
the court system at various points is critical to the overall functioning of an
regulatory system.
6.15 Third, as
seen in the statistical report, the most likely outcome of proceeding to
sentencing is for the defendant to receive
a modest fine. In contrast, the
conditions of a diversion plan have the potential to result in improved safety
mechanisms and behavioural
penance of some sort (such as providing training
opportunities for marginalised groups or students).
6.16 Fourth,
court-ordered diversion offers some advantages over enforceable undertakings. In
preliminary consultations, we heard
a lot of praise for enforceable undertakings
and their potential to promote safer workplaces while reducing the strain on
court resources.
The problem, though, is that enforceable undertakings are often
expensive to develop, and they can require a complex and time-consuming
to negotiate and finalise. This means that enforceable undertakings are
primarily available to defendants with greater financial
means, introducing a
question of equitable access to avenues out of the court system. As a point of
comparison, while the prosecution
(which would still be WorkSafe in the
Magistrates’ Court) would nonetheless need to agree to a diversion plan,
the involvement
of the court in the process might enable the conditions to be
less complex and the defendant to be accountable to a body other than
for complying with those conditions (the courts). Given that we heard that
companies are especially concerned about their
reputation if they are found
guilty of OHS offences, they might find the prospect of entering into a
diversion plan especially attractive,
even if the conditions would ultimately be
more expensive than any court fine that might have been imposed.
6.17 One of the
main impediments to using diversion in OHS cases is that the maximum duration of
a diversion plan is 12 months, whereas
more than half of the 70 enforceable
undertakings ran for a period longer than 12 months. One possible means of
better enabling the
availability of diversion in OHS cases could therefore be to
extend the maximum duration of diversion plans in the specific context
Court-ordered diversion
Question 10
: Should there be an increased use
of diversion in OHS cases? If so, in which types of cases?
available sentencing orders for OHS offences: Do sentencing practices need to
7.1 In this
chapter we consider whether there is a need to change the types of sentencing
orders imposed in OHS cases, either through
legislative reform or through
changes in court practices. This includes whether imprisonment should be
available for more OHS offences
and whether sentence types other than fines
should be imposed in a wider range of OHS cases; we also consider the practical
implications
of recording convictions against companies.
we identified earlier, 30 years of reviews into the sentencing of OHS offences
in Victoria and Australia have suggested that courts
should more frequently
utilise a broader array of sanctions than fines in OHS cases, especially cases
involving corporate entities.
The Industry Commission recommended as much in
1995, as did the
Maxwell Review
in 2004 and the national review of model
OHS laws in 2008. Yet we have found that 87% of sentencing outcomes in all OHS
fines, the remainder are largely constituted by adjourned undertakings
with donation conditions (so they function much like
and there seems to
have been just one adverse publicity order made since
are numerous issues with monetary penalties in the context of defendant
Monetary penalties
may not result in any internal disciplinary action against the individuals
responsible. The burden of monetary
penalties is sometimes passed on to
shareholders and consumers rather than being felt by those responsible. Monetary
penalties can
create the impression that OHS breaches are ‘purchasable
commodities’. Courts can sometimes be forced to choose between
(functionally) putting a company into liquidation or imposing a penalty that
doesn’t reflect the gravity of the offence. Further,
companies can avoid
payment of fines through various strategies.
in the 1980s, corporations around the world were starting to receive sentencing
dispositions that required them to engage in
some form of behavioural penance:
lending an executive to a charitable organisation for a year to develop an
ex-offenders program;
a bakery company donate bread to charitable
organisations;
and supplying
a shed to an organisation that enables Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people to learn trade skills and workplace
health and safety, as well as
organising for a staff member to obtain health and safety qualifications within
These behavioural
conditions, requiring some specific action on the part of the defendant company,
have the potential to significantly
increase health and safety practices in
workplaces, while still achieving the punitive and deterrent effects that a fine
might otherwise
have had, especially given the significant costs often involved
in implementing those conditions.
Imprisonment for OHS offences
an individual is prosecuted for a criminal offence, a court can only impose a
prison term if the maximum penalty for that offence
expressly allows such a
Currently, there
are only three offences in the OHS Act that carry a potential prison term,
including (with their maximum prison
manslaughter (25 years);
endangering serious injury in a workplace (5
assaulting,
intimidating or threatening an inspector (2
noted in the statistical report, there were only four individuals who received a
prison sentence for an OHS offence during the
This is unsurprising
given that the OHS offences for which most individuals were prosecuted –
breach of duty offences –
only allow a maximum penalty of a fine, so
courts in those cases were not able to impose a prison term. Of the four people
who received
a prison sentence:
received a wholly suspended
for assaulting an
inspector (in the same case);
one received a
wholly suspended sentence for recklessly endangering serious injury in a
workplace; and
one received an
immediate term of 6 months’ imprisonment for recklessly endangering
serious injury in a workplace.
7.7 There are no
publicly available sentencing remarks for any of those cases. There was,
however, one unreported County Court judgment
(Case Study 3), and one case
summarised on the WorkSafe website (Case Study 4).
Case study 3: Wholly suspended prison sentence for an OHS
The offender directed a new employee to drive a
heavy vehicle in dangerous conditions while knowing that the parking brake was
The truck slid downhill on a steep slope, flipped over and landed on
its side, and the driver was killed.
The court took into account a wide range of mitigating factors for the
offender, many of which resulted from the five-year delay between
the offence
and sentencing, none of which was attributable to the offender. The court said
that as a result of the stress and cost
of the protracted criminal proceedings,
the offender had separated from his partner, lived alone (no longer lived with
his four-year-old
son), sold his house to pay for legal fees because he was
ineligible for legal aid, frequently travelled interstate and back to Victoria
to attend the court proceedings, and found it difficult to find employment
because of the pending charges. He had, though, eventually
found alternative
employment, and he tendered a character reference from his new employer saying
that they were very satisfied with
his performance in relation to occupational
health and safety. He also pleaded guilty prior to trial and assisted
authorities with
frank responses during the investigation.
: 20 months’ imprisonment, wholly suspended for 3
Unpublished sentencing remarks provided to the
Case study 4: Immediate prison sentence for an OHS
A 72-year-old woman was the owner and operator of a
scrap metal business. At the workplace, there was a forklift that she drove. She
had never held a forklift licence. She was driving the forklift while moving a
large bin in which one of her employees was standing.
The employee fell from the
bin, the bin fell off the forklift because it was not properly secured, and the
bin landed on the employee’s
head, killing him.
: 6 months’ imprisonment and a $10,000 fine
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries and
Enforceable Undertakings’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2023)
our preliminary consultations, a number of stakeholders suggested that more OHS
offences should be capable of attracting a
prison term, in order to emphasise to
employers the seriousness of the offences. Some stakeholders also observed that
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
(Vic), an individual can receive up to 2
years’ imprisonment if they transport goods in an unsafe manner
their behaviour actually results in death or serious
Stakeholders were
keen for us to explore whether general breach of duty offences should be capable
of receiving imprisonment if someone
is seriously injured or killed as a result
of the breach.
Imprisonment for OHS offences
Question 11
: Are there any OHS offences that
do not currently attract a maximum penalty of imprisonment, but should? If so,
which offences, in
what circumstances, and what should the maximum prison term
An overlap between OHS Act and Crimes Act
Victorian offence of recklessly endangering serious injury in a workplace is
very similar to a category 1 breach of duty offence
in the model OHS
The breach of duty
offence involves a person creating a risk of death or serious injury through
recklessness (New South Wales, Tasmania,
Queensland, Australian Capital
Territory, South Australia, Northern Territory), gross negligence (New South
Wales) or negligence
(Australian Capital Territory), or actually causing death
or serious harm (Western Australia), and it can potentially result in a
term of up to five years.
main difference in the Victorian offence is that there is no need to establish
that the person was a duty holder who breached
a relevant duty.
note – as Maxwell did in
– that in the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) there is already an offence of reckless conduct
endangering serious injury, which carries an identical five-year maximum
The only difference
between the two offences is that the
offence requires the
prosecution to also prove that the conduct occurred ‘at a
workplace’.
then, the more specific
offence could be seen as somewhat
redundant. There are some advantages to particularism (introducing specific
versions of general
offences), such as symbolic value, tailored deterrence and
fair labelling.
But there are
also disadvantages, such as making the criminal law more difficult to understand
and enforce, and risking inconsistency
if similar offences are treated
differently.
option we would be keen to hear about from stakeholders is whether it may be
more fruitful for the offence of recklessly endangering
serious injury in a
workplace to (a) include an additional element that the person is a duty holder
who has breached their duty (similar
to category 1 offences in the model laws)
but then (b) have an enhanced maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment
(for example),
to reflect the additional element in the
when compared to the
offence. This would be intended to
reflect the additional seriousness of the offence when committed by a person
with an active duty
to preserve the health and safety of others, and also to
acknowledge that the crime captures cases where the person’s conduct
recklessly endangers not just serious injury but
Overlap between
and OHS Act offences
Question 12
: Should the maximum penalty of 5
years’ imprisonment for reckless conduct endangering serious injury in a
workplace (section
) be increased? If so, why and to
what? If not, why not?
Community correction orders for OHS offences
correction orders (CCOs) came into effect in January 2012, replacing a number of
previous sentencing options.
CCOs are community orders requiring offenders to comply with a number of
mandatory conditions
or more optional conditions,
such as engaging in unpaid community work, attending court for judicial
supervision, or participating in some form of assessment
and treatment. CCOs can
be imposed for any offence that carries a maximum penalty of either imprisonment
or a fine of more than 5
(which accounts for
almost all OHS offences).
7.13 During the
reference period, there was only one CCO imposed for an OHS offence, and that
was in 2014 (Case Study 5). There were
also three cases prior to 2012 where a
now-abolished community-based order was imposed. As these four cases represent
just 0.3% of
all OHS cases sentenced in the reference period, it is fair to
describe these community orders as very rare in OHS cases.
Case study 5: A community correction order for an OHS
The offender in this case was an employee of a
company that had been contracted to perform sweeper truck works during
asphalting of
a road. After a number of ‘near misses’ at that
worksite, involving other employees of various companies, the offender
his sweeper truck and ran over an employee at the worksite, killing him.
The court received numerous victim impact statements, as well as character
references and medical reports relating to the offender,
including from a
psychologist who was treating him for the emotional distress arising from the
incident. He pleaded guilty at the
earliest opportunity, showed genuine remorse,
had been of good behaviour in the two years since the incident and had the
of his wife and two teenage children.
: 2 year CCO with the following conditions:
supervision by a
community corrections officer;
500 hours of
unpaid community work (the maximum is 600 hours);
mental health
assessment and treatment; and
participation in
courses related to the offending.
The court also recorded a
conviction.
Unpublished sentencing remarks provided to the
Adjourned undertakings
adjourned undertaking is often known as a good behaviour
It is one of the least
severe sentencing orders available in
but it is also very
flexible and can be quite onerous. The only mandatory conditions are to be of
good behaviour (i.e. don’t
reoffend) and attend court if required (which
is very rare).
also attach any optional condition they think
appropriate,
which is why
Maxwell observed that adjourned undertakings have significant potential in OHS
cases: ‘[t]he conditions imposed
in undertakings have the potential to
significantly improve standards by requiring duty holders to adopt a systematic
approach to
available for both individuals and defendant companies.
the reference period, adjourned undertakings were imposed in 135 OHS cases in
representing 11.3%
of all OHS cases. This is very similar to Maxwell’s finding that, in
2002–03, 12% of OHS cases resulted
in an adjourned
undertaking.
the OHS cases where we were able to ascertain the conditions attached to
adjourned undertakings,
of the conditions required any improvements to workplace safety. Instead, the
only optional conditions, where there were any,
were to require charitable
donations. Of six adjourned undertakings imposed in OHS cases in the
Magistrates’ Court:
optional conditions;
one involved a
$10,000 donation to the Court Fund, which is managed and distributed by the
Magistrates’ Court;
one involved a
$50,000 donation to the Lighthouse Foundation (a charity for young people at
risk of homelessness); and
involved an individual and two defendant companies that were sentenced in the
one case following an incident in which a man
The individual had to
make a $25,000 donation to the Court Fund; one defendant company had to pay
$75,000 to Sunraysia Residential
Services; and one defendant company had to pay
$50,000 to each of Mildura State Emergency Services, Mallee Accommodation
Program and Sunraysia Rural Counselling Service ($150,000 in
7.17 Further, in
Case Study 6, the County Court imposed an adjourned undertaking on a government
agency and mandated a $50,000 charitable
Case study 6: An adjourned undertaking for an OHS
In 2011, an employee working at the Disability
Forensic Assessment and Treatment Service Centre (DFATS) was sexually assaulted
a resident at the facility. DFATS was managed by the Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS) and at the time housed residents
with intellectual
disabilities who had committed sexual offences.
After the incident, it was found that DHHS knew that the resident had
previously formed attachments with, and had assaulted, female
staff, and that he
had thoughts about harming female clinicians. DHHS also had reports that the
resident was a high risk of sexual
abuse towards female staff, with
recommendations that risk management strategies be implemented to ensure female
staff’s safety.
This information had not been disclosed to employees and
supervisors working with that resident.
DHHS pleaded guilty to failing to provide the necessary information to
employees to maintain a workplace that was safe and without
risks to health:
OHS Act 2004
(Vic) ss 21(1) and 21(2)(e).
DHHS was sentenced to a 12-month adjourned undertaking, with a special
condition to make a $50,000 donation to Djirra, an organisation
that provides
support to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who experience family
violence – predominantly women.
[2018] VCC 886
7.18 In the
context of OHS offending, then, adjourned undertakings are the second most
common sentencing outcome (albeit still far
less prevalent than fines), but the
only optional conditions seem to be charitable donations of similar value to
what might otherwise
have been imposed as a fine.
Health and safety undertakings
and safety undertakings are a specific sentencing order available in cases
involving OHS offences. They are modelled on the
adjourned undertaking
provisions of the
and they can be imposed
in addition to, or instead of, any other order that the court may make in
relation to the offence (for example,
Section 137 of the OHS
Act provides as follows:
Release on the giving of a health and
safety undertaking
a court ... finds a person guilty of an offence against this Act or the
regulations the court may (with or without recording a
conviction) adjourn the
proceeding for a period of up to 2 years and make an order for the release of
the offender on the offender
giving an undertaking with specified
conditions.
undertaking must specify the following conditions—
the offender attend before the court if called on to do so ...
the offender does not commit, during the period of the adjournment, any offence
against this Act, the regulations, the
Equipment (Public Safety) Act 1994
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
or regulations made under those
the offender observes any special conditions imposed by the
limiting subsection (2)(c), the court may impose on an offender who is an
employer special conditions that the offender—
a consultant ... to advise on or assist with occupational health and safety
matters; and
and implement a systematic approach to managing risks to health or safety that
arise or may arise in the conduct of the offender’s
undertaking; and
for the carrying out of an audit of the offender’s undertaking in relation
to health and safety by an independent person[.]
7.20 In effect,
courts can impose a health and safety undertaking for up to 2 years, requiring
the offender not to commit any further
health and safety offences while also
requiring compliance with any other conditions that the court deems appropriate,
such as improving
workplace safety.
the end of the adjournment period, if satisfied that the offender has complied
with the conditions of the order, the court ‘must
discharge the offender
without any further hearing’. It is an offence to breach a health and
safety undertaking, and a breach
can result in the offender having their order
varied or being resentenced for the original
to court data, there were no health and safety undertakings imposed at all
during the reference period. We are, however,
aware of at least three health and
safety undertakings imposed, because they are noted on WorkSafe’s
Court data for those
same three cases suggests that the outcome was an adjourned undertaking via the
Sentencing Act
, rather than a health and safety undertaking via the
. As such, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the
other 132 adjourned undertakings (according to court data) in OHS cases
fact health and safety undertakings.
one of the three cases with an apparent health and safety undertaking, the
WorkSafe prosecution summary does not specify any reported
conditions.
In the second
case, a $40,000 donation was
And in the third
case, the offender was required to engage Australian Industry Group ‘to
continue to develop and implement
any changes to a safety action plan’,
and also pay a $5,000 donation to the
Again, it seems that
donations are the most common condition of these undertakings as
7.24 Regardless
of how many invisible health and safety undertakings there may be, they are
clearly rare. This is, perhaps, unsurprising
for two reasons:
First, many
companies often respond to workplace health and safety incidents themselves by
improving their practices prior to sentencing,
as was apparent in the reduced
need for specific deterrence in many OHS cases in the higher courts (see
[2.19]). There may therefore
be little need to impose behavioural obligations
beyond the remedial measures already implemented by the offender since the
the cost of implementing safety measures will usually exceed the value of any
fine that the court will impose, making a fine
a more attractive sentencing
option than a health and safety undertaking in most cases. (And courts would be
required to consider
alternative orders if the offender does not consent to a
health and safety undertaking.) To illustrate using an example from the
Territory, following an incident in 2016, Woolworths itself spent over $500,000
on improvement works, and then also spent
almost a further $2.3 million in
fulfilling the conditions of a health and safety undertaking ($2.8 million in
But the maximum fine
applicable to the relevant offence was just $1.5
The primary
incentives for Woolworths to have consented to the expense of improvement works
and the undertaking were likely to be
not only to remedy the issue but also to
avoid a finding of guilt or a conviction and to mitigate reputational damage, an
that is no longer present at the time of sentencing.
7.25 That second
reason is a cause of concern. If the cost of implementing improved safety
measures is prohibitively more expensive
than the value of any fine that might
be imposed, there are few circumstances in which a company or an individual
would be incentivised
to argue for, or consent to, a health and safety
undertaking rather than a fine. This is a shame, because sentencing orders
remedial works – or even better, safety projects that go
‘above and beyond’ for a specific company or broader industry
– can have longer-lasting effects on safety practices than any fine. It
may be that the only way to truly incentivise increased
use of these sorts of
sentencing orders would be to significantly increase the value of fines
currently being imposed in OHS cases.
Then defendant companies may begin
actively offering more imaginative sentencing orders to courts and agreeing to
those orders, thereby
tangibly improving safety practices.
Adverse publicity orders
court that finds an offender guilty of an offence under the
the associated regulations may make an order requiring the offender to publicise
their offending, the consequences of their offending
and the penalty
An adverse publicity
order can be made in addition to, or instead of, any other sentencing order,
though usually it is
in addition to
. The Australian Law Reform Commission
has explained adverse publicity orders as follows:
Publicity or disclosure orders would require corporations to publicise, or
otherwise disclose, information about their unlawful conduct
to specific groups
of people or to the community at large. Orders could require publication of
information through traditional media
outlets, as well as new media outlets,
such as social media.
These orders may be designed to have a punitive effect on corporations by
inflicting reputational damage, as well [as] potentially
furthering general
deterrence by alerting other corporations to the consequences of the misconduct
in question. Such orders may also
facilitate consumer choice by alerting
consumers to bad corporate
behaviour[.]
does not specify what the specific purposes of an adverse
publicity order might be in an OHS case, but case law does offer some guidance.
In a recent OHS case in New South Wales, the prosecution asked for an adverse
publicity order ‘to raise awareness in the building
and construction
industry of the risk of falling from height during the loading or unloading of
plant and materials’.
The court granted the order for two main reasons. The first was that it would be
consistent with the overarching objectives of the
Work Health and Safety Act
(NSW) ‘to publicise the existence of a risk in a particular
activity, how risks can be eliminated and how the enforcement measures
Act are applied’.
second was that such an order would promote the sentencing purposes of
denunciation and general deterrence, while also highlighting
that ‘even a
comprehensive system needs to be
Effectively,
an adverse publicity order can serve both an awareness-raising function (for an
industry) and a punitive function (for
whatever reason, adverse publicity orders appear to have almost never been
imposed by Victorian courts for OHS offences. The one
exception is an OHS case
in the County Court from early 2023, in which it was not the prosecution who
sought an adverse publicity
order but the court on its own motion, feeling that
such an order would be
appropriate.
The defendant
company was required to publish a notice (with agreed wording) in
magazine (specific to the racing industry). The defendant company did
this less than three months after being sentenced. A copy of
the notice is
included in Figure 1. Victoria does not appear to be unique, however; adverse
publicity orders appear to be rare in
OHS cases in all Australian
Figure 1: Adverse publicity order imposed in
DPP v Cranbourne
Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506.
Reproduced with permission
Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
On 13 December 2022, Cranbourne Turf Club Inc (CTC) pleaded guilty in the
County Court of Victoria to one charge of failing to ensure,
so far as is
reasonably practicable, that persons other than its employees were not exposed
to risks to their health or safety from
the conduct of its undertaking, contrary
section 23(1)
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
CTC operates the Cranbourne Training Complex, which is located in Grant
Street, Cranbourne. The Training Complex is used by various
licensed horse
trainers to conduct horse training activities.
One of the training tracks at the Training Complex is called the Sand Trails,
which is a deep sand track that is approximately 1400
metres long. There is no
lighting installed around the Sand Trails.
CTC pleaded guilty to offending that occurred on 30 August 2019. At that
time, CTC opened the Sand Trails between 4:00am and 9:30
am, which meant that
track riders were able to ride horses on the Sand Trails in dark conditions.
This posed a risk to their health
and safety.
CTC admitted that it was reasonably practicable for it to have installed
floodlights around the Sand Trails for it to have restricted
access to the Sand
Trails to daylight hours only.
In September 2019, CTC changed the opening hours of the Sand Trails, so that
it was only open during daylight hours.
On 28 February 2023, CTC was fined $250,000, with conviction.
adverse publicity order made in the context of misleading and deceptive conduct,
in breach of the Australian Consumer Law, is reproduced
in Figure 2. That notice
was variously required to be published within the first 10 pages of The Weekly
Review magazine, displayed
prominently in the defendant’s offices for six
months and published on realestate.com.au for six
2: Adverse publicity order imposed in
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v
Manningham Property Group Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1448
In legal proceedings taken by the Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria, the
Federal Court of Australia has declared that MANNINGHAM
PROPERTY GROUP PTY LTD
(trading as Hocking Stuart Doncaster) has contravened the misleading and
deceptive conduct and the false or
misleading representation provisions
concerning the price of land provisions of the Australian Consumer Law.
MANNINGHAM PROPERTY
GROUP PTY LTD breached the law by advertising Victorian land
for sale at a price, or price range that was less than the market value
likely selling price of that land, thereby representing to potential purchasers
of that land that:
The vendors
would sell that land for a price that was within the advertised price or price
range, or not substantially more, when
Manningham Property Group Pty Ltd knew
that the vendors would not sell that land for the advertised price or within the
price range;
The vendors had
instructed Manningham Property Group Pty Ltd to sell the land for the advertised
price or within the advertised price
range, or not substantially more, when
Manningham Property Group knew that the vendors had not done so;
Property Group had reasonable grounds for believing and holding the opinion that
the land would be sold at the advertised
price or within the advertised price
range, or not substantially more when it did not have such reasonable grounds
for believing
and holding such opinion; and
selling price for the properties was within the price range in the
advertisements, or not substantially more than thee
highest figure in the price
range in the advertisements, when the likely selling price was not within the
price range in the advertisements,
ad was substantially more than the highest
figure in the price range in the advertisements.
The Federal Court
of Australia has imposed upon MANNINGHAM PROPERTY GROUP PTY LTD:
penalties totally $160,ooo in respect of the false or misleading
representations, concerning the price of land provisions,
of the Australian
Consumer Law (Victoria);
A compliance
program designed to ensure no further contraventions of these provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria); and
An obligation to
publish the details of the order of the Court.
This notice is
published and paid for by MANNINGHAM PROPERTY GROUP PTY LYD in accordance with
the Order of the Federal Court of Australia
insert date
legal proceedings taken by the Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria.
is another example; appearing in the Wilmington Morning Star (a local newspaper
in North Carolina, USA) in 1990 was a statement
by a company found guilty of
environmental offending:
We Apologize for Polluting the Environment
General Wood Preserving Company recently pled guilty in federal court to
illegally disposing of hazardous waste in 1985 at its plant
in Leland, North
Carolina. As a result of that crime, General Wood Preserving was fined $150,000,
and was ordered to publish this
advertisement. We are sorry for what we did, and
we hope that our experience will be a lesson to others that environmental laws
be respected.
Board of Directors
General Wood Preserving Co., Inc
7.31 There is
something to be said for the use of language involving the first person
‘we’ in this example, compared to
the third person ‘CTC’
used in the Cranbourne Turf Club notice. The use of ‘we’ shows that
the corporation
took ownership of the offending, it clearly conveyed their
remorse, and hearing directly from colleagues arguably improved the deterrent
potential of the publication for the intended audience (overcoming the mindset
of ‘it wouldn’t happen to me’).
there have been few adverse publicity orders made in Victorian OHS cases, these
orders are often made in other regulatory contexts,
such as the regulation of
misleading and deceptive
The purposes of
adverse publicity orders in that context have been specified numerous times, and
they differ from the purposes of
such orders in an OHS
The cases in which
these orders appear, however, do provide a useful illustration of the wide
variety of forums in which offenders
can be made to publish an adverse publicity
the information in major
newspapers;
the information in newspapers where the company normally
advertises;
the information in industry-specific publications (these were all OHS
the information in the company’s store or
the information on the company’s
the information on
the matter in the company’s annual
or other publications
of the company, such as a shopping
case law also suggests that if there is no need for further publicity beyond
what has already occurred during the criminal
proceedings,
defendant company no longer
courts may refuse to
make such an order. There was, though, one case where the court ordered the
prosecution to bear the costs of
publishing the adverse publicity order because
the company was in
liquidation.
7.34 In the
context of defendant companies, and OHS offenders especially, there is a long
history of law reform bodies recommending
increased use of adverse publicity
orders. As we observed in Chapter 1, multiple reviews of the sentencing of OHS
offences have suggested
increased use of such orders: the Industry Commission
review in 1995, the Maxwell Review in 2004 and the national review of model
laws in 2008. In addition:
2003, the NSW Law Reform Commission published a report on the sentencing of
defendant companies. It recommended a number of changes
to legislation that
would best enable the use of adverse publicity orders in cases involving
offending by corporations, including
ensuring offenders bear the costs of the
adverse publicity order, and allowing courts to stipulate the target audience,
or forum in which the notice should occur and the content of the
2006, the Australian Law Reform Commission published a report on the sentencing
of federal offenders. It recommended that federal
sentencing legislation should
enable courts to order corporations to publicise their offending conduct, in
order to ‘enable
judicial officers to impose sentences on corporations
that are capable of achieving the purposes of
sentencing’;
2020, the Australian Law Reform Commission published a report on corporate
criminal responsibility. It recommended amending the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) to specifically enable courts to order corporations to publicise or
disclose certain information;
2022, the Law Commission for England and Wales published a report on corporate
criminal responsibility. They noted that there had
already been a handful of
adverse publicity orders made against corporate offenders, and while the Law
Commission was only detailing
options for reform (not making recommendations),
it did commend the utility of adverse publicity orders in the sentencing of
non-natural
7.35 We are
interested in exploring afresh the potential utility of adverse publicity orders
in OHS cases, the factors that stakeholders
believe might be limiting their
current use in Victoria, and how those limitations might be overcome.
Further sentencing orders
are also a range of other sentencing orders available in related regulatory
schemes. For instance:
benefit orders
require an offender to pay back an amount that represents the
monetary benefits obtained as a result of an
benefits penalty orders
require an offender to pay up to three times the
amount that represents the monetary benefits estimated to have been obtained as
a result of the offence;
restoration
and prevention orders
require an offender to take a specific action that the
court considers reasonably necessary to rectify actual harm or to prevent
risk of harm resulting from the
restorative
project orders
require an offender to undertake a project for the benefit of
the public;
supervisory
intervention orders
require an offender to undertake specified actions to
improve their compliance with the
prohibition
prohibit the offender from having a specific role or responsibility
for a certain period of
Sentencing orders in OHS cases
Question 13
: Should sentencing orders other
than fines (for example, community correction orders, adjourned undertakings,
health and safety undertakings,
adverse publicity orders) be used more
frequently in OHS cases?
Recording convictions in OHS cases
sentencing someone in Victoria, courts have discretion whether or not to record
a conviction.
There are a
number of consequences that flow from a court recording a conviction. For
individuals, a conviction can affect access
to employment, housing, adoption,
travel and more. For companies, many of the traditional consequences of having a
conviction recorded
7.38 During
preliminary consultation, we asked stakeholders – especially employer
groups and defence lawyers – how the
recording of a conviction may affect
defendant companies. By and large, stakeholders raised two implications:
first was that companies tendering for government work may need to disclose
relevant prior convictions, which could hinder their
success in procurement
It is not clear
how many companies sentenced for OHS offences would typically bid for government
work such that they would be affected
by a conviction in this way. Moreover, we
were told that some procurement processes now require companies to disclose
whether they
have had any ‘findings of guilt’, which would mean that
they would need to disclose the offending regardless of whether
or not the court
recorded a conviction.
implication is not tangible but instead is reputational. We heard from multiple
stakeholders that the priority for many
companies sentenced for OHS offences is
to avoid having a conviction recorded, with some companies saying that they
would rather
receive a higher fine if it meant not having a conviction recorded.
This is somewhat peculiar, given that the company has still been
found guilty of
the offence, so the same level of opprobrium should theoretically apply. But if
companies do perceive the recording
of a conviction as more damaging to their
reputation than a simple finding of guilt, this could represent a useful lever
in the sentencing
exercise to promote just punishment, denunciation and
deterrence.
7.39 We are
interested in hearing further from stakeholders about the recording of
convictions against companies found guilty of OHS
offences. Are there further
consequences of the recording of convictions that we have not identified here?
If not, given that there
seem to be relatively limited consequences for the
recording of convictions, is there a need to reconsider how the courts’
discretion is currently exercised? To that end, we are asking for your views
be for courts in deciding
whether or not to record a conviction for an OHS offence, especially in cases
involving defendant companies.
Recording convictions for OHS offences
Question 14
: What do you believe should
ordinarily be the most significant factors for courts in deciding whether or not
to record a conviction
for an OHS offence?
amounts for OHS offences: Do sentencing practices need to change?
chapter considers whether there might be a need to change the values of fines
imposed for OHS offences in Victoria. As we noted
at [1.15], the most consistent
observation in the 30 years of reviews of sentencing OHS offences has been that
the values of fines
imposed for OHS offences are not consistent with the
seriousness of the offending, especially for offending by larger companies.
Indeed, we have found that for some OHS offences, average fines have actually
decreased significantly over the last
What are the fine amounts in OHS cases?
are by far the most common sentencing outcome in OHS cases. They made up 86.7%
of all sentencing outcomes for the 1,906 OHS
offences sentenced during the
reference period (1,652 charges received
In our statistical
report, we found that the median fines for OHS offences in the
Magistrates’ Court in the 8 years to 30 June
$20,000 for
companies sentenced for an employer breach of duty offence (sections 21 and 23
$12,500 for
individuals sentenced for an employer breach of duty offence (sections 21 and 23
$20,000 for
companies sentenced for other breach of duty offences (sections 22 and 24 to 31
individuals sentenced for other breach of duty offences (sections 22 and 24 to
companies sentenced for breach of notice offences (sections 62(1), 110(4),
111(4) and 112(5) of the
for individuals sentenced for breach of notice offences (sections 62(1), 110(4),
111(4) and 112(5) of the
reviews have found that average court fines for OHS offences in Victoria were
$8,000 in 1995,
the 3 years to 30 June 2003 (representing 7% of the maximum penalty and 17% of
the Magistrates’ Court’s jurisdictional
and $31,000 in the 2
years and 2 months to 1 September
The average fine for an
employer breach of duty offence in 2019–20 was $30,980, representing just
2.1% of the available maximum
penalty, and 7.5% of the Magistrates’
Court’s jurisdictional limit.
higher courts, almost all OHS offences sentenced during the reference period
were employer breach of duty offences (148
of 169 OHS offences). In the 8 years
to 30 June 2021, the median fine for companies sentenced for an employer breach
of duty offence
was $250,000 (that is, 12.5 times higher than in the
Magistrates’ Court). And for individuals, it was $100,000 (8 times higher
than in the Magistrates’ Court).
Why aren’t fines increasing?
could be a number of reasons for the apparent intractability of fine amounts for
OHS offences in Victoria.
8.6 The first
reason could simply be that the nature of OHS cases sentenced in Victoria could
be changing, such that less serious
offences are making up a greater proportion
of prosecuted and sentenced OHS offences. This does, however, seem unlikely.
During preliminary
consultation, no stakeholders identified a change in the
nature of OHS cases over the last 20 years. Nor did we identify a change
characteristics of OHS cases that might explain the difference, such as more
cases involving less serious risks, less likely
risks or smaller companies, or
fewer cases involving death or serious injury.
second reason could be that courts are not taking into account the slow but
gradual increases in penalty unit values (which therefore
increase the maximum
penalties for OHS offences). From 1981 to 2003, a penalty unit in Victoria was
precisely $100.
Since 2003,
however, penalty unit values have been indexed annually. As of 1 July 2023, a
penalty unit is valued at $192.31, almost
twice what it was 20 years ago.
Indexation of penalty unit values is intended to ensure that maximum penalties
and sentencing practices
keep pace with inflation, though there was one year
when the penalty unit value increased by an amount well in excess of inflation,
with the intention that larger fines would deter people from ‘unlawful
behaviour’.
preliminary analysis suggests that the yearly incremental increases in penalty
unit values have little effect on the values of
fines imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court.
third, and probably most likely, reason is the anchoring effect of current
sentencing practices.
Section 5(2)(b)
Sentencing Act
courts to have regard to ‘current sentencing practices’ when
deciding on an appropriate sentence. This requires
courts to consider both
relevant sentencing statistics and comparable
with the objective of
achieving consistency in sentencing. The relevance of current sentencing
practices in Victoria was somewhat
diluted by the High Court in
when it said that ‘current sentencing practices must be taken into
account, but only as one factor, and not the controlling
factor, in the fixing
of a just sentence’.
Even so, current sentencing practices remain an important consideration for
courts, and some research has suggested that judges,
even at sentencing, have
been heavily influenced by numerical
So long as there is
information about fines imposed in recent cases to act as a reference point,
courts will likely continue to feel
‘anchored’.
has also been no attempt by the Director of Public Prosecutions to seek an
‘uplift’ to sentencing practices for
OHS offences. In
the Victorian
Court of Appeal took what remains a nationally unique approach to intervention
in sentencing practices. Where sentencing
outcomes for an offence,
, no longer bear a genuine relationship to the maximum penalty, the
court has repeatedly (albeit not recently) indicated a willingness
sentencing courts with guidance, calling for an ‘uplift’ in
sentencing practices. For instance, it has called
for uplifts in the lengths of
prison sentences for incest and aggravated
In the absence of
such a declaration, it is difficult to envisage on what basis sentencing courts
might feel empowered to unmoor
themselves from the values of fines currently
being imposed within the present statutory framework.
to why fines have not increased but have outright declined, one possibility is
that since 2014, prosecutors have been unable to
make submissions about
sentencing ranges. Prior to the High Court’s decision in
Victorian prosecutors
frequently made submissions to sentencing courts about what they believed was
the appropriate sentencing range
in a particular
For instance, in
v L Arthur Pty Ltd
, the prosecution argued that a fine of between $350,000
and $450,000 would be appropriate (a $330,000 fine was
AirRoad Pty Ltd
, the prosecution submitted that a fine of between $350,000
and $425,000 would be appropriate (a $375,000 fine was
, the High Court concluded that such submissions were matters of
opinion, not law, and were no longer permissible. In the absence
of prosecutors
being able to make submissions on sentencing ranges, we have been told that an
alternative practice has emerged. The
prosecution and defence now each tender
what they argue are three or so comparable cases from the WorkSafe prosecution
with the implication being that those cases are indicative of a
sentencing range.
8.11 It may be
that prosecutors’ inability to make direct submissions about sentencing
ranges and the decline in fine amounts
are simply two independent, concurrent
changes. It is, though, at least arguable that limiting the ability of
prosecutors to assist
the court with a recommended sentencing range has somehow
contributed to the decline in fine amounts. For instance, OHS offences
have some of the largest fines of all criminal offences committed by
corporations. But many magistrates only hear OHS cases
very rarely, so their
limited opportunities to determine fine amounts in OHS cases may – in the
absence of guidance from a
sentencing range – be creating a downward pull
on sentencing practices for OHS offences.
Should fines be increased in appropriate OHS cases?
years there have been calls to increase the values of fines imposed on
corporations found guilty of criminal offending. It was
observed over 30 years
ago that ‘fines have been too low to deter crimes attributed to
corporations’.
now Emeritus Professor Andrew Hopkins wrote that:
the level of fines is not sufficient to have a significant deterrent effect on
large companies. Only if courts are prepared to impose
fines much higher than
they currently do will these fines in themselves become an influential
consideration.
8.13 In 2004,
Maxwell Review
recommended ‘substantially increasing’
maximum penalties for breaches of duties, describing sentencing practices at the
time as inadequate. Far from there having been an increase since then, the
average fine has fallen from 7% of the available maximum
penalty to just 2.1%,
and from 17% of the Magistrates’ jurisdictional limit to just
Fines for OHS offences
Question 15
: In your view, is there a need to
increase fine amounts for OHS offences, either generally or in specific types of
cases? If so,
why, and in which types of cases? If not, why not?
Options for increasing fine amounts for OHS offences
are numerous policy options that could be employed in an attempt to increase
fine amounts for OHS offences, should this
be needed, and we are keen to test
those various options with stakeholders.
Increasing the maximum penalty
of the most common options typically employed to change sentencing practices is
to increase the maximum penalty for an offence.
The maximum penalty for an
offence is an important yardstick that courts must consider in determining an
appropriate sentence in
For instance, maximum
fines for OHS offences range from 5 penalty units for people who fail to
circulate a provisional improvement
notice (about
to 100,000 penalty
units for corporations found guilty of workplace manslaughter (about $19.2
Court of Appeal has said that increasing the maximum penalty for an offence is
usually designed to suggest either that sentencing
practices as a whole are
or that there are
‘worst case’ versions of an offence for which the current maximum
penalty is not sufficient.
maximum penalty prescribed by Parliament for an offence provides
authoritative guidance as to its relative seriousness and is prescribed
worst class of the offence in question. The increase will be relevant
whenever the increase shows that Parliament regarded
the previous penalties as
inadequate. Even in cases where the new maximum is only of general
assistance, it becomes the ‘yardstick’
which must be balanced with
all other relevant factors.
[2008] VSCA 51
On some occasions, when Parliament increases the maximum penalty, that suggests
that more severe penalties should be imposed not
just for offences falling
within the worst class but over a range (not necessarily the whole range) of
cases ... On other occasions,
an increase in the maximum penalty means only that
Parliament has thought of a worst class of case for which the previous maximum
was inadequate.
DPP v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
The maximum fine for breach of duty offences is
currently about $346,000 for individuals and $1.73 million for
corporations
is the real effect of increasing the maximum penalty for offences, though?
Sentencing practices do not always change significantly
when a maximum penalty
is increased. For example, in 2008 the Victorian Government doubled the maximum
prison term for negligently
causing serious injury from 5 years to 10
But while the maximum
penalty doubled, the median prison sentence only increased 25%, from 2 to 2.5
This could potentially
suggest that while increasing the maximum penalty can increase the severity of
sentences imposed, that increase
may be more modest than the increase in the
maximum penalty.
more specifically, the maximum penalty for employer breach of duty offences was
just 2,500 penalty units in the
OHS Act 1985
, and that was almost
quadrupled to 9,000 penalty units in the
Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
, the Director of Public Prosecutions argued that
sentencing practices should be increased to reflect that increase in the maximum
penalty; however, the Court of Appeal said that the case was an inappropriate
vehicle for such guidance because the Director was
‘not seek[ing] any
increase in the actual sentences imposed’ on the
8.19 In many
respects, the maximum penalty for breach of duty offences is not the problem.
The median fine ($20,000) for breach of
duty offences sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court in 2019 represented just 1.4% of the available maximum
penalty. Aside from
a handful of OHS cases with especially large fines, the vast
majority of fines for OHS offences represent less than 6% of the maximum
fines for breach of duty offences in Victoria are also consistent with maximum
penalties for similar OHS offences in other
Australian jurisdictions, as well as
other similar offences committed by corporations, such as the maximum fine of
10,000 penalty
units for failing to reasonably minimise risks of harm to human
health or the environment from pollution or
8.21 On the
other hand, there are a number of reasons to consider increasing the available
maximum penalty for OHS offences:
it could go some
way to increasing the values of fines imposed for OHS offences as a whole, if
current sentencing practices are not
adequately reflecting the objective
seriousness of these offences;
current maximum penalty may not allow for sufficient fines to be imposed in
cases involving very large corporations – in
a similar context, the
Federal Court has observed that for defendant companies, maximum penalties in
the region of about $1 million
‘are arguably inadequate for a corporation
the size of Coles’,
that ‘difficulties ... can arise when a penalty regime fixes maximum
penalties as to body corporates, without reference
to size of the
contravener’;
a comparable jurisdiction (England and Wales), the maximum fine for OHS offences
has recently been made
to enable much
higher fines in cases involving very large corporations that have committed
serious OHS offences; and
offenders who have pleaded guilty while subject to the current maximum penalty
have received fines of over 75% of the
which in itself
could suggest that the penalty ceiling is set too low.
8.22 We are
therefore keen to hear from stakeholders about whether there should be an
increase in the maximum fine for OHS offences
in Victoria, especially for breach
of duty offences, and if so, how much of an increase.
Mandatory or presumptive sentencing
option is the introduction of mandatory or presumptive sentences for OHS
offences. Mandatory sentencing involves parliament
requiring courts to impose a
specific sentence type or sentence length/fine amount for a particular offence;
presumptive sentences
are mostly the same, but there can be
exceptions.
may be some who feel that if current sentencing practices for OHS offences are
inadequate, the introduction of mandatory sentencing
could be a useful policy
solution. We have commented previously on the undesirability of mandatory
sentencing,
‘curtail[ing] judicial discretion and inevitably lead[ing] to
injustice’.
Introducing standard sentences for OHS offences
sentences for OHS offences could be another mechanism of increasing
Standard sentences
are the numerical sentence that parliament has indicated should represent the
‘middle of the range’
of objective seriousness for an offence (not
taking account of subjective factors, such as pleas of guilty). They were first
in 2018 and currently apply to 13 serious offences, each of which
carry a prison term, as opposed to a monetary penalty. The standard
sentence is
set at 40% of the maximum penalty for almost all of the current standard
sentence offences.
have previously found that the introduction of standard sentences has increased
the lengths of prison sentences imposed for sex
Standard sentences
may therefore represent one possible mechanism for increasing the values of
fines imposed in OHS cases (for example,
by introducing a monetary standard
sentence for breach of duty offences).
8.27 However,
standard sentences may be ill-suited to an OHS context for a number of
First, standard
sentences would make the exercise of sentencing OHS offences even more complex
than it already is.
Second, there
may be unintended consequences of imposing a monetary standard sentence for the
first time (given that all other standard
sentences are currently set as prison
terms) and applying a standard sentence to defendant companies for the first
standard sentences for OHS offences have the potential to reinforce and compound
the current approach whereby the size of the
company appears to have little
effect on the size of the penalty in OHS cases. The reason standard sentences
may have this effect
is that they are intentionally formulated only with
reference to the ‘objective factors affecting the relative seriousness
that offence’.
contrast, the size of the company is a subjective factor. So while standard
sentences for breach of duty offences have the potential
to significantly
increase sentencing practices, there are two likely scenarios: in the first,
sentencing practices hover close to
the standard sentence because it has a
powerful effect on decision-making, and the size of the company continues to be
irrelevant consideration in OHS cases; in the second, sentencing
practices start to more significantly reflect the size of the company
diverge widely below and above the standard sentence, such that it is not truly
a ‘standard’ sentence.
A guideline judgment from the Court of Appeal
2004, the Court of Appeal has had the power to provide sentencing courts with
broad sentencing guidance via what are known as
judgments’.
involve the Court of Appeal providing guidance about qualitative matters, such
as the weighting of sentencing purposes or sentencing
factors, or quantitative
matters, such as ‘the appropriate level or range of sentences for a
particular offence or class of
The court can
give a guideline judgment on application by a party to an appeal, on application
by the Attorney-General (since 2017)
or on its own
2013, the Court of Appeal twice invited an application from the Director of
Public Prosecutions for a guideline judgment in relation
to the offence of
intentionally causing serious injury and suggested that it would consider giving
a guideline judgment on its own
occurred. In 2016, the Royal Commission into Family Violence recommended that
the Director of Public Prosecutions seek
a guideline judgment within two years
in relation to the sentencing of family violence
That also never
there has only been one guideline judgment since guideline judgments were
introduced almost 20 years
And the Attorney-General
has not sought a guideline judgment since being given that power in 2017.
judgments were introduced in Victoria as a ‘mechanism to promote greater
consistency of approach in sentencing’
and to allow the Court of Appeal to
‘articulate unifying principles to guide the exercise of judicial
discretion’.
been a number of guideline judgments (albeit not since 2004) in New South
where they have been
described as ‘a mechanism for structuring discretion, rather than
restricting
discretion’.
also previously described guideline judgments as ‘the best legislative
mechanism to provide guidance that will promote
consistency of approach and
promote public confidence in the criminal justice
continue to hold that view about the significant potential of guideline
judgments, their continued rarity, even in the wake
of the 2017 reforms, leaves
us dubious about the appetite for a guideline judgment on OHS offences from the
various entities required
– either the Director of Public Prosecutions or
the Attorney-General, and the Court of Appeal itself.
An ‘uplift’ judgment from the Court of
Victorian Court of Appeal has developed a unique line of case law in Australia
with what are loosely described as ‘uplift’
cases. Similar to a
guideline judgment, this is a case where the Court of Appeal scrutinises current
sentencing practices for a particular
for an ‘uplift’ in sentencing practices by first-instance courts.
been nine uplift cases since 2010, all but one (
which were in offender-initiated sentence appeals, relating to the following
causing serious injury by glassing (2010);
confrontational
aggravated burglary (2012);
negligently
causing serious injury by driving (2015);
driving causing death (2016);
cultivating a
commercial quantity of narcotic plants (2016);
trafficking in a
commercial quantity of a drug of dependence (2017);
rape by digital
penetration (2017); and
Potentially,
if there is no appetite for a guideline judgment on OHS offences, the Director
of Public Prosecutions could seek an uplift
to sentencing practices instead.
Indeed, as mentioned, in 2011 the Director of Public Prosecutions asked the
Court of Appeal to provide
guidance on sentencing ranges in OHS
Though the appeal was
dismissed (see [8.18]), the court did comment that ‘sentencing practice in
cases of this kind are in
need of appellate consideration ... to give some
guidance to sentencing judges as to the adequacy of the current sentencing
practices’.
Director of Public Prosecutions has, though, not sought an ‘uplift’
to sentencing practices for any offence since
Coupled with not having
sought a guideline judgment since 2014, there may be a lack of inclination from
the Director to seek an uplift
in sentencing for OHS offences.
Assessing the penalty unit value at sentencing
8.35 Another
avenue to increase the values of fines imposed on OHS offences – and
perhaps all offences – could be to change
the current prevailing practice
of assessing penalty unit values at the date of the offending, and instead apply
the relevant penalty
unit value at the date of sentencing.
heard during consultation that the prevailing approach is to apply the relevant
penalty unit value as at the date of offence. The
rationale, we were told, is
that to do otherwise would represent a retrospective increase in the maximum
penalty. The case law in
OHS cases certainly supports this position, with courts
clearly applying the penalty unit value at the date of offence to determine
the maximum fine and any jurisdictional
8.37 There is,
however, an alternative view that warrants consideration. Maximum penalties are
not set in dollar values; they are
set in penalty units. Arguably, a fine of 10
penalty units in 2009–10 ($1,168.20) is the same as a fine of 10 penalty
in 2019–20 ($1,652.20). They are both 10 penalty units, which is the
unit of measurement used to set the maximum penalty. Allowing
offenders to
benefit from inflation (through the accrual of interest, the free use of those
funds during the intervening period and
the declining value of a dollar) could
be seen as creating an unfair financial advantage for defendant companies that
are not sentenced
until years after the offending.
for example, the case of
DPP v Heavy
The offending
occurred in the 2014–15 financial year, with an investigation beginning
three years later and protracted criminal
proceedings (two trials) resulting in
the company being found guilty by a jury three and a half years after that. Both
of Appeal and the original sentencing court assessed the applicable
maximum fine for the employer breach of duty offence as $1,328,490
penalty units multiplied by
The company was,
however, not sentenced until February 2022, at which stage the penalty unit
value was $181.74. If that penalty unit
value had applied, the maximum penalty
would have been assessed as $1,635,660 (23% higher).
8.39 As far as
we could discern, this issue has not been litigated in the Court of Appeal.
Instead, it is largely taken for granted
that the applicable penalty unit value
is that at the date of offence.
A sentencing guideline (via a sentencing guidelines
8.40 Another
option could be to introduce a sentencing guideline for Victorian courts dealing
with OHS offences, which would outline
various (discretionary) ranges of
sentencing outcomes based on a number of factors in the case. For instance, in
England and Wales,
an employer will be highly culpable for an OHS offence if it
fails to make appropriate changes following prior incidents exposing
health and safety. Further, the employer will fall into ‘harm category
2’ if the risk creates a medium likelihood
of death, and the employer will
be a medium-sized company if it has an annual turnover of between £10 and
£50 million pounds.
In those circumstances, the court would be required to
consider (but not be bound by) the broad sentencing range set out in the
guideline of between £220,000 and £1.2 million, with a
starting point of £450,000.
this sort of numerical guidance for courts has the potential to significantly
change sentencing practices. When the new sentencing
guideline came into effect
in England and Wales, fine amounts for most OHS offences increased, but
especially for large and very
large organisations, for whom the median fine
increased from £25,000 to £370,800 (effectively, a 1,500%
potential utility of sentencing guidelines for OHS offences in Australia has
been noted on several occasions. They were recommended
by the Industry
Commission in 1995.
almost recommended them but concluded that the then forthcoming power for the
Court of Appeal to give guideline judgments
was a more appropriate vehicle for
such guidance.
The national
review of model OHS laws recommended sentencing guidelines, as did the Boland
Review a decade later, when no guidelines
had yet been
Australia has since commissioned a feasibility study about the introduction of
sentencing guidelines in the model
In response to
that feasibility study, Safe Work’s members made the decision not to
proceed at this time.
2017 the Victorian Government announced that it would be establishing a
sentencing guidelines council, modelled on similar bodies
that have been created
in England and Wales, and in Scotland. We were asked for advice about the most
appropriate model for such
a body being established in Victoria. In responding
to those terms of reference, we published a consultation paper as well as a
We received a
number of submissions in the course of our inquiry, including from WorkSafe
Victoria, which argued strongly in favour
of sentencing guidelines to address
‘public perceptions of leniency and
inconsistency’.
A legislated sentencing guideline
is an alternative mechanism for introducing sentencing guidelines that may
achieve the same aim of changing sentencing
practices. In particular, the
Victorian Government could, in the unique context of OHS offences, introduce a
legislated sentencing
guideline in the
. It would have a similar
appearance and function to the health and safety offences sentencing guideline
published in England and
Wales, but rather than being developed by an
independent body, the guideline would be introduced by parliament.
8.45 Such an
approach would introduce a sentencing guideline only for a specific type of
offence without first needing to establish
an entire sentencing guidelines
council. Like standard sentence legislation, such a sentencing guideline could
unmoor existing sentencing
practices by limiting the sentencing practices to
which courts should have reference. In the absence of any appetite for an uplift
or guideline judgment from the Director of Public Prosecutions or Court of
Appeal, a legislative solution may be the next best thing.
As with the
sentencing guidelines in England and Wales, the only obligation would be for
courts to take the sentencing guideline
into account, while retaining discretion
to sentence anywhere within a particular range, or even outside that range if
the circumstances
of the case warrant it. The sentencing ranges could be set in
penalty units, rather than dollar values. There should not be any constitutional
issues given that various other means of structuring judicial discretion have
been upheld over time (for example, mandatory sentences).
This approach would
ideally be the subject of community consultation to ensure any new sentencing
guidelines would best reflect community
expectations.
Fine amounts for OHS offences
Question 16
: If fine amounts for OHS
offences should be increased, what would be the best way to achieve that
of fines for OHS offences
9.1 This chapter
considers the issues that arise in the enforcement of fines imposed for OHS
offences. The process for collection
of fines is not always straightforward, the
ultimate recipient of the money paid is not clear, many fines go unpaid,
directors are
(currently) never made personally liable for a company’s
fines, and there is a clear pattern of companies ‘phoenixing’
– that is, going into liquidation only to re-emerge in form and substance
soon after. If fines for OHS offences are not paid,
it is not clear how those
fines could achieve the various purposes of sentencing for which they were
our statistical report, we found that 43% of total fine amounts imposed in OHS
cases in the 4.5-year period to June 2021 went unpaid,
amounting to $10.3
Court fines for OHS offences: Where do they go?
better understand the process for the collection, management and enforcement of
court fines for OHS offences, we spoke with
Fines Victoria, WorkSafe and the
Magistrates’ Court.
a court imposes a fine for an OHS offence, there are four possible avenues for
payment. First, if the offender pays the fine
to the court registry on the day,
enforcement processes are never initiated. Second, if the fine has not been paid
on the day, it
will usually be referred to Fines Victoria for collection and
management (and, if necessary,
enforcement).
Third, if the
fine has not been paid on the day
the court has made a specific order
section 69Y
Sentencing Act
, the fine remains with the court
for enforcement, rather than being referred to Fines Victoria. Fourth, WorkSafe
Victoria may invoice
the offender directly. We were told that the instructing
solicitors in WorkSafe prosecutions will advise their finance team when
is imposed, and request that an invoice be generated. The finance team then
invoices the courts, Fines Victoria or the offender
9.5 In all, OHS
offenders may potentially be interacting with any of three agencies – the
court that imposed the fine, Fines
Victoria or WorkSafe – in paying the
Figure 3: Process for paying court fines for OHS
imposes a fine on the offender.
pays the fine to the court registry on the day. If the offender doesn’t
pay the fine on the day:
court refers the fine to Fines Victoria
fine remains with the court for enforcement
(section 69Y)
prosecutions notifies the finance team and the WorkSafe finance team invoices
the offender.
then appears to be some inconsistency in how court fines for OHS offences are
distributed. There is a default position in the
Sentencing Act
court fines for any offences ‘must be paid into the Consolidated
Fund’ for general use.
Consistent with this, we heard that some court fines in OHS cases are being paid
into consolidated revenue.
9.7 There is,
however, also a potentially competing provision in the
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
(Vic) that has been interpreted as
displacing that default position. That provision reads:
There must be paid into the [WorkCover Authority] Fund — (a) any amount
received or recovered by or on behalf of [WorkSafe]
as a fee or as a penalty for
an offender under ... the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
unless the regulations expressly provide
on this provision, many fines imposed in OHS cases (indeed, most of them) are
paid by the courts and Fines Victoria directly
to WorkSafe (into the WorkCover
Authority Fund).
Monies paid
into that fund are required to be used in a variety of ways, including paying
injured workers any compensation they are
entitled to, assisting courts to
offset the costs of workers compensation proceedings, and funding WorkSafe
Arguably, the
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
supports this interpretation, stating that section 513 ‘provides
for payments into and out of the fund ... including the payment
into the fund
for amounts recovered as penalties for offences against Acts administered by
WorkSafe Victoria’.
preliminary view is that these two pathways should not be operating in parallel.
fines for OHS offences would be disbursed
the WorkCover Authority Fund
to consolidated revenue. If the
legislative intent of
section 513
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2013
(Vic) was to direct all court fines for OHS offences
to WorkSafe, that should be made clear. Other laws state in explicit terms where
fines are to be dispersed. For example, the
Environment Protection Act
(Vic) expressly provides that fines for offences under the Act are
to go to the Consolidated Fund, except in certain
circumstances.
Wales legislation gives courts discretion, if the court considers it necessary,
to direct that a portion (up to 50%) of
a fine be paid to the prosecuting agency
(for example, SafeWork NSW).
In Western Australia, the equivalent
Sentencing Act
contains a schedule
specifying the entity or account to which a fine imposed under certain Acts is
to be paid or
9.10 WorkSafe is
in an unusual position as a regulator that recovers the monetary amounts
resulting from its prosecutions. Victoria
Police and the Director of Public
Prosecutions do not recover fines imposed on offenders they prosecute –
those amounts go
to consolidated revenue.
Payment of fines
Question 17
: What could be some
opportunities to simplify or improve the process for paying fines imposed in OHS
Liquidated companies
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) publishes statistics on
the number of companies entering external administration
each year. During the
reference period, the number of companies entering external administration in
Victoria remained relatively
stable, ranging from 1,325 to 2,935 per
A majority of these
companies either entered voluntary administration or were wound up by the court
or creditors.
9.12 When courts
are sentencing a company that has been wound up, or is in the process of
liquidation, the current approach is to
ignore the likelihood that the fine will
never be paid and instead sentence as though the company is still solvent. In
DPP v Concorp Group Pty Ltd
for example, the court said:
The sentencing principles in relation to these matters are clear and settled.
First, notwithstanding the company is now in liquidation,
I take account of the
decision of Teague J in
R v Denbo Pty Ltd
. In that decision, Justice
Teague proposed to fix a fine at the amount which would have been appropriate if
the company had remained
as thriving as it appeared to have been at the time of
the contravention of the duty. But otherwise, the fine must reflect the need
take into account normal sentencing principles. In other words, I take from
that I am to ignore the fact that the company is in liquidation and
the fine will never be paid.
the statistical report, we found that only 7% of companies that were
deregistered as at July 2023 had fully paid their OHS fine,
compared with 79% of
companies that were still
Improving payment rates of fines in OHS cases
$2.5 million in fines for OHS offences goes unpaid each
On this understanding,
it is worth exploring options to improve payment rates. This is in part because
that revenue is appropriately
received by the Victorian Government to pay for
important public services, but more importantly because the purposes of
(including the related confidence of the community in the justice
system) depend on sentences being enforced. We have identified
two potential
avenues to improve fine payment rates: first, making ‘phoenix’
companies liable for fines imposed on their
predecessors, and second, increasing
directors’ liability for fines imposed on companies.
Phoenix companies
2011, Schmidt described the ‘well-known’ phenomenon of the
phoenix company
as a scenario where:
a company is wound up once criminal proceedings are concluded and the business
then springs back into life under the guise of a new
company without the fine
imposed on the old company being paid and the new business not carrying the
baggage of the old company’s
2016, a County Court judge called for legislative intervention to address this
‘standard practice’ of companies liquidating
and reforming to avoid
liability for (among other debts) any fines that might be imposed for OHS
In that case, the
defendant company was found guilty of failing to provide a safe workplace for
employees after an employee had been
killed by a suspended cage loaded with
flattened cardboard boxes falling on top of him. The company had an annual
turnover of about
$1 million at the time and employed 11 staff, but soon after
the incident the company went into liquidation. The court observed that
company had been sold and was likely trading again. The company received an
$800,000 fine with conviction, but because the company
was in liquidation, the
fine was all but unenforceable. The court said:
The company has shown no remorse and in evidence on the plea, were a number of
documents, demonstrating the positive steps those
responsible for its
administration have taken to avoid the financial consequences of this offending.
In short, the company was placed
in liquidation for reasons which are recorded
as including a contingent WorkCover debt (whatever that might mean), there was
to deregister the company despite the existence of these charges, and
it seems likely that the business has been sold to another
related entity and
has already risen from the ashes and is trading.
I was informed by the learned prosecutor that this form of rearrangement of
companies charged with offences under this Act occurs
so often that it is now
almost ‘standard practice’. It does seem to me that some form of
legislative intervention is
required to give penalties imposed for breaches of
this important legislation some real
9.17 There are a
number of potential solutions to this practice, some of which could potentially
occur in tandem, while others may
be too unworkable to be feasible. First,
render company directors personally liable (under certain circumstances) if a
company goes
into liquidation before paying any fines imposed. Second,
disqualify directors of the liquidated company from being directors of
company for a period of time – this may not result in any fines being
paid, but it could prevent the company from
re-emerging under a different name.
Third, introduce the concept of successor liability (as it is known in the
United States), where
if a liquidated company re-emerges in the near future in a
functionally near-identical form (that is, the same director(s), same
same functions, etc.) it would be financially liable for past fines.
Director liability for OHS fines
are currently three stages of criminal proceedings at which company directors
can be rendered liable for fines imposed
for OHS offences committed by defendant
companies: charged as a co-offender, ordered liable
sentencing and
ordered liable
sentencing. Some directors are already being
prosecuted (i.e. the first stage) for one or more OHS offences alongside the
However, directors do not appear to have ever been ordered liable for
fines at or after sentencing (i.e. the second and third stages)
in Victoria.
Sentencing Act
allows a court to order that a director be
liable for any fine that it imposes on a company, but only if the company is not
to pay the fine, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
company ‘would not be able to meet any liabilities that
it incurred’
immediately before the
Given that most
OHS risks eventuate in companies that are solvent (at the time), it is unlikely
that – without legislative
reform – this provision could be used
very often. One possibility could be to expand the application of this provision
cases where the company appears to be unable to meet any liabilities
at the time of sentencing, rather than immediately before the
is also possible for Fines Victoria to deem someone a ‘declared
director’ after sentencing, rendering that person liable
for fines imposed
on a company.
In particular,
where the sheriff is unable to locate and recover sufficient property belonging
to a company to cover the amount of
a fine imposed on it, Fines Victoria may
inspect the company’s ASIC records and issue a notice declaring that a
company director
is jointly and severally liable for the fine. Four weeks after
the notice has been issued, Fines Victoria may take enforcement action
that director, provided it also supplies the director with a notice of final
demand. The director can, though, challenge
that declaration on a number of
Until recently,
these provisions had not been used, but Fines Victoria advise that it has
‘now used the provisions in relation
to a small number of
Disqualification from being a director
measure to deter illegal phoenix activity is to give all company directors a
unique identifying number. In 2021, a Director Register
was established,
requiring all company directors to register with ASIC for a director identifying
number (DIN). This followed the
Australian Law Reform Commission’s enquiry
into corporate criminal
responsibility.
It could be
plausible for Victorian courts to disqualify people registered on that system
from acting as company directors for a
period of time. There may, however, be
constitutional implications in Victorian courts making orders relating to a
federal scheme.
This issue would warrant further investigation.
Successor liability for phoenix companies
liability has been described as ‘a safety valve ensuring just results in
the face of corporate law’s limitations
liability’.
Effectively, this option would involve an application to a court for a
declaration that a company is functionally the same as its
predecessor –
through an analysis of its directors, staff, plant, clients, etc. – and
should therefore be held liable
for any court fines (or other debts) imposed on
the predecessor.
Payment of fines
Question 18
: What could be some
opportunities to improve fine payment rates for OHS offences?
Appendix 1: Preliminary consultation
7 March 2023
Meeting with WorkSafe Victoria
18 April 2023
Meeting with WorkSafe Victoria
Meeting with Fines Victoria
2 June 2023
Meeting with County Court of Victoria
2 June 2023
Meeting with Rob O’Neill (barrister)
6 June 2023
Meeting with Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee
7 June 2023
Meeting with Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
8 June 2023
Meeting with Herbert Smith Freehills
8 June 2023
Meeting with Duncan Chisholm (barrister)
13 June 2023
Meeting with Tim Bourbon (barrister)
13 June 2023
Meeting with Seyfarth Shaw
14 June 2023
Meeting with Australian Industry Group
15 June 2023
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
19 June 2023
Meeting with WorkSafe Victoria
20 June 2023
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
20 June 2023
Meeting with Office of Public Prosecutions
28 June 2023
Meeting with Victorian Court of Appeal
28 June 2023
Meeting with Sentencing Council for England and Wales
4 July 2023
Meeting with Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office
5 July 2023
Meeting with Andrew Palmer KC (barrister, as he then was)
6 July 2023
Meeting with Victorian Trades Hall Council
11 July 2023
Meeting with Ariadne French (barrister)
11 July 2023
Meeting with Paul Holdenson (barrister)
25 July 2023
Meeting with Comcare
25 July 2023
Meeting with Fines Victoria
27 July 2023
Meeting with Environment Protection Authority Victoria
15 August 2023
Meeting with Victim Services, Support and Reform
17 August 2023
Meeting with Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
1 September 2023
Meeting with the National Heavy Vehicle Regulator
13 November 2023
Meeting with Safe Work Australia
Appendix 2: Maximum penalties for offences under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Maximum penalty individual
Maximum penalty company
Offences with maximum penalties of imprisonment
Workplace manslaughter
25 years’ imprisonment
100,000 penalty units
Recklessly engage in conduct placing another person in danger of serious
injury in a workplace
5 years’ imprisonment
1,800 penalty units
20,000 penalty units
Assault, intimidate or threaten an inspector
2 years’ imprisonment
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Offences with:
penalties of 9,000 penalty units (for companies)
penalties of 1,800 penalty units (for individuals)
fail to reasonably provide and maintain a safe working
environment for employees
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
fail to reasonably ensure other people not exposed to
health and safety risks
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Self-employed person
fail to reasonably ensure other people not
exposed to health and safety risks
1,800 penalty units
fail to reasonably take care for their own safety or the
safety of others
1,800 penalty units
intentionally or recklessly interfering with, or misusing,
anything provided for health and safety
1,800 penalty units
Manager/controller
of workplace
fail to reasonably ensure
workplace and means of entering/leaving are safe
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Designer of plant
fail to reasonably ensure it is safe and without
risks to health
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Manufacturer of plant
fail to reasonably ensure it is safe and
without risks to health
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Supplier of plant
fail to reasonably ensure it is safe and without
risks to health
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Person installing, erecting or commissioning plant
reasonably ensure it is safe and without risks to health
1,800 penalty units
9,000 penalty units
Offences with:
penalties of 2,500 penalty units (for companies)
penalties of 500 penalty units (for individuals)
Breach enforceable undertaking
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Designer of building or structure
fail to reasonably ensure it is
safe and without risks to health
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Employer or self-employed person carry out work or activity without
required licence or registration
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Breach provisional improvement notice
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Discriminating against an employee because they have raised health and
safety issues (or similar)
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Breach non-disturbance notice
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Breach improvement notice
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Breach prohibition notice
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Fail to comply with inspector’s direction
500 penalty units
2,500 penalty units
Offences with:
penalties of 1,200 penalty units (for companies)
penalties of 240 penalty units (for individuals)
Employer fail to monitor health and conditions
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Employer or self-employed person fail to notify of incident
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Employer or self-employed person fail to provide written record of
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Employer or self-employed person fail to keep copy of record of
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Employer or self-employed person fail to preserve incident site
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Give false or misleading information
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Product false or misleading document
240 penalty units
1,200 penalty units
Offences with:
penalties of 900 or fewer penalty units (for companies)
penalties of 180 or fewer penalty units (for individuals)
Employer fail to consult with employees
180 penalty units
900 penalty units
Employer fail to consult with other employers in relation to labour
180 penalty units
900 penalty units
Person use plant that is not appropriately registered or licensed
100 penalty units
500 penalty units
Person use substance that is not appropriately registered or licensed
100 penalty units
500 penalty units
Person carry out work or activity without registration or licence
100 penalty units
500 penalty units
Carry out work without prescribed qualification
100 penalty units
500 penalty units
Carry out work without permit
100 penalty units
500 penalty units
Fail to keep information relating to health and safety of employees
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to provide information/documents to WorkSafe
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Coerce in respect of negotiations for designated working group
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Refuse to allow health and safety representative to attend course
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to provide information to health and safety representatives
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Disclose identifying health information
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Employer fail to ensure its representative in resolving a health and safety
issue is an appropriate person
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Authorised representative obstruct, hinder, intimidate or threaten an
employer or employee
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Obstruct, hinder, intimidate or threaten an authorised representative
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Impersonate authorised representative
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to produce document to inspector
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Breach WorkSafe terms/conditions for return of a thing
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to assist inspector
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to allow entry to inspector
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Hinder, obstruct, conceal from or prevent assistance to inspector
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Impersonate inspector
60 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fail to reasonably ensure negotiations start within 14 days
10 penalty units
50 penalty units
Fail to give written notice establishing designated working group
10 penalty units
50 penalty units
Fail to give written notice of variation of agreement
10 penalty units
50 penalty units
Fail to establish health and safety committee within 3 months
10 penalty units
50 penalty units
Fail to circulate provisional improvement notice
5 penalty units
25 penalty units
Fail to keep list of health and safety representatives
5 penalty units
25 penalty units
Fail to circulate notice
5 penalty units
25 penalty units
Fail to provide name and address to inspector
5 penalty units
Bibliography
K. Lee, ‘Not Quite a Brave New World: Victoria’s Occupational Health
and Safety Act 2004’
[2005] DeakinLawRw 20
(2005) 10(2)
Deakin Law Review
Asher, Nicole, Jarrod Whittaker and Karen Percy, ‘Hazelwood Power
Station Operators Fined Nearly $2 million over 2014 Latrobe
Valley Mine
(19 May 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-05-19/hazelwood-power-station-latrobe-valley-2014-mine-fire-fine/12261858>.
Australian Government,
National Review into Model Occupational Health and
Safety Laws: First Report
(Australian Government, 2008).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Compliance with the
Trade Practices Act
: Final Report
(Australian Law Reform Commission, 1994).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Final Report:
Corporate Criminal
Responsibility
, ALRC Report 136
(Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
ALRC Report 108
(Australian Law
Reform Commission, 2008).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders,
ALRC Report 103 (Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Securities and Investments Commission, ‘Insolvency
Statistics – Series 1: Companies Entering External Administration
Controller Appointments’ (asic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://asic.gov.au/regulatory-resources/find-a-document/statistics/insolvency-statistics-up-to-31-july-2022/insolvency-statistics-series-1-companies-entering-external-administration-and-controller-appointments/>.
Australian Senate, Education and Employment References Committee,
Never Came Home – The Framework Surrounding the Prevention, Investigation
and Prosecution of Industrial Deaths in Australia
(Australian Senate,
Education and Employment References Committee, 2018).
Bagaric, Mirko, ‘In Search of a Coherent Approach to Community
Protection in Sentencing’
[2020] MonashULawRw 12
(2020) 46(3)
Monash University Law Review
Bennett, Mark W., ‘Confronting Cognitive “Anchoring Effect”
and “Blind Spot” Biases in Federal Sentencing:
A Modest Solution for
Reforming a Fundamental Flaw’
(2014) 104(3)
Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology
Bennett, Trevor, Katy Holloway and David Farrington, ‘The Statistical
Association Between Drug Misuse and Crime: A Meta-Analysis’
(2008) 13(2)
Aggression and Violent Behavior
Boland, Marie,
Review of the Model Work Health and Safety Laws: Final
(Safe Work Australia, 2018).
Braithwaite, John and Gilbert Geis, ‘On Theory and Action for Corporate
Crime Control’
(1982) 28(2)
Crime & Delinquency
Braithwaite, John and Peter Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety
Enforcement in Australia
A Report to the National Occupational Health
and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, 1985).
Casey, Rebecca, Eric Tucker, Leah F. Vosko and Andrea M. Noack, ‘Using
Tickets in Employment Standards Inspections: Deterrence
as Effective Enforcement
in Ontario, Canada’ (2018) 29(2)
The Economic and Labour Relations
Centre for Innovative Justice, ‘Restorative Justice Practices
WorkSafe’ (cij.org.au, 2016)
<https://cij.org.au/research-projects/restorative-justice-practices-worksafe/>.
Chalmers, James and Fiona Leverick, ‘Fair Labelling in Criminal
(2008) 71(2)
Modern Law Review
Chapman, Gretchen B. and Brian H. Bornstein, ‘The More You Ask For, the
More You Get: Anchoring in Personal Injury Verdicts’
(1996) 10(6)
Applied Cognitive Psychology
Consumer Affairs Australia and New Zealand,
Australian Consumer Law Review
(Consumer Affairs Australia and New Zealand, 2017).
Cornish, Derek B. and Ronald V. Clarke (eds),
The Reasoning Criminal:
Rational Choice Perspectives on Offending
(Springer-Verlag, 1986).
Deloitte Access Economics,
Safer, Healthier, Wealthier: The Economic Value
of Reducing Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses
(Deloitte Access Economics,
Department of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Restorative Justice for
Victim Survivors of Family Violence’ (justice.vic.gov.au,
<https://www.justice.vic.gov.au/fvrjservice>.
Englich, Birte, Thomas Mussweiler and Fritz Strack, ‘Playing Dice with
Criminal Sentences: The Influence of Irrelevant Anchors
on Experts’
Judicial Decision Making’ (2006) 32(2)
Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin
Erez, Edna,
Victim Impact Statements
, Trends & Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice no. 33
(Australian Institute of Criminology, 1991).
Fisse, Brent and John Braithwaite,
The Impact of Publicity on Corporate
(State University of New York Press, 1983).
Flynn, Asher and Arie Freiberg,
Plea Negotiations
Final Report to
the Criminology Research Advisory Council
(Criminology Research Grants,
Australian Institute of Criminology, 2018).
Freeman, James, Sherrie-Anne Kaye, Verity Truelove and Jeremy Davey,
‘Is There an Observational Effect? An Exploratory Study
into Speed Cameras
and Self-Reported Offending Behaviour’ (2017) 108(1)
Accident Analysis
& Prevention
Freiberg, Arie, ‘Bridging Gaps, Not Leaping Chasms: Trust, Confidence
and Sentencing Councils’ (2021) 12(3)
International Journal for Court
Administration
Freiberg, Arie,
Fox & Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal
Law in Victoria
(3rd ed., Thomson Reuters, 2014).
Freiberg, Arie and Victoria Moore, ‘Disbelieving Suspense: Suspended
Sentences of Imprisonment and Public Confidence in the
Criminal Justice
System’ (2009) 42(1)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
Grooms, Wes and DJ Biddle, ‘Dogs and Crime: Reduced Rates of Property
Crime in Homes with Dogs in Milwaukee’ (2018) 26(1)
Hamilton, Mark,
Environmental Crime and Restorative Justice: Justice as
Meaningful Involvement
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2021).
Hardy, Tess, ‘Digging into Deterrence: An Examination of
Deterrence-Based Theories and Evidence in Employment Standards
Enforcement’
(2021) 37(2–
International Journal of Comparative
Labour Law and Industrial Relations
Health and Safety Executive, ‘The Victim Personal Statement’
(hse.gov.uk, 2020)
<https://www.hse.gov.uk/foi/internalops/ocs/100-199/130_12/index.htm>.
Heffernan, Madeleine, ‘Are the Profits Better at Hungry
Sydney Morning Herald
(17 February 2017)
<https://www.smh.com.au/business/companies/are-the-profits-better-at-hungry-jacks-20170217-gufigw.html>.
Hopkins, Andrew, ‘Prosecuting for Workplace Death and Injury’
(Paper presented at the Australian Institute of Criminology
Conference: Crime in
the Workplace, Wollongong, 24–26 November 1993).
Horder, Jeremy, ‘Rethinking Non-Fatal Offences Against the
(1994) 14(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Indermaur, David and Lynne Roberts,
Confidence in the Criminal Justice
, Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice no. 387
(Australian Institute of Criminology, 2009).
Industry Commission,
Work, Health and Safety: An Inquiry into Occupational
Health and Safety
Volume 1: Report
(Industry Commission, 1995).
Industry Commission,
Work, Health and Safety: An Inquiry into Occupational
Health and Safety
Volume 2: Report
(Industry Commission, 1995).
Jamieson, Suzanne, Belinda Reeve, Toni Schofield and Ronald McCallum,
‘OHS Prosecutions: Do They Deter Other Companies from
Offending?’
(2010) 26(3)
Journal of Health, Safety and Environment
Johnstone, Richard, ‘Rethinking OHS Enforcement’, in Elizabeth
Bluff, Neil Gunningham and Richard Johnstone (eds),
OHS Regulation for a
Changing World of Work
(The Federation Press, 2004) 146–178.
Johnstone, Richard, ‘Work Health and Safety and the Criminal Law in
Australia’ (2013) 11(2)
Policy and Practice in Health and Safety
Judicial College of Victoria,
Sentencing Manual Case Summaries
<https://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/bench-books/sentencing-manual-case-summaries>.
Judicial College of Victoria,
Victorian Sentencing Manual
2022) <https://resources.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/article/669236>.
Judiciary of Scotland, ‘Sentencing Statements (HMA v Broomhall
(judiciary.scot.com, 2023)
<https://judiciary.scot/home/sentences-judgments/sentences-and-opinions/2023/06/05/hma-v-broomhall-ltd>.
Kahan, Dan M. and Eric A. Posner, ‘Shaming White-Collar Criminals: A
Proposal for Reform of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines’
(1999) 42(S1)
Journal of Law & Economics
Kuney, George W., ‘A Taxonomy and Evaluation of Successor Liability
(Revisited)’ (2017) 18
Transactions: The Tennessee Journal of Business
Law Commission for England and Wales,
Corporate Criminal Liability: An
Options Paper
(Law Commission for England and Wales, 2022).
Levitske Jr., John, ‘Will the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s New
Proposed Guidelines for Crimes by Organizations Provide
an Effective Deterrent
for Crimes Attributed to Corporations? (Or Will the New Proposed Guidelines Put
an Exclamation Point in the
Sentence for Corporate Crime?)’ (1991) 29(4)
Duquesne Law Review
Lund, Dorothy S. and Natasha Sarin, ‘Corporate Crime and Punishment
Post-Crisis: An Empirical Study’ (2021) 100
Texas Law Review
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Court Fund’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2023)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/court-fund>.
Maxwell, Chris, ‘A New Approach to Criminal Appeals’ (Speech,
Victorian Bar, 7 October 2009).
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(State of Victoria, 2004).
McCallum, Ron, Toni Schofield and Belinda Reeve, ‘The Role of the
Judiciary in Occupational Health and Safety Prosecutions:
Institutional
Processes and the Production of Deterrence’ (2012) 54(5)
Industrial Relations
McGorrery, Paul and Marilyn McMahon, ‘Causing Someone Else to Commit
Suicide: Incitement or Manslaughter?’ (2019) 44(1)
Alternative Law
Mendeloff, John and Wayne B. Gray, ‘Inside the Black Box: How do OSHA
Inspections Lead to Reductions in Workplace Injuries?’
(2005) 27(2)
National Judicial College of Australia, ‘Sentencing Corporations’
(csd.njca.com.au, 2023)
<https://csd.njca.com.au/principles-practice-categories-of-federal-offenders-corporations2/>.
NSW Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Corporate Offenders
, Report 102
(New South Wales Law Reform Commission, 2003).
NSW Sentencing Council, ‘Guideline Judgments’
(sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au, 2023)
<https://sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au/about-sentencing/guideline-judgments.html>.
NT WorkSafe, ‘Woolworths Group Limited’ (worksafe.nt.gov.au,
<https://worksafe.nt.gov.au/laws-and-compliance/enforceable-undertakings/woolworths-ltd>.
Office of the Work Health and Safety Prosecutor, ‘Court Reports’
(owhsp.qld.gov.au, 2023)
<https://www.owhsp.qld.gov.au/court-reports/2023>.
Orth, Uli, ‘Secondary Victimization of Crime Victims by Criminal
Proceedings’ (2002) 15(4)
Social Justice Research
Parker, Christine, ‘Reinventing Regulation Within the Corporation:
Compliance-Oriented Regulatory Innovation’
(2000) 32(5)
Administration
Paternoster, Raymond and Sally Simpson, ‘A Rational Choice Theory of
Corporate Crime’, in Ronald V. Clarke and Marcus
Felston (eds),
Activity and Rational Choice
(Routledge, 1993) 37–58.
Rachlinski, Jeffrey J., Andrew J. Wistrich and Chris Guthrie, ‘Can
Judges Make Reliable Numeric Judgments? Distorted Damages
(2015) 90(2)
Indiana Law Journal
Safe Work Australia, ‘Implementation of WHS Ministers’ Agreed
Response to the Review of the Model WHS Laws’ (safeworkaustralia.gov.au,
https://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/law-and-regulation/model-whs-laws/implementation-whs-ministers-agreed-response-review-model-whs-laws.
Safe Work Australia, ‘Key Work Health and Safety Statistics Australia,
2023’ (data.safeworkaustralia.gov.au, 2023)
<https://data.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/insights/key-whs-stats-2023>.
SafeWork SA, ‘Prosecutions’ (safework.sa.gov.au, 2023)
<https://safework.sa.gov.au/enforcement/prosecutions>.
Schmidt, Monika, ‘Sentencing Corporate Offenders: Conundrums and Areas
of Potential Law Reform’ (2011) 10(2)
Judicial Review: Selected
Conference Papers: Journal of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales
Schofield, Toni, ‘Deterring Workplace Deaths and Injuries: Legal
Sanctions and Outcomes or Institutional Process?’ (Paper
presented at the
Annual Conference of the Australian and New Zealand Associations of Sociology,
University of Auckland, 3–7
December 2007).
Schofield, Toni, Belinda Reeve and Ronald McCallum, ‘Deterrence and OHS
Prosecutions: Prosecuted Employers’ Responses’
(2009) 25(4)
Journal of Occupational Health and Safety – Australia and New Zealand
Scholz, John T. and Wayne B. Gray, ‘OSHA Enforcement and Workplace
Injuries: A Behavioral Approach to Risk Assessment’
(1990) 3(3)
of Risk and Uncertainty
Sentencing Advisory Council,
A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria:
Issues Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2017).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria:
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘A Sentencing Guidelines Council for
Victoria: Submissions’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au,
https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/publications/submissions-for-sentencing-guidelines-council-for-victoria>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Higher
Courts’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2023)
https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-higher-courts>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2023)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/cases-sentenced-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Attitudes to Offence Seriousness
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2012).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Does Imprisonment Deter? A Review of the
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2011).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Guilty Pleas in the Higher Courts: Rates,
Timing, and Discounts
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Major Driving Offences: Current Sentencing
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Mandatory Sentencing: Information Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Maximum Penalty for Negligently Causing
Serious Injury: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2007).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Final Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2023).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentence Indication and Specified Discounts:
Final Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2007).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence Safety
Notices and Intervention Orders: Third Monitoring Report
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Guidance in Victoria: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Matters: Mandatory Sentencing
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Sex Offences in Victoria: An
Analysis of Three Sentencing Reforms
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate
Sentencing Orders – Suspended Sentences: Final Report—Part 2
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Assessing the Impact and
Implementation of the Sentencing Council’s Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food
Safety and Hygiene Offences Definitive Guideline
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2019).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Corporate Manslaughter
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2016).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Corporate Offenders: Fraud,
Bribery and Money Laundering
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
General Guideline: Overarching
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2019).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences Guidelines:
Consultation
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2014).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Response to
Consultation
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2015).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Definitive
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2016).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Organisations: Breach of Food
Safety and Food Hygiene Regulations
(Sentencing Council for England and
Wales, 2016).
Stanton, Michael, ‘Instruments of Injustice: The Emergence of Mandatory
Sentencing in Victoria’
[2022] MonashULawRw 9
(2022) 48(2)
Monash University Law Review
State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence
, Volume III:
Report and Recommendations
(State of Victoria, 2016).
Stensholt, Bob,
A Report on the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Administrative Review
(Public Accounts and Estimates Committee, 2007).
Sutherland, Edwin H.,
White Collar Crime: The Uncut Version
(Vail-Ballou Press, 1983).
Thornton, Dorothy, Neil A. Gunningham and Robert A. Kagan, ‘General
Deterrence and Corporate Environmental Behavior’
(2005) 27(2)
Tombs, Steve and David Whyte, ‘The Myths and Realities of Deterrence in
Workplace Safety Regulation’ (2013) 53(5)
British Journal of
Criminology
Treacy, Colman, ‘Keynote Address: Criminal Law Review
Conference’
(Public Lecture, Criminal Law Conference, 3 December
Treloar, Alexandra, ‘Olam Orchards Australia, Complete Commodity
Management Plead Guilty over Carwarp Workplace Death’,
December 2020)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-12-18/almond-producer-and-contractor-face-court-on-safety-charges/12995598>.
Truong, Cam H. and Luisa F. Alampi, ‘Increased Civil Pecuniary
Penalties – The “Cost of Doing Business” or
an Effective
Deterrent?’ (2020) 28(1)
Australian Journal of Competition and Consumer
Van Sintemaartensdijk, Iris, Jean-Louis van Gelder, Jan-Willem van Prooijen,
Claire Nee, Marco Otte and Paul van Lange, ‘Assessing
the Deterrent Effect
of Symbolic Guardianship through Neighbourhood Watch Signs and Police Signs: A
Virtual Reality Study’
Psychology, Crime & Law
10.1080/106831.6X.2022.2059480)
<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1068316X.2022.2059480>.
Victorian Government,
Victorian Government Response to the Ministerial
Taskforce on Workplace Sexual Harassment
(Victorian Government, 2022).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to
Sexual Offences
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2016).
Warner, Kate, Julia Davis, Caroline Spiranovic, Helen Cockburn and Arie
Freiberg, ‘Why Sentence? Comparing the Views of Jurors,
Judges and the
Legislature on the Purposes of Sentencing in Victoria, Australia’
Criminology & Criminal Justice
WorkSafe Victoria,
Policy for Victims and Persons Adversely Affected by
(WorkSafe Victoria, 2020).
WorkSafe Victoria,
Prosecution Result Summaries and Enforceable
Undertakings: A Directory of the Most Recent Prosecution and Enforceable
Undertaking
<https://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/prosecution-result-summaries-enforceable-undertakings>.
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries and Enforceable
Undertakings’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2023)
<https://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/prosecution-result-summaries-enforceable-undertakings>.
Arthur’s Seat
Scenic Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 269
Ashdown v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 408
Berichon & Anor v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 319
Boulton & Ors v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Australian Tourism Centre Pty Ltd
(in liq) & Anor
[2010] VSC 571
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Midas Trading (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] VSC 141
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Parking Patrols Vic Pty Ltd &
[2012] VSC 137
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Manningham Property Group Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1448
Di Tonto & Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
Doherty v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 215
Donnelly v The King
[2023] VSCA 120
Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 241
DPP v ABD Group Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1450
DPP v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
DPP v Amcor Packaging Pty Ltd
[2005] VSCA 219
DPP v AM Design and Construction Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
DPP v Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1056
DPP v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
DPP v Best Benchtops and Stone Pty Ltd
[2022] VCC 2296
DPP v Bilic Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 810
DPP v BPL Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 282
DPP v Bradbury Industrial Services Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1029
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Buhagiar and Anor
[1998] 4 VR 540
DPP v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 192
[2023] VCC 200
DPP v Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131
DPP v Concorp Group Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1846
DPP v Condo
[2019] VSCA 181
DPP v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1882
[2009] VSCA 114
DPP v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
DPP (Cth) v Besim
[2017] VSCA 158
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 148
DPP v De Kort
[2019] VCC 291
[2018] VCC 886
DPP v Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1326
DPP v Eliott Engineering Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 266
DPP v Energy Brix Australia Corporation Pty Ltd
[2006] VSCA 116
DPP v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
DPP v Handcock
[2019] VCC 444
DPP v Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1543
DPP v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
DPP v Heavy Mechanics
[2022] VCC 107
DPP v Heavy Mechanics
[2023] VSCA 69
DPP v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
DPP v Keilor-Melton Quarries Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 2139
DPP v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
DPP v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
DPP v Mainline Developments Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 47
DPP v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
DPP v Melbourne Water Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
DPP v Midfield Meat International Pty Ltd
[2021] VCC 2034
DPP v Multiworks
[2021] VCC 1553
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
DPP v Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
DPP v Rapid Perforating Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1167
DPP v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17
DPP v Redback Tree Services
[2017] VCC 1602
DPP v Reynolds (a pseudonym)
[2022] VSCA 263
DPP v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
DPP v Saloon Park Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 709
DPP v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
DPP v SJ & TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
DPP v Specialised Concrete Pumping Victoria Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 105
St Vincent’s Care Services Ltd
[2021] VCC 1035
DPP v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1954
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
DPP v Tooradin Excavations Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1419
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
DPP v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 980
DPP v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553
DPP v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
Eade & Anor v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 142
Esso Australia Pty Ltd v Robertson
[2004] VSCA 79
Gregory (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
Harrison & Anor v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 349
Henry v The King
[2023] VSCA 100
Hogarth v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 302
Kalala v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 223
Kumar v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 191
Midfield Meat International Pty Ltd v The King
[2023] VSCA 106
Nash v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 172
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 198
Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 82
Pasznyk v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 87
Quah v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 164
R v Barro Group Pty Ltd
[2009] VCC 1623
R v Benbrika & Ors
[2009] VSC 21
[1994] VicRp 54
[1994] 2 VR 98
R v FRH Victoria Pty Ltd
[2010] VSCA 18
[2008] VSCA 51
[2007] VSCA 298
R v MacNeil-Brown & Anor
[2008] VSCA 190
R v P & O Ports Ltd
[2006] VCC 667
[2004] VSCA 53
Shrestha v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 364
Stephens v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 121
Tseros v The King
[2023] VSCA 179
Uzun v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 292
VWA v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] VMC 1
VWA v Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
[2011] VMC 14
Whitten v The King
[2023] VSCA 181
Winch v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 141
Australian Capital Territory
Bradley & Joanne Finnigan Pty Ltd v WorkSafe
[2016] ACTSC 158
New South Wales
Ex parte Gerard & Co. Pty Ltd & Anor
[1944] NSWStRp 30
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 370
Ex parte Zietsch & Anor
[1944] NSWStRp 29
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 360
Kennedy v The King
[2022] NSWCCA 215
Linnane (NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
R v Khayat & Anor (No 14)
[2019] NSWSC 1817
R v O’Connor
[2014] NSWCCA 53
R v Zamagias
[2002] NSWCCA 17
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
SafeWork NSW v KD & JT Westbrook Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWDC 255
SafeWork NSW v KD & JT Westbrook Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v MHE-Demag Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 261
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civibuild Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWDC 163
South Australia
Campbell v Maverick Steel Pty Ltd
Campbell v Turner
[2001] TASSC 91
[2016] TASCCA 9
Lefever & Smith v White
[2002] TASSC 19
Reeves v Ranson
[1999] TASSC 52
Commonwealth
ACCC v Apple Pty Ltd (No 4)
ACCC v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 1405
ACCC v Hewlett-Packard Australia Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 653
ACCC v J Hutchinson Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] FCA 1007
ACCC v Lactalis Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] FCA 839
ACCC v Safety Compliance Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2015] FCA 211
ACCC v Sony Interactive Entertainment Network Europe Ltd
ACCC v TPG Internet Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 54
ACCC v TPG Internet Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2012] FCA 629
ASIC v AMP Superannuation Ltd
[2023] FCA 488
ASIC v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
[2022] FCA 1251
ASIC v Aware Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2022] FCA 146
ASIC v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 2)
[2021] FCA 966
ASIC v Insurance Australia Ltd
[2023] FCA 724
ASIC v MLC Ltd
[2023] FCA 539
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (No 2)
[2021] FCA 966
Barbaro & Anor v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Alpha Flight Services Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 1434
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Dimmeys Stores Pty Ltd
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Fletcher & Parker (Balwyn) Pty
[2017] FCA 1521
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Hoskins (Maroondah) Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1973
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Melbourne South Eastern Real
Estate Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 1763
DPP (Cth) v Alkaloids of Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 1424
DPP (Cth) v Nippon Yusen Kabushiki Kaisha
[2017] FCA 876
DPP (Cth) v Vina Money Transfer Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 665
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
Fraser Henleins Pty Ltd v Cody
[1945] HCA 49
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
[2001] HCA 21
Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v ACCC
[2012] FCAFC 20
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft v ACCC
[2021] FCAFC 49
International
R v Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation
(Chelmsford Crown Court, Cavanagh J, 16 June 2021)
R v Nestle UK
[2021] EWCA Crim 1681
R v Tata Steel UK Ltd
[2017] EWCA Crim 704
R v Thames Water Utilities
[2015] EWCA Crim 960
R v University College London
[2018] EWCA Crim 835
R v Whirlpool Appliances Ltd
[2017] EWCA Crim 2186
US v Danilow Pastry Company,
563 F Supp 1159 (SDNY
US v Mitsubishi International Corporation
[1982] USCA9 824
677 F2d 785
Whirlpool UK Appliances Limited v The Queen
[2017] EWCA Crim 2186
Legislation
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Amendment (Child Homicide) Act 2008
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Legislation Amendment Act 2008
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
Environment Protection Act 2017
Environment Protection Act 1970
Fines Reform Act 2014
Heavy Vehicle National Law Application Act 2013
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational Health and Safety Act 1985
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Amendment (Abolition of Suspended Sentences & Other
Matters) Act 2013
Sentencing Amendment (Community Correction Reform) Act 2011
Sentencing Amendment (Sentencing Standards) Act 2017
Sentencing (Further Amendment Act) 2005
Sentencing (Victim Impact Statement) Act 1994
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Bill 2013
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
New South Wales
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Northern Territory
Sentencing Act 1995
Work Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Heavy Vehicle National Law
(Queensland)
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
South Australia
Sentencing Act 2017
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Western Australia
Road Traffic Act 1974
Sentencing Act 1995
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Commonwealth
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Corporations Act 2001
Crimes Act 1914
Defence Act 1903
National Security Act 1939
Model Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth)
Productivity Commission Act 1998
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
England and Wales
Health and Safety at Work Act 1974
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Quasi-legislative materials
Supreme Court of Victoria, General,
Note SC Gen 1: Practice Notes and Notice to the Profession
(30 January
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 2 May 2012,
2027–2028 (Kim Wells, Treasurer).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 20 March 2003,
479 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 22 November
2007, 4100 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General).
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2024
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-75-7 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
This consultation paper reflects the law as at 31 December 2023.
Access Economics,
Safer, Healthier, Wealthier: The Economic Value of Reducing
Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses
(2022) 3–4.
Work Australia, ‘Key Work Health and Safety Statistics Australia,
2023’ (data.safeworkaustralia.gov.au, 2023).
reference period reflects the years between the commencement of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) on 1 July 2005, and the
most recent court data that the Council had available (to 30 June 2021).
consultation paper will not consider the sentencing of offences contained in
federal legislation, namely, the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
which are prosecuted by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions and/or
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic), repealing the
Environment Protection Act 1970
Heavy Vehicle National Law
(Queensland) which is adopted in
Victoria pursuant to the
Heavy Vehicle National Law Application Act 2013
is necessary to review WorkSafe prosecution summaries of Magistrates’
Court cases because there are only two published Magistrates’
judgments in OHS criminal cases, and they are judgments about findings of guilt,
not sentencing:
VWA v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] VMC 1
Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
[2011] VMC 14.
Most Australian jurisdictions
rely on the regulatory body responsible for prosecutions to publish summaries:
see, for example, Office
of the Work Health and Safety Prosecutor, ‘Court
Reports’ (owhsp.qld.gov.au, 2023); SafeWork SA, ‘Prosecutions’
(safework.sa.gov.au, 2023).
College of Victoria, ‘31 – Occupational Health and Safety
Victorian Sentencing Manual
(4th ed., 2022).
College of Victoria, ‘VSM Case Summaries – 10 – Occupational
Health and Safety Offences’,
Sentencing Manual Case Summaries
1998, the Industry Commission was merged with a number of other entities to form
what is now the Productivity Commission:
Productivity Commission Act 1998
Commission,
Work, Health and Safety: An Inquiry into Occupational Health and
Volume 1: Report
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(2004) (henceforth
‘Maxwell Review’).
A Report on the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Administrative Review
Government,
National Review into Model Occupational Health and Safety Laws:
First Report
Senate, Education and Employment References Committee,
They Never Came Home
– The Framework Surrounding the Prevention, Investigation and Prosecution
of Industrial Deaths in Australia
Review of the Model Work Health and Safety Laws: Final Report
Commission (1995), above n 13, 103–104;
Maxwell Review,
Australian Senate, Education and Employment References Committee (2018), above n
17, 70; Boland (2018), above n 18, 127–128.
Some of the organisations that
criticised the low values of fines in 1995 included the Australian Council of
Trade Unions, the Community
and Public Sector Union, and the Australian Liquor,
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers Union: Industry Commission,
Health and Safety: An Inquiry into Occupational Health and Safety
(1995) 412. Some of the organisations that criticised the low
values of fines in 2018 were Maurice Blackburn and the Australian Council
Trade Unions: Australian Senate, Education and Employment References Committee
(2018), above n 17, 70; Boland (2018), above n
18, 54, 68.
Commission (1995), above n 13, 124–126;
Maxwell Review,
376–381; Stensholt (2007), above n 15, 81, 85; Australian Government
(2008), above n 16, 148–149.
Commission (1995), above n 13, 112–113;
Maxwell Review,
Commission (1995), above n 13, 116–118;
Maxwell Review,
367–369; Australian Government (2008), above n 16, 139 (‘In our
view, the maximum penalties provided in some jurisdictions
are too low to have a
meaningful value as a deterrent or as a potential punishment for a breach ...
higher maximum fines are necessary’);
Australian Senate, Education and
Employment References Committee (2018), above n 17, 70.
Government (2008), above n 16, 164; Maxwell Review, 384–386 (although
Maxwell preferred guideline judgments over
sentencing guidelines); Australian
Senate, Education and Employment References Committee (2018), above n 17, 70;
Boland (2018), above
n 18, 129, 131. For an overview of sentencing guidelines,
see Sentencing Advisory Council, A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria:
Issues Paper (2017).
for example,
DPP v Condo
[2019] VSCA 181
for example, Derek B. Cornish and Ronald V. Clarke (eds),
The Reasoning
Criminal: Rational Choice Perspectives on Offending
instance, research has consistently shown a strong association between substance
use and offending, with the former limiting rationality:
Trevor Bennett et al.,
‘The Statistical Association Between Drug Misuse and Crime: A
Meta-Analysis’ (2008) 13(2)
Aggression and Violent Behavior
Advisory Council, ‘Cases Sentenced in the Higher Courts’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2023); Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Cases
Sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au,
Chris Maxwell, ‘A New Approach to Criminal Appeals’ (Speech,
Victorian Bar, 7 October 2009).
Advisory Council,
Does Imprisonment Deter? A Review of the Evidence
Grooms and DJ Biddle, ‘Dogs and Crime: Reduced Rates of Property Crime in
Society & Animals
(finding that homes with dogs had a slightly increased deterrent effect in
relation to property crime rates compared to similarly
zoned homes without
van Sintemaartensdijk et al., ‘Assessing the Deterrent Effect of Symbolic
Guardianship through Neighbourhood Watch Signs
and Police Signs: A Virtual
Reality Study’ (2022)
Psychology, Crime & Law
10.1080/106831.6X.2022.2059480) (finding that the presence of neighbourhood
watch signs had a slightly increased deterrent effect).
Freeman et al., ‘Is There an Observational Effect? An Exploratory Study
into Speed Cameras and Self-Reported Offending
Behaviour’ (2017) 108(1)
Accident Analysis & Prevention
v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25, [82]:
Judges are aware that, if they consistently impose sentences that are too
lenient or too severe, they risk undermining public confidence
administration of justice and invite legislative interference in the exercise of
judicial discretion. For the sake of criminal
justice generally, judges attempt
to impose sentences that accord with legitimate community expectations.
As cited with approval in
Kennedy v The King
[2022] NSWCCA 215
R v Khayat & Anor (No 14)
[2019] NSWSC 1817
[2016] TASCCA 9
R v O’Connor
[2014] NSWCCA 53
Indermaur and Lynne Roberts,
Confidence in the Criminal Justice System
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice no. 387
(2009); Arie
Freiberg, ‘Bridging Gaps, Not Leaping Chasms: Trust, Confidence and
Sentencing Councils’ (2021) 12(3)
International Journal for Court
Administration
Tombs and David Whyte, ‘The Myths and Realities of Deterrence in Workplace
Safety Regulation’ (2013) 53(5)
British Journal of Criminology
H. Sutherland,
White Collar Crime: The Uncut Version
(1983) 236.
Paternoster and Sally Simpson, ‘A Rational Choice Theory of Corporate
Crime’ in Ronald V. Clarke and Marcus Felston
Routine Activity
and Rational Choice
(1993) 38; John Braithwaite and Gilbert Geis, ‘On
Theory and Action for Corporate Crime Control’
(1982) 28(2)
Delinquency
Paternoster
and Simpson
(1993), above n 38, 41.
Thornton et al., ‘General Deterrence and Corporate Environmental
(2005) 27(2)
Law & Policy
expressly made the point in 2004 that ‘[o]ne obstacle to consistency in
sentencing is that magistrates seldom give written
reasons for their
decisions’:
Maxwell Review
Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries and Enforceable
Undertakings’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2023).
instance, one US study in the early 1980s found that workplace injuries
decreased ‘significantly ... after increases in
general enforcement and
after specific contacts with enforcement agencies’: John T. Scholz and
Wayne B. Gray, ‘OSHA Enforcement
and Workplace Injuries: A Behavioral
Approach to Risk Assessment’ (1990) 3(3)
Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty
283, 302. See also John Mendeloff and Wayne B. Gray,
‘Inside the Black Box: How do OSHA Inspections Lead to Reductions in
Injuries?’ (2005) 27(2)
Law & Policy
219; Richard
Johnstone, ‘Rethinking OHS Enforcement’, in Elizabeth Bluff et al.
OHS Regulation for a Changing World of Work
(2004) 154; Suzanne
Jamieson et al., ‘OHS Prosecutions: Do They Deter Other Companies from
Offending?’ (2010) 26(3)
Journal of Health, Safety and Environment
213; Tess Hardy, ‘Digging into Deterrence: An Examination of
Deterrence-Based Theories and Evidence in Employment Standards
Enforcement’ (2021) 37(2–
International Journal of Comparative
Labour Law and Industrial Relations
; Toni Schofield et al.,
‘Deterrence and OHS Prosecutions: Prosecuted Employers’
Responses’ (2009) 25(4)
Journal of Occupational Health and Safety
– Australia and New Zealand
Schofield, ‘Deterring Workplace Deaths and Injuries: Legal Sanctions and
Outcomes or Institutional Process?’ (Paper
presented at the Annual
Conference of the Australian and New Zealand Associations of Sociology,
University of Auckland, 3–7
December 2007).
Casey et al., ‘Using Tickets in Employment Standards Inspections:
Deterrence as Effective Enforcement in Ontario, Canada’
(2018) 29(2)
The Economic and Labour Relations Review
however, that judicial officers consistently rank general deterrence as the most
important purpose of sentencing more broadly,
not just in OHS cases: Kate Warner
et al., ‘Why Sentence? Comparing the Views of Jurors, Judges and the
Legislature on the
Purposes of Sentencing in Victoria, Australia’
Criminology & Criminal Justice
(finding that in a series of
cases where jurors were surveyed or interviewed, 35% of judges considered
general deterrence the driving
objective, compared to just 9% of jurors involved
in those same cases).
DPP v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
DPP v Kenneally
[2019] VCC 658
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Mainline Developments Pty Ltd
DPP v SJ & TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences, Corporate
Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Response to Consultation
(2015) 7–8.
McCallum et al., ‘The Role of the Judiciary in Occupational Health and
Safety Prosecutions: Institutional Processes and
the Production of
Deterrence’ (2012) 54(5)
Journal of Industrial Relations
(Cth) v Nippon Yusen Kabushiki Kaisha
[2017] FCA 876
, [173], [211], [273];
DPP (Cth) v Alkaloids of Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 1424
(Cth) v Vina Money Transfer Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 665
, [111], [185], [217];
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft v ACCC
[2021] FCAFC 49
, [152], [167];
Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v ACCC
[2012] FCAFC 20
, [62], cited with approval
ACCC v TPG Internet Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 54
, [64]. See also Cam H.
Truong and Luisa F. Alampi, ‘Increased Civil Pecuniary Penalties –
The “Cost of Doing Business”
or an Effective Deterrent?’
(2020) 28(1)
Australian Journal of Competition and Consumer Law
Dorothy S. Lund and Natasha Sarin, ‘Corporate Crime and Punishment
Post-Crisis: An Empirical Study’ (2021) 100
Texas Law Review
National Judicial College of Australia, ‘Sentencing Corporations’
(csd.njca.com.au, 2023).
for example,
Whitten v The King
[2023] VSCA 181
Tseros v The
[2023] VSCA 179
Uzun v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 292
Pasznyk v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 87
Berichon & Anor v The
[2013] VSCA 319
v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
DPP v AM Design and Construction
Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
, [37]–[38];
DPP v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553
v Keilor-Melton Quarries Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 2139
DPP v New Sector
Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
, [22]–[24];
DPP v WCA (Vic) Pty
[2013] VCC 980
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
DPP v ABD Group Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1450
, [10], [15]–[16]. See
DPP v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
(finding that the company’s cooperation with authorities coupled with
significant post-incident remedial measures meant
‘specific deterrence is
not a relevant sentencing consideration’ at all).
v Barro Group Pty Ltd
[2009] VCC 1623
DPP v Melbourne Water
Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
DPP v Tooradin Excavations Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1419
DPP v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
, [17]–[19];
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) &
[2017] VCC 2021
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
DPP v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
, [32]–[33];
DPP v Melbourne
[2021] VCC 407
v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1954
, [31], [43].
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
, [53]–[54], [69].
v Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131
, [74]–[78]. See also
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Mainline
Developments Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 47
, [45]–[46].
v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
, [48]. See also
DPP v Bradken
Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
v Specialised Concrete Pumping Victoria Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 105
v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
, [37] (emphasis added).
v Eliott Engineering Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 266
, [54]–[55].
v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
, [44]–[45].
v Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1326
, [58]. See also
DPP v Seascape
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
, [40] (‘I place some weight on
specific deterrence in view of the ... lack of insightful remorse’).
[2001] HCA 21
, [46] (citations omitted).
for example, the increasing rate of imprisonment for breaches of family violence
orders in Victoria: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of
Family Violence Safety Notices and Intervention Orders: Third Monitoring Report
for example, the increasing length of imprisonment sentences for sex offences,
especially against children: Sentencing Advisory
Sentencing Sex
Offences in Victoria: An Analysis of Three Sentencing Reforms
(2021) 75. The
Council has also previously found that sex offences against children are now
viewed as ‘among the most serious’
of all crimes: Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Community Attitudes to Offence Seriousness
v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
DPP v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
, [17]–[18].
Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 241
DPP v Thiess Services Pty
[2015] VCC 1954
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
v Multiworks
[2021] VCC 1553
Commission for England and Wales,
Corporate Criminal Liability: An Options
(2022) 140.
for example,
R v P & O Ports Ltd
[2006] VCC 667
Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
[2001] HCA 21
, [118] (citation omitted).
Freiberg and Victoria Moore, ‘Disbelieving Suspense: Suspended Sentences
of Imprisonment and Public Confidence in the Criminal
Justice System’
(2009) 42(1)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology
(‘The purpose of denunciation is a symbolic one, often linked with
retributivism’).
v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
DPP v Hazelwood Power
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
DPP v De Kort
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
DPP v Australian
Box Recycling Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1056
DPP v BPL Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 282
DPP v Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1543
R v Barro Group Pty Ltd
[2009] VCC 1623
Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 241
DPP v Thiess Services Pty
[2015] VCC 1954
v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
[2019] VCC 291
v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
v Benbrika & Ors
[2009] VSC 21
, [139]. See also
DPP (Cth) v Besim
[2017] VSCA 158
for example,
DPP v Buhagiar and Anor
[1998] 4 VR 540
, 547, cited with
approval and quoted in
Winch v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 141
Henry v The King
[2023] VSCA 100
, [105] (‘there are cases where a
judge may reach the view that ... a sentence is appropriate ... because it may
be productive
of reformation, which offers the greatest protection to
society’). See further
R v Zamagias
[2002] NSWCCA 17
, [32]; Mirko
Bagaric, ‘In Search of a Coherent Approach to Community Protection in
Sentencing’
[2020] MonashULawRw 12
(2020) 46(3)
Monash University Law Review
v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
ALRC Report 108
(2008) 238–240,
248–251, citing extensively from Christine Parker, ‘Reinventing
Regulation Within the Corporation:
Compliance-Oriented Regulatory
Innovation’
(2000) 32(5)
Administration & Society
Braithwaite and Peter Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in
A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety
(1985) 81, 104.
v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1954
v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
; Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd v
[2015] VSCA 241
offences have also been referred to as ‘inchoate offences’: Richard
Johnstone, ‘Work Health and Safety and the
Criminal Law in
Australia’ (2013) 11(2)
Policy and Practice in Health and Safety
Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 241
v Saloon Park Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 709
, [40]–[57].
v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA
for example,
DPP v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
(describing the risk as ‘at the outer limits of
foreseeability’).
Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 241
, the appellant
unsuccessfully attempted to deploy this reasoning, using the sentence imposed in
Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131
benchmark sentence for a breach involving death, against which the sentence
imposed on the appellant had to be assessed.
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
NSW v MHE-Demag Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 261
Health and Safety Act 2020
of Scotland, ‘Sentencing Statements (HMA v Broomhall Ltd)’
(judiciary.scot.com, 2023).
Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences, Corporate
Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Definitive Guideline
v Whirlpool Appliances Ltd
[2017] EWCA Crim 2186.
Justice Treacy, ‘Keynote Address: Criminal Law Review Conference’
(Public Lecture, Criminal Law Conference, 3 December 2015).
Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences, Corporate
Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences Guidelines: Consultation
(2014) 25 (emphasis added).
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Fines Act 1996
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1995
In Tasmania, see
Campbell v Turner
[2001] TASSC 91
Lefever & Smith v White
[2002] TASSC 19
[1999] TASSC 52
[2019] VCC 444
, [23], [28] (‘I have taken into account ...
that you are of modest financial means’).
v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
DPP v United
Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
, [34]–[35];
DPP v Mainline
Developments Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 47
DPP v SJ & TA Structural
[2019] VCC 2016
, [16], [24];
DPP v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
DPP v AM Design and Construction Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
, [27], [29], [38], [54];
DPP v Redback Tree Services
[2017] VCC 1602
[11] (‘I was informed that the company is financially successful and has
the capacity to pay an appropriate fine ... the company
turned over in excess of
$1m in the last financial year’);
DPP v Fergusson & Anor
, [47]–[49];
DPP v Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
, [25] (‘beyond the bare fact of liquidation the resources that
remain available to meet any penalty are not known. What is
known from the
record of interview, is that at the time, the company was ... turning over
something in excess of $1 million a year’);
DPP v Bilic Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 810
DPP v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1882
, [21] (‘It is clear that the accused is able to pay a
significant fine’);
DPP v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
, [32]–[34];
DPP v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 980
DPP v Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
Di Tonto & Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
, the Court of
Appeal indicated that the sentencing court had not received as much supporting
evidence as might have been ideal:
It is true that perhaps more
could have been put before the sentencing judge to support the contention that
fines of the order that
her Honour ultimately fixed would be ruinous, and
disproportionate to the financial circumstances of each appellant.
v Mainline Developments Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 47
, [47]. See also
Tooradin Excavations Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1419
, [10] (The defendant company
‘has the capacity to pay a fine within that range’);
DPP v Dotmar
Epp Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1326
, [51] (‘Defence counsel indicated that
there would be no issues as to the company’s capacity to pay any fine
DPP v Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
[56] (‘The company therefore remains a trading entity ... [and has] the
means to be able to pay the fine’.)
v SJ & TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
, [16], [24].
[2019] VCC 291
, [18]–[19]. See also
DPP v Resource
Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
, [34] (‘it appears that
Resource Recovery operates the waste recycling centre, and its associated
companies, Moorabbin Bulk
Bins and Combined Bulk Bins are the major supplier of
the waste material it processes ... All three companies are linked or controlled
... I was provided with financial statements of all 3 companies’).
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
DPP v New Sector
Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Keilor-Melton Quarries Pty Ltd
DPP v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553
DPP v Hungry Jacks
[2018] VCC 1454
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
DPP v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 192
DPP v ABD Group Pty
[2016] VCC 1450
DPP v BPL Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 282
DPP v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1954
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
DPP v Melbourne Water Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
DPP v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051.
v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
, [38] (‘I note the
capacity to pay was not raised as an issue’);
DPP v New Sector
Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
, [49] (‘No issue arose as to
whether New Sector had the capacity to pay an appropriate penalty’).
v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 980
, [35]. At [34] the court observed, having
received a letter from the company’s accountant about its financial
position, ‘that
a crushingly large fine payable immediately would prevent
the company from continuing to trade’.
v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
, [34]–[35].
Seat Scenic Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 269
Tonto & Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
, [28]–[32].
v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
, [54], [63]. See also
v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
, [47]–[49].
v Concorp Group Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1846
DPP v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
DPP v Specialised Concrete Pumping Victoria Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 105
v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
; Madeleine Heffernan, ‘Are
the Profits Better at Hungry Jack’s?’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(17 February 2017).
v Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131
, [1], [5].
Justice Treacy, ‘Keynote Address: Criminal Law Review Conference’
(Public Lecture, Criminal Law Conference, 3 December 2015).
2018, in response to terms of reference from the Victorian Government, we
published an issues paper and final report outlining
how a sentencing guidelines
council could be established in Victoria to produce these sorts of guidelines:
Sentencing Advisory Council
(2017), above n 23; Sentencing Advisory Council,
A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria: Report
the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in England and Wales confirmed in
Whirlpool Appliances Ltd
[2017] EWCA Crim 2186
, despite the
guideline offering numerical sentencing ranges of fine amounts, the sentencing
of OHS offences remains ‘an exercise
of judgment appropriately structured
by the Guideline ... not straitjacketed by it’.
Council for England and Wales (2016), above n 105, 3–20.
instance, the guideline notes that public bodies should have their financial
position assessed by their ‘Annual Revenue
Budget’ (i.e.,
appropriation): ibid 6.
Commission for England and Wales (2022), above n 75, 141, citing Sentencing
Council for England and Wales,
General Guideline: Overarching Principles
(2019). See also Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Manslaughter
(2016); Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Offenders: Fraud, Bribery and Money Laundering
(2014); Sentencing Council
for England and Wales,
Organisations: Breach of Food Safety and Food Hygiene
Regulations
for example,
R v Nestle UK
[2021] EWCA Crim 1681
, [39]–[40];
Tata Steel UK Ltd
[2017] EWCA Crim 704
R v Thames Water Utilities
[2015] EWCA Crim 960
, [29]–[42].
for example,
Partnership
University NHS Foundation Trust
(Chelmsford Crown Court, Cavanagh J, 16 June 2021), [91] (‘I am
satisfied that the Trust is a Large Organisation ... Its most
recent annual
revenue ... is about £325 million’);
R v University College London
[2018] EWCA Crim 835
, [16]–[18];
Whirlpool UK Appliances Limited v
[2017] EWCA Crim 2186
, [33] (‘the turnover of the appellant
was of the order of £700m. Although the judge did not say in terms that the
was therefore a very large organisation within the language of the
Guideline it is clear to us that it must be ... It was therefore
permissible to
move outside the appropriate range in order to achieve a proportionate
Statistical
College of Victoria,‘12.3.1 – Financial Circumstances’,
Victorian Sentencing Manual
(4th ed., 2022) 233 (citations omitted).
v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
Council for England and Wales (2016), above n 105.
Fox & Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in
(3rd ed., 2014) 479–480.
Council for England and Wales (2016), above n 105, 6.
Court of Victoria, General,
Practice Note SC Gen 1: Practice Notes and Notice
to the Profession
(30 January 2017) 1.
v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
DPP v De Kort
v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
for example,
St Vincent’s Care Services Ltd
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
v Bilic Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 810
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
, [38]–[41].
v Saloon Park Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 709
v Keilor-Melton Quarries Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 2139
, as inserted by
Criminal Procedure Legislation
Amendment Act 2008
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 22 November 2007, 4100 (Rob
Hulls, Attorney-General). This amendment was based on our recommendation in
Advisory Council,
Sentence Indication and Specified Discounts:
Final Report
research does suggest that caution is required in interpreting stated section
6AAA guilty plea discounts, with some defence
practitioners and judicial
officers describing those statements as ‘totally artificial’,
‘arbitrary’, ‘pluck[ed]
... out of the air’, something
‘[n]obody ever puts any real thought into’, and ‘a nuisance
more than anything
else’: Asher Flynn and Arie Freiberg,
Negotiations
Final Report to the Criminology Research Advisory
(2018) 122–128.
was one unpublished judgment in 2010 where the court did not specify the
discount despite the defendant company having pleaded
Unpublished
sentencing remarks provided to the Council
Statistical
Advisory Council,
Guilty Pleas in the Higher Courts: Rates, Timing, and
v BPL Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 282
v AM Design and Construction Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
Unpublished
sentencing remarks provided to the Council.
v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542.
v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
, [23]–[30].
v Best Benchtops and Stone Pty Ltd
[2022] VCC 2296
Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
, at [160], the court
noted that the offending company’s lack of prior convictions was ‘of
some significance given the
role it has played operating and employing staff at
the Hazelwood mine since privatisation in 1996’.
v Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1543
, [23]: the court accepted that the
offending company’s industrial safety record was excellent, given that in
the preceding
decade, approximately 55 million work hours had been performed on
its construction sites.
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
, [46], [58].
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
, [52], [61].
v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
DPP v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
v Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 1985
(as enacted).
Lee Adams, ‘Not Quite a Brave New World: Victoria’s
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
[2005] DeakinLawRw 20
(2005) 10(2)
Deakin Law Review
, as noted in the
Maxwell Review
Maxwell Review,
for example,
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Eliott Engineering Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 266
, [54]–[55];
Mainline Developments Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 47
, [45]–[46];
Thiess Services Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1954
DPP v Toll Transport Pty
[2016] VCC 1975
, [53]–[54].
for example,
DPP v Rapid Perforating Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1167
for example,
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
Melbourne Water Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
DPP v Dotmar Epp Pty
[2014] VCC 1326
, [59]: ‘I have taken into account in mitigation of
sentence the plea of guilty which has had considerable utilitarian value.
also taken into account in mitigation that the company co-operated in the
investigation and provided candid information in
respect of some matters. It is
also to the company’s credit that it has taken steps to improve safety at
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
, [57], [61];
DPP v Thiess Services Pty Ltd
DPP v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
for example,
DPP v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
Unpublished
sentencing remarks provided to the Council.
(Victim Impact Statement) Act 1994
Victim Impact Statements
, Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal
Justice no. 33 (1991) 3.
s 5(2)(daa)
, as inserted by
Sentencing (Further Amendment
Eade & Anor v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 142
for example,
Tseros v The King
[2023] VSCA 179
Donnelly v The
[2023] VSCA 120
[2023] VCC 200
[22]–[23]. And in the specific context of OHS offending, see the case of
DPP v Midfield Meat International Pty Ltd
[2021] VCC 2034
for example,
DPP v Reynolds (a pseudonym)
[2022] VSCA 263
Doherty v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 215
[2004] VSCA
[1994] VicRp 54
[1994] 2 VR 98.
the High Court has observed, no one sentencing factor can ever ‘be the
controlling factor’:
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
[2007] VSCA 298
, [11] (‘the reception of a victim impact
statement into evidence on the plea is to be approached by the sentencing judge
a degree of flexibility’).
ss 8L(5)(b)
, (6)(b), as inserted by
Victims and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2018
(emphasis added).
Policy for Victims and Persons Adversely Affected by Crime
same issue is apparent in England and Wales: Health and Safety Executive,
‘The Victim Personal Statement’
(hse.gov.uk, 2020) (‘in
some cases there will not be a clear demonstrable causal link’).
v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
[196]–[200].
v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
, [141]. This case
resulted in the largest fine of any OHS case during the reference period ($1.56
million): see Nicole Asher et al.,
‘Hazelwood Power Station Operators
Fined Nearly $2 million over 2014 Latrobe Valley Mine Fire’,
(19 May 2020).
v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1882
v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
[2017] VCC 2021
[31]–[32], [131], [146].
for example,
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
for example,
DPP v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
, [45] (‘Whilst
no formal victim impact statement was tendered, I infer that the tragic death of
a man ... likely had a profound
impact on his family, especially his
v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
DPP v Australian Box Recycling
[2016] VCC 1056
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
DPP v Melbourne Water Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
DPP v WCA (Vic) Pty
[2013] VCC 980
DPP v Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1543
(‘the directors and officers of the corporation are deeply remorseful for
the offending that caused the death of the deceased’);
DPP v Orbit
Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
[53] (‘it was your
failure ... as well as the company’s recklessness in acting as it did that
caused the death of this
young man’).
v Fergusson & Anor
[2017] VCC 1276
, [12] (emphasis added), [23]
(‘I take into account the victim impact statements’).
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 731
, [13], [45]. On appeal, the court also
seemed to acknowledge that ‘the breach ... resulted in death’:
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
v Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1056
v WCA (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 980
v Melbourne Water Corporation
[2014] VCC 184
for example,
DPP v De Kort
[2019] VCC 291
DPP v SJ & TA
Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
DPP v Bilic Homes Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 810
Tooradin Excavations Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 1419
DPP v Eliott
Engineering Pty Ltd
[2014] VCC 266.
[2019] VCC 291
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
DPP v Seascape
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
, [31]–[37];
DPP v Kenneally & Anor
[2019] VCC 658
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
, [9]–[10];
DPP v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553
, [17]–[22];
Hungry Jacks & Ors
[2018] VCC 1454
, [28]–[31];
DPP v Phelpsys
Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
, [12]–[26];
DPP v Specialised
Concrete Pumping Victoria Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 105
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407.
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
for example, Paul McGorrery and Marilyn McMahon, ‘Causing Someone Else to
Commit Suicide: Incitement or Manslaughter?’
(2019) 44(1)
Alternative
Law Journal
v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1132
, [27] (‘I have taken
into account the impact on the victim or victims in this matter ... [via the]
victim impact statement’).
v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 192
v CLM Infrastructure Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 192
Seat Scenic Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 269
, [25] (‘the
question of the cause of the injuries ... was an aggravating factor, in respect
of which the Crown bore an onus
of proof beyond reasonable doubt’);
FRH Victoria Pty Ltd
[2010] VSCA 18
for example,
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
335 of that Act allows impact statements to be made not only by people who
suffer ‘injury, loss or damage’ as
a result of the offence, but also
by people who can speak to ‘the risk of harm to human health or the
environment caused by
the offence’:
Environment Protection Act 2017
See also the note accompanying
Sentencing Act
Orth, ‘Secondary Victimization of Crime Victims by Criminal
Proceedings’ (2002) 15(4)
Social Justice Research
Youth and Families Act 2005
of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Restorative Justice for Victim Survivors
of Family Violence’ (justice.vic.gov.au,
s 83A(1A)(d).
Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate Sentencing Orders
– Suspended Sentences: Final Report—
Environment
Protection Act 2017
On the use of restorative justice
conferences in an environmental crime context, see Mark Hamilton,
Environmental Crime and Restorative Justice: Justice as Meaningful
Involvement
Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual
(2021) 206–207; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(2016) 194.
Government,
Victorian Government Response to the Ministerial Taskforce on
Workplace Sexual Harassment
is, for example, a specific legislative instrument governing restorative justice
processes in the Australian Capital Territory
and New Zealand:
(Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Victorian Law Reform Commission recommended limiting restorative justice
conference availability to cases where the offender pleads
guilty, as opposed to
having been found guilty, because when someone has contested their guilt,
subsequent participation in a restorative
justice conference ‘might be
insincere’: Victorian Law Reform Commission (2021), above n 246, 208.
for Innovative Justice, ‘Restorative Justice Practices WorkSafe’
(cij.org.au, 2016).
s 464ZF(2).
s 85C(b)(iii).
Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders: Report
v Melbourne Health
[2021] VCC 407
Australia Pty Ltd v Robertson
[2004] VSCA 79.
v Energy Brix Australia Corporation Pty Ltd
[2006] VSCA 116
Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
div 2 subdiv 1.
Procedure Act 2009
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Victoria, ‘Belgravia Health & Leisure Group Pty Ltd’ (22 June
Prosecution Result Summaries and Enforceable Undertakings: A Directory
of the Most Recent Prosecution and Enforceable Undertaking
(henceforth
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Maroondah City Council’ (6 October 2016),
Prosecution
Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Mettle Pty Ltd’ (19 October 2016),
Prosecution Result
; WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Specialty Packaging Group Pty
Ltd’ (8 December 2015),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Wagstaff Cranbourne Pty Ltd’ (11 July 2014),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘George Weston Foods Limited’ (16 July 2020),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Mettle Pty Ltd’ (19 October 2016),
Prosecution Result
both case studies, the donation was ordered to be paid into the Court Fund,
which is a fund managed by the Magistrates’ Court
with the monies
distributed to charitable and community organisations: Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria, ‘Court Fund’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2023).
Hopkins, ‘Prosecuting for Workplace Death and Injury’ (Paper
presented at the Australian Institute of Criminology
Conference: Crime in the
Workplace, Wollongong, 24–26 November 1993).
Statistical
v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
, [120]–[125].
376–378; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Compliance with
Trade Practices Act 1974
: Final Report
(1994) [10.3].
v Mitsubishi International Corporation
[1982] USCA9 824
677 F2d 785
(9th Cir, 1982).
v Danilow Pastry Company,
563 F Supp 1159 (SDNY
v Maverick Steel Pty Ltd
[2022] SAET 101
, [37]–[38].
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(‘A person who is not a
volunteer ... [or] who is an officer of an applicable entity ... must not engage
in conduct that—
(a) is negligent; and (b) constitutes a breach of an
applicable duty that the person [or entity] owes to another person; and (c)
causes the death of that other person’).
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(‘A person who, without lawful
excuse, recklessly engages in conduct that places or may place another person
who is at a workplace
in danger of serious injury is guilty of an indictable
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(‘A person must not assault,
directly or indirectly intimidate or threaten, or attempt to intimidate or
threaten, an inspector
or a person assisting an inspector’).
Statistical
prison sentences are an abolished sentencing order in Victoria, but they remain
available for offences committed prior to
1 September 2013 (in the higher
courts) and 1 September 2014 (in the Magistrates’ Court):
Amendment (Abolition of Suspended Sentences & Other Matters) Act 2013
(Vic). They enable the offender to serve their sentence in the community,
but a court can activate the prison sentence if the person
offends during the
operational period of their suspended prison sentence.
Goods Act 1985
section 31 of the Model Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth).
Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Health and Safety Act 2012
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
There is also an offence of reckless conduct
endangering life, which carries a 10-year maximum penalty, and which has no
counterpart
Crimes Act 1958
the County Court has referred to sentencing practices for that
offence as relevant in determining current sentencing practices for the
There is little in terms of previous
authorities on sentence for this charge, because as I say, it is really in its
infancy. Some
guidance can be taken from
because the
terms are similar and they provided some guidance when this charge was drawn.
Having said that however, it is of course
a very different charge in the nature
of the circumstances because this relates solely to conduct in a work place.
Unpublished sentencing remarks provided to the Council.
for example, James Chalmers and Fiona Leverick, ‘Fair Labelling in
Criminal Law’
(2008) 71(2)
Modern Law Review
Jeremy Horder, ‘Rethinking Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person’
(1994) 14(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
turn, a 10-year maximum penalty would be identical to the penalty applicable for
the offence of reckless conduct endangering life
Amendment (Community Correction Reform) Act 2011
we recently recommended that they be renamed as such: Sentencing Advisory
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Final Report
ss 72(2)(a)
(2)(a)–(b).
ss 72(2)(c)
were 6 imposed in the higher courts and 142 in the Magistrates’
, 378 (18 of 149 prosecutions).
is based on the same two-year dataset that we recently used to examine
conditions of
adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020: Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Consultation
(2022) 88–90.
Treloar, ‘Olam Orchards Australia, Complete Commodity Management Plead
Guilty over Carwarp Workplace Death’,
(18 December
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Prosecution
Result Summaries
Building Services Pty Ltd on 20 June 2013: WorkSafe Victoria,
‘Healy’s Building Services Pty Ltd’
(11 July 2014),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Paper Recovery Pty Ltd on 4 April 2017 (the company was ordered to pay $40,000
to the Institute for Safety, Compensation
and Recovery Research): WorkSafe
Victoria, ‘Australian Paper Recovery Pty Ltd’ (12 April 2017),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Orchard Pty Ltd on 20 December 2018: WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Bellevue Orchard
Pty Ltd’ (3 January 2019),
Prosecution Result Summaries
WorkSafe, ‘Woolworths Group Limited’ (worksafe.nt.gov.au,
Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Adverse publicity orders are also
available in the model OHS jurisdictions: see, for example,
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
Law Reform Commission,
Final Report:
Corporate Criminal
Responsibility
, ALRC Report 136
(2020) 353.
NSW v Saunders Civibuild Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWDC 163
NSW v Saunders Civibuild Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWDC 163
NSW v Saunders Civibuild Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] NSWDC 163
, [123]. The
District Court of New South Wales similarly offered ‘publicising
risks’ and ‘deterrence and denunciation’
for making an adverse
publicity order in
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
, [134]–[135].
an earlier study, researchers found that company executives believed that their
company’s reputation had been damaged by
negative publicity following a
conviction: Brent Fisse and John Braithwaite,
The Impact of Publicity on
Corporate Offenders
v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
, [120]–[125].
appear to only be a handful of published OHS judgments in other jurisdictions in
which adverse publicity orders were made:
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset
Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
SafeWork NSW v KD & JT Westbrook
[2018] NSWDC 255
Bradley & Joanne Finnigan Pty Ltd v
WorkSafe ACT
[2016] ACTSC 158.
of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Manningham Property Group Pty Ltd
, [82]. See also
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Fletcher &
Parker (Balwyn) Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1521
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 2)
reproduced in Dan M. Kahan and Eric A. Posner, ‘Shaming White-Collar
Criminals: A Proposal for Reform of the Federal Sentencing
Guidelines’
(1999) 42(S1)
Journal of Law & Economics
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2 s 247. Adverse publicity orders are also
available under
section 330
Environment Protection Act 2017
include (a) to ‘alert customers to the fact that there has been misleading
and deceptive conduct’, (b) to ‘protect
the public interest by
dispelling the incorrect or false impressions that were created by the
[behaviour]’, and (c) to ‘support
the primary orders and assist in
preventing repetition of the contravening conduct’:
ACCC v TPG Internet
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2012] FCA 629
for example,
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Dimmeys Stores Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 1371
ACCC v Hewlett-Packard Australia Pty Ltd
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Parking Patrols Vic
Pty Ltd & Anor
[2012] VSC 137
Director of Consumer Affairs
Victoria v Australian Tourism Centre Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor
for example,
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Fletcher & Parker
(Balwyn) Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1521
for example,
DPP v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
SafeWork NSW v KD & JT Westbrook Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] NSWDC 15
for example,
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Hoskins (Maroondah) Pty
[2019] FCA 1973
, [11]–[12];
Director of Consumer Affairs
Victoria v Melbourne South Eastern Real Estate Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 1763
[113]–[114];
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Fletcher &
Parker (Balwyn) Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1521
Director of Consumer
Affairs Victoria v Midas Trading (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2009] VSC 141
for example,
ASIC v Insurance Australia Ltd
[2023] FCA 724
v AMP Superannuation Ltd
[2023] FCA 488
ASIC v MLC Ltd
ASIC v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
ACCC v J Hutchinson Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] FCA 1007
ASIC v Aware Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2022] FCA 146
ASIC v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 2)
[2021] FCA 966
v Sony Interactive Entertainment Network Europe Ltd
[2020] FCA 787
[109]–[110];
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Hoskins
(Maroondah) Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1973
, [11]–[12];
Director of
Consumer Affairs Victoria v Fletcher & Parker (Balwyn) Pty Ltd
ACCC v Hewlett-Packard Australia Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 653
for example,
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Melbourne South Eastern
Real Estate Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 1763
, [113]–[114]
(realestate.com.au).
for example,
Maxwell Review
, 378. The NSW Law Reform Commission also
raised the possibility of a ‘shareholder mail-out’: NSW Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing: Corporate Offenders
, Report 102 (2003) 166.
of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Alpha Flight Services Pty Ltd
for example,
ACCC v Lactalis Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] FCA 839
[157]–[160];
Linnane (NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v
[2020] NSWDC 755.
for example,
ACCC v Safety Compliance Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2015] FCA 211
for example,
Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria v Australian Tourism
Centre Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor
[2010] VSC 571
Law Reform Commission (2003), above n 334, 159–168.
Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
ALRC Report 103 (2006) 748–750.
Law Reform Commission (2020), above n 317, 348, 353–354.
Commission for England and Wales (2022), above n 75, 145–148.
Environment
Protection Act
Vehicle National Law (Queensland)
Environment
Protection Act
Environment
Protection Act
Vehicle National Law (Queensland)
Vehicle National Law (Queensland)
for example,
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civibuild Pty Ltd (No 2)
Statistical
32–33, 46, 50.
Commission (1995), above n 19, 394.
370–371, 383.
(2007), above n 15, 85.
(as enacted). Prior to the introduction of penalty
units, maximum fines were set as dollar amounts for each offence itself (for
the maximum penalty for dangerous driving was originally imprisonment
‘for a term of not more than two years’ or a fine
more than One hundred pounds
Crimes Act 1958
(as enacted) (emphasis added).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 2 May 2012, 2027–2028
(Kim Wells, Treasurer).
[2009] VSCA 114
v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
Englich et al., ‘Playing Dice with Criminal Sentences: The Influence of
Irrelevant Anchors on Experts’ Judicial
Decision Making’ (2006)
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
188; Gretchen B. Chapman
and Brian H. Bornstein, ‘The More You Ask For, the More You Get: Anchoring
in Personal Injury Verdicts’
(1996) 10(6)
Applied Cognitive Psychology
519; Jeffrey J. Rachlinski et al., ‘Can Judges Make Reliable Numeric
Judgments? Distorted Damages and Skewed Sentences’
(2015) 90(2)
Law Journal
; Mark W. Bennett, ‘Confronting Cognitive
“Anchoring Effect” and “Blind Spot” Biases in Federal
Sentencing:
A Modest Solution for Reforming a Fundamental Flaw’
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology
v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 408
, [30]–[32]; see also
Hogarth v The
[2012] VSCA 302
v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 302
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
See also below at [8.32].
& Anor v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2.
were known as ‘MacNeil-Brown ranges’:
R v MacNeil-Brown &
[2008] VSCA 190.
v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
v AirRoad Pty Ltd
[2012] VCC 1960
Levitske Jr., ‘Will the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s New Proposed
Guidelines for Crimes by Organizations Provide
an Effective Deterrent for Crimes
Attributed to Corporations? (Or Will the New Proposed Guidelines Put an
Exclamation Point in the
Sentence for Corporate Crime?)’ (1991) 29(4)
Duquesne Law Review
Hopkins, ‘Prosecuting for Workplace Death and Injury’ (Paper
presented at the Australian Institute of Criminology
Conference: Crime in the
Workplace, Wollongong, 24–26 November 1993).
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25,
DPP v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
[2008] VSCA 51
, [45]. See also
Hogarth v The Queen
v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
, [8]–[12].
Amendment (Child Homicide) Act 2008
, as recommended by us in
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Maximum Penalty for Negligently Causing Serious
Injury: Report
Advisory Council,
Major Driving Offences: Current Sentencing Practices
(2015) 7, as discussed in
Harrison & Anor v The Queen
[2015] VSCA
, [97]–[98].
v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17
Environment
Protection Act 2017
v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 1405
v Apple Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2018] FCA 953
, [65]. Consumer Affairs Australia and
New Zealand has argued that many maximum fines for corporations are inadequate,
and proposed
a new system where the maximum fine was significantly increased by
reference to either a larger dollar value or the company’s
turnover: Consumer Affairs Australia and New Zealand,
Australian Consumer Law
and Safety at Work Act 1974
(E&W) sch 3A;
Legal Aid, Sentencing and
Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
(E&W) s 85. There have been a handful
of Australian offences in the past that have also had no limit on the fine that
can be imposed,
including serious examples of dangerous driving causing death in
Road Traffic Act 1974
, unlawfully giving or obtaining
information as to Australia’s defences (
Defence Act 1903
), and black marketing and other offences (
National Security Act 1939
(Cth) s 10). See also
Fraser Henleins Pty Ltd v Cody
[1945] HCA 49
Ex parte Gerard & Co. Pty Ltd & Anor
[1944] NSWStRp 30
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 370
Ex parte Zietsch & Anor
[1944] NSWStRp 29
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 360
, 364. Arguably, the
em-dash in Table 2 of
section 109(2)
Sentencing Act
maximum fine amount is specified as the monetary equivalent of life
imprisonment, could suggest that the
Sentencing Act
anticipates an offence carrying an unlimited fine. This situation is also
not clarified by
Sentencing Act
, which otherwise
purports to outline what the maximum fine for any offence shall be, but it does
not clarify the maximum for a level
Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 82
, [64] ($750,000
DPP v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1975
($1 million
Michael Stanton, ‘Instruments of Injustice: The Emergence of Mandatory
Sentencing in Victoria’
[2022] MonashULawRw 9
(2022) 48(2)
Monash University Law Review
Advisory Council,
Mandatory Sentencing: Information Paper
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Matters: Mandatory Sentencing
Advisory Council (2018), above n 131, v.
Advisory Council (2021), above n 68, 78–79.
s 5A(1)(b).
s 6AC(1)(eb)
, as inserted by
Sentencing Amendment
(Sentencing Standards) Act 2017
, following our recommendation
in Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Guidance in Victoria: Report
(2016) xviii–xix.
, as inserted by
Sentencing Amendment (Sentencing
Standards) Act 2017
v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 172
Kumar v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 191
of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence
, Volume III: Report and
Recommendations
(2016) 233.
& Ors v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
(on the use of CCOs as a sentencing
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 20 March 2003, 479 (Rob
Hulls, Attorney-General).
Sentencing Council, ‘Guideline Judgments’
(sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au, 2023).
[1998] NSWSC 423
Advisory Council (2016), above n 390, 133.
the same order as they appear above:
Winch v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 141
Hogarth v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 302
Harrison & Anor v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 349
Stephens v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 121
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 148
Nguyen v The Queen
Gregory (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 364
Kalala v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 223.
Quah v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 164
‘uplift’ case in which the Court of Appeal clarified that the call
to uplift sentencing practices for trafficking
in a commercial quantity of a
drug of dependence should have a knock-on effect of also increasing sentencing
practices for trafficking
commercial quantity of a drug of
dependence. However,
Quah v The Queen
was simply about maintaining
relativity between those two offences, not a standalone commentary on the
adequacy of sentencing practices
for the latter offence.
v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17.
v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17
last offence for which the Director appears to have sought an uplift was rape by
digital penetration:
Shrestha v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 364.
for example,
Midfield Meat International Pty Ltd v The King
[2023] VSCA
DPP v Heavy Mechanics
[2023] VSCA 69
Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust)
Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
, fn 22, fn 25;
Dotmar Epp Pty Ltd v The Queen
v Heavy Mechanics
[2023] VSCA 69.
v Heavy Mechanics
[2023] VSCA 69
DPP v Heavy Mechanics
Council for England and Wales,
Assessing the Impact and Implementation of the
Sentencing Council’s Health and Safety Offences, Corporate Manslaughter
Safety and Hygiene Offences Definitive Guideline
Commission (1995), above n 13, 114–116.
(2018), above n 18, 131.
Work Australia, ‘Implementation of WHS Ministers’ Agreed Response to
the Review of the Model WHS Laws’ (safeworkaustralia.gov.au,
with Safe Work Australia (13 November 2023).
Advisory Council (2017), above n 23; Sentencing Advisory Council (2018), above n
full submission (Submission 17) is available on our website: Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘A Sentencing Guidelines Council
for Victoria: Submissions’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2023).
Statistical
is the usual process for all court fines:
Fines Reform Act 2014
Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
s 513(3)(a).
and beyond any costs recovered by the prosecuting agency:
Sentencing Act 1991
Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Bill 2013
Environment
Protection Act 1970
(Vic) s 69, as replaced by
Environment Protection Act
. If the penalty is brought by a litter authority
or a Council, then the fine must be paid to the Environment Protection Fund or
Council respectively. The Environment Protection Fund was established by
the 2017 Act, is administered by the treasurer and may be
used to fund waste
treatment and disposal operations where it is apparent that existing facilities
are inadequate to comply with
the Act: ss 441–443.
This excludes costs and witnesses’ expenses:
Fines Act 1996
(WA) sch 1.
Securities and Investments Commission, ‘Insolvency Statistics –
Series 1: Companies Entering External Administration
and Controller
Appointments’ (asic.gov.au, 2022).
v Concorp Group Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1846
DPP v Bradbury Industrial
Services Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1029
, [136]–[137].
Statistical
Approximately
$10 million in fines were completely unpaid among cases sentenced between
January 2017 and June 2021: ibid
Schmidt, ‘Sentencing Corporate Offenders: Conundrums and Areas of
Potential Law Reform’ (2011) 10(2)
Judicial Review: Selected Conference
Papers: Journal of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales
v Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1056
v Australian Box Recycling Pty Ltd
[2016] VCC 1056
Reform Act 2014
Reform Act 2014
from Fines Victoria (20 November 2023).
Australian Law Reform Commission (2020), above n 317, 513.
W. Kuney, ‘A Taxonomy and Evaluation of Successor Liability
(Revisited)’ (2017) 18
Transactions: The Tennessee Journal of Business
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.34 MB)
PDF format (3.22 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter