URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Camberwell Developments Pty Ltd [2025] VicLiqComm 8; (29 October 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Camberwell Developments Pty Ltd under
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
to vary a condition of
packaged liquor licence no. 32072134 (
Variation Application
) for premises
trading as Bottlemart at Greenvale, located at Greenvale Shopping Centre, site
G16-G17 of 1-11 Greenvale Drive, Greenvale
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Chair
Date of Decision:
29 October 2025
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to grant the Variation
Application and vary licence no. 36156914 as set out in Appendix
John Larkins
background to this matter is largely set out in the published decision of the
Victorian Liquor Commission (
) dated 1 December 2023, in which
the Commission determined to grant an amended and uncontested application made
by Camberwell Developments
(Applicant)
for a packaged liquor
licence (described as
licence no. 32072134 (
)) for premises
known as Bottlemart at Greenvale located at Greenvale Shopping Centre, site
G16-G17 of 1-11 Greenvale Drive, Greenvale
17 July 2025, the Applicant applied to the Commission under
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for variation of a
condition of the Licence (
Variation Application
). Specifically, by way of
the Variation Application, the Applicant sought to amend the commencement of
trade condition on the Licence
from 10am to 9am for Monday to Saturday. All
other conditions on the Licence would remain unchanged, including the
“Notice of any application to amend the Premises
Management Plan must be given to Corpus Christi Community Greenvale Incorporated
and the Roman Catholic Trusts Corporation
Relevantly,
CCGI and RCTC were collectively described in the Commission’s previous
published decision as objectors to the Applicant’s
initial packaged liquor
licence application before that application was then amended, with the amended
application ultimately determined
as an uncontested application within the
meaning of section 3.
Applicant provided the following reasons in support of the Variation
Application:
(a) Greenvale Shopping Centre serves a predominantly elderly demographic who
shop in the morning. As the licensee for the Premises,
we have consistently
received feedback from customers requesting that our store open before 10am as
many customers wish to conveniently
purchase liquor after completing their
grocery shopping at the supermarket next door.
(b) Like (a) above, foot traffic in the shopping centre significantly declines
after school pick-ups, so granting the Variation Application
community expectations [s4(1)((b) LCR Act] and enhance customer
convenience.
Variation Application included an email on behalf of the previous objectors
discussed in paragraph 4 above confirming that there
would be no objection by
them to the proposed new commencement of trade condition on the Licence from
10am to 9am for Monday to Saturday.
Chief Commissioner of Police (
Victoria Police
) also advised the
Commission on 24 August 2025 that Victoria Police did not object to the
Variation Application.
Commission is also assured from the Applicant’s statement of display,
dated 21 September 2025, and the copy of the newspaper
advertisement, dated 9
September 2025, that the Variation Application was displayed and advertised in
accordance with the LCR Act.
No objections were received by the Commission.
with the Commission’s previous published decision, it is fitting that the
Commission determine this Variation Application
as an uncontested application
under section 44 and have regard to the objects of the LCR Act in section
this Variation Application could be determined by a delegate authorised to act
on behalf of the Commission, given the background
that is set out in the
previous published decision, in which a single commissioner determined that
application, it is appropriate
that this Variation Application is also
determined by a single commissioner.
Material before the Commission
Commission has considered all of the material before it including:
(a) the Variation Application, dated 17 July 2025;
(b) the proposed updated Premises Management Plan, dated 19 August 2025;
(c) confirmation of no objection by Victoria Police to the Variation
Application, dated 25 August 2025;
(d) confirmation of no objection by the registered service manager at CCCGI,
dated 7 July 2025, and further confirmation, dated 2
October 2025;
(e) statement of display, dated 21 September 2025; and
(f) newspaper advertisement, dated 9 September 2025.
Reasons for Decision
noted above, the Applicant is seeking by way of this Variation Application for
the Commission to allow it to amend the commencement
of trade condition on the
Licence from 10am to 9am for Monday to Saturday and the registered service
manager at CCCGI and Victoria
Police have not objected to this Variation
Application.
Commission considers that, informed by the objects of the LCR Act in section 4,
there are no grounds under section 44(2) to refuse
this Variation Application.
proposed earlier commencement of trade time by one hour (being 10am to 9am for
Monday to Saturday) is not excessive. It is also,
and in any event, consistent
with the commencement of trade time in the defined ordinary trading hours for
packaged liquor licences
in section 3.
that there have been no concerns in any of the material before the Commission
regarding the Licensee’s operations at the
Premises and given that all
other conditions on the Licence would remain unchanged, the Commission is
overall satisfied that it would
be appropriate in the circumstances to grant
this Variation Application and vary licence no. 36156914 as set out in Appendix
A regarding
trading hours.
Decision on review
Commission has determined to grant the Variation Application and vary licence
no. 36156914 as set out in Appendix A regarding
trading hours.
The preceding 15 paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Chair).
Appendix A – Licence No. 32072134
General information
Any reference to the
Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian Liquor Commission, or any
successor statutory office,
body or officer however named, under the
Control Reform Act 1998
) or successor legislation, that has
powers and carries out regulatory functions equivalent to the Victorian Liquor
Commission.
This licence is a packaged liquor
licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor in sealed containers,
bottles or cans on the
licensed premises for consumption off the licensed
premises during the trading hours specified below.
Trading hours
Sunday Between 10am and 8pm
ANZAC DAY Between 12pm and
Good Friday & Christmas Day No trade
day Between 9am and 10pm
Special Condition
Management Plan
The licensee must take all reasonable steps to conduct
and supervise all aspects of the management of the premises in accordance with
the Premises Management Plan provided to the Liquor Regulator, as amended from
time to time to the satisfaction of Liquor Regulator.
Notice of any intention to
amend the Premises Management Plan must be given to the operator of Corpus
Christi Community Greenvale
and the Roman Catholic Trusts Corporation.
Premises Management Plan must be retained on the licensed premises in the
possession of the licensee, nominee or other person
in charge. The Premises
Management Plan must be available to an authorised member of Victoria Police or
a Liquor Inspector if requested.
Liquor Accord
The licensee
must participate in the Greenvale Liquor Accord as approved by a Victoria Police
Licensing Inspector, which will include
the operator of Corpus Christi Community
Greenvale as a member.
A community mobile phone hotline
must be provided and maintained 24 hours 7 days a week to allow for direct
communication by the public
with the licensee. This contact number must be given
to the operator of Corpus Christi Community Greenvale.
The licensee must install and maintain a surveillance recording
system that is able to clearly identify individuals, display time
and date, and
provide continuous images of all areas where patrons are permitted, including
entrances and exits. The position of
the cameras must be to the satisfaction of
the Licensing Inspector or a Liquor Inspector (as the case may be). The
surveillance recording
system must operate at all times the venue is open. A
copy of the recorded images must be retained for at least one month and must
available upon request for immediate viewing and/or removal by Victoria Police
or the Liquor Regulator.
Notice of Transfer
Written notice of
any application to transfer this licence must be given in writing personally or
by post to the operator of Corpus
Christi Community Greenvale.
Access to the Premises after 9pm
Between the hours of 9pm and closure of
the premises, patrons must only enter and exit the licensed premises directly
via the shopping
centre entry from the southern car park located at the west
corner of the adjacent supermarket as marked on the shopping centre floor
provided to the Liquor Regulator.
No Deliveries of Liquor to Corpus
Christi Community Greenvale
Liquor must not be delivered to Corpus
Christi Community Greenvale
Self-Exclusion
If the licensee is
notified and provided identification details of any Corpus Christi Community
Greenvale members who agree to prohibit
themselves from liquor purchase, the
licensee must not serve such members liquor. If such members present on the
licensed premises,
staff must record this in an Incident Register and must
promptly notify and provide this information to management of the operator
Corpus Christi Community Greenvale.
Complaints Register
licensee must maintain a register containing details of any complaints made in
relation to its operations on the licensed premises.
Camberwell Developments Pty Ltd
at Bottlemart at Greenvale [2023] VicLiqComm 14; (1 December 2023).
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Camberwell Developments Pty Ltd
at Bottlemart at Greenvale [2023] VicLiqComm 14; (1 December 2023). Pursuant to
section 3(1), an
uncontested application is defined as
“an application
for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO permit in
respect of which no objection
is received under Division 5 of Part 2 within the
period set out in that Division for that objection (or that period as extended
under section 174)”.
The Victorian Court of Appeal
addressed the concept of “harm minimisation” in section 4 of the LCR
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92.
Warren CJ and Osborn JA endorsed
the observation of Ipp J of the Supreme Court of Western Australia in
considering the harm minimisation
object in liquor licensing legislation in that
State, that the relevant object is “to ‘minimize’ harm or
ill-health,
not to prevent harm or ill-health absolutely” (
Director of Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 258
(2000) 22 WAR 510
at 515). The Court
elaborated in
Kordister at
... [T]he objectives recognise that the manner of supply and consumption
of liquor may positively contribute to the amenity of community
life and may
encourage a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol. It follows that the
notion of harm minimisation is not simply
one of limiting the supply of alcohol.
Rather, it is concerned with regulating supply of alcohol so as to ensure, as
far as practicable,
net community benefit.
... Ultimately, the tribunal was required to balance each of the objects
and arrive at an appropriate synthesis in the particular
circumstances of the
case by the way of a discretionary judgment.
See footnote 3 above as to
definition of “uncontested application” in section 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (777 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter