URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
YFG [2024] VMHT 21 (25 September 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Online video
Tribunal members:
Robert Daly (Legal Member)
Sue Carey (Psychiatrist Member)
Helen Steele (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Marcus Ibaceta
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made an inpatient
treatment order with a duration of 12 Weeks expiring on
19/11/2024.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your legal representative requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's
decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating
team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you were on a
temporary treatment order due to end on 09/09/2024. You also applied to have
your temporary
treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a
hearing before the temporary treatment order expired to decide whether
make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the
Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental health and wellbeing
principles (‘principles’).
Based on the information provided in
your hearing and our understanding of your circumstances, the Tribunal
identified the following
principles were particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – the Tribunal understood your right to be treated with dignity
and respect.
Diversity of
care – the Tribunal acknowledged the important role your General
Practitioner and your private psychologist play
in supporting you to manage your
mental health issues.
restriction – the Tribunal considered your future goals and made its
decision with the aim of promoting your recovery
and full participation in
community life.
decision making – the Tribunal considered your views and preferences, in
particular your preference to be discharged
from hospital to receive treatment
in the community
Health needs
– the Tribunal considered the serious impact your illness had on your
physical health and wellbeing.
Dignity of risk
– the Tribunal had to balance your right to take reasonable risks
(including having a difference of opinion
with the treating team about your
treatment plan) with the serious risk to your mental and physical health and
associated harms if
you did not follow the treatment plan recommended by your
treating team.
Wellbeing of
young people – the Tribunal understood the importance of respecting your
autonomy and your need to be trusted.
The Tribunal must also
give proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’).
Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under
the Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Preliminary issue
Application to deny access to
The mental health service must give you access to any
documents in its possession that are connected to the hearing at least two
days before the hearing. If the treating psychiatrist believes
information in those documents may cause serious harm to you or another
they can apply to the Tribunal to deny you access to those
Your treating psychiatrist applied to deny you access to
certain documents. The Tribunal conducted a preliminary hearing to decide
whether you could see those documents. Your lawyer attended this hearing.
The Tribunal decided that the documents should be withheld from you
because disclosure of the information may cause serious harm to
you or another
person. The Tribunal explained this decision to you when you joined the hearing.
4. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. You provided some written materials as
well. Both you and your treating team spoke to and answered
questions from the
Tribunal in the hearing. Your legal representative also made submissions on your
behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information, but
the next section refers to the information the Tribunal relied on to make its
and explains why.
The Tribunal must have regard to your views
and preferences. From what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you
friends and interests. You plan to start a degree and live in a
Melbourne suburb next year. In your submission you stated that you
motivated to get better. You said that means being in control of your treatment
and receiving treatment in the community
whilst living with your supportive
family. You told the Tribunal you felt disempowered and distrusted being on a
compulsory treatment
order. You said if you were a voluntary patient you would
negotiate with the treating team to be discharged from hospital, so you
treated by your GP, dietician and private psychologist in the
5. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
You and your treating team agree that you have
experienced the life-threatening mental illness of anorexia nervosa since 2016
has affected how you think about your body and the need for eating.
Based on the information before it the Tribunal was satisfied that you
have experienced significant symptoms of disturbed thoughts
manifesting as an
eating disorder, namely anorexia nervosa.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
You and the
treating team agree that you need immediate treatment to prevent serious
deterioration in your mental and physical health
due to the impact of the
report stated that without adequate intervention there was a substantial and
potentially irreversible risk to your physical health
and life. This was
supported by a documented history of multiple hospital admissions due to serious
medical complications caused
by the anorexia.
The Tribunal was satisfied
immediate treatment was necessary to prevent serious deterioration in your
mental and physical health.
This criterion was met.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
The report set out the treating team’s
plan which includes continued treatment in hospital so that they could continue
your physical health, respond to any medical issues and support you
to manage the behaviours caused by the anorexia. Your current
treatment included
a meal plan and medications to reduce anxiety and to manage many of the physical
health consequences of your eating
disorder. The treating team said that once
they were satisfied discharge was safe and appropriate, community health
practitioners
would monitor your physical and mental health to make sure you
would remain safe and stable at home.
You disagreed with the treating
teams plan for continued treatment in hospital.
The Tribunal was
satisfied this criterion was met.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
You told the Tribunal you wish to be a voluntary
patient so that you can be treated with dignity and autonomy. You acknowledge
your treatment order was revoked by the Tribunal on 17 July 2024 on the
understanding that you would remain in hospital and agree
to the treatment plan
recommendations of the treating team. However, you agree that on 12 August 2024
you left hospital without the
knowledge of the treating team and travelled home
by train. You explained that you did this because you were frustrated that the
treating team required you to remain in hospital because you believed your
physical health was stable. You said you agreed to return
to hospital the same
day and don’t understand why the treating team placed you on an inpatient
temporary treatment order.
You said if you are a voluntary patient you
will negotiate with the treating team about your discharge home so you can be
in the community. You said you have been medically stable for weeks and
it is not beneficial and is counter therapeutic for you to
continue to receive
treatment in hospital.
The report stated that, on the ward, it had been
very difficult for you to comply with inpatient treatment protocols, and you had
only accepted treatment when it was mandated under the Act. In the report the
treating team acknowledged that the strong eating disorder
cognitions influenced
your thinking and behaviour.
TD acknowledged your right to autonomy and
said the treating team are trying to uphold your rights as much as possible.
However, TD
told the Tribunal that if you are not a compulsory patient you will
ask to be discharged from hospital immediately or tomorrow without
negotiation.
TD said your medical condition is not stable and it is not safe for you to be
discharged from hospital. She said the
treating team have explained this to you,
but you do not accept the treating team's advice.
TD explained that you
have had multiple and protracted periods of hospital treatment, including five
admissions to hospital since
your discharge in March 2024 because you had lost a
significant amount of weight after receiving treatment in the community.
In determining whether this criterion was met the Tribunal had to
balance your expressed views and the principles of the Act outlined
including your rights to autonomy and least restrictive treatment with the
treating team’s very serious concerns about
your capacity to manage your
mental health issues because of the strong effect the anorexia has on your
thinking and the risks it
causes to your physical health and life.
Tribunal considered this criterion was met because we were concerned that you
would leave hospital if you were a voluntary patient
putting your physical
health and life at risk.
6. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected
under the Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only
make an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be
treated in the community.
Your treating team said community treatment was
not possible because your physical health is not stable and because you have not
able to be safely treated in the community despite multiple attempts to do
so. TD said this is because you have not been able to
follow the treatment plan
in the community. You told the Tribunal that your physical health is stable, and
it is no longer necessary
for you to be treated in hospital, and therefore you
can safely receive treatment in the community. You said you are able to follow
the treatment plan in the community.
The Tribunal acknowledged your
strong preference to be treated in the community after being treated in hospital
for many months. However,
the Tribunal agreed with the treating team that it was
not safe for you to be treated in the community due to your physical health
because you have not been able to be treated safely in the community despite
many attempts. Accordingly, the Tribunal made an
inpatient treatment
Length of the Treatment Order
The Act sets a
maximum duration of twenty-six weeks for treatment orders. Your treating team
requested a treatment order to run for
twelve weeks. TD said the treating
team’s plan is to support you to reach a safe discharge weight and to
obtain an accurate
assessment of your weight and physical health. The treating
team also want to arrange discharge planning that ensures you receive
treatment in a safe environment that is conducive to your ongoing recovery and
avoid a repeated rapid deterioration in
your physical health as has happened
previously.
The Tribunal agreed with the treating team's reasons and
therefore decided to make an order for a duration of twelve
Date of determination: 28-08-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Robert Daly
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 25 September 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (516 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter