URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Failure to undertake work) [2018] VLSC 23 (25 June 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
Commissioner Determination (Failure to undertake work)
[2018] VLSC 23
Date of Determination:
25 June 2018
Pursuant to section 299(1) of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law (Victoria)
(‘the Uniform Law’), I find that the
Respondent Lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and I make
the following orders –
Respondent Lawyer is reprimanded pursuant to section 299(1)(b) of the Uniform
Respondent Lawyer complete a Practice Management Course prior to 31 March 2019
pursuant to section 299(1)(e) of the Uniform Law.
STATEMENT OF
Issues under investigation
Respondent Lawyer is the Principal of the Law Practice and has acted on behalf
of the Complainant in various matters.
following allegations have been investigated:
the Respondent Lawyer failed to act on the Complainant’s instructions to
prepare a revised will;
the Respondent Lawyer failed to prepare joint venture agreement documentation in
accordance with instructions;
the Respondent Lawyer failed to make all necessary arrangements for the transfer
of real property out of the Complainant’s
superannuation fund in
accordance with his instructions;
the Respondent Lawyer failed to register a mortgage in a timely manner;
the Respondent Lawyer failed to maintain documents on a file; and
the Respondent Lawyer failed to lodge a proof of debt.
Investigation
11 January 2017 the Commissioner sent a letter to the Respondent Lawyer that
gave notice of the complaint, requested a response
pursuant to section 371(1) of
the Uniform Law and invited written submissions.
Respondent Lawyer provided a response by letter dated 14 February 2017. This
response stated, amongst other things:
regard to preparing a revised will, general advice was provided from time to
time however, the Complainant’s instructions
remained incomplete and
unsatisfactory; and
remaining allegations were denied, particularly noting instructions from the
Complainant in each circumstance were incomplete
and the solicitor-client
relationship with the Complainant had broken down at the time of each
allegation.
letter dated 21 Match 2017 the Respondent Lawyer was provided with further
materials from the Complainant. Taking into account
these further documents and
the Respondent Lawyer’s submissions dated 14 February 2017, further
details were sought from the
Respondent Lawyer pursuant to section 371(1) of the
Uniform Law.
letter dated 14 August 2017 a representative of the Respondent Lawyer addressed
a number of preliminary issues and sought a response
to these and further
particulars.
letter dated 10 October 2017 the Commissioner addressed the issues raised by
letter dated 14 August 2017 and made a reiterated
(as to its request dated 21
March 2017) and further request for details pursuant to section 371(1) of the
Uniform Law.
Respondent Lawyer provided a response by letter dated 20 March 2018.
letter dated 22 May 2018 the Commissioner advised the Respondent Lawyer of the
findings of the investigation to date, concerns
regarding his conduct, invited
written submissions or material to be considered as to whether the conduct
amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct and
set out the proposed orders pursuant to section 299 of the Uniform Law. Notice
of the proposed order was also given to the Complainant on this date.
email dated 3 June 2018 the Complainant provided submissions regarding the
proposed orders.
Respondent Lawyer did not provide a response.
Commissioner has assessed the conduct having regard to all of the available
evidence, in particular the documentary evidence obtained
throughout the
investigation.
Commissioner notes also the Respondent Lawyer’s submissions that the
Complainant’s instructions were often incomplete
and unsatisfactory.
However, it was incumbent upon him to have sought full and proper instructions,
and where these were lacking
to make any necessary requests in writing, give
subsequent and appropriate advice and/or keep a record of same. The Respondent
submissions state that despite his allegations, he did not always
keep a record.
Failure to prepare will
The Respondent Lawyer conducted a review of the wills of the Complainant and his
wife in 2011.
7 November 2014 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer asking that his
will be updated and stating he had waited a long
time for the Respondent Lawyer
to address the updating of his will.
11 November 2014 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and said that he
needed to re-do his and his wife’s wills
to reflect current
structures.
15 April 2015 the Complainant emailed and asked whether the Respondent Lawyer
had made any progress in updating his will.
8 March 2016 the Complainant’s wife emailed the Respondent Lawyer and
asked for the file in relation to their wills to be
2011 – 8 March 2016 the Respondent Lawyer:
not communicate adequately with the Complainant or his wife;
not complete legal work as instructed;
not advise the Complainant or his wife that he was unable to complete the legal
work as instructed; and
Failure to prepare joint venture
20 April 2015 the Respondent Lawyer met with the Complainant and a third party
alleges instructions
were provided to prepare joint venture documentation however, the Respondent
Lawyer states this meeting was
general discussion
19 August 2015 the third party emailed the Respondent Lawyer and asked how he
was progressing with the joint venture documentation
and when a draft could be
3 September 2015 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and asked for a
reply to the email of 19 August 2015 and said the
Respondent Lawyer had
previously committed to producing the document by 6 September 2015.
Respondent Lawyer discussed the matter with the Complainant on 11 September 2015
and assured him that a draft of the joint venture
documentation would be
provided to him and the third party by 18 September 2015. The Complainant
confirmed this by email dated 15
September 2015.
him that he would have the joint venture documentation
by 29 September 2015. The
Complainant confirmed this by email dated 26 September 2015.
29 September 2015 the Respondent Lawyer had not provided the joint venture
documentation to the Complainant and the third party
and on that day the
Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer to ask where the draft agreement
19 October 2015 the Respondent Lawyer had still not provided the Complainant and
the third party with the joint venture documentation
and the Complainant emailed
the Respondent Lawyer to say that he would instruct an alternate legal advisor
to complete the task.
no time during the period 20 April 2015 – 19 October 2015 did the
Respondent Lawyer advise the Complainant and/or the third
party in writing that
he would not prepare the joint venture documents or advise them of any reason
why he would not or could not
prepare the documents.
to transfer property
an email dated 7 November 2014 the Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer
to effect the transfer of two properties to a new
unit trust and to telephone a
third party for instructions as to what to do.
an email dated 11 November 2014 the Complainant said, amongst other things, that
the Respondent Lawyer needed to contact the third
party in respect of the
transfer of properties out of a Super Fund to a new Unit Trust.
an email dated 21 November 2014 the Complainant informed the Respondent Lawyer,
amongst other things, that if something happened
to him while the properties he
was trying to transfer out of the Super Fund were still there, he would incur a
tax bill of about
$400,000, thus implicitly asking the Respondent Lawyer to
attend to the transfers of the properties.
22 January 2015 the third party informed the Respondent Lawyer by telephone of
the particulars of the properties to be transferred.
15 April 2015 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and asked for,
amongst other things, a status report on the transfer
of the two properties from
the Super Fund to the new Unit Trust, which task he said the Respondent Lawyer
had promised would be finished
three (3) weeks after his return from
15 April 2015 the Respondent Lawyer emailed the third party and asked for the
details of the properties to be transferred and the
entities to which they were
to be transferred.
Respondent Lawyer made no further attempt to contact the third party, either by
telephone or otherwise, to obtain the information.
17 April 2015 the Respondent Lawyer forwarded the email to the third party dated
15 April 2015 to the Complainant.
2 September 2015 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and said that
there was an agreement that the transfer of the properties
out of the Super Fund
would be done by the end of August and asked about the current status of the
13 September 2015 the Complainant forwarded the email of 2 September 2015 to the
Respondent Lawyer again.
23 September 2015 the third party emailed the Respondent Lawyer and provided the
details of the properties to be transferred and
the company to which they were
to be transferred.
Respondent Lawyer did not complete the transfers of the properties or ever
inform the Complainant in writing that he would not
Failure to register mortgage
Complainant advanced money to a third party which was secured by a mortgage over
a property.
email dated 28 January 2011 to the third party and copied to the Respondent
Lawyer, the Complainant told the third party that the
Respondent Lawyer would
16 February 2012 the Complainant emailed the third party, with the Respondent
Lawyer copied to the email, stating the third party
would take all steps
necessary to organise, as soon as possible, the registration of the mortgage, as
discussed with the Respondent
11 April 2012 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and said, amongst
other things, that if he cannot be fully paid out
within 60 days then he will
require the mortgage to be registered.
4 July 2013 the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer and instructed him to
register the mortgage immediately.
Respondent Lawyer never registered the mortgage or informed the Complainant
and/or the third party in writing that he would not
the file in relation to this matter, when returned to the Complainant, did not
contain the mortgage or any documentation
in relation to the bankruptcies of the
third parties estate. The Respondent Lawyer therefore failed for properly
maintain documents
on his file.
Findings of fact on issues
under investigation
the basis of the available evidence, I find the following proved:
Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer to prepare wills for himself and
his wife but at no time between 2011 – 8 March
2016 did the Respondent
Lawyer prepare a will for the Complainant or his wife nor did he inform them
that he was unable to do so;
Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer to prepare joint venture documents
but at no time during the period 20 April 2015
– 19 October 2015 did he
advise the Complainant and/or the third party in writing that he would not
prepare the joint venture
documents or advise them of any reason why he would
not prepare the documents;
Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer to transfer property but the
Respondent Lawyer did not complete the transfers of
the properties or ever
inform the Complaint in writing that he would not do so;
Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer to register a mortgage but the
Respondent Lawyer never registered a mortgage in accordance
with instructions or
informed the Complainant/and or the third party in writing that he would not do
Respondent Lawyer failed to properly maintain documents on a file.
Relevant law
Legal Profession Act 2004
(‘LPA’) applies to part of the
conduct, the subject of the findings of fact, as it occurred prior to 1 July
Uniform Law applies to the conduct the subject of the findings of
fact thereafter.
1 July 2015 the Uniform Law commenced and pursuant to clause 27 of Schedule 4 of
Division 7 of the Uniform Law I am empowered to
deal with a complaint made after
the commencement day of the Uniform Law in relation to conduct which could have
been but was not
the subject of a complaint under the provisions of the LPA.
Characterisation of the conduct
prepare will
reason of the above findings of fact, I am satisfied of and find that the
Respondent Lawyer failed, in the course of engaging in
use his best endeavours to complete legal work as soon as reasonably possible in
breach of Rule 1.2 of the
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as reasonably
possible in breach of Rule 4.1.3 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
298(b) of the Uniform Law prescribes that, without limitation, conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting
of a contravention of the Rules.
the Respondent Lawyer failed to prepare wills as instructed and did not advise
in writing that he was unable to do so, his conduct
fell below the expected
standard of competence and diligence. This conduct thereby constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct
pursuant to section 298 of the Uniform
Failure to prepare joint venture agreement
reason of the above findings of fact, I am satisfied of and find that the
Respondent Lawyer failed, in the course of engaging in
legal practice:
use his best endeavours to complete legal work as soon as reasonably possible in
breach of Rule 1.2 of the Old Rules;
communicate effectively and promptly with clients in breach of Rule 39.1 of the
deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as reasonably
possible in breach of Rule 4.1.3 of the Rules; and
follow his clients’ instructions in breach of Rule 8.1 of the Rules.
298(b) of the Uniform Law prescribes that, without limitation, conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting
of a contravention of the Rules.
the Respondent Lawyer failed to prepare the joint venture documentation as
instructed and did not advise in writing that he would
not prepare the documents
or advise of any reason why he would not prepare the documents, his conduct fell
below the expected standard
of competence and diligence. This conduct thereby
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 298 of the
Uniform Law
Failure to transfer property
reason of the above findings of fact, I am satisfied of and find that the
Respondent Lawyer failed, in the course of engaging in
legal practice:
use his best endeavours to complete legal work as soon as reasonably possible in
breach of Rule 1.2 of the Old Rules;
communicate effectively and promptly with clients in breach of Rule 39.1 of the
deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as reasonably
possible in breach of Rule 4.1.3 of the Rules; and
follow his clients’ instructions in breach of Rule 8.1 of the
298(b) of the Uniform Law prescribes that, without limitation, conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting
of a contravention of the Rules.
the Respondent Lawyer failed to transfer property as instructed and did not
advise in writing that he would not do so, his conduct
fell below the expected
standard of competence and diligence. This conduct thereby constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct
pursuant to section 298 of the Uniform
Failure to register mortgage
reason of the above findings of fact, I am satisfied of and find that the
Respondent Lawyer failed, in the course of engaging in
use his best endeavours to complete legal work as soon as reasonably possible in
breach of Rule 1.2 of the Old Rules;
communicate effectively and promptly with clients in breach of Rule 39.1 of the
Old Rules; and
maintain documents in relation to the matter in breach of Rule 7.2 of the Old
298(b) of the Uniform Law prescribes that, without limitation, conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting
of a contravention of the Rules.
the Respondent Lawyer failed to register the mortgage as instructed or inform
the Complainant and/or the third party in writing
that he would not do so, his
conduct fell below the expected standard of competence and diligence. This
conduct thereby constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to
section 298 of the Uniform Law
Determination
light of the above and having considered all of the evidence and relevant law, I
determine that it is fair and reasonable in all
the circumstances to make the
order detailed above.
to section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation, appeal to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal or seek a
review by the
VCAT of this determination made under section 299 of the Uniform
Russell Daily
Delegate of the Victorian
Legal Services Commissioner
25 June 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter