URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chow v Chang [2021] VMC 1 (10 February 2021)
THE MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
DIVISION OF COURT
MAURICE CHOW
SIWEN CHANG
OF DECISION
February 2021
MAY BE CITED AS
NEUTRAL CITATION
CATCHWORDS – Civil Complaint - Conversion and
Detinue – Disputed Ownership of a Pomeranian Dog – Whether a Gift
Domestic Animals Act 1994
Companion Animals Act
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Aston Legal Group
For the Defendant
Ms F Milnes
McDonald Legal
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
1 At the centre of this dispute is a white
male Pomeranian dog named Kobe (‘the Dog’). The dispute arises in
the context
of a previous intimate relationship between Mr Maurice Chow, the
plaintiff in this proceeding, and Ms Siwen (also known as Marina)
defendant. The Dog has been in the possession of Ms Chang since the time the
relationship broke down in November 2019.
seeks relief in the form of an order that the Dog be returned to his possession
as the rightful owner. Ms Chang, on the
other hand, contends that she is the
owner of the Dog and it should remain in her possession. She alleges that the
Dog had been purchased
for her by Mr Chang as a gift.
3 At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Chow
applied for leave to amend his pleadings. Upon hearing oral submissions from
both parties,
leave was refused. The original complaint was filed and served in
17 December 2019 to which a defence dated 24 January 2020 was filed.
Chang’s solicitors opposed the application on the grounds that the
amendments were significant and would require amendments
to the defence. The
proposed amended statement of claim struck out the whole of original pleadings
and added extensive particularisation
of disputed matters, as well as expanding
on the prayer for relief to include damages for loss of use and enjoyment of the
Chow’s solicitors had apparently forwarded a proposed amended
statement of claim to Ms Chang’s solicitors in October
2020. There was no
response to the proposed amendments to the pleading nor was the matter raised
again by Mr Chow’s solicitors
even though the matter had in the meantime
apparently been the subject of appropriate dispute resolution (which was
unsuccessful).
Accordingly, rather than the matter being delayed, the defendant
consented to the matter proceeding on the original pleadings.
4 The matter was heard over one day (via WebEx) with
both parties giving evidence. Mr Chow also called a friend, Ms Cordelia Chang.
Oral and written submissions were delivered and documents were tendered into
evidence by consent.
5 For the reasons that follow,
I find that plaintiff has failed to discharge the burden of proof that he is, as
he claims, the lawful
owner of the Dog. The plaintiff’s claim is therefore
dismissed. I further find that Ms Chang is the lawful owner of the Dog
to remain in her possession.
6 It is convenient to consider the evidence
in this matter in chronological order.
7 From about
June 2017, Mr Chow and Ms Chang lived together in an intimate relationship in
rented accommodation in Southbank.
8 Some time after
the intimate relationship was established, Ms Chang began asking Mr Chow to buy
her a dog or a puppy as a gift.
Mr Chow was resistant to the idea, at least
initially. For example, Ms Chang had sent him screen-shots of a puppy with a
“bday gift please” to which he replied, “no pets
baby”. Another time, in response to a message from Ms Chang
screen-shot of a rescue dog, Mr Chow wrote: ‘Daddy is busy making money.
No time for a doggy like this’. There
were various exchanges of text
messages such as:
• Ms Chang:
‘[Heart emojis]. Buy me a dog lol” to which Mr Chow replied
“Lol [laughing emoji] yes madam”.
• Ms Chang: ‘I just want a dog’
[kissing and puppy-face emojis] to which Mr Chow replied: ‘[Kissing
• At later point, after
an exchange as to the merits of dog ownership, Mr Chow texted Ms Chang:
‘Can you stop being a
pain in the bum bum [sic] and get us a god damn
cutie dog’.
9 When asked why she had not simply bought
a dog herself, Ms Chang said in cross-examination it was because she could not
and that Mr Chow earned four times what she did.
10 Mr Chow said that from around January 2018 the
couple began searching for a dog and began looking into types of breeds. Both
said Mr Chow had asked Ms Chang to undertake most of the research of
breeds and breeders as he was then very busy with the start-up
business. Mr Chow did some research himself including speaking to his friend, Ms
Cordelia Chiang, who had a Pomeranian.
He concluded that a Pomeranian was a
suitable breed in terms of temperament and to live in an apartment. At one
point, he sent Ms
Chang text messages stating: ‘That’s why I need a
white one. I know what I like’. At another point, Mr Chow sent
text message stating: ‘it’s massive. I’m looking into others.
I don’t want breeds to be loud.
Or dependent. Too noisy. And
demanding’.
11 Ms Cordelia Chiang, an auditor
by occupation, had been friends with Mr Chow since about 2008. She said that
because she owned a
Pomeranian herself, Mr Chow had, in early 2018, asked her
Chang said she had done the majority of the communications with different
breeders before deciding on the Pomeranian breed and
selecting a breeder with
whom she had at least 15 exchanges.
13 In September
2018, once a breeder had been selected, the Dog was chosen and purchased from
the breeder (who operated in New South
Wales). Ms Chang chose the Dog’s
14 Mr Chow said it was untrue that the Dog was
purchased as gift for Ms Chang. He had he wanted a dog himself. There was never
a discussion
of the Dog being a gift.
15 It was not
disputed that Mr Chow paid the breeder the sum of $4,300 being the purchase
price for the Dog. Although the monies came
from Mr Chow’s account, the
receipt of the transfer of payment to the breeder stated the monies were from
In cross-examination, Ms Chang denied that Mr Chow had
written ‘Marina’ as an indication that the Dog was intended to
gift for her, but rather, as Mr Chow contended, for mere identification purposes
for the breeder who had been in communications
16 By about October 2018, the Dog had been couriered
by the breeder to Melbourne and began residing at the shared residence of Mr
Chow and Ms Chang. It was not disputed that Ms Chang took two weeks’
annual leave to settle the Dog into his new home.
17 In about November 2018, Ms Chang resigned from
her full-time employment which she said was so as to be the Dog’s primary
carer. In cross-examination, she denied the true reason she gave up work was
because of issues with management in the workplace.
Ms Chang arranged
vaccinations and vet checks and paid also for items related to the Dog’s
care and well-being. Ms Chang shared
group texts with friends regarding
‘my puppy’ and created numerous social media posts about the
Dog’s arrival and
thereafter including that she ‘had been waiting
for this moment for so long’. She taught the Dog tricks.
18 Mr Chow said that by the time the Dog arrived, he
had flexibility in his work hours and he could spend time with him in the early
morning before work and after 2:00 pm when he finished working. He also taught
the Dog tricks, attended vet checks and paid items
related to the Dog’s
care and well-being.
19 By 13 November 2019, Mr Chow
and Ms Chang’s intimate relationship had broken down. Ms Chang said, on
that date, she said
moved out of their shared residence and took all her
personal possessions including the Dog. Ms Chang said that when she was packing
her things, Mr Chow had begged her not to take Kobe. She agreed did not take
with her other gifts from Mr Chow such as a mobile phone
and a laptop.
20 On 14 November 2019, Ms Chang, without being
requested by Mr Chow to do so, transferred the sum of $4,300 into the account of
Chow. At the time of the hearing, that sum is held in trust by Mr
Chow’s solicitors. In cross-examination, Ms Chang denied
transferring that
sum to Mr Chow because she knew the Dog was Mr Chow’s property. She said
she paid the money because she did
not want Mr Chow to ‘lose face’
or think she had taken advantage of him after he paid the original sum for the
also that she did not want to owe him anything. When asked whether she
knew Mr Chow wanted Kobe back, she conceded that he was emotional
when she was
leaving with the Dog and did not want Kobe to go.
21 It was not disputed that Mr Chow demanded that Ms
Chang return of the Dog by way of text message on 13 November 2019 and by way
solicitors’ letters on 20 November 2019 and 4 December 2019.
22 By way of other documentary evidence relied upon
by Ms Chang, there was:
a. A NSW Certificate of
Identification for a male Pomeranian dog named ‘Kobe’ regarding
microchip implantation on 10 September
2018 that stated: ‘Owner Details:
Miss Siwen Chang’.
b. An Australasian Animal
Registry Registration Certificate (undated) in relation to the registered
microchip of ‘Kobe’,
a male Pomeranian dog stating, ‘Owner
Information: Siwen Chang’.
c. An Australian
National Kennel Council Ltd Certificate of Limited Pedigree of the Dog issued 3
May 2019 certifying that ownership
was transferred from the breeder to Ms S
Chang on 20 September 2018.
d. City of Melbourne
correspondence addressed to Ms Chang dated 8 October 2019 confirming
registration of ‘Kobe.’
23 When asked
why he wanted Kobe back, Mr Chow said he loved him and that it was unfair for Ms
Chang to have the Dog which he had
purchased. In cross-examination, Mr Chow said
the explanation for the ownership and registration documents being in Ms
name was because she had dealt with the breeder, she took care of
the household administration and he was too busy with his business.
Chang had taken advantage of the situation in registering the Dog with the
council in her name prior to leaving the relationship.
He had tried to register
the Dog but was informed Kobe was already registered by Ms
24 In cross-examination, Ms Chang agreed that
after the relationship had broken down, she contacted police complaining about
conduct towards her. She disagreed the police then decided to
withdraw an application on her behalf for a family violence intervention
against Mr Chow. She said she then withdrew the application on the advice of a
family violence advocate because had lacked
any detail of Mr Chow’s
conduct during the relationship.
25 The legal
and evidentiary burden of proof rested with Mr Chow to establish that he is the
lawful owner of the Dog, with an entitlement
to immediate possession. On the
other hand, the burden of proof was on Ms Chang to establish on the balance of
probabilities that
the Dog was gifted to her.
submissions for the plaintiff, it was said that, on the evidence, Mr Chow is the
lawful owner of the Dog and is therefore entitled
to immediate possession of the
Dog. It was Mr Chow who purchased the Dog from the breeder. So, ownership
therefore passed from the
breeder to him in consideration of the purchase price.
Further, at no stage, did Mr Chow ever gift, nor did he ever intend to, gift
Dog to Ms Chang. At most, Mr Chow had expressed an intention to give Ms Chang
the right to use and enjoy the dog whilst they
were in an intimate relationship.
In removing the Dog from the former shared residence and then failing to deliver
him up, Ms Chang
had done so wrongfully and had committed an act of detinue. In
continuing to possess the Dog and failing to surrender the Dog to
Mr Chow, she
acted inconsistently with his rights to immediate possession and committed an
acted of conversion.
27 For Ms Chang, it was
submitted that, on the weight of evidence, Ms Chang was the lawful owner of the
Dog which had been purchased
for her and at her request by Mr Chow as a gift in
the context of the intimate relationship. Upon leaving the relationship, she had
lawfully removed her personal property, including the Dog. The fact of the Dog
being purchased for her as a gift was supported by
the numerous and
contemporaneous exchanges of text messages between her and Mr Chow.
Additionally, her ownership of the Dog was supported
by documentary evidence in
relation to the receipt of purchase, the certificates of microchip registration
at the time of and prior
to the purchase from the breeder and with the
28 In essence, this was a factual dispute
in which the credit of the witnesses was central to my decision. I formed the
Ms Chang was a witness of truth who appeared to be doing her best to
give accurate responses to the questions asked of her. She made
appropriate
concessions that were adverse to her interests including that Mr Chow was
emotional and did not want Kobe to go and had
begged her not to take the Dog. On
the other hand, I formed a somewhat less favourable impression of Mr
Chow’s evidence. I
found some of his answers to be attempts to mislead the
Court, such as saying he bought a dog because he wanted a dog which is
inconsistent
with multiple contemporaneous test messages that demonstrated his
reluctance to acquire a Dog.
29 As both Counsel
submitted, the fact of the dog being registered in Ms Chang’s name does
not, of itself, establish or constitute
statutory ownership in Victoria
according to
Domestic Animals Act 1994
). In that Act, an ‘owner’ is defined as a person who
‘keeps or harbours the animal or has the animal in his or
Counsel for the Defendant referred also to the definition of ‘owner’
Companion Animals Act 1998
In my view, the ownership of the Dog is governed by the law of Victoria given
that is the State in which the Dog has been cared for
since its purchase from
the breeder. Even if I am wrong, the NSW Act’s definition does not advance
matters in favour of either
party given ‘owner’ is defined, in the
alternative, to mean: the owner in the sense of being the owner of the animal
personal property; the person by whom the animal is ordinarily kept; the
registered owner.
30 Weighing the whole of the
evidence, and having, as I said, the benefit of observing all the witnesses give
evidence to the Court,
I preferred Ms Chang’s version of events as being
more probable. The weight of evidence, particularly of Ms Chang and corroborated
by the content of the contemporaneous text messages such as ‘buy me a dog
lol’ and ‘bday gift please’, satisfied
me that, as a matter of
fact and law, Mr Chow purchased the Dog with the intention of gifting it to Ms
Chang. I find that Mr Chow
purchased the Dog at her request and to accede to a
dearly held wish of hers in the context of a then loving relationship. I find,
on the evidence, in spite of Ms Chang’s pleas to be given a dog, Mr Chow
was resistant to the idea of acquiring a dog but ultimately
acceded to her
request saying playfully ‘yes madam’ and ‘Can you stop being a
pain in the bum bum and get us a
god damn cutie dog’. In my opinion, when
weighing the oral evidence and the content of the contemporaneous text messages,
it is simply implausible that he purchased the Dog for himself intending Ms
Chang merely to have enjoyment of it.
31 Whilst I
accept Mr Chow did his own researches, I am of the opinion he did so more to
‘sign off’ on Ms Chang’s
wish for a Pomeranian rather than
because he had a particularly strong interest in acquiring a dog himself. I also
accept that Mr
Chow warmed to the idea of a dog being part of their lives (such
as the message to ‘get us a god damn cutie dog’). Mr
Chow became
fond of the Dog and enjoyed aspects of pet ownership as a member of the
household. However, that does not, in my view,
in any way alter the fact that,
as I have found, in weighing the whole of the evidence and on the balance of
probabilities, he bought
the dog as a gift for his then intimate partner, Ms
32 Finally, I formed the impression that Mr
Chow was an astute person who was starting up and running a business. Whilst, as
said, nothing turns upon it in respect of the statutory definition of
‘owner’, I find that as a matter of probability
and, notwithstanding
that he was busy at the time the Dog was acquired, if he had intended to be the
owner of the Dog himself, he
would have ensured that the documents referred to
him accordingly. I find therefore that the evidence as to the microchip
registration
and the purchase receipt stated to be from ‘Marina’
(event though the money came from Mr Chow) further supports my finding
Dog being purchased by Mr Chow intending Kobe to be a gift for Ms Chang.
plaintiff’s claim is dismissed with costs. The parties are invited to make
submissions or file minutes of consent regarding
costs or ancillary matters.
Domestic Animals Act 1994
Companion animals Act 1998 (NSW), s.7
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter