URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:38:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vass (GRE) - App 10 2008 [2009] VRAT 3 (24 March 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 10 of 2008
In the matter of an Appeal
MR TONY VASS
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF TWELVE-MONTHS DISQUALIFICATION
IMPOSED BY GREYHOUND RACING VICTORIA FOR BREACHING GREYHOUND
AUSTRALIASIA RULES
83(2) & 83(3)
MR F.G. DYETT
, His Honour
Mr B. Toner,
Mr I. Vigor, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON 24 MARCH
2009 AT 3.07 P.M.
MR T. VASS appeared on his own behalf.
MR J.B. DAVIS appeared on behalf of Greyhound Racing Victoria.
( His Honour Judge Dyett)
R U L I N G
HIS HONOUR: On 21 October and 25 November 2008 a Stewards' Inquiry was
conducted at the offices of Greyhound Racing Victoria in respect
of a post race
urine sample taken from the greyhound Front Line Hero following the running of
Race 6 at Traralgon on Friday 27 June
2008. The sample when analysed revealed
the presence of morphine.
The Stewards conducting the inquiry were Mr Glenn Fish (Chairman),
and Mr Peter Chitty. The appellant
Mr Tony Vass, who was the
trainer of the greyhound in question, appeared in person. At the conclusion of
the inquiry the appellant
was charged with a breach of Rule 83(2) of the
Greyhounds Australasia Rules, in that he did fail to produce the greyhound Front
Hero free of any drugs for an event at Traralgon Greyhound Racing Club on
27 June 2008, given that the post race sample taken from
the greyhound indicated
the presence of morphine. The appellant was subsequently found in breach of
Rule 83(2) and therefore guilty
of an offence under Rule 83(3).
He was disqualified from holding a training licence for 12 months,
pursuant to Rule 83(4), Front Line Hero which had won Race
6 was disqualified
from that event with consequent loss of the prize money. The appeal before this
tribunal occupied three sitting
days. I am satisfied according to the
Briginshaw standard of proof of the following historical facts; after Front Line
Race 6 entitled Pak Motor Mowers Final (GOBIS), the Steward in charge
of the Traralgon meeting, Mr Raymond Paul, elected to include
this greyhound
among the four dogs from which swab samples were taken at the meeting, because
as he said in evidence, "the race being
a final I think there was quite a fair
bit of prize money involved in it" (T.71).
The appellant was present when his dog's urine was collected, under
the supervision of a veterinary surgeon, into two plastic
bottles which were
sealed, numbered V11207 and were placed in a special plastic package bearing the
same number as photographed in
Exhibit Book at p.35. The package also contained
a control sample, constituting the customary sample kit emanating from Racing
Services Limited (RASL), the laboratory accredited by the National
Association of Testing Authorities (NATA), a semi government body
entrusted with
the accreditation of laboratories throughout Victoria.
Until the end of the meeting the sample package remained with three
other such sample packages in a locked cabinet in the Stewards
Traralgon. Thereafter all packages were placed in a refrigerated unit in the
boot of Mr Paul's car, which remained locked.
On Monday 30 June 2008 Mr Paul
attended, along with Stewards Mills and Polson, another greyhound meeting at
Cranbourne where he
placed the four sample kits in the locked cabinet in the
Stewards room at that course. On the way to that meeting he posted to Greyhound
Racing Victoria the Stewards report on the Traralgon meeting and other
documents, including the white copy of the triplicate sample
identification
document V11207, linking that numbered sample to Front Line Hero (Exhibit Book
He retained the yellow copy and the pink copy was in the possession
of the appellant. At the conclusion of the Cranbourne meeting
the Steward
Andrew Mills took possession of the four swab packages from Traralgon, a further
five from Cranbourne, and placed all
nine in the locked boot of his car where
they remained until Wednesday 2 July 2008, when he drove the Steward Brett
Polson to Flemington
where they both attended a course of instruction. His car
was parked in the vicinity of the RASL laboratory at 40 Epsom Road.
At 2.50 p.m. that day during a course break Mills gave Polson the key
to his car and Polson took all nine packages from the refrigerated
unit in the
boot. He delivered them to Adam Ziebell at the RASL laboratory, and received a
confirmatory receipt, Exhibit B. Certainly
from the time Mr Paul reached the
Cranbourne meeting there was no documentation in the vicinity of the four
Traralgon samples, which
would enable a hypothetical intruder into either of the
Stewards cars to identify the sample taken from Front Line Hero.
Subsequently an employee of RASL recorded in the record of receipt in
the laboratory's computer, that all nine samples were intact.
A print out of
this record of receipt has been certified by the deputy laboratory director
David Batty. Moreover I accept the evidence
of the laboratory director Dr Vine
that there were no visible holes at all in the sample bottles or seals
photographed in Exhibit
Book 34, and are tendered in evidence as Exhibit
Upon a routine screening by the laboratory of urine from each of the
nine samples the appellant's dog's urine was shown to contain
an irregularity
leading the analyst to believe that the sample perhaps contained morphine
(T.118), and the presence of morphine was
confirmed in the sample by liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry testing on 7 July 2008 (Sample A).
On 22 July 2008 the deputy director of RASL David Batty advised Dr
Brian Williams, the Chairman of Stewards, by letter and certificate
of analysis
that Sample A contained morphine; further that the confirmation of this finding
would depend on the results of the reserve
urine and the control samples, which
were available for analysis in the presence of an analyst nominated by the
trainer if required.
When advised of this the appellant nominated Neville
Newton Brown, the senior analyst with Probe Analytical with the qualification
Bachelor of Applied Science in chemistry, who attended the laboratories of RASL
on 19 August 2008, and witnessed the analysis
of the reserve urine sample
(Sample B).
Mr Brown signed a pro-forma printed document (Exhibit Book 37)
on that date. It was conceded by Mr Davis for the Stewards that
a number of
actions attributed to Mr Brown in that printed form were actually done by the
analyst of RASL, and the signed pro-forma
was only admitted into evidence
subject to that understanding and subject to the excision of any concession by
Mr Brown in the printed
form that Sample B appeared to be intact.
It is to be noted that the appellant elected, allegedly on the ground
of expense, not to call Mr Brown whom he had called as a
witness during the
Stewards' Inquiry. Again in Sample B the presence of morphine was confirmed by
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
analysis, and a report summarising these
results bearing the signatures of both the deputy laboratory director David
Batty, and the
laboratory director Dr Vine was issued by RASL on 20 August 2008
(Exhibit Book 25 to 7).
Morphine is a drug under both Limbs(a) and (e) of the definition of
drug in Greyhounds Australasia Rule 1. As to (a), the Tribunal
accepts the
evidence of Dr Vine and of Dr Alistair Smith, the principal veterinarian at the
Sandown Veterinary Clinic, that morphine
acts upon the central nervous system of
a greyhound and is a potent analgesic or painkiller. It also produces a feeling
of euphoria,
all of which is performance enhancing, but an excessive dose of
morphine would have the converse effect of sedating the animal.
As to Limb(e) of the definition morphine at all material times has
been listed in Schedule 8 of the Standard for Uniform Scheduling
of Drugs and
Poisons (Commonwealth) as amended from time to time, and therefore is a drug
within that Limb. Much of the argument
in this appeal however related to
Limb(d) of the definition which reads; "unusual or abnormal amounts of
endogenous substances including
but not limited to cortisol and
testosterone".
It was contended by the appellant that morphine was a substance which
could be produced naturally, that is endogenously by mammals
greyhounds, as well as being an exogenous substance which could be detected in
the dogs urine as a result for example of
deliberate injection into the blood
stream or the administration of codeine, or of the dog consuming food containing
poppy seeds.
Each of these examples as a consequence of metabolism could result
in the dog's urine testing positive to morphine. Such exogenous
morphine came
within Limbs(a) and (e) of the definition, but endogenous morphine, so the
argument ran, was a substance within Limb(d)
and to be within the definition of
a drug must be present in unusual and abnormal amounts.
It was submitted that this could not be established because no
threshold had been set and anyway the analysis were qualitative
only and not
quantitative of the amount of morphine detected. The appellant further argued
that the analysis were invalid and that
it did not establish the presence of
morphine in Samples A and B in any event. The other major ground of appeal
relied upon was
that there were breaches of security by the Stewards in their
handling of the samples during the five days from the taking of the
Friday evening of 17 June 2008 to Wednesday 10 July at 2.50 p.m. when RASL's
Adam Ziebell issued a receipt for the nine
Dealing with these arguments in reverse order, on the first day of
the Stewards' Inquiry the Steward Brett Polson gave incorrect
evidence, that he
had taken possession of the samples at Cranbourne on the Monday night, placed
them in a refrigerator in the boot
of his car and retained possession of them
until delivering them to RASL on the Wednesday. I accept that this was a
mistaken recollection
which he corrected on the second day of the inquiry after
checking the rosters and realising that he did not have a Greyhound Racing
Victoria car at that stage.
On the other hand there is no evidence whatsoever that the sample
package in question in this appeal was the subject of tampering
at any point
during the five days when the samples were in transit. Such a delay of course
is unsatisfactory; it is highly desirable
that samples taken by Stewards at any
greyhound meeting be conveyed to RASL as promptly as circumstances reasonably
permit. Leaving
samples in refrigerated units in the boots of cars left parked
and unattended for lengthy periods, as occurred in this case, constitutes
security risk which should be avoided in future.
The plastic containers and seals tendered in evidence (Exhibit D)
showed no visible signs of needle holes and as Dr Vine pointed
out, a needle
fine enough to make a hole invisible to the naked eye would not be strong enough
to penetrate the plastic containers
or seals. The hypothetical intruder, who
would need a key to obtain undetected access to a Stewards car, would have no
way of identifying
the Front Line Hero sample.
I reject as fanciful the appellant's suggestion that while Mills car
was parked at Flemington someone from Greyhound Racing Victoria
could have used
the spare key to Mills car kept by Greyhound Racing Victoria to gain access to
the boot, and could have identified
the appellant's dog's sample kit from the
white triplicate copy of the sample identity document posted to Greyhound Racing
by Mr Paul on Monday 30 June and which may have arrived there before
2.50 p.m. on Wednesday
2 July. There may have been strained
relations between the appellant and Greyhound Racing Victoria, as he submitted,
but the evidence
of lack of tampering with the sample package is overwhelming.
Turning to the challenge to the accuracy and validity of the
analytical results, both Samples A and B were subjected to liquid
chromatography
mass spectrometry - two forms of analysis by the one instrument, and in
each instance the identification of morphine
was confirmed by comparison of that
data with similar data from an authentic sample or reference sample of morphine.
Liquid chromatography
involves measuring the time taken by the substance being
analysed to pass through a chromatography tube (the retention time) and
comparing that with retention time of the reference standard Dr Vine described
this as a separation method, by contrast with the
mass spectrometry analysis,
which he termed an identification method, whereby the molecules of morphine are
converted into electrically
charged particles which are manipulated in electric
fields during which manipulation the morphine molecule falls to pieces producing
lines characteristic of morphine or "a fingerprint of morphine" as he termed
This again is compared with a reference sample, the minimum criteria
for comparison being three ions which match. The results
in respect of Samples
A and B were matching ions comfortably in excess of three in each instance. For
Sample A compare Figure 2,
third graph Exhibit Book 29 with the third graph in
Figure 3 of the reference sample in Exhibit Book 30, and for Sample B compare
the lower graph in Figure 4 (E.B.31) with the lower graph in the reference
Sample Figure 5(E.B.32).
Mr Vass confines his attack on validity to the liquid chromatography
tests. There was a difference of .078 per cent in each instance
between the
retention time in relation to both Samples A and B, and the reference standard.
I accept that this difference is well
within the allowable tolerance of plus or
minus two per cent which RASL applies and which is consistent with the
guidelines of the
Association of Official Racing Chemists (AORC) an
international organisation of senior staff at racing laboratories (T.189), and
by implication approved by the National Association of Testing Authorities
Australia (NATA).
I reject the appellants submission based upon the claim of the
manufacture of the analysing equipment that the retention time
should be within
0.3 per cent of the reference sample, and I accept Dr Vine's explanation that
the manufacturer's claim has been
based upon pure reference material rather than
morphine extracted from urine (T.202). In any event the mass spectrometry
were not challenged at all so the validity of the positive findings of
morphine in both Samples A and B must be upheld.
The third major ground of appeal was based upon Limb(d) of the
definition which reads, "unusual or abnormal amounts of endogenous
substances,
including but not limited to cortisol and testosterone." To adopt
Dr Vine’s definition endogenous substances such
as testosterone, also
adrenaline not specified in the definition, are produced naturally in the body
of a greyhound as part of its
normal biochemistry, (T.102).
There was a conflict in the expert evidence as to whether morphine in
some circumstances could be an endogenous substance. "Endogenous
production of
morphine would require the synthesis of morphine within the body of a greyhound
from materials other than morphine",
(T.103), "and other than an immediate
precursor such as codeine", (T.104). Codeine is converted by a process of
metabolism to a
number of other materials one of which is morphine.
A precursor means a particular substance which is one step removed
from a substance to which is it ultimately converted. "Codeine
is a precursor
because it is directly metabolised by the body into morphine", (T.104). This is
an example of exogenous production
of morphine, likewise food containing seeds
from the opium poppy, if consumed by a greyhound can result in morphine being
in the dog's urine.
"Morphine is an opiate derived from the opium poppy", (T.233). "The
composition of the poppy seed is metabolised to morphine
and that is excreted by
the body", (T.234). As Dr Vine explained endogenous production of morphine
would require the substance to
be produced from material much more distantly
related to it, i.e. basic building blocks present in the normal diet of a
Some research suggests that tyrosine may be one of the building
blocks from which morphine can be constructed. The suggested
pathway would
involve some ten or 12 steps and according to Dr Vine is "the subject of
controversy among researchers", (T.105).
Dr Smith - the principal veterinarian
at Sandown Veterinary Clinic which specialises in treatment of racing greyhounds
as above indicated
– also gave evidence. In that evidence he said that he
sees the results of many analyses of greyhound urine samples in the
his work as accredited on track veterinarian of Greyhound Racing Victoria, and
adviser to Stewards. Both he and Dr Vine
gave evidence that if tyrosine, which
is a component of numerous types of food, produced morphine in this way many
more urine samples
would test positive to morphine whereas morphine was found in
relatively few cases and the usual explanation was attributable to
substances such as poppy seeds or codeine.
By contrast, Professor Colin Burton Chapman, a highly qualified
expert from Monash University who is a lecturer in veterinary
pharmacology at
Melbourne University Veterinary School and whose research areas include drug
detection and drug analysis, gave evidence
that while he was originally of the
view that morphine was not present endogenously in animal studies, he had
reviewed articles in
prestigious journals which he tabled, and these articles
had convinced him that it is now well accepted that endogenous morphine
present in animals. He furthermore said: "That levels or amount will fluctuate,
that it is feasible to find it in urine and that
the amounts would be trace,
very small amounts", (T.261).
"The research work had not been done on dogs but there was strong
circumstantial evidence that these propositions applied to dogs
because a dog
was no different physiologically from other species", (T.267).
He had read that tyrosine might be a precursor in some way and that
had been hypothesised that if the dog had lots of tyrosine,
maybe that would
push the pathway in that direction. But that is conjecture, he said. It was
feasible that if you increase the
intake of tyrosine, you increase the
production of morphine. Other than that he could not say (T.275).
An explanation for the positive test in this appeal, according to the
professor, could be that it is endogenous. "An explanation
could be that the
dog was chewing on opium poppies. The explanation could be, dare I say it, that
the dog was given morphine", (T.273).
The appellant gave evidence on Friday that because the dog was highly
strung, he had added to the dog's diet, tyrosine in powdered
form which he
purchased in May 2008 as supported by an exchange of emails,
(Exhibit 2). He often also fed the dog foods high in
tyrosine, such as
crushed walnuts. He did not give Front Line Hero any drugs, including morphine,
before the event in question.
A negative swab taken from his dog on
2 January 2008, he said, was not inconsistent with his case because that
was before he had
purchased the tyrosine in powdered form.
I find it unnecessary to resolve the conflict between experts as to
whether morphine can be endogenously produced by a greyhound
because I accept
the evidence of Dr Vine that the quantities of morphine in the samples analysed
were approximately three times larger
than the reference sample for the 100
nanograms per millilitre, (T.127).
They were within the range of 200 to 400 nanograms per millilitre,
(T.132). They were middle of the range results by comparison
relatively few positive morphine results which the laboratory had detected over
the years, (T.128 and 155). Therefore,
I find that the morphine detected in
Samples A and in B were in larger quantities than any trace amounts which a
greyhound may produce
naturally, as suggested by Professor Chapman.
In addition, the administration of large amounts of tyrosine would
reasonably be expected to lead to elevated levels of a substance
3-Methoxtyramine, (T.108). Samples A and B from Front Line Hero contained very
low levels of this substance, according to
Dr Vine. He saw no evidence
suggesting that high levels of tyrosine had been fed to this greyhound, based
upon this finding, (T.108).
To sum up, I accept Dr Vine's opinion and I do not accept that the
morphine found in Samples A and B was produced endogenously,
whether as a result
of the consumption of tyrosine or otherwise. I uphold the finding of the
steward's inquiry that there was a
breach of Greyhounds Australasia Rule 83(2)
in that Front Line Hero was not free of morphine, a drug within Limbs A and E of
definition, when presented for Race 6 at Traralgon on 27 June 2008.
On the other hand, there is insufficient evidence for me to be
satisfied that the morphine, which I find came from an exogenous
source, was
deliberately given to the dog. As the race was a final, it was reasonable for
the appellant to anticipate that the winner
would be swabbed which would be a
strong disincentive to such action. No charge has been laid under Rule 83(1) in
any event. I
make those observations because they may be relevant to
The appeal against conviction must be dismissed. I am grateful for
the assistance of both my advisers, although the decision
has been my own. And
I am also grateful for the well researched submissions of the appellant and also
of Mr Davis for the stewards.
The latter's submissions ultimately carried the
day but bearing in mind the appellant's lack of advocacy experience and lack of
legal training, it must be said that I and my advisers were most impressed by
his conduct of this appeal, his mastery of the scientific
papers and the
industry which he obviously devoted to the appeal's preparation.
HIS HONOUR: I have discussed the matter of penalty with my advisers but
the decision of course on this matter, as it was in respect
of the matter of
conviction, is my own. I take into account the appellant's contribution to
really the community of dog racing,
his reference to his participation in an
official capacity in the past in the Lang Lang Course Club and so on, his work
on a voluntary
basis. That is to be taken into account, on the one hand. On
the other hand, must be taken into account the very serious nature
of the drug
in the sense that it does command a severe punishment.
The situation in other cases suggests quite often a penalty of three
months disqualification where it cannot be established, as
in this instance,
that the drug was deliberately given to the dog. Here of course we have an
appellant who does have some blemishes
in his career. The more serious matters
are a long time ago but nevertheless they are blemishes and I think in fairness
sides a penalty of four months disqualification is appropriate,
commencing on this day, 24 March 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (64.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter