URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/81.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Hill [1996] VicRp 81; [1996] 2 VR 496 (4 March 1996)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
TADGELL and CHARLES JJA and SOUTHWELL AJA
19 February, 04 March 1996
Tadgell and Charles JJA and Southwell AJA
The applicant, who was at the date of sentencing (2 November 1995) aged 16 years and at the date of the offence aged 15, was in October
last presented in this court upon a presentment containing one count of murder, to which he pleaded not guilty. On the second day
of the trial the Crown accepted the applicant's plea of guilty to one count of manslaughter, an offence under the common law, the
maximum penalty for which is 15 years' imprisonment (Crimes Act 1958
Sentencing Act 1991
applies. No prior convictions were alleged and after hearing a plea for leniency and obtaining a pre-sentence report prepared pursuant
Sentencing Act 1991
(the Act) the learned trial judge on 2 November 1995 sentenced the applicant to be imprisoned for five years, and fixed a non-parole
period of three years. His Honour declared that the period of 373 days be reckoned as already served.
On the following day, pursuant to its powers under s244(1) of the
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(the 1989 Act) the Adult Parole Board ordered that the applicant be transferred to a youth training centre. Later reference is made
to the consequences of the making of that order.
The grounds of the initial notice of appeal were in these terms:
1. The sentence is manifestly excessive.
2. The learned trial judge erred in the interpretation of
Sentencing Act 1991
However, after the application had commenced counsel for the applicant applied for leave to amend the grounds by adding the following:
3. The learned trial judge erred in wrongly taking into account or placing an inappropriate emphasis upon the executive power in
relation to the possible release date in setting the term of the sentence.
4. The learned trial judge failed to take into account the operation of
Sentencing Act 1991
and of s188 and s189 of the
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
in determining sentence.
Ground 4 raises questions of difficulty in the interpretation of the provisions to which the ground refers. The problem may be put
briefly in this way. S32 of the Act empowers a court to make a "youth training centre order" in respect of a "young offender". (One
must resort to the 1989 Act to find a definition of a "youth training centre".) A "young offender" is defined by s3 of the Act as
one "who at the time of being sentenced is aged 17 or more but is under the age of 21 years". As has been said, the applicant is
aged 16 years, and is accordingly not a "young offender" as defined, but he is a "child" as defined by s3 of the 1989 Act. However,
s189(2) of the 1989 Act provides a limit of two years in respect of detention in a youth training centre; whereas, s32(3)(b) of the
Act empowers the County Court and the Supreme Court to order detention for a period of three - years. The question arises as to the
appropriate manner in which the problem created by an obvious lacuna in the legislation is to be solved.
While at first demurring to the granting of leave to amend in respect to ground 4, on the basis of the element of surprise, the prosecutor
in the end did not accept the invitation of the court to make further written submissions. The court deferred the question whether
leave should be granted.
The facts may be stated briefly. On Tuesday 2 October 1994 at about 9pm the deceased Winston Lloyd Simons died at his Housing Commission
flat in Doveton, as a result of the applicant having struck him on the head a number of times with a beer bottle. The deceased was
aged 46. On the day of his death the deceased purchased a considerable quantity of alcohol and throughout that day consumed alcohol
with his neighbours and with the applicant. Some time after 6pm the applicant and three friends (Smith aged 14, Barker aged 16 and
Aydin aged 14) went to the deceased's flat. The five persons drank beer, watched television and talked until the beer ran out at
the applicant told Aydin that the deceased had $200 and he was going to "roll him".
Some little time later an argument developed between the applicant and the deceased over the payment for the purchased beer. According
to Aydin, the deceased was sitting on the bed when the applicant commenced to beat him about the head with a beer bottle. He, Aydin,
ran off, but heard three or four more blows, each of which he described as a "clunk". Smith said that the deceased and the applicant
were fighting, that he, Smith, left the room and he then heard the thud of a bottle hitting something a couple of times.
The body of the deceased was discovered by a neighbour on the following day. Post-mortem examination established that four blows
to the head had caused death. The deceased's blood alcohol concentration was .29%, a fact relied upon for the applicant as a basis
for the inference that since the applicant had spent a considerable time drinking with the deceased, he, the applicant, must also
have been considerably affected by alcohol.
It was common ground upon the hearing of the plea that the applicant should be regarded as having killed the deceased by an unlawful
and dangerous act. The Crown should, we think, thereby be taken to have conceded that, savage though the attack may have been, the
prosecution may not have been able to prove that the probably intoxicated applicant intended to kill or to cause really serious bodily
harm. The principal thrust of the plea was put in these terms: the applicant had had an uneventful life until the age of 12, when
he was the subject of a series of sexual abuses by a neighbour and his wife, including acts of rape, at least one of which was committed
at knife-point. From then on the applicant became increasingly uncontrollable and in due course the assistance of the Community Welfare
Services was sought. The applicant is yet to face proceedings for an armed robbery alleged to have been committed not long before
the commission of the offence presently under consideration. Upon the hearing of the plea, counsel for the applicant called as a
witness Mr Ross McDonald, a youth officer employed at the Melbourne Juvenile Justice Centre (formerly known as Turana), where the
applicant had been detained since the commission of the offence. Mr McDonald said that the applicant had been well-behaved but was
immature and vulnerable and "would be open to sexual abuse, emotional torment and the like" if he were to be imprisoned at Pentridge.
Counsel for the applicant urged the sentencing judge to impose a youth training centre order pursuant to s32 of the Act. A submission
was then developed concerning the power of the court under the combined effect of the Act and the 1989 Act, some of the provisions
of which have been earlier mentioned. It was said that the court had power to order that the applicant be detained in a youth training
centre for a period of three years. Counsel urged his Honour to impose such a sentence and to order that the period of detention
so far served (approximately 12 months) not be declared to be a period reckoned as already served, so that in fact the effective
sentence would be approximately four years' detention in a youth training centre. This course had been followed by Hampel J in R
v Gilbert (unreported, 16 September 1994).
The proper understanding of this submission depends upon reference to the terms of s35(1) of the Act which provides: If an offender
is sentenced to a term of detention in a youth training centre in respect of an offence, any period of time during which he or she
was held in custody in relation to proceedings for that offence or proceedings arising from those proceedings and for no other reason
must, unless the sentencing court otherwise orders, be reckoned as a period of detention already served under the sentence.
In the discussion which followed, the judge expressed the view that the applicant would not spend any time in Pentridge but rather
would be sent to one of the "training places". Counsel for the applicant persisted with his submission which would have the effect,
as he said, "of producing a four year period ... [which] is certainly an appropriate disposition".
The learned judge thereafter heard evidence from Mr Walton, a psychologist, who expressed the opinion that: Youth training is the
better option because of the facilities, and also there is priority given to education, rehabilitation and so on. These things already
have been well in train with him. That sort of attention would not be available within the prison system.
The prosecutor submitted to the judge that it would be "wrong in principle" to adopt what he suggested was a "device" put forward
by counsel for the applicant. In the course of his remarks the prosecutor reminded the judge that s10 of the Act applied.
It should be observed that at no time during the plea hearing was reference made to the fact that the ultimate decision, not only
as to the nature of the institution in which the applicant would serve his sentence, but also the period of his actual incarceration,
would be made not by the sentencing court, but by the Youth Parole Board. This follows from the provisions of s244 of the 1989 Act,
the relevant provisions of which we now set out:
(1) If the Adult Parole Board considers it appropriate in the interests of a person under the age of 21 years imprisoned in a prison
to transfer that person to a youth training centre, the Adult Parole Board may if satisfied, after considering a report from the
Director-General, that -
(a) that person is suitable for detention in a youth training centre; and
(b) a place is available in a youth training centre - direct that that person be transferred to a youth training centre.
(5) A person transferred from a prison to a youth training centre under subs(1) becomes, on transfer, subject to the jurisdiction
of the Youth Parole Board for the - unexpired portion of the term of his or her sentence and that sentence is to be treated for all
purposes as a sentence of detention in a youth training centre.
(6) The Youth Parole Board may at any time release a person detained in a youth training centre after being transferred there under
subs(1) and in determining whether to release a person the Board may take into account the period which that person spent in prison.
(7) The Youth Parole Board may release a person on parole under subs(6) even though a non-parole period fixed in accordance with Subdivision
(1) of Division 2 of Pt3 of the
Sentencing Act 1991
has not ended.
It will be seen that upon the transfer pursuant to subs(1), the offender becomes (by subs(5)) subject to the jurisdiction of the
Youth Parole Board.
It was common ground upon this application that when the applicant was transferred (as he was on 3 November 1995) the quoted provisions
operated to empower the Youth Parole Board to release the applicant on parole at any time, notwithstanding the fact that the sentencing
judge had fixed a non-parole period of three years.
It follows that to the extent to which the judge attempted to ensure that the applicant would serve a specified period of detention
before he could be released on parole, such attempt was doomed to failure. That is not to say that the Youth Parole Board would ignore
the fact that a non-parole period had been fixed, any more than it would ignore a recommendation made by the court pursuant to s189(4)
of the 1989 Act relating to "the management or treatment of, or any other matter concerning, a child sentenced to detention in a
youth training centre".
In his sentencing remarks the learned judge accepted that the applicant's actions in attacking the deceased were not premeditated
but that he "reacted in violent anger following an argument over money or alcohol".
His Honour appeared to accept that the combined operation of the Act and the 1989 Act permitted him to pass a sentence of three years'
detention in a youth training centre. His Honour went on to observe: In my opinion, this maximum period is substantially less than
the nature and gravity of the offence required by way of sentence.
His Honour went on to discuss the pre-sentence report which the court is required to obtain by s188(1)(e) of the 1989 Act. His Honour
referred to that section of the report which indicated that it was possible that there would be an early consideration of the question
of parole, and then said: In my opinion, it would be most undesirable for parole to be considered in your case in a few weeks' time
for a number of reasons. Firstly, in terms of appropriate punishment for this offence, you should be detained for about three years
... the report also states that if you are not credited with pre-sentence detention time you will be eligible for parole thirteen
months from this day. For the same reasons I regard such a short period as inadequate.
Upon this application these observations were said to demonstrate error in that his Honour's exercise of discretion had been influenced
by "reliance upon the future exercise of executive power": R
(1992) 62 A Crim R 141
at 144. This was the basis of ground 3 of this application. We do not now pause to consider the correctness of that submission.
The sentencing judge went on to reject the proposal put forward by counsel for the applicant to obtain an effective term of four
years' detention in a youth training centre by "otherwise ordering" under s35(1) of the Act. His Honour said: -
In my opinion, this is not a legitimate reason for ordering that pre-sentence custody be not deducted from the sentence. A court
should not seek to extend the statutory maximum period by a device.
In this court it was said for the applicant that whether or not the order sought involved resort to a "device", the learned judge
was in error, whereas counsel for the Crown submitted that his Honour was correct, and that it was contrary to the whole scheme of
the combined provisions of the two relevant Acts to impose an effective period of detention in a youth training centre in excess
of three years.
If the judge had proceeded to impose a sentence of four years' imprisonment upon the basis that to do so would be improperly to use
the "device", then the correctness of his Honour's view would squarely be raised upon this application. However, it is clear that
his Honour thought that a head term of four years, whether it be imprisonment or detention, was inadequate, as is demonstrated by
the fact that his Honour imposed a term of five years' imprisonment. It follows that even if the claimed error were shown, it did
not bring about the sentence in fact imposed. It therefore becomes unnecessary now to consider whether leave should be granted to
add grounds 3 and 4. However as will be seen, it will be necessary for us to return to the subject matter of the proposed ground
Accordingly, the question which now falls for decision is whether the sentence of five years' imprisonment is manifestly excessive;
or, to put it another way, whether the judge fell into sentencing error by forming the view that a period of four years' detention
was not in all the circumstances adequate. Since s10 of the Act applies, the learned judge must have had in mind as a starting point
a sentence of seven and a half years' imprisonment, which upon any view is a heavy sentence to be imposed on a 16 year old offender.
On the other hand this was a most serious example of the serious crime of manslaughter. So much was virtually conceded by senior
counsel for the applicant upon the plea, in that he put forward a period of four years as "an appropriate disposition". It must be
a rare case indeed where counsel feels obliged to make submissions which inferentially concede that a period of three years' detention
in a youth training centre for a 16 year old offender would not be regarded as adequate.
For the applicant, it was submitted that in imposing a sentence of imprisonment in an adult prison (it being said that the judge
could not properly anticipate or speculate upon the possibility of executive action of the kind in fact made in this case - that
is, the transfer on the day following sentence to a youth training centre) the sentencing judge disregarded powerful evidence that
a youth training centre was the appropriate institution for the applicant's incarceration; and that the benefits of the training
and rehabilitation provided in the latter institutions were such that it was quite inappropriate to impose a sentence which might
result in the applicant being incarcerated in an adult prison.
It was next said for the applicant that since the judge expressed the opinion that the applicant should be detained "for about three
years" this object could be achieved by a youth training centre order. We think it clear that the judge was not there referring to
a head sentence, but to a non-parole period.
For the Crown, it was said that the judge rightly regarded this offence as a serious example of a serious crime and that the sentence
was not beyond the permissible range.
As has so often been said, the issue raised is not one which admits of lengthy reasoning.
It is true that the judge was not bound in law to give a discount for the plea of guilty. It might fairly be said that the plea did
not demonstrate true remorse but - was probably motivated by a realisation that self-defence would be a difficult defence to run,
that juries are rarely impressed by intoxication as a defence, and that it would be nigh on impossible for the applicant to escape
a finding that his act was at least unlawful and dangerous, and that there was a real risk of a conviction for murder.
However, the applicant, young as he was, probably intoxicated, acted, as the judge found, without premeditation but in sudden anger.
The assault was not, as counsel for the Crown submitted in this court, "prolonged" or "sustained"; and the applicant had no prior
convictions.
In all those circumstances, we find ourselves driven to the conclusion that the judge either failed to give due weight to these considerations
or failed to have regard to the fact that s10 applied. We think that in the circumstances, a starting point of, say, six years' imprisonment
(making an effective term of four years) would have been unassailable, but a sentence of seven and a half years (and perhaps more
if a discount was given for the plea of guilty) was simply too high. It follows that we are of opinion that the sentence of five
years' imprisonment was excessive, and that it ought to be set aside.
The problems raised by proposed ground 4 to which we have earlier alluded must now be tackled, since this court is called upon to
re-sentence the applicant.
In the first place, the court is empowered to imprison the applicant, pursuant to s7(a) of the Act, which refers to "a person" being
subject to its provisions, or, pursuant to s7(b) to order that he "be detained in a youth training centre".
Difficult questions arise in relation to the making of an order of detention in a youth training centre. As has been said, resort
must be had to the 1989 Act for a definition of that expression - s3 of the latter Act provides that it "means a youth training centre
established under s249(c)" and "youth training centre order" means "an order referred to in s137(1)(j)".
S249(c) provides that the Governor-in-Council may establish "youth training centres for the care and welfare of persons ordered to
be detained in youth training centres under this Act or the
Sentencing Act 1991
empowers the Children's Court to order detention of a "child" "in a youth training centre under s188".
S188(1) of the 1989 Act empowers the Children's Court to order detention in a youth training centre in respect to a child "aged 15
years or more but under 18 years".
By s189(2) the period of detention cannot exceed two years in respect of any one offence, and by s189(3) cannot exceed three years
in respect of aggregate orders in relation to more than one offence.
It should be noted that s16(b) of the 1989 Act denies the Children's Court jurisdiction in cases of homicide.
S32 of the Act, so far as is now relevant, is in these terms:
(1) If a sentence involving confinement is justified in respect of a young offender a court may make a youth training centre order
if it has received a pre-sentence report and -
(a) it believes that there are reasonable prospects for the rehabilitation of the young offender; or
(b) it believes that the young offender is particularly impressionable, immature or likely to be subjected to undesirable influences
in an adult prison.
(2) In determining whether to make a youth training centre order, a court must have regard to -
(a) the nature of the offence; and -
(b) the age, character and past history of the offender.
(3) The maximum period for which a court may direct that an offender be detained in a youth training centre is -
(a) if the court is the Magistrates' Court - 24 months; and
(b) if the court is the County Court or the Supreme Court - 36 months.
(4) Subs(3) applies irrespective of how many offences the offender is convicted of in the same proceeding.
(a) a sentence of detention in a youth training centre is imposed on an offender already under such a sentence; and
(b) the subsequent sentence is cumulative on the prior sentence; and
(c) the aggregate of the periods of the unexpired portion of the prior sentence and the subsequent sentence exceeds the relevant maximum
period set out in subs(3) - the subsequent sentence must be taken to be a sentence that the offender be detained in a youth training
centre after the completion of the prior sentence for the period then remaining until that maximum period is reached.
The limitation imposed by s32 of the three years' detention both for a single sentence (subs(3)) and for a cumulation of sentences
(subs(5)) seems clearly to indicate that Parliament was of the view that no offender should be liable to serve more than three years'
detention in a youth training centre.
To summarise, s188 and s189 of the 1989 Act authorise the Children's Court to order that a "child" be detained in a youth training
centre for up to two years; s32(1) of the Act authorises the Supreme Court to make a youth training centre order in respect of a
"young offender"; and subs(3)(b) of s32 imposes a maximum period of 36 months for which the Supreme Court may direct that "an offender"
be detained in a youth training centre. The questions for us are whether the Supreme Court may deal under s32 with an offender who,
being under 17 years of age, is not a "young offender" and, if it may, what length of detention it may order. Tantalisingly, the
expression "young offender" is found in the Act - leaving aside its definition in s3(1) - only in s32(1). Notably, the expression
is avoided in subs(2), subs(3), subs(4) and subs(5) of s32, and elsewhere in subdiv(4) of Pt3 (s32-s35, under the heading "Youth
Training Centre Orders") where "offender" is used save in s33. In s33, unaccountably, neither "offender" nor "young offender" is
to be found, "person" being evidently preferred. Moreover, "offender", which is otherwise used copiously throughout the Act, is not
defined at all: cf
Corrections Act 1986
It would appear, however, that "offender" in the Act generally comprehends any person who has been found guilty of an offence and
with whom a court may deal under s7. It may nevertheless be appropriate to give "offender" in subdiv(4) of Pt3 a narrower meaning
than that, so that an offender who is, when sentenced, older than a "young offender" is not included. However that may be, what we
have to determine is whether, in that subdivision, "offender" includes an offender who is, when sentenced, younger than a "young
A strictly literal interpretation of the relevant provisions might require a conclusion that the County and Supreme Courts cannot
impose upon a "child" an order for detention in a youth training centre for more than two years. That was the view formed by Cummins
J in R v Fullilove (unreported, 5 December 1995) who remarked that "the interface of the provisions of the
Sentencing Act 1991
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
is neither complete nor completely harmonious". -
Cummins J had before him an offender aged 15. His Honour held that the court could not impose detention for more than two years and
that, "If such a sentence is insufficient for the gravity of this case, the sentence must be gaol".
In September 1994, Hampel J in R v Gilbert sentenced a 16 year old offender to three years' detention, and "otherwise ordered" under
s35, to produce an effective sentence of something over four years' detention. The problem now under discussion was not then adverted
to; however, in December 1995, after Cummins J had sentenced Fullilove, Hampel J caused Gilbert to be the subject of further submissions,
albeit, so it would seem, that his Honour was then functus officio. His Honour ultimately gave a "ruling", in which he expressed
the opinion that his earlier order had been within power. The learned judge said: The term "young offender" in (s32(1)) is clearly
a term of art which is defined as a person between 17 and 21 years of age. Subs(3) of s32, however, deals specifically with the periods
for which the court may direct that "an offender", as distinct from a "young offender", be detained in a Youth Training Centre, providing
that the maximum period is 24 months when imposed by a Magistrates' Court and 36 months when imposed by the County or Supreme Court.
It is, to say the least, an awkward set of provisions and definitions, because one has to look at the machinery of the Children's
Court Act, but cannot proceed under the Children's and Young Persons Act sentencing provisions because the (former) Act specifically
excludes cases of homicide. So I think that counsel both submit correctly that s32(3) provides its own regime, as distinct from s32(1)
and extends to 36 months the period for which an offender, being a child, can be detained in a Youth Training Centre.
It was submitted for the applicant in this court that the learned judge there reached the correct conclusion but by means of the
wrong reason, in that "young offender" in subs(1) and "offender" in subs(3) must be held to have the same meaning; whereas it was
said for the Crown that Hampel J's reasoning was correct.
It was next submitted that it could not have been the intention of Parliament that the combined effect of the legislation would be
that while an offender aged 17, whose conduct merited a period of detention of three years, would escape a sentence of imprisonment
in an adult prison, an offender aged 16 who similarly must be deprived of his liberty (at least notionally) for the same period,
would have to be sent to prison.
Since the evidence generally is overwhelming (and there is specific evidence in this case) that the environment of an adult prison
is highly unsuitable for young persons, we agree that such an intention ought not to be ascribed to Parliament.
Accordingly, we are of the view that the word "offender" in s32(3) should be held to include a "child" as defined by the 1989 Act.
To hold otherwise in the present case would oblige this court to impose upon the applicant a sentence of imprisonment in an adult
prison, with the stated undesirable result.
We feel bound to say that there appears to us to be an air of unreality in much of the discussion which occurred before us and in
the reasoning process which we regard this court as obliged to adopt. It has for long been well-known that offenders of the applicant's
age are rarely housed in an adult prison, and this applicant is not so housed, nor is he likely to be. Parliament is at liberty to
allow this knowledge to affect the legislative process. Yet the sentencing court must not allow such knowledge to affect the sentencing
process. This fact, combined with the earlier mentioned fact that the Youth Parole Board (which, unlike a court, is -
not obliged to make public its decisions) and not any court, decides when a young offender will be released, appears to provide but
little support for the ideal of truth in sentencing.
For those reasons, we regard this court as having the power, pursuant to s32 of the Act, to direct that the applicant be detained
in a youth training centre for three years.
However, we agree with the learned judge (and accept as correct the concession in this regard of senior counsel for the applicant
upon the plea) that a sentence of that duration is inadequate. The question then arises as to whether it is permissible to adopt
the "device" which was shunned by the sentencing judge, by "otherwise ordering" under s35(1).
S35(1) (which is in comparable terms to s18(1), the latter dealing with periods of imprisonment) is addressed primarily to the prison
authorities responsible for the administration of the Act. However, it also empowers the sentencing court to "otherwise order", that
is to say, to order that the period spent in custody is not to be reckoned as already served. It would follow from the making of
such an order that the offender would serve a term which was the aggregate of the period already served and the sentence then imposed.
In most cases, such a result would appear to offend the principle that an offender should serve a term no longer than the justice
of the case requires; it being the duty of the court to impose a sentence appropriate in all the circumstances or, put another way,
a sentence which fits the crime. If that is the sentence imposed, justice requires that time already served is subtracted. That was
the practice in the law long before legislative intervention.
The legislation is silent as to the considerations which the sentencing court should take into account in exercising the wide discretion
granted to the court by s35(1).
There are here two considerations which appear to us to be diametrically opposed to each other. On the one hand, there is the consideration
that what we have termed the "clear intention" of Parliament is that the period of detention not exceed three years; on the other
hand, if we take the view (as we do) that three years' detention is inadequate, then we would be obliged to sentence the applicant
to imprisonment. Not without considerable hesitation we have finally concluded that though "device" it may be, that word ought not
necessarily be given a pejorative meaning, and in the particular circumstances now before the court it is a legitimate device, and
one, we might add, which counsel for the applicant urges us to adopt. Furthermore the adoption of this course will assist in the
achievement of two objectives which are important in the case of a youthful offender, particularly so where the offender is a child.
The first of these is that rehabilitation is usually far more important than general deterrence; the second is that such an offender
is not, if it can be avoided, sent to an adult prison for a first offence: see R v Misokka (unreported, Court of Appeal, 9 November
1995) at 6-7 and the authorities there cited.
We think that the appropriate term of detention is four years. To achieve that end, we sentence the applicant to detention in a youth
training centre for three years, and will make an order which has the effect that one year of the period already served not be reckoned
as already served. As it seems to us, that result will be achieved by declaring, pursuant to s35(1), that the period of 130 days
be reckoned as already served. -
We express the hope that our observations concerning the difficulties in interpreting the relevant legislation will in due course
lead to appropriate amendments by Parliament.
Application for leave to appeal granted and appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the applicant: Patmalar Ambikapathy.
Solicitor for the respondent: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter