URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Manningham United Blues Football Club at Petty's Reserve [2024] VicLiqComm 7; (27 May 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Manningham United Blues Football Club Inc, for an
internal review of a decision by a delegate to grant in part an application
a renewable limited licence for the premises located at Petty’s Reserve,
61-77 Reynolds Road, Templestowe, trading as Manningham
United Blues Football
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Mr Barry Withoos and Mrs Kerry Withoos, for an
internal review of a decision by a delegate to grant in part an application for
a renewable limited licence for the premises located at Petty’s Reserve,
61-77 Reynolds Road, Templestowe, trading as Manningham
United Blues Football
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Deputy Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances:
Messrs Mike Cockburn, Nick Cimino, Nick Raptopoulos and
Harry Tsindos for the Licensee
Mr Barry Withoos and Mrs Kerry Withoos in objection
Mr Ben Schier, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 21 February 2024
Date of Decision: 27 May 2024
Date of Reasons: 27 May 2024
In relation to the Licensee Review Application and the
Objector Review Application,
the Commission has determined to vary the
decision of the Delegate and grant the renewable limited licence subject to the
set out in Appendix A
Original Application
10 January 2023, Manningham United Blues Football Club Inc (
applied to the Victorian Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a renewable limited
Original Application
) in respect of the premises located at
Petty’s Reserve, 61-77 Reynolds Road, Templestowe (
Premises is a sporting facility owned and managed by Manningham City Council
). It consists of two soccer fields, a children’s
play-space, a sealed car park, rest rooms and a pavilion. The pavilion is
comprised of an open-air viewing area, a kitchen and an indoor function space
Licensee is a soccer club incorporated on 20 January 2015.Its 68 teams compete
over a range of age groups and levels.
way of the Original Application, the Licensee sought a renewable limited
...consumption of alcohol to occur within the social
[club] room, under cover viewing area and the tiered seating/steps facing the
western pitch via a purpose built [sic] canteen facility on training evenings
and match day Saturday/Sunday. Other calendared fundraising
social events such
as presidents [sic] lunch, best & fairest events, sponsors dinner evening,
seniors guernsey presentations
and other club support evenings.
Licensee proposed the following trading hours across a full
Monday to Friday Between 5pm and
Saturday and Sunday Between 12pm and 11pm
Licensee also sought the Commission’s approval for persons under the age
of 18 years to be present on the Premises.
24 February 2023, the Licensee lodged an amended application consisting of an
amended plan of the proposed licensed area (
Red-Line Plan
following trading hours (
Amended Application
Tuesday Between 5pm and 8:30pm
Wednesday Between 5:30pm and 8pm
Thursday to Friday Between 5:30pm and 8:30pm
Saturday to Sunday Between 12pm and 8pm
accordance with section33(3), the Commission served a copy of the Original
Application on the Chief Commissioner of Police and
the Licensing
) on 13 February 2023
. On 3 March 2023,
Victoria Police advised that they did not object to the Original Application. On
16 March 2023, a copy of the Amended
Application was given to Victoria Police.
On 7 April 2023, they responded with no objection.
accordance with section33(3), the Commission served a copy of the Original
Application on the City of Manningham (
) on 13 February 2023. On
16 March 2023, a copy of the Amended Application was given to the Council.
17 April 2023, the Council advised that, whilst it did not object to the Amended
Application, the proposed trading hours across
a full year did not align with
the times allocated by Council, which was for a maximum of 6 months in any year.
Additionally, the
Council requested the Commission to seek submissions from the
Licensee in regard to any proposed amenity controls, specifically in
relation to
how it proposed to administer patron management, monitor music noise and the
provision of security at the Premises. The
Commission sought those submissions
from the Licensee on 28 April 2023.
On 21 March 2023, the Licensee
advised that the Council had allocated the previous summer (October to March,
inclusive) and the upcoming
winter (April to September, inclusive) for use of
the Premises. As such, the Licensee asserted that it effectively had continuous
use of the Premises in any event and expected to retain continuous use of the
Premises by virtue of renewing arrangements with the
Council every 6 months.
The Commission received 28 letters of objection from 37 members of the public
in relation to the Amended Application. In summary,
the the objections were submitted on the ground that granting the Amended
Application
would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the
18 April 2023, the Licensee responded to the Objectors’ submissions as
a) the proposed trading hours in the Amended Application were not inconsistent
with the Council’s allocation for use of the
b) there will be ‘
a zero-tolerance policy towards any form of
misconduct and there will be responsible service of alcohol
trained to monitor the behaviour of patrons
c) there will be no consumption of liquor outside the Red-Line Plan and there
will also be
strict measures in place to prevent alcohol from leaving the
28 April 2023, the Commission served the Objectors with the Licensee’s
response, inviting them to respond either maintaining,
or withdrawing their
respective objections. Nine Objectors responded maintaining their objection.
Licensee emailed the Commission on 30 April 2023 detailing its ‘
Management Plan
’. The respective
amenity controls detailed in the email were not in the form of finalised
documents, but rather, two paragraphs
forming the body of the Licensee’s
email and composed of broad statements of the means by which the Licensee would
amenity concerns of the Objectors and Council.
2023, the Licensee lodged a further revised red-line plan (
Amended Red-Line
), limiting the proposed licensed area to the pavilion, the kitchen, the
club room and the outside viewing area.
Delegate’s decision
Original Application was determined as a contested application pursuant to
section 47 and considered on the grounds provided in
section 44(2).
11 October 2023, a delegate of the Commission (
) granted, in
part, the Amended Application (
Original Decision
). Noting the
Council’s concerns, the Delegate imposed the following
This licence is only in force during April to
September inclusive each year.
was noted that Victoria Police had not objected to the Original Application, nor
had Council, the owner of the Premises, objected
to the Original Application on
amenity grounds
Delegate stated, ‘
I am not persuaded that the grant of the licence will
be detrimental to the amenity of the
Applications for Internal Review
Objector Review Application
27 September 2023, Mr Barry Withoos and Mrs Kerry Withoos applied for an
internal review of the Original Decision (
Objector Review
Application
way of the Objector Review Application, Mr and Mrs Withoos sought to have the
Delegate’s decision set aside and substituted
by a decision of the
Commission to refuse the Original Application.
and Mrs Withoos provided the following reasons in support of the Objector Review
Application:
the Premises is
a sensitively zoned residential area
’ and therefore
a licence should not be granted;
existing amenity issues at the Premises relating to noise, unruly behaviour and
parking which would be exacerbated by liquor
being supplied; and
the Licensee
already has a liquor licence at its home ground and otherwise promotes itself as
being family oriented.
Supplementary
to the Objector Review Application, Mr and Mrs Withoos also applied for a stay
of the Original Decision.
October 2023,
the Commission
determined to refuse to stay the decision, primarily on the basis that in
accordance with the principles set out in
Bell & Eager v Liquor Licensing
Victoria and Swapnil Pty Ltd
refusal to stay the decision would not render proceedings in relation to the
Objector Review Application
as the Objector Review
Application would likely be heard and determined before the Licensee would next
be authorised to supply liquor
under its licence in April
Licensee’s Review Application
17 October 2023, the Licensee lodged a review application (
Licensee Review
Application
). The Licensee Review Application sought to have the
Delegate’s decision varied to permit the supply of liquor 12-months of
year, as opposed to the 6-months (April to September, inclusive).
Licensee provided the following reasons in support of the Licensee Review
Application:
the Council has
approved the Licensee using the Premises for both winter (April to September,
inclusive) and summer (October to March,
inclusive); and
the Delegate
failed to provide sufficient reason for the Original Application only being
granted in part, for a 6-month period.
Legislation and
the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section152, the decision made by the Delegate in the
Original Decision is a
reviewable decision. Both the Applicant and the Licensee are considered eligible
persons to apply for review
of that decision. Mr and Mrs Withoos and the
Licensee Review Application were made pursuant to section153.
to section157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to each
review application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Amended Application. In
this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Amended Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Amended
Application.
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Amended Application was contested,
as objections were received
under division 5 of part 2 within the relevant
an application is a contested application, pursuant to
section 47(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must,
after the period for making an objection under Division 5 has expired, including
any extension
of time granted for making an objection, grant or refuse a
contested application.
47(2) provides that the Commission may refuse to grant a contested application
on any of the grounds set out in section 44(2)
and section 44(3) applies
accordingly.
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant an application on certain
grounds, including that the granting of the
application would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises to which the
application relates
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed
However, the definition of ‘amenity’ for the purposes of the LCR
Act is not limited by these
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
section 4(2) provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of a contested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 47(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission, with
reference to the objects of the LCR
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
47(3) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant, make any enquiries it considers appropriate
and give both applicants
objectors a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Accordingly in this matter, the
Licensee and Mr and Mrs
Withoos were given reasonable opportunity to be heard in
both being invited to give evidence on oath and make submissions before
Commission.
Section 172U(1) provides that the Commission must
endeavour to perform its functions and exercise its powers without undue
and as expeditiously as practicable, as the requirements of the Act
and proper consideration of the subject matter permit. Accordingly,
Commission determined to hear and decide both review applications in
consolidation.
Section 172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence but may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the
rules of natural justice.
Renewable limited licences
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable limited
Pursuant to section
14(1B), a renewable limited licence authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
the times determined by the Commission
and specified in the licence, and it may
be renewed in accordance with the LCR Act. A limited licence may further be
subject to any
conditions determined by the Commission and specified in the
26(1) provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is
satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the
licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope
Requirement
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) Objector Review Application received on 27 September 2023;
(b) Delegate’s Reasons dated 11 October 2023;
(c) Licensee Review Application received on 17 October 2023
(d) A letter from Council to the Licensee dated 15 November 2023;
(e) Submissions from Mr and Mrs Withoos dated 5 December 2023;
(f) A further submission from Mr and Mrs Withoos dated 29 December 2023;
(g) A further submission from Mr and Mrs Withoos dated 15 January 2024;
(h) Submissions from the Licensee dated 5 February 2024;
(i) A further submission from Mr and Mrs Withoos dated 19 February 2024; and
(j) A further submission from the Licensee dated 20 February 2024.
Preliminary Meetings
the interest of progressing the matter in the manner required under the LCR
the Commission held two
virtual preliminary meetings
with the parties on 30 November 2023 and 19 December
The Deputy Chair also
visited the area on Saturday 9 December 2023.
The preliminary
meetings involved discussion of administrative matters with respect to the
conduct of an internal review hearing and
the additional material sought by the
Commission from both respective parties. That additional material was ultimately
received by
the Commission as part of both respective parties’ further
submission, as referred to in paragraph 47(f)-(h), above.
hearing was held in relation to the applications for internal review on 21
February 2024. The objectors Mr and Mrs Withoos appeared
for the Objectors and
Mr Mike Cockburn appeared with Mr Nick Cimino, Mr Nick Raptopoulos and Mr Harry
Tsindos for the Licensee.
opening remarks, Mr Cockburn, Secretary for the Licensee, clarified that the
primary purpose of the licence ‘
is to support the senior
’ of which there are 12 fixtures per
The licence would be
utilised in tandem with the operation of the Licensee’s canteen, which is
open from approximately 1pm
to 5pm on a game day. In addition, Mr Cockburn noted
that the Licensee hosts a number of events each year, ‘
things like the
president’s lunch, or it might be a team
Mr Cockburn
confirmed that the Premises must be vacated by 9pm each day consistent with the
terms for the allocation of the Premises
from the Council to the Licensee.
Mr Withoos gave evidence under oath that the Premises is
not used for just this one club, it’s used for multiple
He stated that
introducing liquor supply at the Premises could result in ‘
would detract from the amenity of the area, given Petty’s Reserve is
bordered by residential dwellings. Further, Mr Withoos
noted what he perceived
to be a lack of accountability on both the part of the Licensee and the Council
in what he considered to
be a failure to maintain amenity at the
He also noted that the
area surrounding the Premises had remained a ‘
for the period
in which he and Mrs Withoos had resided in the area, being ‘
Mr Cockburn was first to give evidence under oath
for the Licensee. He outlined that whilst fixtures for the club’s various
teams are scheduled from February to August (inclusive) each year, player trials
are held from November to December (inclusive) at
the Premises, whilst preseason
operates from January. As a result, he stated that the club is active at the
Premises for close to
12 months each
Further, whilst a number
social community groups
private enterprise
apply through
the Council for ad hoc ‘
early morning
Premises, the Licensee is the only entity with ongoing afternoon/evening
allocation, with the exception of the Chinese Football
Association, which has
an ongoing allocation of one of the two fields on Wednesday
As such, when asked by
the Commission to characterise its ‘
autonomy over the
Mr Cockburn
responded that the Licensee had ‘
a 90 per cent
Finally, Mr Cockburn clarified that the purpose of the Licensee seeking a
liquor licence was to supplement income received through
the canteen and
sponsorship packages by enabling ‘
additional fundraising
in order for
the Licensee to meet its financial obligations relating, but not limited to the
lease of the Premises from Council,
fees from Football Victoria, Football
Australia, coaches’ salaries and
After a brief adjournment, Mr Cockburn proposed
the following conditions to be applied to the Licence:
Club Room only:
Monday to Thursday 6pm to 9pm
Saturday to Sunday 5pm to 8pm
Entire Red-Line Plan:
Friday 6pm to 9pm
Saturday to Sunday 12pm to
The above proposed hours for supply were submitted on the basis of the
Licensee’s access to the Premises as permitted by the
Council under the
terms of its allocation of the Premises, noting that access to the club room is
managed by the Council and is not
possible after
addition, Mr Cockburn spoke to the Licensee’s proposed patron management
plan, clarifying that the club’s policy is
to offer and continue
to offer... our contact details back out to the broader community to allow them
to engage with [the Licensee]
if they believe there’s any issues or
Mr Cockburn
noted that the Licensee distributes letters amongst residents nearby the
Premises, providing them notice of upcoming
events and fixtures that the club
anticipates will attract higher attendance rates. He also clarified that
we believe out of the 12 [fixtures] [there] is typically about three
games a year where there’s a risk of a larger crowd, but
we also offset
that risk with increased
addressing Mr and Mrs Withoos’ concerns with respect to amenity, Mr
Cockburn noted that several matters raised came under
the purview of Council. He
noted further that the Licensee, as the majority tenant at the Premises, had a
vested interest in engaging
with the Council to address amenity concerns at the
Premises including, but not limited to, an increase in litter, a perceived
of BYO alcohol, management of CCTV and parking congestion.
the hearing, the Commission noted that if the renewable limited licence were to
be applicable for 12-months, it would be appropriate
to condition its use, such
as to prohibit its being used in conjunction with non-club activities. Mr
Cockburn agreed. However, he
advised that liquor was only proposed to be
supplied by the Licensee from the canteen when the Licensee is operating the
which is the case on match days and training matches throughout the
week; the ‘president’s
and committee
Tsindos, Restaurant Manager for the Licensee gave evidence under oath. He stated
that in supplying liquor under previous temporary
limited liquor
his practice (on
behalf of Licensee) has been to employ staff from his restaurant, who hold
current responsible service of alcohol
) certificates. He said that
these staff enforce a strict policy with respect to requesting evidence of age
documentation from patrons.
also stated that his policy has been to restrict supply ‘
to about two
or three drinks, depending who it was. So you can’t come there and buy six
schooners... so there’s a limit
to the amount they can
He also stated
that RSA signage was currently displayed ‘
in four different
that the lines of liquor sought to be supplied under a renewable limited licence
are one lager beer, one pale ale beer,
one red wine, one white wine and one
scotch whiskey. Each are served in plastic
Mr Nick Cimino, Treasurer for the Licensee gave evidence under oath and spoke
primarily to the Licensee’s patron management
plan. He said that in
addition to the presence of ground marshals, match officials and committee
members that under Football Victoria’s
Competition
and associated Match
Day Risk Security Policy,
Licensee is
obliged to have three security officers
in attendance at its
we’ve actually doubled that up
[to six security officers] we double the six [to twelve security officers]...
when we have the
Finally, Mr Nick Raptopoulos, President for the Licensee gave evidence under
oath in support of Mr Cimino’s evidence relating
to the Licensee’s
patron management plan. He stated that if required as a licence condition, the
Licensee would commit to refining
existing protocols and incorporate them into
an official club document.
Further, he stated the Licensee was committed to entrenching its proposed
club music plan
’, which included a policy requiring that
recorded amplified music is not played above background music
in an official
Written submissions, 1 March 2024
response to a request of the Commission on 22 February 2024, the Licensee
provided (in summary) the following written submissions
(a) in line with the Scale and Scope
Requirement,
the Licensee
proposed the following lines of liquor to be sold for consumption anywhere
within the red-line area:
light beer;
lager beer; and
white wine (sauvignon blanc and pinot grigio);
red wine (pinot noir and shiraz); and
sparkling wine (prosecco).
(iii) spirits;
premixed scotch whiskey and ginger ale;
premixed bourbon whiskey and cola;
vodka spritzer;
gin spritzer; and
tequila spritzer
(b) the Licensee proposed that within the club room, in addition to the same
lines sought above, it would seek to supply the following
lines of liquor:
(i) 3x whiskey spirits (2x scotch whiskey variants and 1x bourbon variant);
(ii) 1x gin spirit;
(iii) 1x vodka spirit;
(iv) 1x aperitif spirit;
(v) 1x digestive spirit; and
(vi) 1x port wine.
(c) all liquor would be supplied for consumption in plastic cups, or cans, with
the exception of ‘
meetings or events like [the] President’s
’ at which liquor would be served in glassware. Further, the
Licensee stated that shots and double-shot mixed spirits would
not be served on
the Premises.
(d) the Licensee also provided a document titled ‘
Venue Management Plan
for Alcohol Consumption and Music Management at Pettys [sic] Reserve
). The Plan sought to entrench the Licensee’s submissions at
the Hearing in relation to the following matters:
(i) music selection and volume control;
(ii) complaints handling process;
(iii) responsible service of alcohol protocols including appropriate signage and
demarcated red-line area;
(iv) security measures;
(v) policy with respect to disorderly conduct and intoxication;
(vi) commitment to conduct post-season evaluation of the Plan; and
(vii) applicable trading hours.
(e) the proposed trading hours under a renewable limited licence are:
Club Room only:
Monday to Thursday 6pm to 9pm (last drinks served 8:45pm)
Saturday to Sunday 5pm to 8pm (last drinks served 7:45pm)
Entire Red-Line Plan:
Friday 6pm to 9pm (last drinks served 8:45pm)
Saturday to Sunday 12pm to 5pm
Site visit, 25 March 2024
order to assist in its deliberation by further informing the Commission of the
context in which a proposed licence would be utilised
by the Licensee and the
related concerns with respect to amenity raised by the Objectors, on 25 March
2024, the Commissioners attended
the Premises and immediate surrounds, in the
company of Mr Tsindos for the Licensee.
Reasons for decision on
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Amended Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must determine the
following key issues:
(a) whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is
(b) secondly, whether the grant of a renewable limited licence would detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in
which the Premises are
(c) whether the grant of the Review Application would be contrary to the objects
of the LCR Act, in particular the object of harm
minimisation.
Whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met
stated above, the Commission may grant a renewable limited licence only if
satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is met
— that is, that the
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
are no statutory signposts prescribing specific factors for the Commission to
consider in determining whether the Scale and
Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions, the Commission has considered ‘
the nature,
location, duration or frequency of hours of operation of the licence in
’ as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
Commission notes that the supply of liquor is proposed to be limited to be in
connection with the operations of the club, consisting
of training sessions,
match days, sponsorship events and ad hoc team and committee meetings. Further,
supply is limited by the Licensee’s
ability to access the Premises in
accordance with the terms of its Council allocation of the Premises. The
Licensee’ proposed
trading hours reflect this connection.
Commission does not consider the proposed 12-month applicability of a renewable
limited licence would render the licence inconsistent
with the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
Commission also considers the proposed lines of liquor sought to be supplied are
appropriately limited in scale and scope.
the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is
Whether granting the application would detract from or
be detrimental to the amenity of the area
application may be refused under sections47(2) and 44(2) if the grant of the
licence would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which
the premises are situated.
and Mrs Witnoos objected on the basis of amenity concerns, particularly with
respect to concerns that parking congestion on residential
streets surrounding
the Premises and noise from patrons at the Premises, including disruptive
behaviour and aggressive language,
could increase as a result of alcohol
consumption at the Premises.
and Mrs Withoos noted that noise at matches and training sessions at the
Premises was ‘
astronomical on weeknights and weekends
considered ‘
adding alcohol to this already huge disruption would be
nothing but disastrous
also asserted:
‘The swearing, the screaming, the banging of
fencings [sic] when goals are made, the parking on residents’ nature
the clogging of local streets, the verbal abuse hurled at residents
regarding parking is already causing a huge disruption to local
residents...
adding alcohol to this already raucous behaviour is going to end in
5 December 2023, Mrs Withoos submitted copies of correspondence from the Council
dated between 25 May 2022 and 10 July 2023. The
letters detail efforts by Mr and
Mrs Withoos to resolve existing concerns relating to fencing, the soccer goal
nets and lighting.
The Council advised that in response to the concerns of Mr
and Mrs Withoos (in summary) the Council had taken the following actions:
it had reduced
permitted hours of use of the Premises;
lights at the
Premises were controlled by the Council, not allocated entities;
signage had been
erected at the Premises advising patrons to avoid impacts to the amenity of the
traffic and
parking impacts on the surrounding area on match days are monitored by Council
officers; and
entities at the Premises continue to be engaged by the Council in relation to
their responsibilities to maintain amenity
when using the
29 December 2023, Ms Withoos submitted copies of further correspondence between
itself and the Council, which included a letter
dated 22 December 2023 from the
mayor for Manningham Council. The content of the letter indicated that the
Council was continuing
to work with the Licensee to ensure facilities at the
Premises sufficiently met the demands of a club competing in the Northern
League and had consulted with residents in relation to development at
the Premises, receiving ‘
positive feedback... from residents and the
club in response to these strategies
’ which would inform the
Council’s ongoing approach into the 2024 season. .
Commission, whilst sympathetic to the concerns raised by Mr and Mrs Withoos in
relation to the historic and ongoing development
of the Premises in connection
with Council’s allocation of the use of the Premises, is not satisfied on
the evidence presented
by Mr and Mrs Withoos, that granting the licence
application would have the impact on the area’s amenity which they submit
would occur. Rather, the correspondence referred to in paragraphs 71 and 72
between Mr and Mrs Withoos and Council detailed historic
amenity concerns the
purview of Council, in connection with use of the Premises, generally, as
opposed to its use by the Licensee,
specifically in relation to a liquor
the Commission accepts that there has been an impact on residents’
experience in relation to amenity in connection with
use of the Premises as a
sporting venue, the Commission is required under the LCR Act to consider
specifically, whether or not granting
the application to permit supply and
consumption of liquor as proposed by the Licensee, would detract from or be
detrimental to the
amenity of the
The evidence before the
Commission was not persuasive of a potential for the proposed variation to the
licence to result in a detrimental
effect on the amenity of the
The Commission also notes that between 1 December 2023 and 16
March 2024, the Licensee supplied liquor in connection with events at
Premises on eight occasions, as permitted under three temporary limited liquor
No complaints were
received by the Commission in connection with these events. Further, with the
introduction of the Plan lodged
by the Licensee with the Commission on 1 March
2024, as outlined at paragraph 59, the Commission considers the Licensee to have
appropriate and enforceable controls in relation to maintaining the
amenity of the area in connection with the proposed supply of
liquor under a
renewable limited licence.
The Commission further notes that the Licensee has been consultative with Mr
and Mrs Withoos. At the hearing, the Licensee also invited
guidance from the
Commission on how it might maintain good standing in the community in which it
operates, whilst satisfying its
obligations under its Licence. It has stated
that it is committed to continued engagement with the Council and the local
in an attempt to maintain good standing and has entrenched this
practice as part of the Plan in conducting ‘
post-season evaluations to
assess the effectiveness of the alcohol and music management plan
involving the gathering of ‘
residents to identify any areas for improvement
’. The Commission
accepts that the aforementioned actions indicate good faith on the part of the
Licensee and a genuine commitment
to minimising the potential for the supply of
liquor under the Licence to result in a detriment to the amenity of the area.
Notwithstanding the considerations above, the Commission considers it
appropriate to impose additional conditions on the Licence as
Appendix A. The Commission notes that a common concern shared by the Objectors
related to the potential for patrons to
consume liquor in areas of Petty’s
Reserve outside the licensed area and closer to residential areas, such as the
at the rear of the Premises. The additional conditions seek to reduce
the proposed licensed area so as to align with the seated viewing
area outside
the club room and create a greater distance from residential buildings. The
conditions will assist to better enable
the Licensee to comply with its
obligation to monitor its patrons in improving sight-lines from the canteen,
specifically in relation
to the club room and the outside viewing area.
Additionally, the Commission considers it appropriate to impose a further
condition requiring that the Licensee install physical signage
indicating the demarcation of the boundaries relating to the licensed area.
Specifically, the signage will ensure that patrons
are cognisant of the areas in
which they are permitted to consume liquor, allowing for the Licensee to better
monitor its patrons.
The site inspection of the Premises referred to at paragraph 60 assisted the
Commission in its deliberations and fortified its view
as to the utility of
imposing the additional conditions on the Licence as set out in Appendix A.
Whether granting the application would be contrary to the objects of the
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under sections
47(2) and 44(2), the Commission must still exercise
its discretion whether or
not to grant a limited licence. Such a discretion must be exercised by the
Commission with regard to any
other relevant considerations, as well as with
regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly the primary object of harm
minimisation.
the imposition of the conditions set out in Appendix A herein, in connection
with the Licensee’s commitment to the responsible
service of alcohol,
supervision of the Premises and the circumstances in which it proposes to supply
liquor, the Commission is satisfied
that adequate controls exist over the supply
and consumption of liquor at the Premises and that the risk of harm,
particularly in
these circumstances in relation to supplying minors, is
effectively minimised. Accordingly, the Commission considers that the grant
licence in this instance would not be contrary to the LCR Act’s object
concerning harm minimisation.
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that, subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A herein, the
granting of a renewable limited
licence is appropriate in the circumstances.
Accordingly,
the Commission has determined to vary the Original Decision and grant the
renewable limited subject to the conditions
set out in Appendix A.
In doing so, the Commission has determined to approve the Licensee
Review Application and refuse the Objector Review Application.
preceding 87paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
Mr John Larkins (Deputy Chair), Mr James O’Halloran
(Deputy Chair)
and Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner)
This licence is a renewable limited licence and
authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed premises for
consumption
on the licensed premises during the trading hours specified
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to
the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading
hours authorised under this licence.
Club Requirements
The rules of the club shall comply with Schedule 1 of the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
Special conditions
Physical signage must be erected at the accessible borders of both the
outside licensed area and the club room clearly identifying
that no liquor is to
be consumed beyond the borders of the outside licensed area and the club room,
in accordance with the trading
hours under this licence.
Trading hours
CLUB ROOM ONLY:
Monday to Thursday 6pm to 9pm (last drinks served 8:45pm)
Saturday to Sunday 5pm to 8pm (last drinks served 7:45pm)
ENTIRE RED-LINE AREA:
Friday 6pm to 9pm (last drinks served 8:45pm)
Saturday to Sunday 12pm to 5pm
Approvals/Consents
Section 120(2)(e).
Persons under the age of 18
years are not permitted on the licensed premises other than in the company of a
responsible adult in
relation to preparation for and participation in sporting
activities only. This approval does not include social activities but does
include presentation functions. The approval applies during the trading hours
specified above but no later than 10pm on any day.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
‘licensing inspector’, see section 3(1).
LCR Act section 38(1).
Ibid, section 160(1)(b).
Ibid, section 160(3) the
Commission must make a decision on an application for a stay within 10 days
after the application is made.
Bell v Eager v Liquor
Licensing Victoria and Swapnil Pty Ltd
[2000] VCAT 214.
Arulanantham v Medical
Board of Australia
[2012] VCAT 124.
LCR Act sections 157(2) to (5)
further prescribe the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Ibid, sections 44, 49 and
Ibid, sections 44 and
Ibid, section 3(1) (see
contested application
section 44(2)(b)(i).
section 3A(1).
section 3A(2). Until a legislative amendment in 2018, the following
factors were also included as evidencing detriment to the amenity
of the area:
(a) the presence or absence of parking facilities; (b) traffic
movement and density; (c) noise levels.
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
Ibid, section 157(3).
Ibid, section 14(1).
Ibid, section 14(2)(c).
Ibid, sections 172U(1);
Ibid, section 172X.
Ibid, section 172Y(1).
Hearing transcript, 21
February 2024, page 4, lines 23 to 25.
Ibid, page 4, lines 35 to
Ibid, page 9, lines 21 to
Ibid, page 9, line 27.
Ibid, page 10, lines 3 to
Ibid, page 11, line 3.
Ibid, page 11, line 2.
Ibid, page 19, lines 36 to
Ibid, page 21, lines 28 to
Ibid, page 21, line 31.
Ibid, page 21, lines 32 to
Ibid, page 21, lines 16 to
Ibid, page 22, line 9.
Ibid, page 22, lines 3 to
Ibid, page 20, lines 7 to
Ibid, page 22, line 35, to
page 24, line 5; page 26, lines 33 to 42.
Ibid, page 29, lines 29 to
Ibid, page 24, lines 72 to
Ibid, page 24, lines 19 to
Ibid, page 25, line 7,
understood to be a corporate luncheon at the Premises at which the
Licensee’s executive committee invite
sponsors to attend.
Ibid, page 46 line 5, to
page 49 line 45.
Temporary limited liquor licences 90175065, 90175066
and 90176072.
Above n 21, page 53, lines
Ibid, page 53, lines 19 to
Ibid, page 54, lines 38 to
Ibid page 53, lines 33 to
38; page 57, line 27 to page 59, line 5.
2022 Rules of
Competition,
Football Victoria, cl 1.11.2.
Match Day Risk &
Security Policy
, Football Victoria.
Above n 21, page 60, lines
Ibid, page 63, line 19, to
page 64, line 20.
LCR Act s 9(5); also see
Whiting v Hosier Bar Pty Ltd
[2005] VCAT 814
, Morris J at [14]:
a working technical definition of background music, in the context of
a licensed bar, might be where the noise level (both of the
music and of
patrons) does not exceed L10 db(a) 80.’
Above n 21, page 66, line 36
to page 67, line 18.
LCR Act s 26(1).
sections 44(2)(b)(i) and 47(2).
Ibid, sections 4 and
section 26(1).
Fynix Pty Ltd at 36A
Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-Internal Review)
[2016] VCGLR
LCR Act sections
4(1)(a)(ii); 3A; 3AA.
Temporary limited liquor
licences 90175065, 90175066 and 90176072.
LCR Act, sections 4,
47(3) and 172D(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.41 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter