URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1619.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Mathiasson [2025] VCC 1619 (10 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CR-25-00452
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
CONNOR MATHIASSON
DATE OF HEARING
24 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
10 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Mathiasson
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1619
REASONS FOR
Subject: CRIMINAL LAW
Catchwords: Culpable driving, negligently causing serious injury
Legislation Cited:
Sentencing Act 1991
Cases Cited:
, Azzopardi & Ors v the
, DPP v Hill
, R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
Rakatau v R
, Victorsen v R
, Phongthaihong v R
, DPP v Reid
, DPP v Agius
Sentence: TES: 11 years imprisonment NPP: 7 years
imprisonment
APPEARANCES
For the DPP
Mr N Hutton SC
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr R Nathwani KC
Doogue + George
HER HONOUR:
Mathiasson, you have pleaded guilty before me to one charge of culpable driving
causing the death of Elise Hodder and one charge
of negligently causing serious
injury to Emma Swords.
maximum penalty for culpable driving is 20 years imprisonment and the maximum
penalty for negligently causing serious injury is
years imprisonment. Culpable driving has a standard
sentence of 8 years, the meaning of which I will return to.
Circumstances of offending
circumstances of your offending were comprehensively outlined in the Summary of
Prosecution Opening dated 15 October 2025. I
have also viewed CCTV and Body
Worn Camera footage of the incident and the aftermath. I will summarise the
circumstances here.
the night of 12 October 2024, you went to a rave near the Sir Zelman Cowen car
park at 458 Kooyong Road, Kooyong with your friends
Soda Pop White, Aiden
Creevey and Joshua Creevey.
were not licensed to drive, your licence having expired on 9 July 2023.
had driven your friends in your gold Holden Commodore sedan from Sunbury to the
rave, leaving at about 10.30pm and arriving between
11.30 and midnight. You and
your friends shared a 10 pack of premixed Jack Daniel’s and Coke cans
during the drive.
continued to drink at the rave. At about 1am your group decided to leave the
rave and all got into your car, with you driving.
Ms White was in the front
passenger seat and the Creevey brothers were in the back.
the same time, Elise Hodder and her friends Emma Swords, Hugh, Jeremy Orr,
Olivia Fahey and Beau arrived at the Sir Zelman Cowen
car park. They got out of
the car and walked through the car park.
Coincidentally,
a marked police vehicle was present in the car park at this time. Officers
Nagao and Clinton commenced their body
worn camera footage at 1.07am on 13
October 2024, meaning that the incident before the court occurred at
Nagao described what happened as follows “...out of the corner of my right
eye, I saw a vehicle travel north in the carpark
approximately 25m in front of
me at an extremely fast rate of speed. I’d say 60km/h or something. The
vehicle was a gold-coloured
sedan and drove straight into a group of pedestrians
in the carpark to the left-hand side of us. From what I remember it was the
front of the car which impacted the group of pedestrians. I saw one person go
under the engine block area of the vehicle, get dragged
under. The vehicle went
backwards a bit then accelerated forwards again over the pedestrian and into a
white wagon which was parked.
Hitting the parked vehicle prevented the
gold-coloured sedan from going further forward.”
police officers moved their vehicle to block your car in. SC Nagao removed you
from your vehicle and arrested you. Elise Hodder
was trapped beneath your
vehicle. Emma Swords was hit by your vehicle and was seriously injured. Jeremy
Orr was knocked to the
ground by your vehicle.
Nagao asked why you had driven over the pedestrians and you said
“I’m so sorry. I didn’t mean it. I didn’t
didn’t mean it.” You were handcuffed while the officers attended to
your victims.
Nagao went to Ms Hodder and tried to comfort her. He did so for some 5 minutes
until she lost consciousness and stopped breathing.
It was later determined
that Ms Hodder died from chest injuries and mechanical traumatic asphyxia.
Swords suffered two badly broken ankles which were repaired during several
surgeries using pins and plates. She was wheelchair
bound for some 10 weeks and
had to learn to walk again.
Orr sustained minor rib and knee injuries.
preliminary breath test revealed your alcohol concentration to be 0.177%. A
later blood sample revealed a blood alcohol concentration
of 0.213%. Your blood
further contained metabolites of cocaine and cannabis, however it cannot be
determined when you took these
substances so they are referred to as context
only, not one of the bases of your culpability.
Investigations
conducted by LSC Timothy Bail, an accident reconstructionist, determined that
your vehicle had been parked nose in
(facing south) to a parking bay in the car
park. You reversed out and made a left steering input, resulting in the front
vehicle rotating clockwise. Your car impacted the rear of a Nissan
vehicle before colliding with the pedestrians. The driver's side
of your car
impacted with the rear of a Haval vehicle. The pedestrians were hit, and the
Haval was rotated anticlockwise. Your
brakes were not applied at the time of
vehicle continued to rotate until it was facing north, approximately 180 degrees
from its initial position. You then drove forward,
over Ms Hodder and colliding
with Ms Swords and Mr Orr. You continued accelerating, pushing the Haval
approximately 90 degrees until
it mounted the gutter.
have pleaded guilty to culpable driving on the basis that you were under the
influence of alcohol to such an extent as to be incapable
of having proper
control of a motor vehicle, your blood alcohol concentration being between
0.177% and 0.213%, and on the basis of
negligence, the negligence being that
(a) Were under the influence of alcohol;
(b) Failed to keep a proper lookout while reversing;
(c) Reversed at speed in a car park open to the public;
(d) Impacted 2 vehicles that were parked behind your vehicle;
(e) Impacted a group of pedestrians who were walking in the vicinity of your
(f) Failed to immediately stop the vehicle on impact with the vehicles and
pedestrians;
(g) Failed to keep a proper lookout while driving forward after the initial
collisions;
(h) Drove forward at speed in a car park open to the public; and
(i) Again impacted one of the 2 vehicles and the group of pedestrians.
have pleaded guilty to negligently causing serious injury to Ms Swords on the
same bases of negligence.
Objective gravity and moral
culpability
context, you were caught by a speed camera on your way to the rave driving
in excess of the speed limit. You were unlicenced.
You were drinking while driving. You had metabolites of cocaine and cannabis
in your system. While not part of the charges before the court, all of these
factors demonstrate your contempt for the safety of
other road users on the
night in question.
objective gravity of the offending before the court could not be higher. Ms
Hodder has lost her life. Ms Swords’ future
has been irreparably damaged.
All those who know and love them have been impacted and will continue to be so.
All because you chose
to drive negligently while significantly affected by
has been suggested that someone in the car yelled “go forward” after
the initial striking of the pedestrians. This
may well have been the case;
however, you were the driver and responsible for paying proper attention to your
surrounds. It is in
no way mitigatory but perhaps reflects an element of panic
in the moments the offending took place.
assert through your counsel that you intended to leave the car in Melbourne. I
find this an unlikely proposition but not one
with any bearing on the outcome of
the case. The fact is, you did drive the car after the
rave and you did hit Ms Hodder and Ms Swords. You
will have to live with that decision for the rest of your life.
blood alcohol was between 3 and 4 times the legal limit.
Your driving was erratic and while of short
duration, was fast and dangerous and placed 3 people in direct risk of harm, a
was so tragically realised.
into account your voluntary substance use, the nature and extent of the injuries
inflicted on your victims, the number of people
put at risk by your driving and
the nature of the driving itself, I find your moral culpability to be very
Victim Impact
received 25 Victim Impact Statements in this matter,13 of which were read to the
court. All very eloquently detailed the impact
of your offending on Ms
Hodder’s family and friends and on Ms Swords and her family and friends.
You have taken the life of
one much loved young woman and seriously injured
another. The grief you have caused is immeasurable.
Hodder, Ms Hodder’s father, told the court of the depth of his loss and
the devastation of losing his daughter. His
“heart and soul have been
torn apart.” He stated “There is not healing. The wound remains
open. I grieve daily
while trying to support her mum, her brothers, their
partners and their daughters. Elises’ death should never have happened
... Our lives are forever changed, and Elise has none.” As Mr Hodder
said, “No family should ever have to bury their
child in such cruel and
evil circumstances.”
Courtney, Ms Hodder’s mother, told the court that “the loss of
Elise, in such sudden and horrific circumstances,
has been utterly devastating.
The experience of being woken at 6am by two police officers at our door and
being told that Elise
had been killed by a drunk driver was beyond traumatic.
There are no words to describe that level of shock and disbelief ... The
of that being the end of her life and in those circumstances, without me or
Michael there to comfort her, is unbearable.
As her parents, we had always
protected her and kept her safe. I would have lain beside her, kept her warm,
kissed her, comforted
her, and told her that we loved her. I would have said
goodbye. What a violent, cruel ending for my gentle, loving girl.”
Hodder’s parents were required to identify her but due to the extent of
her injuries, much of her body had to remain covered.
This caused them further
profound sadness, as has the loss of future milestones and achievements. As Ms
Courtney stated, ‘The
emotional impact of Elise’s death has been
catastrophic.”
Swords’ detailed the guilt she suffers for having survived the collision
and how she recalls images of her friend dying
beside her. She also outlined
the horrific injuries she suffered as a result of your driving, the multiple
operations, the metal
fixation and casts on her ankles for months. She has lost
her job, her apartment, her friends and her independence, having had to
to her family interstate. She stated “I will never be the person I was
before that night. I will carry this loss,
this grief and this fear into
everything I do ... I saw my best friend die. I survived in a way that haunts
and relatives of Ms Hodder variously described felling her loss as “a
constant weight of sadness, anger and helplessness,”
coaster,” “complete emptiness,” “suffocating in
grief” and “like drowning.”
and relatives of Ms Swords note her mental and physical suffering and her
withdrawal from them because of “the fear
and trauma she now
I have only quoted from several of them, I take the contents of each Victim
Impact Statement into account and recognise the
catastrophic impact of the
offending. These statements are an important factor in the sentencing synthesis,
however I must take care
not let the consequences of your offending overwhelm
other sentencing considerations.
Plea of guilty and
offered to plead guilty to the offending in July 2025. You counsel submitted
that you were always going to plead guilty but that
was not clear until after
your receipt of the statement of Dr Schreiber, you having previously offered to
plead to a lesser alternative.
I accept that after the additional statement was
served you indicated a plea and entered pleas to the current indictment.
I do not find your plea was entered at the earliest stage, no witnesses were
cross-examined. Your plea has significant utilitarian
benefit in that you have
saved the court and the community the time and expense of running a trial and
most importantly, spared the
witnesses the ordeal of giving evidence. In those
circumstances, you have facilitated the administration of justice and you are
entitled to a benefit for that.
your plea of guilty, you have accepted responsibility for your offending and
demonstrated ongoing remorse. You made immediate
expressions of remorse at the
scene and were appropriately distressed upon hearing the victim impact
statements.
told Mr Newton that you “still think about the accident and its effects
– maybe twice a day. Thinking about how it
affected people and how it
still would be [affecting them]. I know how it feels to lose someone abruptly,
and that fact –
that I am the one who made the decision that caused it to
happen to them – is really hurtful. But prison is more on my mind.
It’s hard not to think about [prison] all the time. I am worried about
the victim and the victim’s friends and I have
written letters [to them].
But I’m not sure about sending them. It was pretty difficult, they just
seem to want me dead.
I would probably want the same thing.”
are clearly immature, as reflected in your statement that prison is on your mind
while others are so clearly suffering as a result
of your actions. While you
have displayed a concern for your own future, I find that this co-exists with
your remorse.
Personal circumstances and psychological
turn now to your personal circumstances.
are now 24 years old, having been born in February 2001. You were 23 at the
time of the collision. You have an older brother
and a younger paternal
half-brother.
were initially raised in Riddells Creek but your mother, who suffered from
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and severe post-natal
depression found the
location isolating and your family moved to Sunbury when you were about 6.
father was a senior executive and was often interstate or overseas for work.
Your parents protected you and your brother from
your mother’s mental
illnesses as best they could, but your early years were turbulent. Your mother
was often hospitalised
and visiting her was a regular weekend activity for your
parents separated when you were aged 12 and after living with your mother for a
brief period, you moved to live with your father.
Your father commenced a new
relationship when you were about 15 years of age and after some initial
difficulties, you now get on
well with his new partner.
2017, when you were 16 years of age, your mother took her own life. According
to Patrick Newton, whose report I shall return to,
you experienced “a
complicated grief response incorporating strong feelings of loss together with
intensely ambivalent feelings
regarding the circumstances of her death and the
illness that had preceded it.” You did not receive and psychological
at this time.
attended local schools before attending Collingwood College for a brief period.
You completed year 10 before leaving formal education.
You have working in a
range of unskilled positions including assisting with carpentry, plastering and
cabinet making. Your employment
has been interrupted by your substance use.
Since this incident you worked casually at a fish and chip shop but this
petered out.
cannabis use commenced in high school and you were using at the time of your
mother’s death. Your use escalated thereafter.
You drank in your teenage
years but did so heavily from the age of 17. It was at this time you also began
to use party drugs such
as MDMA and stimulants and on occasion, hallucinogens.
Following the collision, you continued to use cannabis for several months
have now ceased its use. You have not been intoxicated since the collision.
were involved in a serious relationship for about 2 years in the period leading
up to the collision, but it suffered due to your
heavy substance abuse. While
the relationship had an on/off phase, it ultimately concluded a couple of weeks
before the collision.
received a report and addendum report from clinical and forensic psychologist
Patrick Newton dated 15 October 2025 and 21 October
2025 respectively. He
diagnosed you with severe substance use disorder in remission, post-traumatic
stress disorder in partial remission
and mild to moderate major depressive
Newton opined that it was the substance use which had the most significant
impact on your offending behaviour as the PTSD was precipitated
by the collision
and the depressive disorder only reached diagnosable significance as a result of
the collision. “These effects
[being your offending] were the result of
self-induced, extreme consumption of alcohol and other drugs which took place on
a voluntary
basis and with full awareness of the likely effects it would induce
and the risks this posed.”
is, the drug and alcohol use which you voluntarily engaged in, was the cause of
this collision. While you would have been “behaviourally
disinhibited, had
difficulties exercising appropriate judgement and making reasoned
decisions,” as a
long time drug and alcohol
user, you well knew that these were the consequences of your substance use. Yet
you chose to drive.
Newton further opined that your offending took place in the context of your
immaturity. Your immaturity did not cause the
collision but it is something that needs to be
addressed in your rehabilitation, a factor to which I will return. Being
your “moral reasoning is prone to be ‘pragmatic’ and
‘self-focused.”
Sentencing principles and
considerations
Mathiasson, this was a catastrophic collision, entirely of your own doing. You
chose to drink to excess and then to drive. You
were a collision waiting to
happen and there is now no undoing the consequences of your overwhelmingly
negligent behaviour.
23 years of age at the time of the offending and 24 now, you are not a young
offender but are still youthful. I must therefore
give weight to your
rehabilitation as per the principles in
Azzopardi v the Queen
however, the Court of Appeal stated at
[50] that “while rehabilitation of a young offender is a very important
consideration
in sentencing, the authorities ... demonstrate that it must
sometimes give way to other sentencing considerations, particularly general
deterrence and denunciation.”
is so here and despite your age and immaturity, which I do take into account,
general deterrence must play a significant role
in the sentencing exercise given
the over-representation of young men in culpable driving cases before the
courts. “Unfortunately
the offence of culpable driving is one which is
frequently committed by young drivers. If general deterrence is to be
meaningful,
it must be directed towards this class of offenders and cannot be
regarded as irrelevant because of their
punishment and denunciation are also important factors, given the loss of life
and serious injury resulting from your offending.
submitted by your counsel, specific deterrence has less of a role to play in the
sentencing exercise than general deterrence, although
I disagree with the
proposition that it has no work to do. You have one irrelevant prior matter and
have had 2 speeding
infringements but the impact of
your imprisonment is likely to be salutary. I take your previous good character
into account.
released on bail you complied with the Court Integrated Services Program (CISP)
and underwent AOD counselling and psychological
counselling. You were exited
from CISP upon successful completion of these treatment programs.
light of this, I consider your prospects of rehabilitation to be good, dependent
on you engaging with further drug and alcohol
treatment and further
psychological counselling. You are immature but will be spending a considerable
period of time in custody in which you can undertake
rehabilitative programs.
I consider community protection to be a reduced consideration if you engage with
treatment. Should you do so, I consider
you are unlikely to reoffend in this
family are a pro-social influence on you and have and will no doubt continue to
support you upon your release.
was submitted on your behalf that limbs 5 and 6 of
R v Verdins
have application in your case, that is, that a term of imprisonment
would weigh more heavily on you than on a person in normal health
and that there
is a serious risk of imprisonment having an adverse effect on your mental
on the report of Mr Newton, I find that your post-traumatic stress disorder in
partial remission and mild to moderate major
depressive disorder call for a
modest reduction in sentence pursuant to limb 5 of
am not, however, persuaded that limb 6 has application. Mr Newton opined that
“in a custodial context, [your] youth and immaturity,
[your] vulnerability
to negative influence, [your] status as a first-time prisoner and [your]
pre-existing emotional distress would
all pose challenges. It would be likely
that [you] would require a greater level of support
as a result of such factors.”
a greater level of support is required is not an indication that your
psychological conditions will deteriorate in custody, rather
that you should be
monitored and helped to adjust. While not applying
nevertheless take this factor into account generally.
standard sentencing regime applies to charge 1 with a standard sentence of 8
years. The standard sentence for an offence is a
sentence that, taking into
account only the objective factors affecting the relative seriousness of that
offence, is in the middle
range of seriousness. I must take the standard
sentence into account as one of the factors relevant to sentencing. This
requirement
is to be treated as a legislative guidepost having the same function
as the maximum penalty. It does not affect the established
instinctive
synthesis to sentencing or require or permit two-stage sentencing.
Court must only have regard to sentences imposed in cases where the standard
sentence regime applies. I have taken the standard
sentence for culpable driving
into account as one of the factors to consider in my instinctive synthesis of
all the relevant factors
in your case.
where a court is sentencing an offender in respect of two or more offences, one
of which is a standard sentence, the court
must fix a non-parole period of 60%
of the relevant term where the relevant term is less than 20 years.
driving is also a Category 2 offence meaning I must not impose a term of
imprisonment in combination with a Community Correction
Order unless one of the
exceptions in
Sentencing Act 1991
is met. No such
exceptions were argued here.
further apply the principle of totality, noting that the offending in each
charge arises from the one incident. I must recognise
the fact that there are
two victims of your offending, but I moderate the cumulation
so as to impose a sentence that is proportionate to
your overall conduct.
Submissions
parties submitted that the only available sentence is one comprising of a head
sentence and non-parole period.
Hutton SC, for the prosecution, took me to several cases, namely
Rakatau v R
, Victorsen v R
, Phongthaihong v R
involved pleas of guilty to culpable driving
each involved 2 deaths. All involved other offences. Total
effective sentences imposed ranged between 10 and 13 years.
Nathwani KC, appearing for you, took me to
DPP v Agius
involved a plea to
culpable driving and other
offences and
was a sentence imposed after a trial which involved culpable driving and
negligently causing serious injury, resulting in a total
effective sentence of 9
years and 8 months imprisonment.
take each of the cases to which I was referred into account by way of current
sentencing practices, insofar as they are relevant
to the instant matter.
I remind everyone in court that the sentence I am about to impose is not, and is
in no way intended to be, a reflection of
the value of Ms Hodder’s life.
No sentence this court can impose can in any way compensate for her loss. This
is a sentence
based in law, applying the principles of sentencing that I must
take into account.
Disposition
charge 1, culpable driving, you are sentenced to 8 years 9 months
imprisonment.
charge 2, negligently causing serious injury, you are sentenced to 4 years
imprisonment.
1 will be the base sentence.
direct that 2 years and 3 months of the sentence imposed on charge 2 be served
cumulatively on the sentence imposed on charge 1.
makes a total effective sentence of 11 years imprisonment.
direct that you serve a minimum non-parole period of 7 years before being
eligible for release on parole.
declare that pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
, you have served
18 days by way of pre-sentence detention.
declare that pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
, your licence
is cancelled and disqualified for 9 years from today’s date.
Sentencing Act 1991
I make a finding that the offence
was committed while you were under the influence of alcohol which contributed to
the offence.
This is to be noted on the record.
declare that pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
, had you not
pleaded guilty to the offences before the court, the sentence I would have
imposed would have been a total effective
sentence of 13 years 6 months with a
non-parole period of 9 years.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter