URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wald v Dianabelle Pty Ltd [2025] VMC 6 (24 April 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
MAG-CI-240168640
Dianabelle Pty Ltd (trading as Rootcontrollers & Hydrox Australia) ABN
32 065 581 133
First Defendant
Patrick O’Loughlin
Second Defendant
Magistrate M A Hoare
Melbourne Magistrates’ Court
DATE OF HEARING
12 December 2024, 28 – 29 January 2025, 13
February 2025 & 25 March 2025
DATE OF DECISION
24 April 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Wald v Dianabelle Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 6
INTEREST – Motor vehicle property damage claim – Cost of
repairs, towing and storage – Replacement hire car charges
‘Good cause’ – ‘Compensation in respect of liabilities
incurred which do not carry interest as against
the person claiming
interest’ –
Supreme Court Act 1986
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr Paul W McDermott
John Curtain & Associates
For the Defendant
Mr Jake Green
Ligeti Partners
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
1 On 17 May 2024, a motor vehicle owned by
the plaintiff, Mr Michael Wald, was damaged following a collision with a vehicle
by the second defendant, Mr Patrick O’Loughlin, and owned by the
first defendant, Dianabelle Pty Ltd. Liability having been
admitted, the matter
proceeded in the Magistrates’ Court as a ‘quantum only’
dispute. Damages claimed by the plaintiff
comprised: cost of repairs; loss of
amenity in the form of a replacement hire car; and storage costs of the damaged
2 On 13 February 2025, the Court delivered
various factual findings regarding loss and damage and awarded damages on the
favour of the plaintiff. Based on those factual findings, parties were
given leave to reach agreement on calculating the final award
proposing final orders.
3 The award amount was agreed
at $39,619.02. However, the defendants denied there ought to be any amount
awarded for interest. The
parties therefore sought a ruling on the question of
4 On 25 March 2025, submissions were
heard, and the Court was referred to a number of authorities.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK & RELEVENT
AUTHORITIES
Supreme Court Act
’), which governs awards of interest,
applies to proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court by reason of
The Court, on application in
any proceeding for the recovery of debt or damages, must,
unless good cause
is shown to the contrary
, give damages in the nature of interest at such
rate not exceeding the rate for the time being fixed under
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
as it thinks fit from the commencement of the
proceeding to the date of the judgment over and above the debt or damages
7 What constitutes ‘good
cause’ in any given case will depend on the particular facts and
circumstances.
Hosking v Ipex Software Services Pty Ltd
Habersberger J observed
that ‘good cause’ had to be measured against the purposes of the
statutory power to award interest,
(a) to compensate a plaintiff for the loss
or detriment which he or she has suffered by being kept out of his or her money
and deprived
of its use during the relevant period;
(b) to encourage the early resolution of
litigation.
onus was on the defendant to show ‘good cause’ as to why an award
should not be made in accordance with s
10 At the end of the day, the Court had to be
satisfied on the material before it, that there was good reason not to apply the
rule in favour of awarding interest to the
60(3)(a) then provides that the Court must not allow interest on certain
categories of damages:
If the damages awarded by the
Court or jury include or if the Court in its absolute discretion determines that
the damages awarded
include any amount for—
(a) compensation in respect of liabilities incurred
which do not carry interest as against the person claiming interest; ...
— the Court must not allow interest in
respect of any amount so included or in respect of so much of the award as in
its opinion
represents any such
PLAINTIFF’S
CLAIM FOR INTEREST
12 The plaintiff claimed
interest in respect of two categories of loss: first, the cost of repairs,
towing, and storage; and secondly,
hire car charges
13 By way of summary, the evidence relied
upon in support of the first category of loss was as follows:
(a) On the day of the subject collision, the
plaintiff’s damaged vehicle was towed to a workshop called
‘Autosalone’
(the repairer). Also, on the day of the collision, the
plaintiff executed a document headed ‘Authority to Repair, Store and
Autosalone’ in which he authorised the repairer to store, prepare a
quotation for repairs and carry out repairs. The signed
authority contained the
following acknowledgements:
I ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE that the repairer shall be entitled to
charge the fair and reasonable costs of the repairs as set out in his
supplementary quotes (‘the repairs’)
I ACKNOWLEDGE AND
AGREE that the repairer shall be entitled to charge for the cost of towing as
required (‘towing’).
I ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE that that
repairer shall be entitled to charge for the costs of vehicle as set out in
s.153(3) of the Accident
Towing Services Act 2007
(‘storage’).
l IRREVOCABLY AUTHORISE any such sums or
charges relating to above to be paid directly to the repairer and acknowledge
and agree that
any such sums or charges unpaid and outstanding will carry
interest at the rate prescribed of
Penalty Interest Rates Act
l ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE that in the event the at fault driver
or their issuer refuses or fails to pay for the repairs, towing and/or
l will co-operate in all ways reasonable by assisting my repairer in recovering
the costs of those charges.
(b) In accordance with the
plaintiff’s express authority, the damaged vehicle was stored for a period
(pending liability decisions)
and the repairs were quoted for and completed by
the repairer.
(c) A tax invoice was rendered for
the sum of the repairs (addressed to the plaintiff’s lawyers) and remained
unpaid at the
date of judgment.
14 As to the
evidence relating to the second category of loss, the plaintiff had entered into
a credit hire agreement with an entity
referred to by the acronym
The terms of the written
agreement were contained in a single page form signed by the plaintiff. The hire
car agreement provided
for a daily hire rate with ancillary amounts, with
nothing being immediately payable by the plaintiff. There was no provision for
interest. The agreement stated further:
Payment for
the sum invoiced by C.A.R.S to the hirer will not be sought to be paid until all
reasonable avenues of recovery have been
exhausted by agents the hirer has
authorised to act on the behalf of the hirer with regards to the invoiced
plaintiff relied on
Croce v Steel
a decision of Hayne J (on appeal from this Court). There, the Court rejected
the defendant’s submission that s 60(3)(a) operated
to preclude the
plaintiff from interest on the cost of repairs. Hayne J disagreed and said the
compensation which the plaintiff seeks ~ and in respect of which I consider him
entitled to judgment – is compensation for
damage to his motor car and is
not, in my view, properly characterised as compensation in respect of any
liability which the plaintiff
may have to a third party – in this case,
the repairer.
The damages that I consider the
plaintiff should receive are damages that may be measured by the cost of
repairing his motor car,
but they are referable to the fact that an item of his
property has suffered physical damage by reason of the negligence of the
That being so, I do not consider that
s.60(3)(a) applies in the present matter. The fact that the plaintiff may have
made, as is here
the case, a special or unusual arrangement with his repairer
concerning payment for the cost of repairs does not, in my view, affect
characterisation that should be given to the damages that are
Antrim v Hinkley
also on appeal from this Court, O’Bryan J held that the Magistrate had
erred in awarding interest on damages on a vehicle property
damage claim.
Notably, that was in circumstances where the evidence was that the repairs had
not been undertaken. His Honour upheld
the defendant’s argument on appeal
because the ‘cost of repairs had not been incurred when judgement was
For completeness, I note that in
appeal ground was squarely on the basis of s 60(3)(b), which provides that
interest must not be allowed for ‘compensation for
loss or damage to be
incurred or suffered after the date of the
17 According to Counsel for the
plaintiff, s 60(1) is clear and, in accordance with the reasoning in
‘must’ award interest on the full amount awarded to the plaintiff
for his loss and damage caused by the negligence
of the wrong-doer. There could
be no other course taken where the defendant had failed to discharge the
requisite onus to show ‘good
cause’. Moreover,
distinguishable from the facts of the present case as, on the evidence in that
case, the damaged motor vehicle had not been
18 Although no submissions were made
specific to the consideration of interest on the second category of loss,
Counsel for the plaintiff
referred to my previous decision,
a case involving
contested hire car charges. There, I stated ‘plus interest’ in
finding on the plaintiff’s claim
based on the prayer for relief. However,
I consider that conclusion to be neither persuasive nor binding given the
absence of argument
or submissions either way in that
THE DEFENDANT’S
19 Counsel for defendant, on the other
hand, submitted that the Court should follow
(which was decided
with respect to interest on the cost of repairs
Further, it was
contended that s 60(3)(a) had clear application in
this case with respect to the consideration of the loss of amenity claim. The
law established that interest is compensatory in nature for when a
plaintiff is held out of his money, whereas in circumstances of
arrangement (such as the plaintiff’s credit hire car), nothing is paid,
and no loss or detriment is suffered to require
a compensatory award of
20 Counsel for the defendant also
submitted (incorrectly, as noted above), that
was not concerned
with s 60(3). In fact, Hayne J specifically ruled out s 60(3) having application
and observed that, just because
the plaintiff had a special or unusual
arrangement with his repairer concerning payment for the cost of repairs, that
did not affect
the characterisation that should be given to the damages that are
21 Furthermore, in
observed that it was ‘not disputed that interest should not
have been awarded in respect of the cost of hiring a replacement
the specific question of whether interest should be awarded on hiring charges
for a replacement vehicle, in addition to NSW authorities,
the Court was
referred to Lord Mustill’s speech in
Giles v Thompson
The argument ... proceeds on the basis that the motorist’s
cause of action against the defendant, and the financial loss resulting
came into existence at the moment of the accident, and was later quantified ...
when the hiring period came to an end. At
this time, so the argument runs, the
defendant should have recompensed the motorist for her loss. Thereafter, she was
kept out of
her money, a detriment for which she should be recompensed by an
award of interest. Although this argument seemed logical at first
ignores the fact that the power to award interest is discretionary, and that
the exercise of this power should correspond with reality
. In the present
case although the motorist incurred a genuine liability for the hire charges day
by day, it was not a liability capable
of immediate enforcement by the hire
company. In both practical and legal terms the financial position of the
motorist was wholly
unaffected by the defendant’s failure to make
immediate payment, since ... until judgment was given she was not obliged to
the hiring charges ... Thus, although an award of interest is always
discretionary, I am unable to detect any grounds on which
... the discretion
could properly be exercised in favour of the
23 The Court was also referred to
& All Risks Insurance Co Ltd v Callinan
In that case,
the High Court in joint judgment of five justices, addressed the question of
interest, and observed that interest should
only be allowed on damages awarded
representing compensation for ‘those detriments the practical impact of
which has already
at the date of judgment been experienced by the
plaintiff’.
that case was concerned with interest on damages for personal injury, the High
Court articulated the requirement to consider
whether the detriment has been
incurred in practical sense or not.
24 The High
Court put it this way:
A money award is
the only compensation which the law can provide in respect of the suffering of
those detriments and if interest is
to be awarded "on the whole or any part of
that sum for the whole or any part of the period" between the arising of action
and judgment,
... a proper exercise of discretion must necessarily involve the
paying of due regard to the time of manifestation and to the duration
various detriments in
for the defendants referred this Court to various reported decisions of the NSW
Local Court which have declined to award
interest on charges for hire of a
replacement vehicle following the approach set out above in Lord Mustill’s
An example is
in which the Court
concluded that, since the plaintiff had by his own admission not been
‘kept out of his money’ except
in relation to the sum he paid for
the excess waiver fee, it was appropriate not to order pre-judgment interest in
this particular
case. Similarly, in
a NSW Local Court
declined to make an award of interest because there was no
express provision for interest in the hire contract.
26 The passages cited above from
address the application of s 60(3)(a) of the
which limits the
Court’s discretion to award interest on certain categories of
27 In that case, Hayne J drew a distinction
between damages for physical damage to property and compensation for liabilities
to third parties. His Honour concluded that although the cost of
repairs may reflect a liability to a repairer, the damages are not
characterised as compensation for that liability. Rather, the cost of repairs
serves as the measure by which the loss is
quantified.
28 The proper characterisation of the
damages was as compensation for the physical damage to the plaintiff’s
vehicle caused
by the negligence of the
29 I consider this Court is bound by
certainly on the facts of the current case, as regards interest on
repair costs.
30 In my view, on the evidence and
applying the reasoning in
, the invoiced charges for repairs are
properly characterised as compensation referable to the fact that an item of the
plaintiff’s
property suffered physical damage by reason of the
defendant’s negligence. As in
, there was an express
authorisation for the repairs to be carried out for the plaintiff’s
benefit, and the plaintiff authorised
those charges to be paid directly to the
31 By contrast, the towing and storage
charges are not reflective of the physical damage to the vehicle itself. Rather,
they represent
consequential expenses incurred in response to that damage.
However, on the evidence, I am satisfied that these charges were reasonable,
proximate, and necessary in order to secure, preserve and facilitate the repair
of the vehicle. They were also incurred on the plaintiff’s
invoiced directly to him.
32 Further, in the present
case, the authorised charges — including for towing and storage —
expressly carried interest,
with the invoice stating that unpaid amounts
“will carry [interest] at the rate prescribed by
Penalty Interest Rates Act
it is true that the plaintiff was not ‘kept out of his money’ in the
literal sense, having not yet paid for the
repairs or associated charges, the
reasoning in
Fire & All Risks
supports the view that the relevant
detriment was experienced when the plaintiff’s vehicle was damaged and he
authorised the
remedial work, including towing and storage. At that point, the
practical consequences of the defendant’s negligence had manifested,
am satisfied that the charges were properly incurred and invoiced.
34 Further, I am not satisfied that the defendant
has shown any good reason for why interest should not be awarded regarding the
category of loss.
35 In contrast, I am not
satisfied that interest should be awarded in respect of the hire car charges.
Unlike the cost of repairs,
which is directly referable to physical damage to
the plaintiff’s property and reflected a loss that manifested at the time
of the collision, the hire car charges are not of the same characterisation.
Arsalan v Rixon
, the High Court in
joint judgment of five justices, referred to the plaintiff’s loss in that
regard as commonly consisting
of: (i) the physical inconvenience from the
plaintiff's inability to use the damaged vehicle during the period of repair;
loss of amenity or enjoyment of the use of the
Thus, the loss is less
tangible in nature than the physical damage to
37 Further,
confirms that
by hiring a substitute vehicle, the plaintiff is taking a step to mitigate that
While hire car charges for
a substitute vehicle may be recoverable as damages, they are not themselves
reflective of damage to the
plaintiff’s property.
38 Moreover, in circumstances where the plaintiff
has not paid for the hire and is not liable to pay interest on those charges (as
in the evidence in this case), an award of interest on hire car charges carries
a risk of over-compensation to the plaintiff.
39 Finally, the plaintiff’s liability under
the credit hire agreement had not resulted in any real or practical detriment at
the time the agreement was entered into, nor at any time prior to judgment.
Although genuinely incurred, it was not a liability capable
of immediate
enforcement and did not carry interest as against the plaintiff. To say
otherwise would not, in my mind, ‘correspond
with reality’ in the
these circumstances, I am satisfied that there is good cause not to award
interest on the hire car charges, and I decline to
41 Moreover, even if the hire car charges could
otherwise be characterised as compensable loss, I consider that s 60(3)(a)
to preclude the award of interest on this component. On the facts of
this case, the liability incurred under the hire car agreement
does not carry
interest as against the plaintiff. Section 60(3)(a) requires that interest
be awarded in respect of such liabilities, and accordingly, no
interest may be ordered on the hire car charges.
these reasons, I order that the defendant pay interest to the plaintiff on the
damages award, excluding such sum as represents
the hire car charges.
43 I will hear from parties as to final orders.
Magistrate M A
24 April 2025
Supreme Court Act 1986
Clarke v Foodland Stores Pty
[1993] VicRp 81
[1993] 2 VR 382
(Fullagar, Marks and J.D. Phillips JJ)
[2004] VSC 343
A & J Tripodi Pty Ltd v Swan Hill Chemicals Pty Ltd
, [13]-[14] (Cosgrave J).
(n 3) 393-4.
Plaintiff’s Court Book,
119 (‘PCB’).
Ibid ‘HC Rental
Agreement’, 121.
[1993] VicSC 137
Supreme Court of Victoria,
O’Bryan J, 29 March 1994) (‘
Ibid 30, [73].
[2021] VMC 009.
(O’Bryan J).
[1993] UKHL 2
[1994] 1 AC 142
(emphasis in original).
[1978] HCA 31
(1978) 140 CLR 427
Fire & All Risks’)
Giles v Thompson
[2007] NSWLC 33.
[2013] NSWLC 9.
PCB, ‘Authority to
Repair Store and Tow’, 119 (emphasis in original).
Arsalan v Rixon
[2021] HCA 40
, [3], [22] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Edelman and Steward JJ)
Giles v Thompson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter