URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-116 [2007] VMHRB 4 (21 February 2007)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
West Area Mental Health Service - Sunshine
[2007] VMHRB 4
Date of Hearing:
21 February
Board Members
Dr D Ollerenshaw
Involuntary Patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(e) – risk to self and others – receive adequate treatment in a
manner less restrictive –
– treatment plan - take into account
patient’s wishes – side effects – revision of treatment
P was diagnosed as having paranoid schizophrenia. P was concerned about the
side effects of his medication and did not believe that
he required any
P’s legal representative submitted that
and (e) of the Act
were not satisfied, in that P was not currently a danger to himself or others,
and there was a less restrictive
means of ensuring that he received adequate
treatment, as his general practitioner was prepared to administer his medication
take over his care, under supervision from the area mental health
P’s legal representative asked the Board, if it should decide that P
were to remain an involuntary patient, to order a review
of his treatment plan,
pursuant to
of the Act to show that it had taken into account the wishes of
the patient as required by
s 19A(2)(a)
of the Act.
(1) The Board was satisfied that P appeared to be mentally ill.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P did require immediate treatment, which
could be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
(3) The Board was satisfied that involuntary treatment of P was necessary for
his health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or
mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public.
(4) In light of P’s firm view that he does not have a mental illness,
the Board concluded that he lacks the insight to be able
to consent to the
necessary treatment for his mental illness.
(5) The Board was satisfied that it would be premature to discharge P into
his general practitioner, Dr SS’s care. The Board
noted P’s desire
to have his medication administered by Dr SS, even if he remained an involuntary
patient. The Board was satisfied
that at the time of hearing P was unable to
receive adequate treatment for his mental illness in a manner less restrictive
freedom of decision and action.
(6) The treatment plan before the Board did not show that the authorised
psychiatrist had taken into account the matters specified
(7) The Board ordered the authorised psychiatrist to revise the treatment
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was represented by Ms P Mutha of Mental Health Legal Centre Inc
Date of Decision:
21 February 2007
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Mid West Area Mental Health Service – Sunshine
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
21 February 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms Joan Dwyer
Community Member: Ms Marilyn McMahon
Psychiatrist Member: Dr David Ollerenshaw
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 21 February 2007
Doctor: Dr SS
Case Manager: Mr BM
Legal representative: Ms Pasanna Mutha of Mental Health Legal Centre
Observer: Mr OF, on secondment to MHLC
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
21 February 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 13 February 2007 prepared by Dr SS and presented to
Plan of P dated 29 January 2007, prepared by Mr BM and presented to the
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
from MHLC dated 28 September 2006 to Mr SS, P’s treating general
practitioner, and his response dated 2 October 2006,
both lodged with the Board
at the hearing.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P was diagnosed as having paranoid schizophrenia.
He had a 30-year history of psychiatric contact including admission to Royal
in 1974, “G” Division at Pentridge, and, subsequently, contact
with Rosanna, Footscray and Sunshine Psychiatric Services.
He had been an
involuntary patient since 22 August 1996 following admission to Footscray
Psychiatric Hospital in that year. His
current medication was “Inj
Flupenthixol 15mg every 3/52”. He was concerned about the side effects of
the medication
and did not believe that he required any treatment. If he were
to be obliged to continue having treatment, he said that he would
like it to be
administered and managed by his general practitioner. He lived alone in a
property owned by family members, in circumstances,
which caused concern to
those of the treating team who had visited the property. He was satisfied with
his present living arrangements
and did not want the improvements suggested by
his case manager.
The clinical file contained reference to one period of imprisonment on a
conviction of cruelty to horses. The history in the file
referred to a sexual
assault involving a teenage boy. There were entries relating to admission to
hospital following injuries sustained
when a home-made cannon blew up, and two
further admissions when P was injured when assaulted by others. Excessive
alcohol consumption
was reported as a factor in one of those incidents. There
was an account of an occasion, many years earlier, when P fired a gun
stranger’s house.
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Mutha submitted that
criteria 8(1)(c) and (e) of the
were not satisfied in that P was not
currently a danger to himself or others, and there was a less restrictive means
of ensuring
that he received adequate treatment, as his general practitioner was
prepared to administer his medication and take over his care,
under supervision
from Mid West Area Mental Health Services Sunshine.
As to criterion (c), Ms Mutha referred to P’s conviction for neglect of
his horses, for which he was convicted and imprisoned,
and said that it occurred
more than 10 years ago. She said that there was no recent past history of risk
to members of the public.
She submitted, as to any risk to himself, that the
clinical file showed that P had been stable for some time and there was no
of perceptual disturbance or delusions. She referred the Board to recent
entries on the clinical file made 10 August 2006, which
noted that he was
stable, and was not reporting any delusions or perceptual disturbances, and that
he was not demonstrating any bizarre
behaviour or gesticulation, and that he did
not appear “distracted, perplexed or guarded”.
As to the suggestion of self-neglect, Ms Mutha submitted that as P was in
stable accommodation and was having meals provided by Meals
on Wheels, and was
in regular contact with his sister and brother-in-law, that was unlikely. She
said that his family helped with
shopping and haircuts. Ms Mutha submitted that
it was unlikely that the community treatment order made any difference to the
of self-neglect.
As to criterion (e), Ms Mutha said that P sees Mr SS, his general
practitioner, every four weeks for other health issues. He had
relationship with Mr SS and a good support network. She submitted that, in
accordance with P’s stated wishes, it would
be appropriate for his care to
be transferred to Mr SS, or if that were not possible, for there to be shared
care between Mid West
Area Mental Health Services Sunshine and Mr SS.
Ms Mutha also told the Board that P would ideally like to be free of
medication, which he had been taking for 13.5 years, or would
like to have the
medication administered by Mr SS. She said that P would see that as a
significant step. She asked the Board, if
it should decide that P were to
remain an involuntary patient, to order a review of his treatment plan, pursuant
to show that it had taken into account the wishes of the
patient as required by
s 19A(2)(a)
. Ms Mutha pointed out that the
current treatment plan did not show that it had considered P’s strong
desire to be off medication,
or his desire to have his treatment administered by
Ms Mutha submitted that as P was currently on a fairly low dose of
medication, it would be a good time for a trial period free of
medication. She
suggested in the Report on Involuntary Status that would be preferable to
transferring him on to a new medication
after review by a psychiatrist as
proposed by the treating team.
In conclusion, Ms Mutha asked the Board the rhetorical question, “If a
trial free of medication, or a transfer to shared care
is not implemented now,
when will it be?”
Evidence of P
P told the Board that if he
were not obliged to do so by a community treatment order, he would not take
tablets for his mind. He
said that there was nothing wrong with him, and he did
not know why he was “certified”. He said he did not drink alcohol
excessively. When he had money he bought half a dozen bottles of beer a day, if
he had no money he drank water. He said that he
drank alone and that he never
went anywhere. He said that his treatment team had suggested that he socialise
more, but he was not
interested in doing so.
P said that he was sent to Royal Park in the 1970s by Dr B, but that Dr C and
Dr T had “said I was alright”, and discharged
him after seven days.
In regard to the incident with the cannon he said, “I had a little
ordinary cannon. It blew up. I
wasn’t about to harm anyone”.
P said that there was no sexual assault of the teenage boy. He said that the
boy believed he owned the land on which he was living,
and therefore believed he
was wealthy and made up the story in order to get damages from him. He said
some of the land had since
been sold, but he lived on some of the land, in a
house owned by his brother and there is nothing wrong with the house. He said
it does not need painting, gardening or pest control as suggested by the
treating team, nor did he need new bedding.
In explaining his concern about the side effects of the medication, P said
that he could not get an erection and suffers from nervous
tension. He said
that he trusts his general practitioner more than he trusts the people at Mid
West Area Mental Health Services
Sunshine. He said that if Mr SS said that he
needed injections, he would take them from him, but he emphasised that if he
get off medication he would be happy.
Evidence of treating team
Dr SS of Mid West Area Mental Health Services
Sunshine said that it was the view of the treating team that P’s mental
was currently stable because of his injections of Flupenthixol. He said
that there was a possibility of relapse if P stopped taking
medication. He said
that he had only met P once on a home visit and that he observed that his house
was in poor condition and there
were signs of self-neglect.
Dr SS said that on that occasion P had raised with him his concern about the
side effects of his medication. He said he had referred
that issue to the
consultant psychiatrist, and an appointment had been arranged for a review of
the medication. At the time of hearing
that appointment was scheduled for 8
March 2007.
Mr BM, the case manager, said he had concerns about the issue of insight and
willingness to take medication and P’s response
to his psychotropic
medication. He said that P had a good history of attendance at appointments
and demonstrated good rapport at
appointments, and he saw the need to contact
his case manager, at appropriate times.
Mr BM said that although P’s mental state was stable, he had a very
different view of past events from those documented in the
clinical file. He
was concerned that P’s lack of insight would suggest that there was a very
high risk of harm to himself
and others, as in the past, if he ceased taking
medication. He said the file showed a history of P being very paranoid when
Mr BM referred for example to incidents when P fired a gun into a
stranger’s house, and when he had injured himself when a
exploded. On that occasion, which, from the report from Western General
Hospital appears to have been in October
1984 (not 1995 as stated in a clinical
review dated 15 June 2005), P was taken to casualty at Western General Hospital
and was admitted
and remained an inpatient for 12 days. P was again seen in the
Emergency Department at Western General Hospital in November 1993
apparently having been assaulted, and in July 1996 in similar circumstances.
The clinical review of 15 June 2005 also refers
to P having sexually assaulted a
teenage boy in 1994.
It was Mr BM’s opinion that the clinical file showed that while P was
untreated, his behaviour and mental state were extremely
dangerous. He said
that the dose of Flupenthixol had been reduced due to its side effects. P
remained stable on the reduced dose
but there was still concern about side
Mr BM said that the concern about P’s lack of insight arose because he
had said on a number of occasions that there was nothing
wrong with him. He
believed that there was a conspiracy against him, and that he could provide good
reasons for what had happened
in the past.
Mr BM said that a recent home visit he had made with Dr SS had given rise to
increased concern about P’s mental state, because
of the condition of the
house in which he was living. Mr BM was hoping to arrange for the Public
Trustee, who administered P’s
financial affairs, to provide funds to have
the house painted, to tidy the garden, to purchase bedding and to arrange pest
treatment at the property.
In answer to questions from the Board, Mr BM said that he found it hard to
believe that anyone would choose to live that way, unless
affected by mental
illness. He said that it was the aim of case management to try a period free of
treatment, but only if there
was not a likelihood that without medication there
would be a relapse.
The report on involuntary status at paragraph 2.6(b) stated that, because P
was on long-term antipsychotic treatment with extrapyramidal
side effects, an
appointment had been arranged for a review of medication. In answer to
questions from the Board, the treatment
team explained that there was concern
that some of the side effects could include permanent physical damage. Leg
restlessness and
abnormal hand, tongue and upper trunk movements had been noted.
Consideration was being given to changing P to a more atypical depot
medication.
If the consultant should decide that P’s medication were to be changed, he
could become unwell and may even need
hospitalisation. They said these issues
had been discussed with P. The treating team was aware of P’s desire to
treatment transferred to Mr SS, but that could not be done until the
medication review by the consultant had taken place. If the
medication were to
be changed, there could be no transfer of care or shared care until P had again
become stable.
The treatment team also considered that issues about P’s living conditions
and social and family circumstances needed further
attention, before they would
be ready to transfer care to Mr SS.
Other evidence
Board considered the letter from Mr SS dated 2 October 2006. Mr SS did confirm
that he had been P’s treating general practitioner
since 1974. He wrote
that he saw him every four weeks and that he believed his current mental state
was stable. His letter indicated
that he would be prepared to monitor and treat
P’s mental condition in accordance with guidelines from Mid West Area
Health Services Sunshine, which he wrote had “done a very good job
in managing his mental condition”. Mr SS made the
point that he was a
general practitioner, not a psychiatrist and that therefore he would look
forward to receiving directions and
guidelines from Mid West Area Mental Health
Services Sunshine, if P were discharged from there and his care were transferred
SS. In answer to questions posed in the letter from MHLC as to the signs
of deterioration in mental state and steps he would take
to alert Mid West Area
Mental Health Services Sunshine of any deterioration, Mr SS asked for advice
from the relevant mental health
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board was satisfied from P’s demeanour and response to questions,
as well as from the evidence of the treating team, and
the information on his
clinical file, that P appears to be mentally ill.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P did require immediate treatment, which could
be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
order. The Board
acknowledged that P has been treated for over ten years, with no trial as to how
he would be free of medication,
but the Board accepted the evidence of his case
manager that, based on past history, without treatment, he would be likely to
There was no evidence before the Board that people with paranoid
schizophrenia are likely to become free of mental illness after
a long period of
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board was satisfied that involuntary treatment of P was necessary for his
health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or mental
condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public. The
clinical file contained considerable
evidence that when P was unwell his health
and safety deteriorated, and that his conduct at times was dangerous to members
public. Since P became an involuntary patient in 1996 there had been no
hospital attendances similar to those in 1984, 1993 and
1996. Nor was there any
history of incidents, which could have created danger to members of the public,
such as the incidents with
the cannon and gun or the alleged sexual assault in
1994. This suggests that the treatment P has been receiving has ameliorated
symptoms of his illness.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
During the hearing, P at times said that if he were not obliged to take
medication for his mental state, he would not do so. At other
times he said
that if Mr SS said he required injections he would have them. It was difficult
to know whether he was refusing to
consent to the necessary treatment or not.
However in the light of his firm view that he does not have a mental illness the
concluded that he lacks the insight to be able to consent to the necessary
treatment for his mental illness.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
Ms Mutha relied on the correspondence with Mr SS as showing that there was a
manner of P receiving adequate treatment, less restrictive
of his freedom of
decision and action, than him remaining an involuntary patient. Mr SS’s
letter indicated that, as he was
a general practitioner and not a psychiatrist,
he would rely heavily on advice and guidelines from the treating team at Mid
Area Mental Health Services Sunshine, once P was discharged into his care.
In view of the evidence from the treating team as to
the psychiatric medication
review which was due to take place because of concerns about extrapyramidal side
effects of the current
medication, the Board was satisfied that it would be
premature to discharge P into Mr SS’s care. The Board noted P’s
desire to have his medication administered by Mr SS, even if he remained an
involuntary patient. The Board does not have power to
direct the treating team
to adopt that course, but it can and will ask that the issue be addressed in the
treatment plan. The Board
was satisfied that at the time of hearing P was
unable to receive adequate treatment for his mental illness in a manner less
restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
Section 35A
(1) On each appeal and review under this Division, the Board must review
the patient's treatment plan to determine whether—
(a) the authorised psychiatrist has complied with
section 19A
reviewing or revising the plan (as the case may be); and
(b) the plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
(2) The Board may order the authorised psychiatrist to revise the treatment
plan, if the Board is satisfied that—
(a) the authorised psychiatrist has not complied with
section 19A
reviewing or revising the plan; or
(b) the plan is not capable of being implemented by the approved mental
health service.
Thus the Board has an obligation, in every appeal or review, to review the
treatment plan before it, to determine whether the authorised
psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising that plan.
Section 19A(2)
(2) In preparing, reviewing and revising a treatment plan for a patient, the
authorised psychiatrist must take into account—
(a) the wishes of the patient, as far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) unless the patient objects, the wishes of any guardian, family member or
primary carer who is involved in providing ongoing care
or support to the
patient; and
(c) whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the patient's health or well-being; and
(d) any beneficial alternative treatments available; and
(e) the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
(f) any prescribed matters.
(3) The treatment plan for a patient who is detained in an approved mental
health service must contain an outline of the treatment
the patient is to
(4) The treatment plan for a patient who is subject to a community treatment
order or restricted community treatment order must contain
or specify—
(a) an outline of the treatment the patient is to receive; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist or delegate of the authorised psychiatrist
who is to monitor the patient's treatment ("monitoring
psychiatrist"); and
(c) the registered medical practitioner who is to supervise the patient's
treatment ("supervising medical practitioner"); and
(d) the patient's case manager; and
(e) the place at which the patient is to receive treatment; and
(f) the times at which the patient is required to attend to receive
treatment; and
(g) the intervals at which the supervising medical practitioner must submit
a written report concerning the patient's treatment to
the monitoring
psychiatrist.
(5) A treatment plan may contain anything else the authorised psychiatrist
thinks appropriate.
(6) The authorised psychiatrist must ensure that—
(a) the patient is given a copy of his or her treatment plan and any
revisions to it; and
(b) the treatment plan is discussed with the patient by a registered medical
practitioner, the patient's case manager or any member
of a prescribed class of
The treatment plan dated 29 January 2007, which was before the Board, did not
show that the authorised psychiatrist had taken into
account the matters
specified in
That was of concern to the Board, because both P and his
legal representative stressed that if P were to continue to be an involuntary
patient, and thus be obliged to accept treatment for a mental illness, even
though he did not believe he needed it, it was his clear
wish that the treatment
be given by his general practitioner, Mr SS. The Board understands that it is
for the consultant psychiatrist
and other members of the treating team to decide
whether or not it is appropriate that treatment be shared with Mr SS, but the
requires, in
s 19A(2)(a)
, that the wishes of the patient must be taken into
account in preparing the treatment plan. The only way in which the Board can
know, in reviewing the treatment plan, that P’s wish, that treatment be
given by Mr SS, was taken into account, is for that
to be noted in the treatment
plan. Another wish explained by P at the hearing, was that the medication be
ceased or reduced, because
he was troubled by some of its side effects, namely
erectile difficulty and nervous tension.
Section 19A(2)(b)
requires that unless the patient objects, the wishes of any
family member who provides ongoing care and support to the patient must
into account. The treatment plan in this matter did not address those issues.
It did not identify anybody who may provide
care or support to P, nor did it say
whether he objected to the wishes of any such person being taken into
Section 19A(2)(c)
was addressed in the treatment plan, as it stated that the
treatment was intended to reduce the risk of P becoming unwell. However,
the evidence given at the hearing, it seemed that a change in medication was
being considered to reduce side effects of the
current medication. That was not
addressed in the treatment plan.
Section 19A(2)(d)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist take into account
any beneficial alternative treatments available. The Board was told
change in medication was being considered, because of concern, not only about
the side effects identified by P, but also about
the possibility that there may
be some more permanent physical damage. The Board considered that
s 19A(2)(d)
required that the treatment plan demonstrate that those matters had been
taken into account in its preparation.
Section 19A(2)(e)
requires that significant risks associated with the
prescribed treatment and any alternative treatment be taken into account in the
preparation of a treatment plan. The treatment plan before the Board did not
refer to any risks associated with either the prescribed
treatment or the
alternative treatment, which was to be considered at the next psychiatric
review. The treatment team gave evidence
that P may become unstable and unwell,
and may require further hospitalisation if he is to have a change in medication.
requires that the nature and degree of any significant risks
associated with any prescribed or alternative treatment be taken into
the authorised psychiatrist, and that the treatment plan show, on review by the
Board, that this matter has been taken
into account in the preparation of the
treatment plan.
On its review of the treatment plan in this matter, as required by
, the Board determined that the authorised psychiatrist had not complied
in making, reviewing or revising the plan.
Therefore, the Board ordered the authorised psychiatrist to revise the
treatment plan.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met and the treatment required
for P can be obtained through him being subject to a community treatment order,
Board made the determination set out on page 1, and also ordered the
authorised psychiatrist to revise the treatment plan.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (81.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter