URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/992.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kocak v Hobsons Bay CC [2025] VCAT 992 (7 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P155/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. PA241496
Refik Kocak, Julie Chandler & Others
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Hobsons Bay City Council
Marijana King
SUBJECT LAND
20 Garden Street
WILLIAMSTOWN VIC 3016
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
25 August 2025
DATE OF ORDER
7 November 2025
Kocak v Hobsons Bay CC [2025] VCAT 992
AMEND PERMIT APPLICATION
to clause 64 of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Vic), the permit application is amended by substituting for the
permit application plans, the following plans filed with the
M I Projects
A201 – A204 (inclusive)
736-TP-01-A – 736-TP-08-A (inclusive)
736-TP-09-C – 736-TP-10-C, 736-TP-11-B, 736-TP-12-B, 736-TP-13-C,
736-TP-14, A, 736-TP-15-A, 736-TP-16-A, 736-TP-17-B, 736-TP-18-A,
736-TP-19-B,
736-TP-20-A, 736-TP-21-B, 736-TP-22-A, 736-TP-23-B, 736-TP-24-A, 736-TP-25-B,
736-TP-26-A, 736-TP-27-B, 736-TP-28-A,
736-TP-29-B, 736-TP-30-A, 736-TP-23-B,
736-TP-31-A, 736-TP-32-A
Materials and Finishes Schedule Issue B
4 July 2025
PERMIT GRANTED
application P155/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is varied.
planning permit application PA241496 a permit is granted and directed to be
issued for the land at 20 Garden Street Williamstown
VIC 3016 in accordance with
the endorsed plans and the conditions set out in Appendix A. The permit
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 43.01-1
Demolish or remove a building.
Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
Clause 43.02-2
Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
Donna D'Alessandro
APPEARANCES
For applicant
Peter English, town planner, Peter English & Associates Pty Ltd
For responsible authority
Dylan Todd, town planner
For respondent
Adeline Lane, lawyer, Jackson Lane Legal. She called town planning
evidence from:
Alison Milner,
Milner Planning Advisory.
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
Part demolition of the front elevations and roof including the balcony and
buildings and works to construct a balcony and associated
works to the
façade and roof form.
Part demolition of the rear of the dwelling and construction of two storey
Part demolition of the garage and construction of two storey addition to
the rear (contained within the existing courtyard of the
review site).
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the decision to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Hobsons Bay Planning Scheme
Zone and overlays
General Residential Zone – Schedule 2
Heritage Overlay – Schedule 34
Design and Development Overlay – Schedule 8.
Permit requirements
Clause 43.01-1 – a permit is required to demolish or remove a
building, construct a building or carry out works.
Clause 43.02-2 – a permit is required to construct a building or
construct or carry out works.
Land description
The review site is located on the western side of Garden Street, between
Anchorage Avenue and Esplanade, Williamstown.
The review site has a frontage to Garden Street of 7.5 metres, depth of
41.78 metres for an overall area of approximately 315 square
The review site contains a three storey modern dwelling with bedrooms at
ground floor, living areas at first floor and a further bedroom
Private open space is contained to the rear of the dwelling at ground and
first floor level. To the rear of review site is a double
garage accessed via
Port Phillip Crescent to the rear.
A low rendered / steel picket fence runs along the frontage containing a
small garden area.
The dwelling is one of a group of eight three storey buildings built around
late 1990s. The buildings are all similar in architectural
style with a series
of articulated facades. The architecture adopts a repletion of pitched roof
form with dormer style elements
which break down the buildings massing. The
upper levels are recessed and provide balcony areas framed with glass and
treatments.
The buildings are set behind a low rendered fence which defines the street
edge and provides a degree of separation between the public
and private realm.
There is some landscaping within the front set back of each property, but this
is limited.
Tribunal inspection
2 September 2025
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
Kocak, Julie Chandler, Greg Critchey, Ron Williams, Christine Williams, Prisca
Kocak, David Robinson, Andrea Robinson and David
McKenna joint applicants
(‘applicant’) bring this application for review under
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) (‘Act’) seeking
the Tribunal’s review of the decision by the Hobsons Bay City Council
(‘council’)
to approve partial demolition and construction of
extensions at the front and rear of the existing dwelling and garage, at 20
Street, Williamston (‘review site’). The applicant group all
reside at 16, 18, 22, 24 Garden Street, part of the row
of the eight three
storey dwellings as outlined
Figure 1 – Nearmap Aerial of review site and immediate
surrounding dwellings.
applicant’s statement of grounds raised a number of concerns including
unreasonable visual bulk, impact on outlook, excessive
built form, unreasonable
level of overshadowing and the proposed façade detailing would not
integrate with the architectural
form of surrounding development.
the hearing, the applicant submitted that they are satisfied that overlooking
and overshadowing are now satisfactory because of
the amended plans, and the
proposal complies with Clause 54 (‘ResCode’) even though it is not
part of the relevance in
this matter. I therefore make no assessment of the
matters of overlooking or overshadowing.
applicant also further confirms that the proposal satisfies heritage policy at
clause 43.02.
applicant submitted that the key concern is about the built form, scale, height
and neighbourhood character as outlined in the
proposal involves:
demolition of the existing dwelling, including internal areas, door and window
openings to the east, south and west elevations,
and rear first floor deck and
alfresco area and external stairs.
Demolition of
the eastern part of the rear garage.
A two storey
rear addition (ground and first floor) adjacent to the northern boundary to
create a new study at ground and an open
plan kitchen area at first floor.
Construction of
a replacement of the rear deck at first floor, extended to the northern boundary
with a covered roof (part openable).
Extension of the
existing garage facing the internal courtyard including an extension to the
attic/studio space contained within the
demolition of the front façade including the balcony, and new balcony
Demolition of
the existing double-gable roof with a new single gable-end roof form facing the
include new powder coated windows, sheet metal clad walls and corrugated sheet
metal roofing, materials and colours to match
issued a Notice of Decision to Grant a Permit (‘NOD’) as they are
satisfied with the proposed extensions. The
council is satisfied with the
scale, overall design and built form. They do not raise issue with amenity
impacts such as visual bulk,
overshadowing and overlooking. They are satisfied
the proposed demolition and extensions respond to the relevant clauses in the
Scheme, relating to Heritage Overlay (‘HO’) and Design and
Development Overlay (‘DDO’).
respondent agrees with council and relies on expert planning evidence.
respondent has circulated amendment plans making several changes to the decision
plans as follows:
Notations added
regarding glazed balustrade to the terrace
height and dimensions added
Overlooking
Further shadow
Further details
provided to the existing plans.
amended plans do not make any change to the built form.
no party objected to the substitution of the plans, I have allowed the amended
plans to be substituted and these now form those
on which my decision is
key issue for determination in this matter is whether the construction of
building and works including extensions is an acceptable
response to policy
undertaken an inspection of the review site from the front of the site, and
within the rear courtyard, and taken into consideration
the submissions and
evidence, the key issues in this matter are:
Is the proposal
an acceptable response to its policy context?
proposal respond to the neighbourhood character?
find that the proposed extensions to the rear of the dwelling is an acceptable
planning outcome, which responds to the relevant
policies as I refer to in my
findings. I find the proposed extensions to the rear of the dwelling respond to
the existing built
form. I find the proposed changes will not have a negative
impact on the collective townhouse development, streetscape or neighbourhood
regard to the relevant matters under the Scheme, the submissions from parties,
the planning evidence, and undertaken a site
inspection of the review site and
surrounding area, I have decided to affirm council’s decision. The
parties also referred
to several Tribunal decisions which I will not recite. I
provide my reasons below.
PLANNING POLICY AND CONTEXT
review site is located within the General Residential Zone (‘GRZ’)
Schedule 2 (‘GRZ2’). Schedule 2 relates
to Residential Areas,
Altona and Williamstown. The review site is also in a Heritage Overlay
(‘HO’) – Schedule
34, Williamstown Beach Precinct
(‘HO34’) and Design and Development Overlay – Schedule 8
DDO8 relates to Foreshore Height Limitation.
the review site is over 300 square metres, a planning permit is not required for
the proposed extensions under the zone. Given
there are no permit triggers, I
will not recite the zoning provisions of the Scheme.
permit triggers involve demolition, and construction works in HO and buildings
and works in DDO. Therefore, I need to consider
whether the proposal is an
acceptable outcome in terms of heritage, character and amenity
considerations.
Heritage Overlay
review site is in HO34 – Williamstown Beach Heritage Precinct and covers a
large heritage precinct. The proposal triggers
demolition and for the
development of the buildings and works within heritage overlay. There are no
specific provisions in HO34
such as tree controls, external paint colours, other
than solar energy system controls.
review site including the row of three storey townhouses are not graded
buildings under the heritage review.
Design and Development Overlay
clause 43.02, decision guidelines include (as relevant to this
Before deciding on an application, in addition to the decision guidelines in
Clause 65, the responsible authority must consider,
as appropriate:
The Municipal
Planning Strategy (‘MPS’) and the Planning Policy Framework
objectives of the relevant schedule to this overlay.
The provisions
of any relevant policies and urban design guidelines.
Whether the
bulk, location and appearance of any proposed buildings and works will be in
keeping with the character and appearance
of adjacent buildings, the streetscape
or the area.
Whether the
design, form, layout, proportion and scale of any proposed buildings and works
is compatible with the period, style, form,
proportion, and scale of any
identified heritage places surrounding the site.
design objectives in DDO8 include:
To protect and enhance the environment of the Hobsons Bay foreshore as a
environmental, conservation and recreation asset of State,
metropolitan and
local significance.
To ensure that the height, scale, bulk, setback and appearance of new
development is compatible with the prevailing character of
To achieve development that is a high quality architectural and urban design
To preserve solar access to the foreshore, including associated roadways,
bicycle and pedestrian paths.
To protect and enhance key views and vistas.
To protect the foreshore reserve and significant public open spaces from
inappropriate development.
design guidelines include (as relevant):
Whether the development is positioned on the site to
characteristics that predominate in the neighbourhood.
How the development replicates or interprets the broad forms (such as span,
shape, arrangement of ridges, use of gables or hips,
pitch and eaves details of
roofs) that predominate in the neighbourhood.
Whether the development integrates into the design treatment of the walls and
elevations- particularly the height of the eaves –
the typical
floor-to-ceiling heights found in the neighbourhood.
Whether the development uses materials that harmonise with materials commonly
found in the neighbourhood.
How the development relates the front garden and fence treatments to its
surroundings.
Whether the development incorporates building elements and details that
contribute to lightness of structure including balconies,
verandahs, balustrades
and gable ends.
That the height of new development is not to result in amenity impacts upon
adjoining residential properties due to overshadowing,
overlooking and visual
Whether the proposal is consistent with the principles of the Hobsons Bay
Neighbourhood Character Study Build Form Guidelines Supplement
Residential Areas (February 1999).
find that the proposed development responds to the above policies as outlined in
the following sections.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Environments
and streetscapes are not static. They do not stand still in time, not even in
heritage precincts. Whilst the review
site forms part of an integrated terrace
development, this does not prevent changes to the individual properties.
Front façade changes
considering the changes to the front façade, it is relevant to make the
observation that the heritage study does not reference
the review site. This
means that the review site and collection of dwellings are not buildings of
individual heritage significance.
I acknowledge that the review site and
collection of buildings are located with a heritage precinct, but they are not
individually
significant. I further note that there is no reference to Garden
Street being included or nominated as a significant streetscape.
detailed earlier, the applicant submitted that the proposal complied with the
provisions of clause 43.01. It focussed rather on
the DDO8 provisions which I
will address below. With that in mind, for completeness, I also find that the
proposed changes to the
front façade do not offend the heritage
provisions. I agree with the Ms Milner’s evidence, and the council that
proposal is compliant with relevant heritage guidelines as they relate to
whether the external alteration will adversely affect the
significance of the
heritage place.
‘Foreshore Height Limitation – Mill Lane and Garden Street; Nelson
Place; Ferguson Street between Nelson Place and
The Strand, James and Aitken
Streets; and Rifle Range Estate’ applies to the review site. The
applicant submitted that the
relevant design guidelines include:
To ensure that the height, scale, bulk, setback and appearance of new
development is compatible with the prevailing character of
To achieve development that is a high quality architectural and urban design
was also referred to a number of decision guidelines which include:
development replicates or interprets the broad forms (such as span, shape,
arrangement of ridges, use of gables or hips, pitch
and eaves details of roofs)
that predominate in the neighbourhood.
Whether the
development uses materials that harmonise with materials commonly found in the
neighbourhood.
Whether the
development is built in the dominant waterfront style with a contemporary
interpretation.
Whether the
application incorporates existing building forms that contribute to a seaside
Whether the
development incorporates building elements and details that contribute to
lightness of structure including balconies,
verandahs, balustrades and gable
applicants are concerned that the façade modifications would result in an
element that would be incompatible with the remaining
seven dwellings along this
section of Garden Street. In a sense, they want to retain the consistent
façade detailing, and
that they all remain the same.
is nothing in the planning scheme from prohibiting changes to the façade
treatment. There is no covenant,
Section 173
Agreement or other form of control
preventing this change. Accepting that as the starting point, I must consider
if the proposed
changes are acceptable having regard to the DDO8 provisions.
DDO8 design guidelines speak to achieving high quality design, how a development
interprets broad form found in the neighbourhood,
the materials the development
uses and whether the development incorporates building elements and details that
contribute to lightness
of structure.
Figure 3 - Existing east elevation.
Proposed east elevation
was submitted that the eight dwellings are currently cohesive and have a
well-integrated presentation. The applicant is concerned
that the proposed
changes result in a materiality and roof form that would be completely out of
context with the architectural form,
built form envelope and materials of
surrounding development.
review site will look different to the others in the same original development.
It is a contemporary design. But having regard
to the provisions of DDO8, I
make the following findings:-
The proposed
changes retain the consistent height and overall form of the dwelling.
The appearance
of the front façade is compatible with the prevailing character of the
area. This does not mean to replicate.
The proposed front façade
retains a gable roof element, large glazing and balcony elements.
The proposed
development is a high-quality design.
No change to the
front or side fences.
The gable roof
form is consistent with the other townhouses that have been modified, and
noticeable within this development, being
14, 18, 22 and 28 Garden Street (as
shown below). I am satisfied that it does not detract from the neighbourhood
Figure 4 – Proposed front elevation including row of
townhouses facing Garden St.
concerned with the projection of the first floor terrace. The proposed terrace
extends to the street by a varying setback
no greater than two metres. Its
tapered form, which extends to a point forward of the façade, presents as
a considered architectural
response rather than a visually dominating element.
I find the design of the balcony and its projection forward of the façade
does not disrupt the rhythm or presentation of the existing row of townhouses.
Further, such
projections are not atypical in this surrounding context. I accept the
applicant’s submission that comparable
projecting balcony forms existing
within the townhouse development, including at dwellings 16 and 24. On this
basis, I find the
proposed balcony projection to be an acceptable architectural
feature in this context.
Furthermore,
given the site’s location opposite Fearon Reserve and directly opposite
the cricket nets and other back of house
club rooms, I do not consider the
proposal to impose on the foreshore environment and recreation including solar
access. The review
site and adjoining townhouses given its location are removed
from the Esplanade and foreshore.
is further reinforced by the planning evidence from Ms Milner. I agree with her
assessment that the proposed changes to the
front elevation, including the
single gable roof form, projecting balcony and fenestration, is compliant with
the design objective
of DDO8 and will have:-
no impact on the
environment of the foreshore.
no impact on
solar access to the foreshore or associated roadways and pedestrian bicycle
no impact on any
key view or vista.
no impact on the
foreshore reserve or significant public open space area.
Changes to the rear
proposal extends the dwelling to the rear. At the ground floor the dwelling is
extended on the northern boundary to create a
study. At the first floor, the
dwelling extends the alfresco area again to the north boundary and relocates the
external staircase.
At the second floor, there is a minimal extension to the
proposal also extends the garage by 1.5 metres within the review site. The
proposed works to the garage create usable attic space,
removing the pull-down
ladder and constructing stairs up to the attic space with a bathroom.
applicant submitted that the key concern is visual bulk and the impact on the
rear neighbourhood character. The applicant acknowledges
that rear additions
are visible from a number of properties, but the greatest impact will be to the
adjoining dwellings at 18 and
22 Garden Street.
was directed to the relevant design objective:
To ensure that the height, scale, bulk, setback and appearance of new
development is compatible with the prevailing character of
was also directed to the decision guideline:
That the height
of new development is not to result in amenity impacts upon adjoining
residential properties due to overshadowing,
overlooking and visual
the collective row of townhouses facing Garden Street, the rear elevation
presents as a consistent and cohesive row of contemporary
three storey
townhouses. The built form is characterised by a uniform height and roof
profile, with each dwelling incorporating
a pitched roof form containing
dormer-style windows at the third level. The roofs are finished in a light
reflective material, providing
visual continuity across the row of
townhouses.
addition to reviewing the photographic material contained in submissions and
evidence, I also observed on my site inspection, a
number of the townhouses have
been modified. Each townhouse includes a first floor balcony and associated
deck, accessed via an
external stair. The upper level built form is setback
approximately 1 metre from one side boundary, with a solid boundary wall along
the opposite side. In particular, the one sided boundary walls provide a degree
of enclosure to the balcony areas, contributing
to a sense of privacy for each
townhouse. The panoramic photograph provided by the applicant outlines the
built form and varying
structures over the balcony spaces, boundary walls and
external stairs.
Figure 5 – panoramic view of the review site and
townhouse development (from the
14 and 28 Garden Street, the end townhouses have enclosed balconies. Other
townhouses within the row have introduced shade structures,
given all the
balconies have a west-facing orientation. Further, the garages at 16 and 18
Garden Street, have been modified, and
dormer-style/ high level windows
constructed to the attic spaces. Taken together, these cumulative alterations
demonstrate a clear
pattern of built form changes within the townhouses. This
pattern has been influential in my determination, and I do not share the
view as the applicant that the proposal will impact the back yard character and
cause unreasonable visual bulk. This is further
supported by the proposed plans
shown below, the hatched green areas show the proposed extensions, respond to
the site context and
existing built
Figure 6 – existing ground floor plan.
Figure 7 – existing first floor
I previously expressed, the review site will look different to the others in the
same original development and responds appropriately
to the site’s
context. I agree with Ms Milner that it is an infill opportunity. I am not
persuaded by the applicant stating
that the proposed changes will impact the
backyard neighbourhood character. I make the following findings:-
The extensions
are contained to the rear of the review site and will therefore not have an
impact on the environment or recreation
of the foreshore.
No impact on any
key view or vista.
There is no
change to the overall three storey building height.
The proposal
involves a cohesive design outcome that retains the overall building height and
form, while revitalising and modernising
the existing dwelling and reconfiguring
the internal layout to improve the function and form.
Improves the
internal residential amenity and sustainability of the dwelling given the
west-facing rear elevation. The third floor
will be reconfigured and the
windows replaced with infill steel metal cladding. The middle floor will be
enclosed to allow for indoor/outdoor
alfresco space, a usable space all year
Extending the
dwelling to the northern boundary aligns with the existing wall on boundary with
the adjoining property at 18 Garden
Street. The wall height will be extended by
1.91 metres to an overall height of 6.6 metres and further extended by 1.8
This is responsive to the existing built form.
No significant
built form change to the southern boundary. The dwelling is still set back from
the southern boundary with 22 Garden
Street. The addition will extend out
further from the existing elevation by 1.8 metres, but this is largely to
enclose the alfresco
area including the external stairs. This provides a clean
overall finish to the built form, compacting the extensions and removing
structures as evident throughout the townhouse development. I find this is an
improvement in the overall appearance.
The materials
and finishes are consistent with the existing modern development, providing
light-weight and light-colour finishes,
found throughout the beach side of
Hobsons Bay.
Aligns with
prevailing roof pitches, eave heights and building proportions to maintain the
neighbourhood built form rhythm.
Uses recessive
upper-level forms and stepped massing to ensure a gentle transition to avoid
excessive visual bulk.
No change to the
external garage facing Port Phillip Cresent, and any view of the public
There is no
change in the height of the dwelling, therefore there is no result in amenity
impacts upon adjoining residential properties
due to overshadowing, overlooking
and visual bulk.
am also satisfied that the additions to the garage have had regard to the site
context and sensitivity to the courtyard of the adjoining
properties. The first
floor attic is set back from both side boundaries including the slight intrusion
of a maximum of 1.5 metres
into the courtyard area. The design of the garage
extensions with its gable roof form and simple architectural expression
complements
the existing garage. The height of the extensions falls within the
overall height and built form of the existing garage.
the proposal presents a contemporary addition of the existing dwelling form
through a refined, gable roof profile and a single
vertical presentation. The
elevations maintain the existing scale while introducing modern cladding
materials and a rhythmic window
pattern that breaks down mass and adds visual
WHAT CONDITIONS ARE APPROPRIATE?
were discussed at the hearing. The conditions are generally the same as those
outlined in the NOD.
have included a new condition 1 requirement relating to the new boundary walls
to match the existing boundary walls. This is not
shown on the plans and
requested by the council.
the reasons given above, the decision of the responsible authority is varied. A
permit is granted subject to conditions.
Donna D'Alessandro
APPENDIX A – PERMIT DESCRIPTION AND CONDITIONS
PLANNING SCHEME
Hobsons Bay Planning Scheme
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Hobsons Bay City Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND
20 Garden Street
WILLIAMSTOWN VIC 3016
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 43.01-1
Demolish or remove a building.
Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
Clause 43.02-2
Construct a building or construct or carry out works.
CONDITIONS TO APPLY TO THE PERMIT:
Amended Plans Required
the development starts, amended plans to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority must be submitted to, and approved by,
the responsible authority. When
approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of the permit. The
plans must be drawn
to scale and dimensioned. The plans must be generally in
accordance with the amended plans identified as A201 – A204 (inclusive),
736-TP-01-A – 736-TP-08-A (inclusive), 736-TP-09-C – 736-TP-10-C,
736-TP-11-B, 736-TP-12-B, 736-TP-13-C, 736-TP-14, A,
736-TP-15-A, 736-TP-16-A,
736-TP-17-B, 736-TP-18-A, 736-TP-19-B, 736-TP-20-A, 736-TP-21-B, 736-TP-22-A,
736-TP-23-B, 736-TP-24-A,
736-TP-25-B, 736-TP-26-A, 736-TP-27-B, 736-TP-28-A,
736-TP-29-B, 736-TP-30-A, 736-TP-23-B, 736-TP-31-A, 736-TP-32-A prepared by M
Projects and amended on 4 July 2025 (VCAT Amended Plans), but modified to
a) new boundary walls to match existing.
development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered or modified
without the prior written consent of the Responsible
Authority. Unless specified
in a permit condition, this requirement does not apply if an exemption is
available under the Hobsons
Bay Planning Scheme.
owner must meet the costs of all alterations to and reinstatement of, the
Responsible Authority and other Public Authority Assets
deemed necessary and
required by such Authorities for the development. The owner must obtain the
prior specific written consent
of the Council or other relevant Authority to
such alterations and reinstatements and must comply with conditions required by
said Authority in relation to the execution of such works.
service pipes, (excluding downpipes), fixtures and fittings must be concealed on
exposed elevations to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority.
the development has started, it must be continued and completed to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
permit will expire if one of the following circumstances applies:
development is not started within two years of the date of this permit.
development is not completed within four years of the date of this
The Responsible Authority may extend the period in
which to start the development if a request is made in writing before the permit
expires or within six months afterwards.
The Responsible Authority may extend the period in which to complete the
development if a request is made in writing before the permit
expires or within
12 months afterwards and the development was lawfully started before the permit
– End of conditions –
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Nearmap August 2025, review
site highlighted with blue arrow.
Page 6 of applicant’s
photograph submission.
PNPE9 Plans, Drawing
736-Tp-30-A and 31-A.
PNPE9 Plans –
P736-TP-31-A
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter