URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elos Trading Pty Ltd at Eaglemont Cellars [2024] VicLiqComm 15; (7 November 2024)
Elos Trading Pty Ltd at Eaglemont Cellars [2024] VicLiqComm 15 (7 November 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Elos Trading Pty Ltd for an internal review of a
decision by a delegate to refuse a joint application by Elos Trading Pty Ltd
Mortgagee Sales Pty Ltd and Silver 82 Pty Ltd to transfer General Licence
no.31954202 for the premises known as Eaglemont Cellars
from the then licensee,
Upmind Pty Ltd, to Elos Trading Pty Ltd
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Dale Curtis and Mr Samuel Stapleton on behalf of Elos
Trading Pty Ltd
Ms Caitlin McAlister and Ms Susan Mi, Counsel Assisting the
Date of Hearing: 21 August 2024
Date of Decision: 7 November 2024
Date of Reasons: 7 November 2024
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for transfer of
Licence no.31954202 subject to the conditions as set out in Appendix A.
background to this matter before the Victorian Liquor Commission
) has a number of elements relating to various licenced and
unlicenced entities that have been presented to the Commission as part
determination on this internal review application. It is therefore appropriate
to set out in chronological order the matters
that the Commission considers to
be key entities and events.
Trading Pty Ltd (
Elos Trading
) is a corporation established on 23 January
2024. The sole director is Mr Samuel Stapleton and his wife, Mrs Vicki Stapleton
sole shareholder.
28 February 2024 and 19 April 2024, Elos Trading, jointly with Mortgagee Sales
Mortgagee Sales
) and Silver 82 Pty Ltd (
the owners of premises known as Eaglemont Cellars located at 82-84 Silverdale
Road, Eaglemont (
the Premises
), lodged various materials with the
Commission as part of an application under
section 32(1)(b)
Control Reform Act 1998
for the transfer of
General Licence no. 31954202 (
) from the then holder of the
Licence, Upmind Pty Ltd (
) to Elos Trading (
Application
number of essential documents were outstanding when the Original Application was
first lodged with the Commission together with
inaccurate information as will be
discussed further below.
Nevertheless, the Original Application was accepted.
Premises is a double storey building with a combined floor area of 308m²,
including a rear courtyard.
situated on a corner block in the Eaglemont Village shopping strip, close to the
Eaglemont train station.
accordance with section 33(1), a delegate of the Commission (
gave a copy of the Original Application to the Chief Commissioner of Police
Chief Commissioner
) on 19 March 2024.
13 April 2024, the Chief Commissioner and the licensing
) advised that Victoria Police did not object to the Original
Application.
26 March 2024, the Compliance Division of Liquor Control Victoria (
informed the Delegate that it was undergoing investigations into alleged
contraventions of the LCR Act at the Premises arising from
an anonymous
complaint received by LCV on 14 March 2024 and an unannounced visit at the
Premises by authorised liquor inspectors
on 20 April 2024.
28 May 2024, the Delegate refused to grant the Original Application under
section 44(2)(a) on the basis that the proposed transferee,
Elos Trading is not
a suitable person to hold the Licence (
Original Decision
(a) Mr Stapleton, sole director of Elos Trading, via email dated 17 May 2024,
admitted to the Delegate that the Premises had been
used on 17 March 2024 and 20
April 2024 for the supply of liquor to patrons when the Premises were not
licensed premises.
Such information
suggests an indifference towards a regulatory
(b) like (a) above, further to the dates of 17 March 2024 and 20 April 2024,
authorised liquor inspectors who attended the Premises
on 20 April 2024 were
informed that liquor had also been supplied to patrons at the Premises on 19
April 2024, which the Delegate
considered to mean Mr Stapleton’s admission
of up to two days of supply could not be relied
(c) the apparent lack of understanding by Elos Trading as to requirements under
the LCR Act showed a lack of due diligence and basic
(d) the explanation given of a purported lack of understanding did not seem
convincing (rather there seemed to be a knowing breach
(e) while Mr Stapleton answered ‘no’ to questions as part of the
Original Application in relation to any financial interests/relevant
significant associated or relative associates to declare, information shows that
Mrs Stapleton is the shareholder of Elos
Trading and their son, Dimitri (Jimmy)
Stapleton, is an investor. Additionally, the director of Mortgagee Sales, Mr
Georgios Kypriotis,
has a financial interest in Elos Trading by way of reducing
the Premises’ rent in return for Elos Trading’s investment
improving the state of the Premises. This indicates a lack of transparency and
honesty by Mr Stapleton.
7 June 2024, Elos Trading applied, via solicitors, Tresola Legal, under section
153(1), for review of the Original Decision. Elos
Trading broadly asserted that
it was a suitable person to hold the
Legal also represented Mortgagee Sales in relation to a separate application to
register the company on the Licence. Materials
were lodged with the Commission
regarding that application between 13 June 2024 and 6 October 2024. In October
2024, a delegate of
the Commission ultimately deemed that the Commission did not
have jurisdiction to grant such an application.
Elos Trading lodged its Review Application, Sun Chaser Trading Pty Ltd (a
related entity of Elos Trading and Mr Stapleton) (
), was issued
with two infringement notices for trading at the Premises on 17 March 2024 and
20 April 2024 when the Premises was not
licensed premises or authorised premises
contrary to the LCR Act.
Chaser is the holder of Restaurant and Cafe Licence no. 32348145 for premises
located at 1041 Heidelberg Road, Ivanhoe, trading
as The Post Inn. Mr Stapleton
is the owner and operator of The Post Inn. After Sun Chaser commenced trading at
The Post Inn in August
2022, it was given infringement notices and warning
letters as described
Date issued
Offence Date
Description
Infringement Notice
Trading at a venue when the venue was not licensed premises (or authorised
Infringement Notice
Trading at a venue when the venue was not licensed premises (or authorised
Infringement Notice
Supply liquor other than in accordance with a licence or BYO permit.
– Not in accordance with predominant activity condition
- no meals were
being served or consumed.
Infringement Notice
Supply liquor other than in accordance with a licence or BYO permit as the
supply of liquor did occur outside the authorised area.
Infringement Notice
Permit consumption of liquor other than in accordance with a licence or BYO
permit as the consumption of liquor did occur outside
the authorised area.
Warning Letter
Permit consumption of liquor other than in accordance with a licence or BYO
permit as the consumption of liquor did occur outside
the authorised area.
Warning Letter
Not in accordance with predominant activity condition - no meals were being
served or consumed.
a directions hearing on 26 July 2024, Tresola Legal lodged on behalf of Elos
Trading a witness statement from Mr Stapleton,
dated 19 August 2024, with
information (amongst other matters) relating to the manner of the operations at
the Premises and the nature
and extent of all persons involved in the operation
of the Premises.
Legal also lodged written submissions on behalf of Elos Trading, dated 19 August
2024, in relation to the alleged use of the
Premises on 17 March 2024 and 20
April 2024 for the supply of liquor to patrons when the Premises were not
licensed premises.
Post-Hearing
a public hearing of the Review Application on 21 August 2024 (
in which Mr Stapleton and his liquor consultant, Mr George O’Keefe, gave
evidence, Elos Trading made amendments to the Original
Application to be
considered as part of the Review Application. Specifically, Elos Trading lodged
with the Commission, via Tresola
Legal, on 30 August 2024, a revised Declaration
of Associates form, including details of not only Mr Stapleton as an
“associate”
of Elos Trading pursuant to section 3AC but also his
wife and their three children.
Legal also lodged a revised Declaration of Associates form regarding Sun Chaser,
including details of not only Mr Stapleton
as an “associate” of Sun
Chaser pursuant to section 3AC but also his wife and their three children.
support of the Review Application, Tresola Legal submitted an assessment by Mr
O’Keefe as to his independent findings of
Mr Stapleton’s knowledge
of the LCR Act, dated 29 August 2024
Tresola Legal submitted a Noise and Amenity Action Plan for the Premises on 30
August 2024, which indicates in its preamble
that it is designed to be read in
conjunction with the Alcohol Management Plan for the Premises, lodged by Tresola
Legal on 20 August
2024 as part of a bundle of documents in support of the
Review Application.
the Hearing, Deputy Chair O’Halloran and Commissioner Brnovic visited the
Premises. Acting Chair Larkins did so on 6 November
31 October 2024, the Commission sent an email to Tresola Legal requesting that
it submit on behalf of Sun Chaser any comments as
(a) how the company has dealt with such conduct as described in the table in
paragraph 13 above; and
(b) what steps will be put in place to ensure that there will be no repeat of
such described conduct?
1 November 2024, Mr Stapleton confirmed that both he and his companies are now
self-represented, and he lodged submissions in response
to the questions as set
out in paragraph 21 above.
Premises are currently closed to the public.
Legislation and the
Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the Original Decision is reviewable,
and Elos Trading is
eligible to apply for a review of the Original Decision. The Review Application
was made pursuant to section
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original
Application.
Determination of an uncontested application
an application is an uncontested application, pursuant to
section 44(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must
grant or refuse to grant an uncontested application at any time after the expiry
period for objection under Division 5 (or that period as extended under
section 174).
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant an application on certain
grounds, including that the applicant is not
a suitable person to hold or carry
on business under the licence (section 44(2)(a)).
44(3) states:
Without limiting the reasons why a person is not a
suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence... a person is
a suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence ... if the
person or, if the person is a body corporate, any director
of the person has,
within the preceding 3 years—
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere, of an offence of
without a licence or of supplying adulterated
or of an offence against any law relating to customs or excise; or
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of
in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Act.
Commission also considers it appropriate to have regard to persons who are
associates of the Applicant.
Section 3AC provides a definition of associates being:
the purposes of this Act, an associate of a person (the
first person
(a) a person who—
(i) holds or will hold any relevant financial interest, or is or will be
entitled to exercise any relevant power (whether in right
of the person or on
behalf of any other person) in any business of the first person involving the
sale of liquor; and
(ii) by virtue of that interest or power, is able or will be able to exercise
a significant influence over or with respect to the
management or operation of
that business; or
(b) a person who is or will be a director, whether in right of the person or
on behalf of any other person, of any business of the
first person involving the
sale of liquor; or
(c) if the first person is a natural person, a person who is a relative of
the first person, other than a relative—
(i) who is not, and has never been, involved in any business of the first
person involving the sale of liquor; or
(ii) who will not be involved in the business the first person proposes to
conduct as a licensee or permittee.
(2) In this section—
, in relation to a person, means—
(a) the spouse or domestic partner of the person; or
(b) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the person; or
(c) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the spouse or domestic
partner of the person;
relevant financial interest
, in relation to a business
involving the sale of liquor, means—
(a) any share in the capital of the business; or
(b) any entitlement to receive any income derived from the business;
(c) any entitlement to receive any payment as a result of money
relevant power
means any power, whether exercisable by
voting or otherwise and whether exercisable alone or in association with
(a) to participate in any directorial, managerial, or executive decision;
(b) to elect or appoint any person as a director.
section 3(1) defines “director” to include:
(a) any person occupying or acting in the position of director of the body
corporate, by whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to
occupy or duly authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the
directors of the body corporate are accustomed to act.
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission may:
(a) have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects
of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects of the
LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application was ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1) and section
157(1) at the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
stated above, section 44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to
any matter it considers relevant and make any enquiries
it considers
appropriate.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit,
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this
General licences
to section 8(1), a general licence authorises the supply of liquor for
consumption on or off the licensed premises during
ordinary trading hours and at
any other time where determined by the Commission and specified in the licence.
3(1) defines ordinary trading hours in relation to a general licence
(a) the hours between 7 a.m. and 11 p.m. on each day, other than Sunday, Good
Friday or ANZAC Day; and
(b) the hours between 10 a.m. and 11 p.m. on Sunday; and
(c) the hours between 12 noon and 11 p.m. on Good Friday and ANZAC Day.
general licence is considered a high-risk licence category primarily due to the
broad permissions it grants. In particular, the
long trading hours of a premises
with a general licence can lead to increased alcohol consumption and associated
public health and
safety concerns. Research has shown a correlation between
extended hours of alcohol availability and higher incidences of alcohol-related
harm, including violence, public disorder, and health
Assessing suitability
Commission must assess suitability against the objects of the LCR
noting that harm
minimisation is the primary regulatory object and therefore the primary
consideration in liquor licensing decisions
(although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
assessing suitability, the Commission can also be guided by principles applied
in previous decisions. This includes ensuring that
the public have confidence in
the liquor industry.
Commission must be satisfied that Elos Trading has the ability to manage a
licensed premises in a manner that promotes harm minimisation
and complies with
a licensee’s obligations under the LCR Act.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the information,
material and evidence before the Delegate at first instance.
The Commission on
review also considered the following materials:
(a) the Original Decision and Reasons of Delegate, dated 28 May 2024;
(b) the Review Application, received 7 June 2024;
(c) transcript of directions hearing, dated 26 July 2024;
(d) email from Tresola Legal, dated 20 August 2024, enclosing submissions, dated
19 August 2024, and a statement from Mr Stapleton,
dated 19 August 2024;
(e) Alcohol Management Plan for the Premises (undercover of email from Tresola
Legal, dated 20 August 2024;
(f) transcript of the Hearing, dated 21 August 2024;
(g) letter from Tresola Legal, dated 30 August 2024, enclosing:
revised Declaration of Associates regarding Elos Trading;
revised Declaration of Associates regarding Sun Chaser;
by Mr O’Keefe regarding his findings of Mr Stapleton, dated 29 August
vitae of Mr Keefe, dated August 2024;
and Amenity Action Plan for the Premises, dated August 2024;
Safety and Security Management Plan, dated August 2024;
Responsible
Service of Alcohol House Policy, dated August 2024, and
(h) email from Mr Stapleton, dated 1 November 2024.
Issues for consideration
order for the Commission to make its decision on review, the following issues
require consideration:
(a) whether Elos Trading is not a suitable person to hold the Licence for the
purposes of section 44(2)(a);
(b) like (a) above, whether Elos Trading has adequate knowledge for the purposes
of section 44(2)(b)(iv); and
(c) having considered the previous issues, whether the Original Application
should be granted or refused, having regard to the objects
of the LCR Act,
particularly the primary object of harm minimisation.
of these issues is discussed in turn.
Suitability
noted above, one of the issues that the Commission has considered is whether
Elos Trading is not a suitable to hold the Licence.
The Commission has
considered this issue in light of Elos Trading’s association with Mr
Stapleton who;
(a) as the director of the related entity, Sun Chaser, was given two
infringement notices for trading at the Premises on 17 March
2024 and 20 April
2024 when the Premises was not licensed premises or authorised premises contrary
to the LCR Act,
(b) was the director of a company that was the subject of the cumulative conduct
during the period February 2023 – April
(c) declared inaccurate information in the Original Application regarding
associates of Elos Trading pursuant to section 3AC.
above factors are discussed below.
Association with Mr
Contraventions of the LCR Act
Commission notes that the Delegate considered that the trade at the Premises
when the Premises was not licensed premises demonstrated
an indifference towards
a regulatory scheme and this was part of the basis for the Delegate finding that
Elos Trading was not a suitable
person to hold the Licence and refusing to grant
the Original Application.
considered all materials lodged on behalf of Elos Trading, the Commission finds
that inconsistent and contradictory evidence
has been given when seeking to
explain why there was trade at the Premises when the Premises were not licensed
summary, the Commission notes:
(a) on 8 May 2024, Mr Dimitri (Jimmy) Stapleton (Mr Stapleton’s son)
informed LCV that it was Elos Trading’s understanding
that the Premises
were licensed given that LCV accepted payment from Mr Georgios Kypriotis (on
behalf of the landlord) to renew the
(b) while Mr Stapleton said in an email to LCV on 17 May 2024 that he thought
Elos Trading could trade under the Licence because
Mr Kypriotis had paid the
renewal fee, he said in his statement dated 19 May 2024 that there was trade at
the Premises on the identified
days as “test” days; and
(c) in his evidence at the Hearing on 21 August 2024, Mr Stapleton said the
trade at the Premises on St Patrick’s Day (17 March
2024) was partly to
see how the business operations at the Premises would fare and partly because of
a connection between the Premises
and the Irish community on St Patrick’s
the Commission is very concerned with the above, particularly given that the
community needs to be able to have confidence that
they can rely on those to be
transferred a licence are aware of and comply with liquor licensing laws, it is
not sufficient to only
consider the past deeds of a person or entity when
considering suitability. The question is also whether the Commission can have
confidence that such conduct is unlikely to occur in the future. In this regard,
Mr Stapleton presented as a forthright and candid
witness, who expressed genuine
remorse regarding the trade at the Premises when the Premises was not licensed
premises and has accepted
full responsibility for it. At the Hearing, Mr
Stapleton gave evidence about what he would do differently in the future, in
of his conduct on St Patrick’s Day and the ‘test’ days,
showing insight into his conduct. The Commission accepts
that he has genuinely
learned from that conduct and has been deterred from similar conduct in the
future by not only the investigative
and compliance actions taken with respect
to those contraventions, but also by the denunciation of such conduct by this
Commission.
in relation to Mr Stapleton being the director of a company that was the subject
of the cumulative conduct during the period
February 2023 – April 2024,
the Commission notes that Mr Stapleton explained on 1 November 2024:
(a) Sun Chaser took immediate steps to ensure compliance with Restaurant and
Cafe Licence no. 32348145 for The Post Inn together
with other steps to minimise
the risk of non-compliance, including increasing the size of the licensed area
at The Postal Inn and
applying to vary the category of licence from a restaurant
and cafe to an on-premises
(b) he now has an enhanced understanding of requirements under the LCR Act,
particularly given his previous engagement of liquor
consultant, Mr
O’Keefe, and that he intends to ensure that both Sun Chaser and Elos
Trading are always compliant.
have been no adverse incidents alleged against Sun Chaser regarding its
operations at The Post Inn since 22 March
information in the Original Application
Commission notes that the Delegate considered that the inaccurate information
contained in Original Application regarding associates
of Elos Trading pursuant
to section 3AC indicated a lack of transparency and honesty and this was part of
the basis for the Delegate
finding that Elos Trading was not a suitable person
to hold the Licence and refusing to grant the Original Application.
Commission notes that it is important that the public have confidence in the
liquor industry and have confidence in the administration
of the liquor industry
and that the community can rely on those approved as a licensee as being honest
and diligent in their compliance
with their obligations as a licensee.
considered Mr Stapleton’s evidence in the Hearing and the post Hearing
submissions, including the revised Declarations
of Associates for Elos Trading
and Sun Chaser, it appears to the Commission that there has been a
misunderstanding by Mr Stapleton
regarding associates pursuant to section 3AC
without any deliberate intent to mislead. While this is a matter relating to Mr
Stapleton’s
knowledge of the LCR Act, it, of itself, does not lead to a
finding that Mr Stapleton or Elos Trading are not suitable persons.
is no material before the Commission on review, on which it could consider that
the associates subsequently declared, are not
suitable persons for the purposes
of this application.
Finding as to suitability
the Hearing, the Commission considered that Mr Stapleton came across as a
genuine and remorseful witness.
Mr O’Keefe’s assessment report, dated 29 August 2024, as to his
findings of Mr Stapleton knowledge of the LCR Act
and Mr Stapleton’s own
evidence in the Hearing, the Commission considers Mr Stapleton is a ‘hands
on’ owner and
problem solver.
all of the circumstances and having regard to the objects of the LCR Act, the
Commission is not satisfied that it is appropriate
to exercise its discretion to
refuse to transfer the Licence on the basis that Elos Trading is not a suitable
person to hold the
Licence. The exercise of the Commission’s discretion is
discussed further below.
knowledge of the LCR Act
Commission may refuse to transfer a licence under section 44(2(b)(iv), on the
basis that the applicant does not have an adequate
knowledge of the LCR Act. The
Commission raised concerns about the adequacy of Mr Stapleton’s knowledge
of the LCR Act, given
the incomplete application with respect to who were
associates, and the apparent pattern of non-compliances with licensing
requirements
by Sun Chaser Trading Pty Ltd, including at the Premises.
part of the Original Application, Mr Stapleton submitted his New Entrant
Training certificate, dated 2 August 2022, and his
certificate, dated 14 July
2022. Mrs Stapleton also holds an RSA certificate, dated 24 May 2023.
the course of this matter, Mr Stapleton has received advice and support from a
liquor consultant, Mr George O’Keefe. Mr
O’Keefe observed the
compliance procedures of the Post Inn (of which Mr Stapleton is the licensee).
Importantly, Mr O’Keefe
attests to Mr Stapleton’s adequate knowledge
of the basics of the LCR Act.
Commission has further considered the proposed business operations of Elos
Trading, the risk-profile of the licence category relevant
to the Original
Application, and Mr Stapleton own experience in managing licensed premises.
Taking into account all of the circumstances,
the Commission is satisfied that
Elos Trading has an adequate knowledge of the LCR Act for the purposes of
section 44(2)(b)(iv).
this, the Commission encourages Elos Trading to take all necessary and
reasonable steps to ensure that Mr Stapleton and all
other associates pursuant
to section 3AC, to develop an enhanced understanding of the LCR Act in order to
ensure that they maintain
strict compliance with their obligations under the LCR
Act, the regulations and the Licence on an ongoing basis. Specifically, given
the multiple transgressions as described in the table in paragraph 13 above, the
overall size of the Premises, and the high-risk
licence category of a general
licence as discussed in paragraph 43 above, the Commission considers it to be
appropriate that there
be a special condition to this effect. To that end, the
Commission requires Mr Stapleton to re-complete the New Entrant Training
and for all other associates of Elos Trading pursuant to section 3AC to also
complete the New Entrant Training course. The
timeframe for compliance with such
a special condition is by no later than 30 May
the Original Application should be granted having regard to the objects of the
LCR Act, particularly the primary object of
minimisation
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under section
44(2), the Commission must still exercise its
discretion whether or not to grant
the Original Application. Such a discretion must be exercised by the Commission
with regard to
any other relevant considerations, as well as with regard to the
objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm minimisation, which is
the primary
consideration.
regard to all information, material, and evidence, including the absence of any
specific suggestion that Elos Trading’s
activities have been conducive to
or encouraged harm, the Commission is satisfied that adequate controls will
exist over the supply
of liquor and that the risk of any harm should be
minimised. Also, from its view of the area and its inspection of the Premises,
which it is anticipated will be renovated to a high standard, the Commission is
of the opinion that the operation of the licence
has the potential to be an
additional positive option for the community of the area so that a grant of the
Original Application would
be in furtherance of the objects outlined in section
4(1)(b) and section 4(1)(c). Accordingly, the Commission considers that the
transfer of the Licence in this instance would not be contrary to the objects of
the LCR Act including harm minimisation.
Decision on
Commission has determined to set aside the Original Decision and, in
substitution, grant the Original Application subject to the
conditions set out
in Appendix A.
The preceding 72 paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Acting Chair), Mr James
(Deputy Chair), and Mr Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner).
Appendix A - Conditions for General Licence no. 31954202
This licence is a general licence and authorises
the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption on and
the licensed premises during the trading hours specified below.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue
detriment to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the
the premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the
trading hours authorised under this licence.
Maximum Capacities
Internal (57 patrons) External (55 patrons)
Trading Hours
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
Good Friday &
ANZAC Day Between 12noon and 11pm
On any other day Between 9am and
Special Condition
By no later than 30 May 2025, any associate of
the licensee pursuant to section 3AC of
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
complete a New Entrant Training course, including the director of the licensee,
who must re-complete the New Entrant Training
All certificates
of completion of the New Entrant Training course must be submitted by the
licensee to the Commission by no later
than 30 May 2025.
Management Plan
The licensee must adhere to the Alcohol Management
Plan, Noise and Amenity Action Plan, and Venue Safety and Security Management
provided to the Commission in addition to the conditions stated
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act.
The transferor’s details
in the Original Application incorrectly specified Mr Georgios Kypriotis as the
transferor.
92.6m², Ground Level and Courtyard 150.45m², and Outside Curb Side
653m²: Approved red-line plan of the Premises.
Section 3 defines
“licensing inspector” as a person appointed as a licensing inspector
under section 172.
Email response from Mr Samuel
Stapleton to the Delegate, dated 17 May 2024 at 11:36am.
Reasons for Original Decision,
paragraph 32.
Reasons for Original Decision,
paragraph 33 and 46.
Reasons for Original Decision,
paragraph 34, 37 and 46.
Reasons for Original Decision,
paragraph 34 and 46.
Reasons for Original
Decision, paragraph 38 to 46.
Before Tresola Legal was
engaged for the Review Application, Elos Trading was self-represented.
Infringement notices issued
on 16 and 17 September 2024.
Section 157(2) to (5)
further prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Sections 44, 49 and 157.
Sections 44 and 157.
The Commission has taken
into account section 103A and section 104.
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
Section 157(2).
Section 157(3).
See section 4.
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325.
Danz Management v
Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation)
See paragraph 13 above.
Email from Mr Dimitri
(Jimmy) Stapleton to LCV, dated 8 May 2024.
Transcript of the Hearing,
21 August 2024, page 23, line 20.
The variation of category
licence application regarding The Postal Inn is yet to be decided by a delegate
of the Commission.
Mr Stapleton’s
submissions, received 1 November 2024.
See table in paragraph 13
Responsible Service of
Alcohol training.
All emails to the Commission
enclosing certificates of completion of the New Entrant Training course must be
secretariat@liquor.vic.gov.au
See section 4(2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.38 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter