URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stonnington C341ston (PSA) [2025] PPV 42 (25 August 2025)
Stonnington Planning Scheme
Amendment C341ston
15 Avalon Road, Armadale
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
25 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Stonnington Planning Scheme Amendment C341ston
15 Avalon Road, Armadale
25 August 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Armadale Heritage Study (2024)
Stonnington Heritage Review Summary Report Part 2B Armadale Volume 1
– Findings (Extent Heritage, 2024)
City of Stonnington
draft heritage guidelines
draft Local heritage criteria and threshold guidelines (consultation
Malvern Heritage Review (2022)
Malvern Heritage Review Final Report – Volume 1 (GJM Heritage,
October 2022)
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Stonnington Planning Scheme
Stonnington Interwar Heritage Study (2015)
City of Stonnington Interwar Houses Study – Stage 3 (Bryce Raworth
Pty Ltd, September 2015)
Subject house
The house at 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale
Subject land
13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale
Thematic Environmental History
Stonnington Thematic Environmental History (2006, updated March 2009)
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Stonnington Planning Scheme Amendment C341ston
Common name
15 Avalon Road, Armadale
Brief description
Proposes to permanently apply the Heritage Overlay (HO790) to the subject
Subject land
15 Avalon Road, Armadale
The Proponent
City of Stonnington
Planning Authority
City of Stonnington
Authorisation
10 September 2025, with conditions
6 February to 7 March 2025
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 13 Opposed: 1
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair)
Directions Hearing
By online video, 5 June 2025
Panel Hearing
Planning Panels Victoria and by video, 21 and 22 July 2025
Site inspection
Accompanied, 11 July 2025
Parties to the Hearing
- Stonnington
City Council represented by Nicola Collingwood, instructed by Kristin Richardson
of Maddocks, who called expert evidence
on heritage from Dr Aron Paul of
Trethowan Architects
- Subject land
owner represented by Marita Foley and Rupert Watters, instructed by Amanda Johns
of Planning and Property Partners
Pty Ltd, who called expert evidence on
heritage from Carolynne Baker of Urbis
Stonnington PSA C341ston [2025] PPV
Date of this report
25 August 2025
Executive summary
The area which today is
the Stonnington municipality, has been home to large estates with grand mansions
since the nineteenth century,
many of which were constructed during Victorian
era. At the turn of the century, particularly after the first world war, a
of these estates were subdivided due to rising labour and maintenance
costs. One of these estates, ‘Avalon’, was subdivided
into 16 lots
including 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale (subject land) in 1929.
The subject land has been considered in, and omitted from, previous heritage
assessments since 2009. Their wide-swinging approaches
and findings
excluding it
from a heritage precinct extension assessment and relevant studies
recommending
further investigation to see if it is an individually significant place
finding it not
to be of individual heritage significance or a contributory property in the
neighbouring heritage precinct
reassessing and
recommending it be included in the heritage precinct
inappropriate to include in the heritage precinct.
In 2024, Council
engaged heritage consultants, who assessed the subject land and found it
achieved Criterion A and D as an individually
significant place.
Stonnington Planning Scheme Amendment C341ston (the Amendment) seeks to apply
the Heritage Overlay on a permanent basis to the subject
land. Council
exhibited the Amendment from 6 February to 7 March 2025 and received 13
submissions including one objecting submission
from the subject land owner. Key
issues raised in the objecting submission relate to how the subject land was
assessed to determine
its local heritage significance, and whether it met
Criteria A and D.
The Panel has considered the subject land with ‘fresh eyes’
because previous heritage assessments were conducted in different
contexts and
circumstances. While the Amendment broadly followed the methodology outlined in
Planning Practice Note 1, the Panel
has serious concerns about the assessment in
the heritage citation.
Stonnington has many fine examples of interwar houses in the Old English
Revival style which sets a higher local heritage threshold
than municipalities
with fewer and less comparable examples. This should not be interpreted as the
threshold being too high or excluding
more humble examples.
The subject land should be comparable with, if not better than, an
appropriate sample of comparable properties in Stonnington. This
is the point
of difference between an individual heritage place that has heritage
significance (comparable or better) with one that
does not (does not compare
well). It is appropriate to compare the subject land with a property in a
heritage precinct that has
been assessed as being significant by a suitably
qualified professional.
The heritage citation and Statement of Significance have inappropriately
combined multiple qualifiers
(the house style and era and outstanding example
of Mr Wright’s work)
. This has:
narrowed the
theme and distorted the comparative analysis and local heritage threshold
excluded a more
representative sample of Old English Revival interwar houses from the
comparative analysis which the subject land
is unlikely to have compared well
Previous heritage studies and citations have included
better examples of interwar Old English Revival style houses than the subject
house. Even with its narrow range of properties, the subject land does not
compare well with three of the properties in the comparative
analysis. The
subject land would likely have compared less well with a more representative
The subject land does not achieve Planning Practice Note 1 Criteria A and D
and is not of individual heritage significance.
The Panel acknowledges the subject house is a grand handsome building on a
generous property with a large front garden and curving
driveway that has
existed for almost 90 years. However, these attributes alone are not relevant
when assessing heritage, and the
subject land is not of local heritage
significance.
Recommendation
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Amendment proposes to implement the recommendation of the heritage citation
Former ‘Ken-Ailsa’ 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale
(Trethowan Architecture, April 2024).
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
permanently
apply the Heritage Overlay (HO790) to 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale (subject
incorporate the
HO790 Statement of Significance into the Stonnington Planning Scheme (the
Planning Scheme) through the Clause 72.04
reference the
HO790 heritage citation as a background document through the Clause 72.08
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to land shown in Figure 1.
Subject land
Source: Council Part A submission
1.2 Background
Chronology of events
City of Stonnington Heritage Overlay Gap Study: Heritage Overlay
Precinct Final Report
(Bryce Raworth, 2009) recommended the Hampden Road
Precinct be extended without the subject land
City of Stonnington Heritage Strategy Review: Precinct Gaps
(Context) stated the subject house “
is worthy of further
investigation for its potential individual architectural and historic
significance
20 Apr 2018
Bryce Raworth assessed the subject land for Council and concluded it did
not meet individual heritage threshold, and it should not
be included in a
heritage precinct
Bryce Raworth assessed the subject land for Council and concluded it should
not be included in a heritage precinct
15 Aug 2019
Council received a demolition request for the subject land under
Building Act 1993
10 Nov 2021
Council received a second demolition request for the subject land
Toorak, Kooyong and Armadale Heritage Review: Preliminary Gaps
Analysis and Detailed Gaps Analysis
(Extent, 2022) recommended the subject
land be included as a contributory property in the Hampden Road Precinct
20 May 2022
Interim Heritage Overlay (HO697) is applied to the subject land [Amendment
25 Nov 2022
Interim Heritage Overlay (HO726 – Hampden Road Precinct Extension) is
applied to the subject land [Amendment C319ston]
Stonnington Heritage Review Summary Report
Armadale Volume 2
– Citations
excluded the subject land
25 Jul – 2 Aug 2023
At the C320ston Hearing, there were differing expert views about the
proposal to identify the subject land as a contributory property
27 Sep 2023
Stonnington PSA C320ston [2023] PPV
Panel Report concluded the
subject land did not have enough heritage significance to contribute to the
Hampden Road Precinct or to
be an individually significant place
18 Dec 2023
Council officers recommended the subject land be removed from the Hampden
Road Precinct. Council disagreed and resolved to:
Amendment C320ston which retained the subject land in the Hampden Road
- commission an
assessment of the subject land to determine whether it warrants protection as an
individual place through the Heritage
Stonnington Heritage Review Summary Report
Armadale Volume 1
(Extent) had a revised citation which complied with
Dec 2023 resolution
Council commissioned Trethowan Architecture to assess the subject
24 Apr 2024
Trethowan Architecture recommended the Heritage Overlay be applied to the
subject land as an individually significant place
20 May 2024
Council resolved to request authorisation from the Minister for Planning to
prepare and exhibit Amendment C341ston (the Amendment)
10 Sept 2024
Council received authorisation to prepare the Amendment
30 Jan 2025
Interim Heritage Overlay was extended to 31 July 2025 [Amendment
Amendment C341ston exhibition started
Amendment C341ston exhibition ended
12 May 2025
Council considered submissions at its meeting and resolved to refer
submissions to a Panel
Directions Hearing
Council received a third demolition request for the subject land
Panel has summarised previous assessments in
Previous assessments
City of Stonnington Heritage Overlay Gap Study: Heritage Overlay
Precinct Final Report
(Bryce Raworth,
City of Stonnington Heritage Strategy Review: Precinct Gaps
Bryce Raworth Pty Ltd prepared the Interwar Study Stage 3
20 Apr 2018
Bryce Raworth Pty Ltd assessed the subject land
Bryce Raworth Pty Ltd assessed the subject land
Toorak, Kooyong and Armadale Heritage Review: Preliminary Gaps
Analysis and Detailed Gaps Analysis
(Extent, 2022)
25 Jul 2023
Peter Lovell [Amendment C320ston Panel Hearing]
25 Jul 2023
John Patrick [Amendment C320ston Panel Hearing] – limited to
25 Jul 2023
Michelle Bashta [Amendment C320ston Panel Hearing]
25 Jul 2023
Natica Schmeder [Amendment C320ston Panel Hearing]
27 Sep 2023
Stonnington PSA C320ston [2023] PPV Panel
Stonnington Heritage Review Summary Report
Armadale Volume 1
24 Apr 2024
Trethowan Architecture
14 Jul 2025
Dr Aron Paul expert evidence [Amendment C341ston Panel Hearing]
14 Jul 2025
Carolynne Baker expert evidence [Amendment C341ston Panel Hearing]
1.3 Procedural issue
The Department of
Transport and Planning started public consultation on its
draft Local
heritage criteria and threshold guidelines
(draft heritage guidelines) on 31
July 2025. The final version will inform changes to Planning Practice Note
The subject land owner wrote to Planning Panels Victoria on 6 August 2025 to
request the Panel consider its submission regarding the
draft heritage
guidelines. The letter:
referred to the
draft heritage guidelines which states:
place’s historic association (Criterion A) is to be better appreciated
than most other places in the local area
- the place must
be of higher quality or historical relevance, and better demonstrate the type or
class than most other representatives
(Criterion D)
subject land owner would be prejudiced if the Panel considered the Amendment
before the draft heritage guidelines were
requested the
- adjourn its
process and defer its determination until the draft heritage guidelines are
interim report recommending the interim Heritage Overlay be extended before any
further hearing
provided reasons
why it considered its approach to be fair.
Council responded on 8
August 2025 that:
parties have had
an opportunity to fully ventilate their issues and concerns
the Panel should
proceed to consider the Amendment based on the material and evidence before
Panel response
The Panel has considered unresolved issues referred to it by Council based on
information available at that time. It is common for
planning decisions and
changes to occur while a Panel prepares its report. If the Panel considers them
to be relevant to its consideration,
it has the discretion to provide parties
with an opportunity to make submissions on this new information. This is not
the case with
the draft heritage guidelines.
The Panel has not had regard to the draft heritage guidelines because its
contents are intended for consultation purposes. For example,
there may be
opposition to places having to be
“better appreciated than
better demonstrate the type or class than
”, resulting in changes before the guidelines are finalised by the
Department of Transport and Planning. It would be unfair
and unreasonable to
delay the Amendment indefinitely, noting there is no apparent completion date
for the guidelines.
There is always something changing in the urban planning process whether it
be guidelines, strategies, plans, policy and provisions.
planning process would stall if each planning scheme amendment had to wait until
all relevant reviews were finalised.
The Panel considers the subject land owner has not been prejudiced
the subject land
owner repeatedly submitted that the subject land should be better than the
typical interwar Old English style to
be important to Stonnington
heritage guidelines are not intended to be mandatory or enforceable rules
the Panel has
found the subject land is not of local heritage significance based on current
information provided through the Hearing
1.4 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions relate to how the subject land was assessed to
determine its local heritage significance, and where
it met Criteria A and
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community
benefit and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated
decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions
and materials have been considered
by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
- Strategic
justification
15 Avalon Road,
- Assessment
methodology
- Criterion A
(Historical significance)
- Criterion D
(Representativeness).
Previous heritage assessments
Both Council and the subject land owner referred to
previous heritage assessments which affected the subject land. Copies of
assessments were provided by the subject land owner (Documents 13 to
15) and by Council (Documents 17(a) to (j)).
Council submitted:
the subject land
owner has placed significant weight on historical documents that reference the
subject land, are not the subject
of this proceeding and cannot be given
material weight
assessments can provide context and background but cannot reasonably inform the
Panel’s consideration of the Amendment
assessments:
- have largely
been directed to different statutory processes
- relied upon
variable levels of information, research and analysis
- generally (if
not completely) referenced the Stonnington Thematic Environmental History and
the strong association between its important
development themes and the subject
undertaken by reference to a comparative assessment, are not as comprehensive as
Dr Paul’s assessment.
The Panel partly agrees with
Council. The Panel has reviewed but not relied on previous assessments to help
determine whether the
subject land is of local heritage significance as an
individual place. Previous assessments were prepared for a different purpose
within a different context and time. The Amendment has enabled a fresh
assessment of the subject land.
However, for reasons explained in Chapter
, the Panel has reviewed whether
properties included in the heritage citation’s comparative analysis have
been appropriately
assessed. This is to determine whether they are suitable
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
PE Act section 4
Municipal Planning Strategy
Clause 2.03-4
Planning Policy Framework
- 15 (Built form
environment and heritage)
(Preferred neighbourhood character)
(Heritage conservation)
Other planning strategies and policies
Plan Melbourne:
- Direction 4.4
(Respect Melbourne’s heritage as we build for the future)
- Policy 4.4.1
(Recognise the value of heritage when managing growth and
Plan for Victoria – Pillar 3 (Great Places, Suburbs
Planning scheme provisions
Heritage Overlay
Ministerial directions
Ministerial Direction on the Form and Content of Planning Schemes
Ministerial Direction 9 (Metropolitan Planning Strategy)
Ministerial Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Ministerial Direction 15 (The Planning Scheme Amendment Process)
Planning practice notes
Planning Practice Note 1 (Applying the Heritage Overlay)
Planning Practice Note 91 (Using the residential zones)
2.2 Strategic justification
the reasons set out in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
is not supported
by, and does not implement, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
Framework because it seeks to apply the
Heritage Overlay to a property that is
not of local heritage significance (does not meet Criteria A and D)
strategically justified for the same reasons
proceed for reasons explained in the following chapters.
recommends that Council:
1 Abandon Stonnington Planning Scheme
Amendment C341ston and permanently remove the Heritage Overlay (HO790) from
13-15 Avalon Road,
3 15 Avalon Road, Armadale
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
What is significant?
The house formerly known as Ken-Ailsa, designed by Arnaud E Wright built
c.1933 is significant. Significant elements include the original
design of the house, comprising its two-storey form with single-storey wings
including an original garage. Significant
elements include terra-cotta shingle
roofs with flushed eaves curved at the ends, tall brick chimneys with corbelled
crowns, imitation
limewash walls with clinker brick detailing, sash windows and
bay window, central porch entry and diamond pane window under corbelled
The expansive garden setting with curving driveway following original
pathway contributes to the significance of the place as an appropriate
and landscaped setting, but the garden plantings and landscape fabric itself is
not original.
Post-war additions/alterations such as the bar extension, games building,
swimming pool and shed are not significant.
How is it significant?
Former Ken-Ailsa is of historical and representative significance to the
City of Stonnington.
Why is it significant?
Former Ken-Ailsa is significant for its association with the historical
development of the municipality in the interwar period for
its demonstration of
the way in which mansion estates such as “Avalon”
were subdivided in the twentieth century to make
way for the development of
affluent middle-class suburbs. ‘Ken-Ailsa’ is a fine example of such
a house on the approximate
site of a former mansion, designed by an influential
local architect, Arnaud E Wright, in collaboration with developers who
transformed
the municipality into a leafy suburb in the interwar period with
prestigious middle class homes in garden settings.
(Criterion A)
Former Ken-Ailsa is significant as a fine representative example of an Old
English revival styled interwar period house in the municipality
outstanding example of the work in this style of the notable local architect
Arnaud W Wright. It demonstrates notable elements
of the Old English style
including prominent gables with slit brick details, steep roof forms with
terracotta shingles, tall brick
chimneys with corbelled brickwork and decorated
external chimney breast including ‘S’ iron detail, flush and
gable eaves, combination of imitation limewash walls with clinker
brick detailing, diamond and multi pane windows, bay windows with
roofs, arched
doorway with gabled porch. It is distinguished among Arnaud Wright’s Old
English designs by its large scale and
spacious garden setting with curved
driveway, tall chimneys and terracotta shingle roofs with finely detailed eaves
(Criterion D)
3.1 Assessment methodology
(i) The issue
issue is whether the assessment methodology is appropriate for assessing the
heritage significance of the subject land.
(ii) Background
The HO790 heritage citation compares the subject
land with properties shown in Figure 4.
Comparative
Citation comments
Other information
3 Myrnong Crescent, Toorak
Significant (A2 graded) in HO180. Built in 1935 the house is similar to the
subject site but more compressed on a smaller block. The
chimney is shorter and
the fascia are plain. Roof is more standard Marseille terracotta tiles. Has
similar render and brick decoration.
By comparison the subject property is
distinguished by its taller chimneys, finer gable and roof detailing and
materiality, and grander
landscape setting.
HO180 (Power Street Precinct)
21 Power Avenue, Toorak
Significant (B graded) in HO180. Constructed in 1934 contemporaneously with
the subject property by Arnaud Wright, this is almost
a mirror image of the
subject property’s main house, with its symmetrical form but asymmetric
articulation, shingle roof, tall
chimneys. The subject property is larger, with
wider central bay and projecting wings, and located on a larger double
HO180 (Power Street Precinct)
19 Power Avenue, Toorak
Significant (A2 graded) in HO180. Comparable interwar period mix of render
and brick detailing, prominent roof and tall chimneys with
composition featuring rendered walls, centrally located gable and gabled porch
with arched entrance.
HO180 (Power Street Precinct)
28 Albany Road, Toorak
Significant (A2 graded) HO486. Built in 1934 to designs by the noted
architectural firm Irwin and Stevenson English Revival residence
(Criterion D)
presents similar use of render with brick detailing, bay windows, shorter
chimneys, more modest setting.
HO486 (Individually significant)
46 Heyington Place, Toorak
Significant HO495. Built in 1933-1934 to designs by architect Stuart
Calder. English Revival residence (Criterion D) presents similar
use of render
and roof forms with more minimal detailing and less elaborate chimneys in a more
modest setting.
HO495 (Individually significant)
8 Monaro Road, Malvern
Significant HO277. The house is architecturally significant as one of the
most impressive Old English style residences in the municipality
(Criterion D).
It has a strong but carefully articulated facade with intricate detailing
demonstrating architect A Mortimer McMillan's
talent for design in this mode.
More modest than the subject property in scale, less prominent or decorative
HO277 (Individually significant)
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Dr Paul’s expert evidence on the subject
land assessment methodology and ‘threshold’
Assessment methodology
previous assessments of the subject land as background material.
Inspected the
subject land from the public realm.
historical research.
comparative analysis which include places:
- search of
Heritage Victoria Database and HERMES database to “
ascertain a
comprehensive range of places by the architect and residences of the style and
Stonnington”
The Advisory
Committee which reviewed heritage provisions in planning schemes in 2006
- Thresholds are
to be used to sieve out those places recommended for including in the planning
scheme from those of lesser value.
- A comparative
analysis is therefore an important component of the assessment process.
- The threshold
for applying the Heritage Overlay to a place should positively answer the
question – Is the place sufficiently
important that its cultural values
should be recognised in the Planning Scheme and taken into account in decision
- This needs to
consider two elements – Firstly, there should be something to be managed,
evident in the fabric of the place.
Secondly, there should be a criteria for
assessment, and for this the HERCON Criteria have been accepted.
- The threshold
will vary according to the comparative analysis in the locality.
municipality’s Thematic History should also be considered when assessing
whether a place contributes towards the significance
municipality.
All parties and experts
Practice Note 1 sets out an approach to assessing cultural heritage
significance
The subject
house is sufficiently intact.
Council submission
A comparative
analysis is the key tool to determine whether the local significance threshold
Practice Note 1 states:
To apply a threshold, some comparative
analysis will be required to substantiate the significance of each place.
comparative analysis should draw on other similar places within the study area,
including those previously included in a heritage
register or overlay.
Places identified to be of potential state significance should undergo
analysis on a broader (statewide) comparative
The C387melb
Planning Panel found:
The process of comparative analysis for local
level significance
does not require places to be better than others but they
should compare at least as well as others that are similar phase, era or
This is important to ensure the integrity of existing places included
in the Heritage Overlay is not diminished. It also ensures
that it is not just
the grand and landmark buildings that are identified but also allows for the
humbler places to be recognised
as contributing to the heritage significance of
a city, town or precinct.
A comparative
assessment necessarily references the particular characteristics and features of
the place which may reasonably include
scale, setting, massing, architectural
features and expression and materiality, as well as intactness and
Dr Paul’s expert evidence
Of the 30 Hermes
Orion database results for interwar period Old English style houses, the most
relevant example is another individual
significant house by Arnaud Wright at 3
Myrnong Court.
Mr Wright was a
prolific local architect in the interwar period who was involved in local
developments such as the Huntingfield Road
(1934) and Moonga/Power Avenue
subdivisions (1930-40).
significant subdivisions of the surviving mansion estates in the area during the
generally employed the Georgian Revival and Old English Revival styles popular
during the interwar period.
comparable examples of Mr Wright’s designs are:
- 13-15 Avalon
Road (the subject land) (1933) – appears to have been the earlier and
possibly the prototype for houses below
Avenue, Toorak (1934)
- 16 Montalto
Avenue, Toorak (1934)
- 3 Myrnong
Crescent, Toorak (1935).
Wright’s other known houses in the Old English style include:
- 11 Moorakyne
Avenue, Malvern (1934)
Avenue, Toorak (1935)
- 1 Henderson
Avenue, Malvern (1935).
Ms Baker’s expert
The subject land
does not meet the critical threshold of individual significance to justify a
site-specific Heritage Overlay based
on a limited overview of similar properties
and gradings.
The subject
house is handsome, but a conventional example of a large interwar dwelling
designed in the English Domestic Revival style.
broadly reproduced the design with some minor differences on two other sites in
Stonnington.
The subject land
belongs to a category of heritage buildings that would typically only warrant
protection if they formed part of a
The comparative
- compares the
subject house’s key characteristics with other Old English Revival
interwar residences in Stonnington, but these
characteristics are not limited to
individually significant buildings
- ignores the
picturesque composition and more skilful massing of the three individually
significant dwellings at 28 Albany Road,
Toorak; 46 Heyington Place, Toorak; and
8 Monaro Road, Malvern.
Crescent, 19 and 21 Power Avenue in Toorak “
shed little
” on whether the subject land meets the threshold of an
individual significant heritage place because they gain additional significance
by their location in a precinct with high quality interwar residential
development.
Hampden Road, Armadale are contributory buildings in the Hampden Road Heritage
Precinct (HO136) and share many such characteristics
and Old English Revival
design elements.
It is unclear
why the subject land was revised from a contributory property in a precinct
(Amendment C320ston) to an individually
significant place (Amendment C341ston)
information has been identified
- the house
remains unchanged.
Dr Paul’s response to
questions at the Hearing
There is a risk
of excluding more conventional houses if an assessment focuses on grand fine
A house should
not be excluded if it is not the ‘Taj Mahal’ of its
Ms Baker agreed with Dr Paul that a ‘Taj Mahal’
approach would be incorrect.
Subject land owner submission
A heritage study
seeks to identify cultural heritage significance.
Heritage policy
in the Planning Scheme ascribes significance to a heritage place once the
Heritage Overlay is applied.
The C387melb
Panel stated that “
policy is not relevant when it comes to determining
whether or not a place is of heritage significance
Council and Dr
Paul appear to include heritage buildings in its comparative analysis that have
‘policy significance’ but
are not individually significant in the
Heritage Overlay.
fundamentally wrong to apply policy as a tool for assessing cultural heritage
value when considering whether to apply the Heritage
The C246melb
Panel stated:
In terms of the threshold for being categorised as
significant in a precinct the Panel concludes a significant building in a
is a better than typical example of a building which demonstrates one
or more heritage values significant to the precinct (the heritage
If the threshold to being categorised as significant in a precinct were the
same as an individually significant place, there is a
risk this would set the
bar too high. This is clear in the evidence given to the Panel which says the
proposed significant buildings
do not all compare well against buildings
proposed as individually significant places. They do not need to.
The C246 Panel
That is not to say a significant building in a precinct
cannot meet the threshold for local significance in its own right, but that
is not a precondition to being a significant element in the precinct. If being
significant in a precinct makes a building significant
in its own right, this
can be a consequence of its role in the precinct and not independent of it.
A significant building is a highlight which exhibits the heritage values of
the precinct, but without the precinct to provide context
may not have the same
heritage value. This is particularly relevant for a precinct identified for
historic significance (Criterion
A) as the buildings or properties make an
important contribution to the story of the place.
Council submission in response
It disputed Ms
Baker’s criticisms of the methodological approach adopted in Dr
Paul’s comparative analysis.
inappropriately dismissed the comparator examples cited in the Statement of
Significance by the fact that three are in a
heritage precinct.
view on the comparative examples “
shed little light
simplistic and flawed.
C320ston related to whether the subject land should be included in the HO136
heritage precinct so it is
to say it did not consider
the subject property as an individually significant place.
Unlike previous
assessments, Dr Paul’s analysis has had regard to Stonnington’s
important thematic history and its connection
to the subject house.
The subject
house’s elements were:
- considered
collectively by Dr Paul when he undertook the comparative analysis
- disaggregated
by Ms Baker, where she disregarded them as either irrelevant or not
determinative.
It is common for
the scale and setting of heritage buildings to be considered, and given weight
in assessing significance, even where
the garden is not subject to heritage
provisions, as demonstrated in the Statement of Significance for 28 Albany Road,
The setting and
overall scale of the site and surrounds impacts how the subject house is read
and it would be shortsighted to disregard
scale and setting as elements that may
influence significance, like Ms Baker does.
Regarding 8
Monaro Road, it disagreed with Ms Baker that heritage assets are relevant
comparators only insofar as they exhibit precisely
the same built form
attributes.
All examples in
Dr Paul’s comparative analysis inform an understanding of the relative
attributes of the subject land.
The purpose of
the comparison is not to find the same examples but rather which together
comprise a fair representative example.
Council subsequently
provided Statements of Significance for properties referred to at the Hearing
and prepared by professionally
qualified consultants to support other planning
scheme amendments including Amendment
The Panel provided an opportunity for the subject land owner to make
submission on matters raised in Council’s Part C submission,
Council to respond to any further submission. They are summarised in
Further submissions
Subject land owner
Council response
Significance
- The Melbourne
C426melb Panel:
- held that the
threshold for identifying a building as significant in a precinct is lower than
the threshold for identifying a building
an individually significant place
- recognised the
significance of a building may depend on its context so that the same building
might not have the same level of significance
in a different
- The point of
referencing the letter gradings in the previous submission was simply to
emphasise that heritage assessment has long
recognised significance from being
located in a precinct and lose significance by not being in a precinct.
- It cannot be
assumed a property which satisfies the threshold for a precinct significance
also satisfies the threshold for individual
significance.
- Council seeks
to get around this by referring to:
definitions introduced by Stonnington Amendment C132
heritage reviews conducted by heritage consultants
- referring to
Planning Practice Note 1.
- Historical
definitions are not particularly informative.
- Council set
out the historical definitions for context and so that the historical summary of
grading evolution was fairly and properly
represented.
- Council’s
most recent heritage reviews have confirmed that where a property is identified
as significant in a precinct it
would also warrant that designation in its own
- Accordingly
the reviews only identified properties of sufficient significance to justify
applying the Heritage Overlay (individual
Paul’s comparative analysis identified significant properties including
those in a precinct that have been assessed by
recent reviews as being
significant.
- The Melbourne
C426melb Panel observed that all properties graded significant in a precinct
would also have been regarded as significant
in their own right and justify the
Heritage Overlay (individual listing).
- The C426melb
Panel commented in was not helpful to assess the significance of a property by
referencing a different ‘hypothetical’
context which did not apply
to the property.
Heritage policy
- The current
Planning Scheme Clause 15.03-1L is a revised form of heritage policy introduced
to Clause 22.04 through Stonnington
Amendment C132 in 2018.
- Council seeks
to rely on the following definition in Clause
‘Significant places’ means places of either
state or local significance including individually listed places graded A1,
definition has not attempted to move away from the letter grades that appeared
in Clause 22.04.
exhibited the definition as ‘individually listed
buildings and
in a heritage precinct’
and later proposed to delete the
underlined words.
- The Panel
retained the underlined words, and did not support an approach that treats
individual buildings in precincts (which are
not individually listed) as
significance places.
observation was made by the Amendment C132 Panel (not Council) and was provided
for background context.
consultants have since confirmed the significance of the properties included in
Dr Paul’s comparative analysis.
The heritage reviews
- The Armadale
Heritage Study (2024):
- describes a
‘general approach’ in which buildings in precincts were categorised
as Significant, Contributory or Non-Contributory
based on their existing letter
grade ‘in line with Council’s local heritage policy’
- takes into
account considerations of representativeness and aesthetics as they relate to
the ‘common theme upon which precinct
was nominated’
- appears to
have assumed the threshold for significance is the same both in an outside a
precinct which should not be accepted unless
it is clearly justified
properties were identified as significant, it was determined that the site
contributed towards the common theme of the precinct
but was also of cultural
significance in its own right.
Significant (S): a place that is both significant in its own right,
independent of its context within the precinct, and contributes
to the broader
significance of the precinct (DELWP 2010, 6)
- The passage
does not identify the basis for determining this.
- There is no
reference to authoritative guidance or Panel material to support this
- The subject
land owner has not been able to source the 15-year-old document from DELWP.
- This document
should not be given weight or relied on when making decisions in light of the
C426melb Panel findings.
- The Armadale
Heritage Study (2024) comparative analysis compares the Power Street Precinct
exclusively against other precincts,
which is entirely proper.
- A building
significant to a precinct does not automatically make it individually
significant.
- None of the
individual properties in the precinct which are identified as significant in Dr
Paul’s comparative analysis are
themselves the subject of comparative
- Nothing in the
GJM Review indicates individual properties in the Moorakyne Precinct were
subject of a comparative analysis.
- There is no
evidence the buildings’ designation as significant was informed by the
kind of analysis that would establish the
building met the threshold for
applying the Heritage Overlay (individual significance).
- The heritage
reviews were conducted by competent and experienced heritage consultants who set
out their methodology in the reviews.
- It would be an
overreach to suggest that Council must or should prove that independent experts
that it engaged adopted appropriate
methodology.
- The heritage
consultants applied the same approach to significance of properties in a
precinct as Dr Paul – this reflects
the current approach to grading.
appropriate to rely on those recent assessments in Dr Paul’s comparative
Planning Practice Note 1 and Melbourne Amendment C387melb
Practice Note 1 makes clear that there is ‘no need’ to separately
schedule and map individually significant
buildings located in a significant
area because it will not change the controls that apply to them.
- It does not
say or suggest that buildings which are significant in a precinct are
individually significant because they are significant
in the precinct.
- Council’s
quote from the C387melb Panel report does not reflect the circumstances.
- The C387melb
Panel made those comments in the context of the Hoddle Grid Post-War Heritage
Review, and its emphasis reflected that
this was the first time this period of
heritage had been considered in this area.
reasonable to consider places outside the Heritage Overlay within this
- The Amendment
C387melb circumstance does not reflect the situation in Stonnington where there
are many Old English Revival houses,
many of which are on former mansion
- The passage
regarding ‘humbler places’ appears to be
“a form of special
pleading suggesting that some unspecified lower threshold should be adopted for
the evaluation of the Property”.
- As explained
in the C320ston Panel report, where the Heritage Overlay applies to many
individually significant high quality buildings,
then other buildings said to
belong the same class are to be evaluated by reference to those buildings, even
if that means that the
standard for inclusion becomes very high.
- The Panel
needs to be satisfied that the properties selected by Dr Paul properly represent
the benchmark for Stonnington and not
some lower standard.
- When the C387
Panel report, Council’s Part C submission and Planning Practice Note 1 are
read together, it is clear the Panel
was affirming the preferred approach to
comparative analysis is not rigid, forensic or prescriptive.
- The C387 Panel
report extract was included simply to caution against raising the base so high
that properties were inappropriately
excluded – Council
Stonnington Amendment C320ston
- Council’s
submission that the Panel cannot give material weight to information in the
C320ston hearing represents a change
in its position where it said in the Part B
submission that this information is “
not irrelevant
should not be given weighty consideration.
- It would be
procedurally unfair to deliberately ignore relevant information from the
C320ston Panel.
- Disregarding
this information would incentivise planning authorities to bring forward their
cases ‘piecemeal’, knowing
that they would face no penalty and may
be advantaged.
- Panels have
often declined to give weight because a property was not identified in an
earlier heritage study in considering whether
a property should now be included
in the Heritage Overlay.
- Since the
C320ston hearing:
- there has been
no relevant change to the subject land and no new historical information
discovered so material from that process
has not been overtaken by facts
- there has been
no material change in heritage practice or the broader policy
- There was
expert evidence and submissions at the C320ston hearing about whether the
subject land was of individual significance
so the C320 Panel information is
reliable and relevant in informing an assessment of the subject land’s
heritage significance.
- Council’s
Part C submission is consistent with its Part B submission as it addresses the
expert reports submitted to Stonnington
Amendment C320ston.
- Council has
maintained the reports are relevant for background and context, and cannot be
relied on to prove the individual significance
of the subject land.
- Amendment
C320ston sought to include the subject land in a precinct which is a different
- The approach
for the subject land is not ‘piecemeal’ – Council was faced
with its heritage consultant changing
its position regarding the subject land
leading to the C320ston Hearing.
subsequently sought a peer review from another heritage consultant as to whether
the subject land was individually significant.
- Therefore, it
did not re-litigate Amendment C320ston.
Class of objects
continuing confusion in Council’s articulation of what the relevant class
- Council’s
submission is consistent with the oral evidence of Dr Paul where he identifies
an initial ‘primary’
class and qualifies it by reference to Mr
Wright without articulating the precise nature of the qualification or how the
involvement
/ significance of Mr Wright should be understood to affect the
definition of the class.
- It remains
unclear what the scope of the alleged class is.
- Relied on Dr
Paul’s expert evidence regarding the class of objects.
(iv) Discussion
Submissions, parties and heritage experts considered
the subject house was intact enough to be assessed as to whether it has local
heritage significance. The Panel agrees.
Council engaged professionally qualified heritage consultants to provide
independent advice regarding the subject land. The heritage
consultants broadly
followed the methodology set out in Planning Practice Note 1. This
researching the
subject land to see if it qualifies as an individually significant heritage
determining
which criteria apply
preparing a
citation which included a comparative analysis
preparing a
Statement of Significance.
Did the comparative analysis include
the right examples to determine the subject land’s local
significance?
The Panel agrees with Dr Paul that a threshold is important when assessing
heritage significance because it helps ‘sieve’
a place that is
sufficiently important for its cultural values from those which are not. The
comparative analysis forms an integral
part of this assessment, and how it is
prepared can influence whether a property is found to be significant or not.
Stonnington’s thematic environmental history and how it relates to the
subject land needs to be clearly understood to support
an appropriate
comparative analysis. This will inform what properties can be compared with the
subject land to appropriately represent
the relevant theme, building style and
development era in the municipality.
During the Victorian era, many of Melbourne’s affluent class chose to
build their mansions on grand properties in what is today,
Stonnington. When
labour and maintenance costs increased at the turn of the century, Stonnington
had many more grand estates available
to subdivide and develop during the
interwar period than other parts of Melbourne. Many of them were designed in
the Old English
Revival style which was popular at the time. Stonnington
therefore has many representative examples of interwar Old English Revival
houses that are associated with this thematic history.
Many of Stonnington’s interwar houses are fine examples including those
identified in Dr Paul’s expert evidence, the Stonnington
Interwar Heritage
Study (2015), and those subject to the Heritage Overlay. These better examples
did not form part of the comparative
analysis. As discussed in the Chapter
, this is because the comparative
analysis restricted the range of comparable examples.
Dr Paul noted the threshold will vary according to the comparative analysis
in the locality. By restricting the breadth of examples,
the comparative
analysis did not recognise that Stonnington has a relatively high local
threshold for Old English Revival style houses
built during the interwar period.
This approach did not enable a fulsome assessment.
A higher threshold does not mean the Heritage Overlay will be applied only to
the grand and landmark buildings. Rather, it would
be applied to the better,
more representative and important examples of interwar buildings including the
grandest to the humblest.
Nonetheless, the subject house is by no means a humble interwar-era house.
As acknowledged by the heritage citation and by the heritage
experts, it was
designed and built for a family that could afford a large two storey house on a
large property comprising two lots.
The subject house should have been compared
with a more representative sample of significant interwar Old English Revival
houses in Stonnington.
A more representative sample includes some of the properties included in Dr
Paul’s expert evidence but excluded from the comparative
However, the sample should not be too broad to simply include anything
constructed during the interwar period. It is
evident the interwar period had a
diverse range of distinctive styles. The Statement of Significance specifically
refers to the
house being an
“Old English Revival styled interwar
period house
Dr Paul’s Georgian Revival examples included in his comparative
analysis would be relevant as interwar houses associated with
the relevant theme
if they were subdivided from larger Victorian era estates. However, beyond that
scope, they offer little by way
of comparison. As explained by Dr Paul and Ms
Baker, an Old English Revival style house is picturesque and generally
asymmetrical.
The Georgian Revival style houses in Dr Paul’s expert
evidence have a classical design and are generally symmetrical. The
accepts Dr Paul’s view that representiveness relates to the overall
composition of the building’s features rather
than their individual
aesthetics. However, a Georgian Revival style house has a different design
philosophy and composition to that
of an Old English Revival style house, making
it challenging to compare.
Stonnington has many examples of Old English Revival style house so the
comparative analysis should not rely on other styles, particularly
less decorative features.
Should a property be assessed and identified as ‘significant’
before it is included in the comparative analysis?
The comparative analysis included 3 Myrnong Crescent, 19 and 21 Power Avenue
in Toorak which formed part of Amendment C320ston yet
to be introduced into the
Planning Scheme. The Panel is perplexed as to why the comparative analysis
relied on these three properties
when there were so many individually
significant interwar Old English Revival houses with the Heritage Overlay in
Stonnington, as
evidenced in the Victorian Heritage Register (and reflected in
the Planning Scheme) referred to by Dr Paul.
The Panel acknowledges the subject land owner’s concern. The threshold
for an individually significant property is higher than
a contributory property
in a precinct so it needs to be assessed accordingly.
The Panel has not sought to reassess the Armadale Heritage Study (2024)
methodology, however the decision to include three properties
from that study in
the comparative analysis has made it difficult to separate the two. Properties
included in the comparative analysis
need to be carefully selected because this
process will influence whether a property achieves the threshold of heritage
significance.
It would be inappropriate to compare the subject land with a
property that has not been appropriately assessed and found to be of
heritage significance. These three properties should have been assessed with
the same rigour that Council has exercised
for the subject land through the
The Armadale Heritage Study (2024) at section 2.2.8 states:
As a general approach, places previously graded A1 and A2 were graded
Significant, places previously graded B were graded Contributory,
previously graded C or without a grading were graded Contributory or
Non-Contributory, in line with Council’s local
heritage policy.
Planning policy at Planning Scheme Clause 15.03-1L assumes that A1, A2 or B
graded places are significant heritage properties. It
is unclear how this is
possible because not every graded property may fit neatly into the
‘significant’ category. Each
property needs to be individually
assessed to determine whether it is significant or another heritage
For these reasons, the Panel considers it inappropriate to include 3 Myrnong
Crescent, 19 and 21 Power Avenue in the comparative analysis.
These properties
may have been acceptable to include if there were few or no examples to draw
from because the subject land was
one of the first of its class in the
municipality to be assessed for the Heritage Overlay. This is not the case in
Stonnington.
Should a significant property in a precinct be included in the comparative
The Panel was referred to two perspectives regarding properties identified as
‘significant’ within a heritage precinct
– Planning Practice
Note 1 advice and the C246melb Panel report. Planning Practice Note 1 provides
the clearest explanation:
The provisions applying to individual buildings and structures are the same
as the provisions applying to areas, so there is no need
to separately schedule
and map a significant building, feature or property located within a significant
The only instance where an individual property within a significant area
should be scheduled and mapped is where it is proposed that
a different
requirement should apply. For example, external painting controls may be
justified for an individual building of significance
but not over the heritage
precinct surrounding the building.
Having reviewed documents provided at the Hearing, the Panel understands that
heritage significance relates to the heritage place.
A heritage place can be an
individually significant property or a precinct comprising multiple properties.
A property within a
precinct can contribute to the precinct’s significance
where it shares the same theme. Properties that achieve this are categorised
‘contributory’ while those that do not are
‘non-contributory’.
There are instances where a contributory property may also be found to be
individually significant. Where an individually significant
place and a
heritage precinct share the same requirements, Planning Practice Note 1 advises
to categorise such a property as ‘significant’
and map it within the
respective precinct to avoid double mapping the Heritage Overlay. Therefore, a
significant property is not
significant to the precinct. It is significant in
its own right while also contributing to the precinct’s significance.
The curtilage of an individually significant place ends along the Heritage
Overlay boundary (which is generally along the boundary
of an urban property) so
it does not rely on its surrounding context. This means:
a significant
property in a heritage precinct would remain unaffected if it was removed from
the precinct
if 3 Myrnong
Crescent, 19 and 21 Power Avenue in Toorak had been assessed and found to be
individually significant, they would not
have gained additional significance
because of their location in a precinct with high quality interwar residential
development.
It is therefore appropriate to compare the subject land
with properties that have been appropriately assessed and found to be
individually
significant places including those identified as significant in a
heritage precinct.
The Panel has taken into account the following conclusions when considering
whether the subject land achieves Criteria A and D.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
Stonnington
has many fine examples of interwar houses in the Old English Revival style which
sets a higher local threshold than areas
in Melbourne where there are fewer and
less comparable examples.
subject land should be comparable with, if not better than, an appropriate
sample of comparable properties in Stonnington.
comparative analysis did not include an appropriate representation of
Stonnington’s Old English Revival style houses which
resulted in a
disproportionate assessment of the subject land.
is appropriate to compare the subject land with a property in a heritage
precinct that has been appropriately assessed and identified
significant.
3.2 Criterion A (Historical significance)
(i) The issue
issue is whether the subject land achieves Planning Practice Note 1 Criterion
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Subject land owner submission
Criterion A, the property must be of:
Importance to the course or
pattern of our cultural or natural history – historical significance.
The key word is
“importance”.
The C387melb
Planning Panel stated:
Criterion A requires a place to be of
importance to the course or pattern of our cultural or natural history
(Panel’s emphasis).
There is some risk that if the pattern or theme is too generic any building
consistent with it could meet the criterion. This clearly
is not satisfactory,
the theme or pattern in itself needs to be important to the municipality and
then the place needs to clearly
demonstrate it.
The C320ston
Planning Panel emphasised that merely being an example of a theme is not enough
to make a property ‘important’
for the purposes of Criterion A.
It must be shown
that a property is better than the typical interwar Old English style dwelling
in Stonnington, having regard to the
high standard established by existing
properties in the Heritage Overlay.
Council relied on Dr
Paul’s evidence that the subject land achieves Criterion A, and noted
supporting submissions regarding
the property’s historical
significance.
Ms Baker’s expert evidence
The subject
satisfy Criterion A at a local level
- is associated
with interwar development in Stonnington, however, all buildings represent the
period of development in which they
were constructed
- is a result of
this pattern of subdivision, it is otherwise undistinguished in this
The house may be
of some historical interest for how it testifies to a major phase of development
that occurred in first few decades
of the twentieth century when many of
Armadale's large mansion estates were subdivided to create prestigious
residential enclaves
(Thematic Environmental History 8.1.3) – this alone
is insufficient to elevate the place to local level significance.
If it were, many
interwar dwellings in Stonnington would satisfy Criterion A to the extent they
reflect the subdivision and redevelopment
of the large nineteenth century
estates which occurred during the interwar period.
The Hampden Road
Precinct (HO136) is identified as being significant against Criterion A for,
among other things, testifying to the
subdivision of mansion estates, however
the alignment and subdivision of Hampden Road itself provides an understanding
of this history,
as does including the original mansion estate in the
archaeological potential associated with the Victorian mansion that once
partially stood in the north-eastern part of the subject
land is not relevant
when considering whether to apply the Heritage Overlay.
citation’s comparative analysis includes three sites of individual
heritage significance which are not included in the Heritage
Overlay under
Criterion A.
Mr Wright was
commissioned to design the house on the subject land, but he had no apparent
involvement in the Avalon Estate subdivision.
Wright’s role in shaping Huntingfield Road has little bearing on the
subject land.
Mr Wright was
personally responsible for the Huntingfield Road subdivision of the former
mansion sites and designed many of the buildings
subsequently constructed on
those sites.
The Huntingfield
Road estate more meaningfully represents Mr Wright’s role in transforming
the municipality, as recognised in
the HO347 Statement of
Significance.
Dr Paul’s expert evidence
The subject land
is clearly associated with the following historic themes in the Thematic
Environmental History:
- 8. Building
- 8.1.3 The end
of an era – mansion estate subdivisions in the twentieth century
- 8.2 Middle
class suburbs and the suburban ideal
- 8.4 Creating
Australia’s most ‘designed’ suburbs
- 8.7.1 Creating
leafy suburbs.
The subject land
demonstrates:
- how Victorian
mansion estates were subdivided and original homes rebuilt in the new style
- the continued
culture of architect design which is another important theme in
Stonnington’s history (Theme 8.4)
class’ is a very broad term, particularly in an age when almost everyone
sees themselves or aspires to it.
He applied the
adjective ‘affluent’ to describe the character of the middle class
in the area to distinguish them from
a broader middle class – the kind of
middle class people who were “
dentists, race horse owners, who might
afford to build a ‘high status’ large house across two lots on a
commanding and
particularly prestigious site
Nonetheless,
they were suburban houses distinct from the very grand and expansive Victorian
estates that characterised the ‘upper
class’ mansions with
aristocratic pretensions.
Expert response to evidence
Ms Baker’s response to Dr Paul’s expert
The subject
house’s historical association with the development of the area and its
estates is no stronger than any other interwar
building constructed on land
subdivided from a Victorian mansion estate.
Many, if not
most, interwar houses in Stonnington were constructed on land subdivided from
early mansion estates.
individually significant houses cited in the comparative analysis are identified
as having been built on land subdivided from
nineteenth century mansions, but
none (including 50 Hopetoun Road) are identified as satisfying Criterion A
(historical significance).
Dr Paul’s response to Ms
Baker’s expert evidence:
confident the house is ‘better than typical’ and an important
example of the style given its favourable comparison
to other houses of the
Expert responses to questions at the Hearing
A property needs
to demonstrate importance to a historical association to achieve Criterion A
rather than simple connection to the
subdivided from the former estate align with the theme of a former subdivided
The subject land
is not one of the largest in the area, and it does not gain more significance
for retaining its driveway.
The subject
land’s layout reflects the identified theme but this does not translate to
being significant.
The focus should
be on an Old English style with a picturesque composition and fine
(iii) Discussion
Every building in Stonnington designed in the Old
English Revival style and constructed on a lot subdivided during the interwar
from a former mansion estate meets the description set out for Criterion
A in the Statement of Significance. The key is whether
the subject land is
sufficiently important to the course or pattern of Stonnington’s cultural
The subject land is most closely aligned with Thematic Environmental History
8.1.3 (The end
of an era – mansion estate subdivisions in the twentieth century
8.2 (Middle
class suburbs and the suburban ideal).
This is because the subject
land is one of the hundreds of interwar houses created from a subdivision from a
larger estate that had
a Victorian era mansion. However, this is not enough to
make it important to Stonnington.
There should be something distinguishable about the subject land for it to
achieve Criterion A as an individual heritage place. Otherwise,
different to one of the properties that contribute to the Hampden Road Precinct,
noting the subject land is physically separated
from that precinct.
The Panel agrees with the subject land owner submission that the Criterion A
assessment should have regard to the high standard established
by existing
properties in the Heritage Overlay. The subject land’s association as one
of the properties subdivided from a
Victorian era estate is unremarkable.
The subject house has relatively constrained Old English Revival form and
detailing. It does not compare well with existing interwar
heritage properties
in Stonnington, including those in the comparative analysis, that have a
stronger and more significant historical
association with “
development
of affluent middle class suburbs
”. As noted in the Thematic
Environmental History, the affluent middle class had well designed and presented
of their success. This is better associated with existing and
finer examples of interwar Old English Revival houses found in Stonnington.
Finer does not mean grander.
The Panel considers the subject house is not significant for its historical
association with Thematic Environmental History section
8.4 (Creating
Australia’s most ‘designed’ suburbs). There is no evidence
the subject land’s clients encouraged
their architect to explore
experimental or innovative design (Thematic Environmental History section
8.4.2), as Mr Wright’s
design is broadly replicated in other houses in the
area. This is not a house that Mr Wright designed and built to live in
Environmental History section 8.4.3).
The scale of the subject land and house should not be interpreted as adding
significance to its historical association (Criterion
A). These attributes
alone do not contribute to its significance.
The subject house itself does not provide insight into how Stonnington
created a leafy suburb (Thematic Environmental History section
8.7.1). The
Hampden Road Precinct (HO136) more clearly demonstrates an important historical
association through its collection of
houses forming part of the subdivided 1929
Avalon estate. The Precinct is the last remaining intact section of the estate
15 properties along Hampden Road and four along Dandenong Road bound
by a common streetscape with wide avenues and large canopy trees,
with what is expressed in the Thematic Environmental History.
The information presented to the Panel, including the heritage citation and
State of Significance, did not persuade it that the subject
house has enough
local historical significance to achieve Criterion A.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
subject land does not achieve Planning Practice Note 1 Criterion A.
3.3 Criterion D (Representativeness)
(i) The issue
issue is whether the subject land achieves Planning Practice Note 1 Criterion
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Subject landowner submission
Relied on Ms
Baker’s expert evidence and considered the subject land did not achieve
Criterion D.
Dr Paul has
conceded the standard for applying the Heritage Overlay to interwar houses in
Stonnington is ‘high’.
expert report refers to the subject house having a picturesque and asymmetric
composition which does not appear in
the comparative
Council submission
Relied on Dr
Paul’s expert evidence that the subject land achieves Criterion D.
The heritage
citation confirms the subject house is significant as a fine representative
example of an Old English Revival style interwar
period house and as an
outstanding example of Arnaud Wright’s work in this
Ms Baker’s expert evidence
The subject
house does not satisfy the relevant local-level threshold in relation to
Criterion D at a level of individual significance.
Statement of Significant assessment for Criterion D, it is unclear whether the
subject land is considered:
fine representative example of an Old English Revival styled interwar period
outstanding example of the work in this style of the notable local architect
Arnaud Wright
Regarding the
former point:
- all intact
historical places represent the period and style in which they were
constructed
constructed during the interwar period is representative of this era
- such a point
is so universally applicable that it alone is insufficient to elevate a place to
the threshold of individual significance.
All historical
places are representative of ‘a type’ so representativeness alone
cannot be considered a core measure of
significance.
The critical
question is what elevates a particular building to the threshold of individual
significance.
subject house is representative of interwar development and is also a
representative example of the work of architect and
builder Arnaud Wright, they
do not intrinsically elevate the building to a level of individual
significance.
The contention
the subject land is an ‘outstanding’ example of Arnaud
Wright’s work should not simply be considered
in the context of
Wright’s work alone, but should be considered in the context of interwar
Old English Revival dwellings in
Stonnington.
As a rule, care
must be taken to avoid engineering a narrow theme, as it risks distorting the
point at which local-level threshold
Constructing an
historical theme of multiple qualifiers risks excluding most other places in the
municipality from comparison.
Even if the
comparative analysis were limited only to Arnaud Wright’s work, the
subject house is not an outstanding example
of Wright’s work in this
The subject
- is almost a
mirror image of Arnaud Wright’s design at 21 Power Avenue, Toorak, which
was both constructed around the same
time and identified as a B graded building,
as noted in the heritage citation
- shares many
similarities with the dwelling a 3 Myrnong Crescent, Toorak, which its design is
similar to others in Stonnington that
gain significance through their heritage
If a building
‘fine’ or ‘outstanding’ example’ of a particular
Criterion E (aesthetic
significance)
- is significant
for its association with a particular architect or developer, it should be
assessed against Criterion H (associative
significance).
The heritage
citation notes the threshold for a house in Stonnington to meet the threshold of
individual significance against Criterion
E is particularly high.
The subject
provide an equal, let alone better, representation of Arnaud Wright’s work
shaping the municipality in this period
- is simply an
example of his architecture.
Mr Wright was
one of numerous architects working in the area, and his association with the
subject land does not elevate its significance.
The C320ston
Planning Panel found the subject land’s garden was not of any heritage
significance in its own right and was typical
of the period.
Paul’s expert evidence
The subject land
demonstrates a high degree of integrity and representativeness that meets the
local threshold of significance.
Representative
characteristics of the subject house’s style include
picturesque composition of the gabled wings and asymmetric
composition”.
The comparative
analysis finds it compares well to significant representatives of Mr Wright and
Old English Revival houses in Stonnington
and is strongly representative of Mr
Wright’s interpretation of the style.
The subject
house’s representative characteristics include:
- prominent
gables with slit brick details
- steep roof
forms with terracotta shingles
- tall brick
chimneys with corbelled brickwork
- decorated
external chimney breast including ‘S’ detail
- flush gable
- bell cast
- corbelled
gable eaves
- combination of
imitation lime wash walls with clinker brick detailing
- diamond and
multi pane windows
- bay windows
- arched doorway
with gabled porch
- double hung
sash windows
- brick on edge
- porch with
- basketweave
brick details.
The subject
distinguished among Mr Wright’s Old English designs by its large scale and
spacious garden setting with curved driveway,
tall chimneys and terracotta
shingle roof with finely detailed eaves
display half timbering details, which from the comparative analysis appears to
have been Mr Wright’s interpretation
and application of the style
Wright’s style instead used brick, particularly the clinker brick
fashionable at the time, to provide visual interest and
decorative details,
particularly to the gable ends and corners.
The importance
of the house as a representative of the style is established by its particularly
well resolved and fully detailed design,
consistent with the other significant
graded house at 21 Power Avenue which incorporates terracotta shingles and flush
detailed gable
The subject
house is larger than 21 Power Avenue, in a more imposing position and fuller
garden setting.
The landscape
fabric has been altered in the post-war period, but the scale, position and
setting of the house within a garden nonetheless
contributes to its
importance.
The subject
- appears to
have been the first of this series of similar houses to have been completed and
may have served as the prototype for
subsequent designs
- presents as
the most complete and grandest of the group.
English Revival style house of the interwar period in general, the importance of
the house rests both in its combination
of representative elements listed above,
and as the best example of the houses in the style designed by one of its
significant practitioners
in the municipality.
Relevant to
Criterion D, is that builder-architects like Mr Wright could appeal to the
pretension and budgetary concerns of the interwar
middle class residents of the
area who, while affluent, often had more constraints than the owners of the
grand Victorian estates
they were replacing.
Expert responses to evidence
Ms Baker’s response to Dr Paul:
Plans for 3
Myrnong Crescent, Toorak held at the Stonnington History Centre are dated 1932
(before the subject house was constructed).
chimneys, terracotta roof shingles (also widely used on Georgian Revival
buildings), scale and siting on block are not intrinsically
a measure of
significance.
particularly the flush bell eaves is not an element in itself that would elevate
the building to the level of individual
significance.
A place does not
have to be better than all other places in the Heritage Overlay to meet a
threshold of significance, however it has
not been established the subject house
is better than typical of its class.
The subject
handsome, is a conventional example of a larger interwar house design in the
English Domestic Revival style
- does not meet
the prerequisite threshold to be identified as individually significant
- belongs to a
category of heritage buildings that would typically only warrant protection in a
Dr Paul’s response to Ms Baker:
Conceded the
subject house was not the first of similar houses in the area.
The subject
house’s significance as a representative Old English Revival house is
intrinsically related to its significance
as an important representative of Mr
Wright’s work – the two are connected, as Mr Wright was an important
practitioner
of the revival styles in the municipality.
significant houses by Mr Wright in the comparative analysis, even if they are in
a heritage precinct, provides valid and
important comparison to assess the
relative importance of the subject property as an example of the architect's
work and the Old
English style broadly.
Continued to
consider the subject house is of a higher calibre than a house that is only
contributory in a precinct or only significant
to the precinct.
The subject
land’s better than typical characteristics outlined in the comparative
analysis include its scale, setting and size,
as well as the overall composition
of its identified details.
Expert responses to questions at the Hearing
Criterion E
calls for particular aesthetics, whereas Criterion D (Representative) can be
conventional.
It is common to
assess both Old English Revival style and an architect’s work
A significant
building in a heritage precinct would be individually significant outside a
considers a building’s setting rather than the property size.
Agree there
needs to be care to identify a cultural class that is not a narrow theme, but it
also should not be too broad otherwise
it will not be meaningful.
The subject
house’s elements collectively are a measure of its representative
significance.
Acknowledged his
expert report does not refer to houses in the
City of Stonnington Interwar
Houses Study – Stage 3 Background Report September 2015
The front fence
does not appear to be original.
Ms Baker – Criteria D and E
can be confused with each other and are often conflated.
Further submission – Subject land owner
Mr Wright is found to not be sufficiently important to justify defining a class
by reference to him, then the subject land cannot
achieve Criterion D.
This is because
there is no evidence that Dr Paul’s comparative analysis (of which
two-thirds are designs by Mr Wright and one-third
are not in the Old English
Revival style) represents the broader class of Old English Revival buildings in
Stonnington.
(iii) Discussion
The Statement of Significance identifies the subject
house as a “
fine representative example of an Old English Revival
styled interwar period house in the municipality and as an outstanding example
of the work in this style of the notable local architect Arnaud W
As a highly intact building, the Panel agrees with Dr Paul that the subject
house, like other houses of the same style and era in
Stonnington, has the
characteristics identified in the heritage citation and in his evidence.
Consistent with Ms Baker’s view, all intact houses constructed during
the interwar period represent their period and style.
There should be a point
of difference, otherwise referred to as the ‘local heritage
threshold’ to achieve Criterion
D (Representativeness). The comparative
analysis plays an important role in determining this.
As discussed in Chapter
comparative analysis should have included a representative range such heritage
houses in Stonnington. Combining multiple qualifiers
the house style and
era and outstanding example of Mr Wright’s work
inappropriately:
narrowed the
theme and distorted the comparative analysis and local heritage threshold
potentially better examples of interwar Old English Revival
The subject house is simply an Old English Revival interwar
house that was subdivided from a grander Victorian estate and should have
compared accordingly. This is important in Stonnington because it represents
the evolution from upper class mansions on grand
estates to large middle class
As recognised in submissions and expert evidence, Stonnington has a notably
higher local significance threshold for individually significant
Old English
Revival interwar houses than in many other parts of Melbourne. This is because
it has many more comparable and potentially
better examples ranging from the
larger mansions to the relatively less grand houses, many of which were not
included in the comparative
analysis. This higher threshold should not be
interpreted as being ‘too high’ or including only the best
The threshold for local heritage significance distinguishes interwar houses
which are important in demonstrating the principal characteristics
of a class or
cultural place from all other interwar houses. Narrowing the theme and not
comparing the subject land with a representative
sample of properties reduces
this threshold and risks applying the Heritage Overlay to properties that are
not important to Stonnington’s
history or do not achieve Criterion D.
This is what has occurred with the assessment for the subject land. The
subject house’s design composition is relatively conventional
important decorative details and asymmetric form found in better representative
examples in Stonnington. These missing
elements do not make the house a more
‘humble’ example, but rather, unimportant in representing its style
Irrespective, the subject land does not compare well with three of the
properties in the comparative analysis. As identified by Ms
Baker, 28 Albany
Road, Toorak; 46 Heyington Place, Toorak; and 8 Monaro Road, Malvern have Old
English Revival style details that
have been skilfully designed and
Further examples in Dr Paul’s expert evidence persuaded the Panel that
the subject land would compare less favourably if similar
and better examples in
Stonnington were included in the comparative analysis. They include 407
Glenferrie Road, Malvern; 2 Ledbury
Court, Toorak and the humbler 1 Henderson
Avenue, Malvern. The subject house is most comparable with 1 Henderson Avenue,
the latter has an asymmetrical form and details that better represent an
Old English Revival house in Stonnington during the interwar
The Panel does not agree with Dr Paul that the interwar affluent middle class
residents with more financial constraints than owners
of Victorian estates is a
reason to justify a more constrained design. The better examples of interwar
houses included and excluded
from the comparative analysis were also of affluent
middle class residents with similar financial constraints. This simply makes
the subject house a less remarkable example of its class.
The Statement of Significance’s reference to the subject house being
an outstanding example of the work in this style of the notable local
architect Arnaud W Wright
” adds confusion regarding its purported
significance. The Panel agrees with Ms Baker that the direct association to the
relates to Criterion H and the house’s particular aesthetic
characteristics as an ‘outstanding example’ relates
to Criterion E.
The heritage citation found these criteria did not apply to the subject
Dr Paul found the importance of the subject house rests both in its
identified representative elements and as the best example of
houses designed by
one of its significant practitioners in the municipality. The Panel is not
persuaded the identified representative
elements are comparable with or better
than other individually significant heritage places in Stonnington. The
composition of its
details are:
unremarkable and
insufficient to consider the subject house as individually significant
comparable with the contributory houses in the Hampden Road
Asymmetry is an important characteristic for an Old
English Revival house representing its class. The subject house presents in a
generally symmetrical form, though one of its front chimneys is aligned to the
front façade rather than the side. This difference
is insufficient to
offset the overall dominant symmetrical form. Old English Revival style is more
aligned with asymmetry found
in houses in the comparative analysis – 28
Albany Road, Toorak; 46 Heyington Place, Toorak; 8 Monaro Road, Malvern; 407
Road, Malvern; 2 Ledbury, Toorak.
The heritage citation does not include information that support claims the
house was designed by one of the municipalities most significant
practitioners
or a notable architect. The City of Malvern Heritage Study (1992) states
Little is known about Arnaud Wright...
”. The Thematic
Environmental History does not refer to Mr Wright when referring to
Stonnington’s notable architects:
Ballantyne and hare, Joseph Plottel, Marcus Martin and the influential Robert
Haddon were among other notable architects whose work
is well represented in the
study area. The architects built predominantly in the fashionable architectural
styles of Toorak in the
1920s and ‘30s, which were Georgian revival and
Old English.
The Panel agrees with the subject land owner that there is no explanation
regarding the precise nature of Mr Wright’s involvement
association has been included as a qualification. Mr Wright’s association
with the subject house should not be
considered when assessing whether the
subject house is significant as an individual place that achieves Criterion
It is unsurprising the subject house is comparable with contributory houses
in the Hampden Road Precinct (HO136). They are large
properties with large
interwar houses surrounded by generous gardens. This is because the subject
land is a disconnected remnant
from the same subdivided estate as those houses.
However, the subject house is being assessed on whether it as an individual
place rather than its contribution to the precinct’s heritage
significance.
While the original owner purchased two lots (13-15 Avalon Road) to build
their home, this does not elevate the property’s importance
significance.
All the large houses in the subdivided estate were surrounded by generous
gardens. The subject land has a significantly deeper property
through good
subdivision fortune, being wedged between Hampden Road and Barnato Grove
properties. It is unclear whether siting the
house further back to take
advantage of the deeper property was at the request of the owner or something
proposed by the architect.
In either case, the relatively deeper setback and
larger front garden setting are not significant in themselves.
The Statement of Significance acknowledges the landscape fabric is not
original. This is affirmed by:
the City of
Prahran Significant Tree and Garden Study
which states the garden
was created by the owner in the 1960s incorporating already mature
trees and is a classic vernacular design
the design and
materials which were popular during the 1960s – the ‘crazy
paving’ on the driveway and multi-coloured
stone on the retaining
The Statement of Significance identifies the ‘expansive
garden setting’ with the curving driveway as contributing to the
place’s significance. The Panel disagrees. The threshold for an
individually significant heritage place is much higher than
contributing to a heritage precinct. Accordingly, the post-war driveway and
garden retaining wall finishes would have
to sensitively respond to the style
and era that is sought to be represented – Old English Revival style
interwar period.
The 1960s garden finishes do not achieve this. The Panel was
not presented with photographs which showed the garden’s original
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
multiple qualifiers
(the house style and era and outstanding example of Mr
Wright’s work)
has inappropriately:
- narrowed the
theme and distorted the comparative analysis and local heritage threshold
potentially better examples of Old English Revival interwar
The subject land
does not compare well with:
- 28 Albany
Road, Toorak; 46 Heyington Place, Toorak; and 8 Monaro Road, Malvern that were
included in the comparative analysis
- 407 Glenferrie
Road, Malvern; 2 Ledbury Court, Toorak; and 1 Henderson Avenue, Malvern included
in Dr Paul’s expert evidence.
The subject land
does not achieve Planning Practice Note 1 Criterion
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Council Part A submission
Stonnington City Council (Council)
Expert report – Dr Aron Paul
Expert report – Carolynne Baker
Subject land owner
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (Version 2)
Council Part B submission
Hearing presentation – Dr Aron Paul
Dr Aron Paul response to Carolynne Baker expert report
Carolynne Baker response to Dr Aron Paul expert report
Subject land owner
Subject land owner submission
Subject land owner
Memorandum: 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale and 44 Murphy Street, South Yarra
(Bryce Raworth, 20 Apr 2018)
Subject land owner
Memorandum: 13-15 Avalon Road, Armadale
(Bryce Raworth, 8 Aug
Subject land owner
Stonnington Amendment C320ston expert report – Michelle Bashta (Jul
Subject land owner
Stonnington Amendment C320ston expert report – Peter Lovell (Jul
Subject land owner
Stonnington Amendment C320ston expert report – Natica Schmeder (Jul
Subject land owner
City of Stonnington – Heritage grading definitions
Subject land owner
Council Part C submission with attachments:
a) Armadale Heritage Review: Volume 1 (Extent Heritage, 2024)
b) HO180 Statement of Significance (Power Street Precinct)
c) HO143 Statement of Significance (Montalto Avenue Precinct)
d) HO347 Statement of Significance (Huntingfield Road Precinct)
e) Malvern Heritage Review: Volume 1 (GJM Heritage, 2022)
f) HO182 Statement of Significance (Moorakyne Stonington Precinct)
g) City of Malvern Heritage Study 1992 – Arnaud E Wright extract
h) City of Prahran Significant Tree and Garden Study – 15 Avalon Road
up citation for 13-15 Avalon Road prepared by Trethowan Architecture, with
additions marked up by Dr Paul
j) HO333 Statement of Significance (14 Power Street, Toorak)
Subject land owner response to Council Part C submission
Subject land owner
Letter – procedural issues and attached draft heritage
Subject land owner
Council response to Document 18
Subject land was not
identified as a candidate for assessment
Citation revised to comply
with Council’s 18 December 2023 resolution
Council emphasis
Documents 17(a) to (j)
Document 17h
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.96 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter