URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JJV [2025] VMHT 6 (4 April 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Community clinic
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Joel Orenstein (Legal Member)
Joanna Selman (Psychiatrist Member)
Ben Ilsley (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from another location
With online video
With online video
Isobel Lynch
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
With online video from another location
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal revoked your
treatment order.
This statement of reasons:
hearing your legal representative requested a written explanation of the
Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your
treating team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you applied to have
your Treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not an order should remain in place.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – you told the Tribunal that it was very important to you to
retain responsibility for your treatment decisions.
restriction – you explained you wanted to continue with treatment and the
order was not needed for this to happen. You
pointed out that you have the
support of your family as well as plans to regularly see your private
psychologist and general practitioner
carers – we considered the views and support of your family in relation to
your care and treatment and noted that
they were supportive of you managing your
health without the need for a treatment order.
Dignity of risk
– we considered the risks involved if you were to be responsible for your
own treatment decisions, and whether
such risks are reasonable considering the
duty of care of the health service.
The Tribunal must also give
proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory
treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under the
Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Preliminary issue
Application to deny access to
The mental health service must give you access to any
documents in its possession that are connected to the hearing at least two
days before the hearing. If the treating psychiatrist believes
information in those documents may cause serious harm to you or another
they can apply to the Tribunal to deny you access to those
Your treating psychiatrist applied to deny you access to a
certain document. The Tribunal conducted a preliminary hearing to decide
you could see those documents. Your lawyer attended this hearing.
Tribunal decided by a majority decision that the document should be withheld
from you because disclosure of the information may
cause serious harm to you or
another person. The Tribunal explained this decision to you when you joined the
4. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read, you accepted
mental illness and require treatment to prevent a serious deterioration in your
mental health. You also agreed that you
would receive treatment, however you
stated that this could be done as a voluntary patient.
The Tribunal must
also have regard to the views of your carer. Your father told the Tribunal that
he supported your wish to receive
treatment as a voluntary patient.
5. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
You have a history of interaction with mental
health services since 2017 and have had four hospital admissions since that
latest admission was in October 2024, where you presented as
depressed with paranoid, bizarre and persecutorial thoughts.
You did not
contest this criterion and agreed that you experience a significant disturbance
of thought and mood and stated that the
anti-psychotic medication you were on
currently on helps you.
The Tribunal was satisfied that you have a mental
illness characterised by a significant disturbance of thought and mood.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
The treating team shared their view that you
require treatment to prevent a serious deterioration in your mental health,
stating that
you were in the early stages of your recovery and that they
suspected that you have had an untreated psychosis for some time. They
stated that without immediate treatment there was a risk to you through
self-isolation and self-harm, as well as a risk of harm
to others, as you have
previously had homicidal thoughts towards your parents.
Although you
disputed that you have had any recent homicidal thoughts, you acknowledged the
risks in relation to the serious deterioration
in your mental health should you
not continue treatment, and did not contest this criterion.
The Tribunal
accepted the evidence provided by yourself and your treating team that you
needed immediate treatment to prevent a serious
deterioration in your mental
health, and serious harm to you. For this reason, the Tribunal was also
satisfied in relation to this
criterion and did not need to make a conclusion as
to whether there was a risk of harm to others.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
At the time of the hearing the treating team was
providing treatment in the form of medication and case management; accordingly,
were satisfied that you would receive immediate treatment if on a treatment
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
The treating team were concerned about the risks
should you disengage with treatment as a voluntary patient. Although they
acknowledged
that you are doing well and have transitioned to a stable dose of
oral medication over the last four weeks, they also stated that
previously self-ceased medication in the community and that you are still in the
early stages of your recovery. They further
questioned whether you had insight
into your psychosis and therefore whether you would stick to treatment as
recommended. The treating
team recommend that you have 12 months of
anti-psychotic medication in total with support from the community team, and
stated their
view that a treatment order would be a protective factor in
ensuring your adherence to your treatment.
Contrary to this, you stated
that you would continue to take the prescribed dose of medication now that you
have been able to successfully
transition to oral medicine, acknowledging that
the medication is helpful to get rid of bizarre thinking and to keep you well.
also clarified that you are comfortable with your mother's role in
supervising you taking your tablets. You further advised that
you have been
stable in the community for four months, and have now engaged a psychologist in
the community who you see weekly. You
stated that you would continue to meet
with the community team fortnightly and attend on your GP also should you become
a voluntary
patient. You have recommenced studies and have the support of your
parents. Your father told the Tribunal that he supported your
voluntary and that this might be an important and necessary step for your
You acknowledged that there was no practical difference
between the treatment you would have being on a treatment order and following
through with the plan as a voluntary patient. However, you explained it was
important to you to make treatment decisions on your
own free will. You stated
that in a symbolic sense, becoming a voluntary patient would be an endorsement
of you and you state that
this makes a difference to your well-being, as you
would have a different perception of the treatment if you felt that you were
responsible
for decision-making.
The Tribunal considered carefully the
evidence as to risk identified by the treating team and the principles under the
Act and ultimately
agreed with you that there was a less restrictive means than
a treatment order that would enable you to receive immediate treatment.
Tribunal was persuaded by your evidence that you would continue treatment and
engagement with the treating team, as well as evidence
of the supports you have
in the community from your parents to assist you to engage and also to identify
early warning signs of any
potential relapse.
Consequently, the Tribunal
was not satisfied in relation to this criterion.
6. Decision
Given the Tribunal was not satisfied all the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal revoked your treatment
Date of determination: 05-03-2025
[Signed by the legal
Joel Orenstein
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 4 April 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143
Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (518 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter