URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tony Zoobi at Zoobibi premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 31 (5 October 2021)
Decisions and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for the internal review of a
decision by a delegate of the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation under section
44 to refuse a joint application by Eclectic Dreams Pty
Ltd and Mr Philip Newman as liquidator of Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
section 32 to transfer Restaurant and Cafe Licence no 32359722 in respect of the
premises known as Zoobibi, located at 646
Burwood Road, Hawthorn East from Mr
Newman as liquidator of the then licensee Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in liquidation) to
Eclectic Dreams
Commission:
Mr Ross Kennedy, Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Hearing
5 October 2021
Date of Decision:
5 October 2021
Date of Reasons:
18 November 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application to transfer the
Signed: Ross Kennedy
31 March 2021, the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
received a joint application by Eclectic
Dreams Pty Ltd and Mr Philip Newman as liquidator of Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in
liquidation) under
Liquor Control Reform Act
to transfer Restaurant and
Cafe Licence no 32359722 (
) for the premises known as
Zoobibi, located at 646 Burwood Road, Hawthorn East (
from Mr Newman as liquidator of the then licensee, Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in
liquidation), to Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd
Application
reason for the Original Application was because Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd
purchased the cafe and home décor business located
at the Premises from
Mr Newman as the liquidator of Zoobibi Pty Ltd in December 2020 and proposes to
continue sell liquor on the
Premises as is authorised under the Licence. If the
Commission were to grant the Original Application, Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd would
be the new holder of the Licence.
sole director of Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd, Mr Tony Zoobi, is the former director
of the then licensee, Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in liquidation).
Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd
leases the Premises and has been trading there as a café and home
décor business since 24 December
2020. Liquor has been sold on the
Premises as is authorised under the
Original Application included:
(a) an application form lodged on 26 March 2021;
(b) a further application form lodged on 31 March 2021;
(c) current and historical Australian Securities and Investment Commission
company extracts of Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd;
(d) a certificate of completion of an approved responsible service of alcohol
) program by Mr Zoobi, dated 7 October 2020; and
(e) a copy of the winding up order against Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in liquidation) in
the Supreme Court of Victoria, dated 20 November 2020.
accordance with section 33(1) of the LCR Act, a copy of the Original Application
was served on a Victoria Police licensing inspector
Victoria Police
20 April 2021. On 14 May 2021, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it
did not wish to object to the Original Application
3 September 2021, a delegate of the Commission (
determined to refuse the Original Application pursuant to section 44(2)(b)(v)
Original Decision
) on the ground that the Original
Application had not been made in accordance with the LCR Act. Specifically, the
Delegate noted that
the required outstanding information had not been submitted
by the relevant due dates namely:
(a) a New Entrant Training Certificate, or otherwise known as 'Licensees’
First Steps', for Mr Zoobi;
(b) a Declaration of Right to Occupy Notice declaring the right of Eclectic
Dreams Pty Ltd to legally occupy the Premises; and
(c) a copy of the executed lease for the Premises specifying Eclectic Dreams Pty
Ltd as the tenant.
Application for Internal Review
15 September 2021, Eclectic Dreams Pty Ltd (
the Applicant
) applied for
internal review of the Original Decision (
Review Application
As part of the Review Application, the Applicant provided the outstanding
information referred to in paragraph 6 above on 20 September
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review
2 of Part 9 governs internal review applications. Under section 152, the
decision made by the Delegate in the Original Application
is a reviewable
decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for a review of that
decision. The Review Application was
made pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
the application for the transfer of the restaurant and cafe licence, and if so,
whether to do so subject to
conditions;
to grant the
application.
Determination
of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for the transfer of a restaurant and cafe licence
may be contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section
3(1), an uncontested
application is defined as:
an application for the grant,
variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which
no objection is received
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in
that Division for that objection (or that period as extended under section
Review Application is uncontested as no objections were received under Division
5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division (or the period as
extended under section 174).
Exercising the internal review
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 5 of the VCGLR
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) and provide that:
“(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
4(2) of the LCR Act provides further that:
intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction
and duty conferred or imposed by this
Act must be exercised and performed with
due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the misuse and
abuse of alcohol.”
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any matter the
Commission considers relevant, make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the application.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
44(2) provides a list of the grounds on which the Commission may refuse to grant
an uncontested application.
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the ultimate determination
of an uncontested
application is to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at the
discretion of the Commission with reference
to the objects of the LCR
Conduct of an inquiry
34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to that Act, gambling legislation or
liquor legislation, the Commission may conduct
any inquiry in any manner it
considers appropriate.
the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides that the
Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply with the
rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials received
by the Delegate. The Commission also received and
considered the following
(a) the Original Decision, dated 3 September 2021;
(b) the Review Application received by the Commission on 15 September 2021;
(c) a certificate of completion certifying that Mr
Zoobi completed ‘New Entrant Training’, dated 18 November 2020;
(d) a declaration of the Applicant’s right to occupy the Premises, dated
20 September 2021;
(e) a copy of the executed lease for the Premises that specifies the Applicant
as the tenant, dated 5 March 2021; and
(f) correspondence between the Applicant and the Delegate following the Original
On-the-Papers determination of the Review Application
5 October 2021, the Commission informed the Applicant that it was inclined to
determine the Review Application ‘on the papers’,
without a hearing
or an appearance by the Applicant and the Applicant did not object to this. On
the same day, the Commission convened
to determine the Review Application
‘on the papers’.
Reasons for decision on
Issues for determination on review
mentioned in paragraph 18 above, the Commission may refuse to grant an
uncontested application on any of the grounds in section
44(2) when making its
decision in relation to the Review Application.
Suitability
44(2)(a) provides that the Commission may refuse to grant an uncontested
application on the ground that the proposed transferee
is not a suitable person
to hold or carry on business under the licence. When the Original Application
was served on Victoria Police,
no objection was made on the ground that the
Applicant was not a suitable person to hold or carry on business under the
Further to this, the information before the Commission discloses no
matters relevant to the suitability of the Applicant or its sole
director, Mr
the lack of objection by Victoria Police and the absence of material suggesting
that the Applicant is not a suitable person
to hold the Licence, the Commission
does not consider that there is any basis to refuse the Review Application
pursuant to section
44(2)(a) of the LCR Act.
Commission may refuse, pursuant to section 44(2)(b), to grant an uncontested
application on the ground that, among other things,
it would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises to which an
application relates are situated.
Commission notes that there has been no compliance or enforcement action taken
by the Commission in respect of these licensed
premises for non-compliance with
licence conditions and that there is no suggestion that the overall operation of
the Premises will
markedly change if the transfer of the Licence was
Furthermore, there is
no information before the Commission to indicate that the sole director of the
Applicant, Mr Zoobi, has any
history of conducting licensed premises in a manner
which detracts from the amenity of areas in which those premises are
Accordingly,
the Commission does not consider this to be a ground to refuse the Review
Application.
Other factors
Commission has also considered whether granting the Review Application would be
conducive to, or encourage, the misuse or abuse
of alcohol. Noting the
compliance history as discussed in paragraph 28 above, and the type of licence
sought to be transferred, in
which the predominant activity must be the
preparation and serving of meals, as well the existing hours of trade being to 9
all days other than Saturday which is to 10 pm, the Commission has nothing
before it to raise concerns that granting the Review Application
would lead to
the potential misuse and abuse of alcohol.
Commission may also consider whether to refuse the Review Application on grounds
that the sole director of the Applicant does
not have adequate knowledge of the
LCR Act. Noting that the RSA Certificate and New Entrant Training Certificate
for Mr Zoobi were
provided, the Commission does not consider this to be a ground
upon which to refuse the Review Application.
Decision on review
Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets all legislative
requirements set out above concerning the transfer of
the Licence. Accordingly,
based on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that granting
the Review Application is
appropriate in the circumstances.
Commission has therefore determined to set aside the Original Decision and grant
the Review Application.
The preceding 33 paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr Ross Kennedy (Chair), Ms Danielle
Huntersmith (Commissioner),
and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Licence 32359722 was issued on
24 November 2020 to the then licensee, Zoobibi Pty Ltd (in liquidation). Mr
Philip Newman became the
endorsed person on the licence on 9 December 2020 in
the capacity as liquidator.
This is discussed further in
paragraph 28 below.
A reminder email to lodge the
outstanding information was sent to the Applicant on 12 August 2021.
Section 157(2) to (5) of the
LCR Act and section 25(3) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
(VCGLR Act) further prescribe the manner in which the
Commission is to undertake internal reviews.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act sections 44 and
Conversely, a “contested
application” is defined in section 3(1) of the LCR Act as being
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections are
received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for those
objections (or that period as extended under
section 174)
Section 9(3) and 9(4) of the
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm
minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the
primary consideration in
liquor licencing decisions (although not to the
exclusion of others).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section 44(4).
The VCGLR takes compliance
and enforcement action in respect of licensed premises that are found to be
non-compliant with their licence
conditions. The Commission notes that no
prosecution, penalty infringement notice or formal warning has been issued
against these
licensed premises since the Licence was granted on 24 November
The Commission acknowledges
that before the Licence was issued to the then licensee, Zoobibi Pty Ltd, on 24
November 2020, Mr Zoobi,
as the sole director of that company, had never been
the holder of a licence or a director of a company that held a licence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter