URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PTZ [2025] VMHT 5 (1 April 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Online video
Tribunal members:
Robert Daly (Legal Member)
Marija Kirjanenko (Medical Member)
Katherine George (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal revoked your
treatment order.
This statement of reasons:
hearing your legal representative requested a written explanation of the
Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your
treating team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you applied to have
your Treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not an order should remain in place.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
restriction – mental health and wellbeing services are to be provided to a
person living with mental illness with the
least possible restriction on their
rights, dignity and autonomy with the aim of promoting their recovery and full
participation
in the community. Your views and preference were an important
consideration in this regard because you wanted to be a voluntary
patient and
seek treatment through the private mental health system rather than the public
Dignity of risk
– a person receiving mental health and wellbeing services has the right to
take reasonable risks in order to
achieve personal growth, self-esteem and
overall quality of life.
The Tribunal must also give proper
consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory
treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under the
Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. You provided some written materials as
well, including a letter and a letter from your counsellor.
Both you and your
treating team spoke to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
Your legal representative also
made submissions on your behalf. This statement
of reasons does not summarise all that information, but the next section refers
to the information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you wish to
be treated with
autonomy and fairly as a voluntary patient with the support of a team of mental
health professionals from private
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Your lawyer, Claudia, said you agree you have a
mental illness called bipolar affective disorder.
You told us when you
are unwell you become manic and do ridiculous things.
The report says you
have a medical condition called bipolar affective disorder with depressive and
manic episodes, that you have been
receiving treatment for this illness since
2005 and have had multiple admissions to hospital since that time.
report indicates that your most recent admissions to hospital were in December
2024 and February 2025 because you had a relapse
of your symptoms of mania
having stopped taking any medication. Your symptoms included difficulty
sleeping, disorganised thinking,
including pressured speech and racing thoughts,
an elevated mood with increasing irritability which led to disorganised
Both CM and TD said your mental state improved significantly
after you received medication in hospital.
The Tribunal accepted the
evidence before it, including your views, and was satisfied that you have
experienced a significant disturbance
of your thought and mood. At the time you
were treated in hospital your symptoms included being irritable, and pressured
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Claudia said you agree you need treatment to
prevent serious deterioration in your mental health, but you reject any
suggestion that
treatment is needed because you engage in risk taking
You agreed that at the time of your hospital admission in
February there was a fire in your apartment, however you explained that
was due to a malfunction in the air conditioner and was not caused by
The report said you need treatment now to prevent a relapse of your
manic symptoms and to prevent serious harm to yourself and others.
report states that when you have been off medication you have become highly
disorganised in your thought and behaviour, prone
to dangerous risk-taking and
disinhibited behaviour, and become labile and distressed in mood. The report
indicates that in the
past, you have been uncharacteristically hostile and
verbally aggressive towards others.
CM said you need medication called
lithium, a mood stabiliser, now because it is effective in treating your bipolar
disorder symptoms
and preventing depressive and manic relapses.
The Tribunal
accepted the information provided by your treating team and decided that you
need to continue to have immediate treatment
to prevent a serious deterioration
in your mental health. The Tribunal was not satisfied there was enough evidence
on the day of
the hearing to support a finding that you need immediate treatment
to prevent serious harm to yourself and others.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
As you had received treatment up to the time of
the hearing, the Tribunal was satisfied that if a Treatment Order was made you
continue to receive treatment, including lithium medication to help
stabilise your mood and flupentixol, a long-acting injectable
anti-psychotic
medication.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Claudia said you have a strong preference to be
taken off a treatment order and you have a clear plan for voluntary treatment
the private mental health sector. Claudia said you also have many supports
in the community, including NDIS support workers and
a strong network of friends
who are supporting you to continue to receive treatment.
In your written
statement you asked the Tribunal to consider your plan for voluntary treatment
based on a fair assessment, ethical
practice and least restrictive treatment
principles. You said your plan includes support from a private treating team
comprised of
a psychiatrist, your psychologist, your counsellor, your GP and a
social worker. You stated you receive strong support from your
NDIS case manager
who you meet twice weekly. You said your private psychiatrist has agreed to
provide treatment for you provided
you are not on a treatment order. You said
you have been seeing your psychologist for about five years. You provided a
letter from
your counsellor who confirmed that she had an initial consultation
with you in March and you have arranged to have ongoing consultations.
During the hearing you said your relationship with the public mental
health treating team is not working because they do not treat
you holistically.
Instead, they only want to treat you with medicine. You said they don't listen
to you and there is no trust on
both sides.
You said you love having
the long-acting injectable medication, that it acts like a buffer because
sometimes you forget to take the
pills. You said it feels like a new beginning
being on this medication because it is working well and keeping you calm without
effects. You said you have some reservations about continuing to take the
lithium tablets because it has made you feel sick in the
past. However, you
said you will listen to the advice of your private psychiatrist regarding the
lithium and any recommended medication.
You said if you started to feel unwell
you would seek help from your NDIS case manager because you trust
The report states that in the past when you have been a voluntary
patient you have stopped taking any medication and stopped engaging
treating team because you have not agreed that you have a mental illness or need
treatment. The report indicates that this
has resulted in a relapse of bipolar
disorder symptoms and the need for compulsory treatment in hospital.
said the treating team support your transition to care from a private team, but
they would need to be able to engage with the team
to ensure an effective
CM said that lithium is the most effective medication to
treat your symptoms, and he is concerned that if you are a voluntary patient,
you will stop taking the medication which will cause another relapse. He said
this happened recently when you were taken off a treatment
order by the
Tribunal. CM said it is very early days in your recovery for you to be
considered for voluntary treatment having had
two hospital admissions recently
after significant relapses.
The Tribunal acknowledged the treating
team’s concerns, that based on recent history of voluntary treatment
outlined in the
report you may not receive immediate treatment as a voluntary
patient and that you may make decisions that involve a degree of risk.
the mental health principles under the Act require that persons should receive
treatment in the least restrictive way possible
with voluntary treatment
preferred; that your views and preferences should be respected, and that you
should be allowed to make decisions
that involve a degree of risk. Given your
current mental state, your change of view about the current medication, your
plan for treatment
from private mental health services and the support you
receive from NDIS, the Tribunal was satisfied that you would continue to
the immediate treatment you needed as a voluntary patient.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal was not satisfied all the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal revoked your treatment
Date of determination: 05-03-2025
[Signed by the legal member]
Robert Daly
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 01 April 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (521 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter