URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-144 [2007] VMHRB 6 (15 May 2007)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Bomford Centre – Bendigo Health Care Group
[2007] VMHRB 6
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Dr T Murray
Involuntary status –
Mental Health Act 1986
– immediate treatment – side effects
P was an involuntary patient on a community treatment order with a history of
mental illness dating back to the mid 1980s. The symptoms
of her illness
included complex systematised persecutory and grandiose delusional beliefs
involving psychiatric services and the
P told the Board that the dosage of her depot medication had been increased
recently and as a result she felt sick all the time.
Her medication had caused
her to gain weight. It also made her feel drowsy, and she felt robbed of her
dignity. She said that she
preferred to live without medication and if she were
deemed to be well she would cease taking it. She would like to stop her depot
medication but would be prepared to take one oral antipsychotic tablet at night.
(1) The Board was satisfied that P did appear to have a mental illness.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P required immediate treatment in the nature
of antipsychotic medication, review and monitoring of
her mental state by
qualified staff. The Board was further satisfied that any adverse effects of
her medication did not outweigh
the beneficial effects and that the treatment
required could be obtained by making her subject to a community treatment order.
(3) The Board was satisfied that P would not voluntarily accept any or
adequate medication, and if she were not an involuntary patient
she would cease
accepting adequate medication and as a result would experience a substantial
deterioration in her mental health within
a very short period of time.
(4) When looking at whether a person is able to consent to treatment the
Board will consider such matters as whether the person has
an understanding of
the broad nature and symptoms of his or her illness, whether the person
understands the purpose and effect of
treatment prescribed and whether as a
result of such understanding, the patient’s compliance with treatment is
likely be maintained
in the absence of an involuntary treatment order.
P did not understand or accept that she had a mental illness and did not
think that any benefit flowed from her current treatment.
While she stated that
she would be prepared to accept oral medication, the Board was not satisfied
that she was in any way committed
to this form of medication and its use had
been unsuccessful in the past either due to its failure to control her symptoms
failure to take it as prescribed. The Board considered that P had
insufficient understanding of her illness and its treatment to
consent to her necessary treatment.
(5) The Board was satisfied P could not receive adequate treatment for her
mental illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom
of decision and
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
Date of Decision:
15 May 2007
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
John Bomford Centre – Bendigo Health Care Group
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
15 May 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: J Lush
Community Member: F Lindsay
Psychiatrist Member: Dr T Murray
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 15 May 2007:
Case Manager: EC
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
15 May 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 14 April 2007 and prepared by Dr MB.
Plan of P dated 11 April 2007, prepared by EC and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
5. Appeal of P, dated 12 April and lodged with the Board on 12 April
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for her health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
An involuntary treatment order was made in respect
of P in May 2005 and she had remained an involuntary patient since then. For
of that time she had been on a community treatment order, her current
community treatment order being due to expire on 30 November
2007. In her
appeal she referred to her current employment in radio advertising, cleaning and
personal care and stated that she
thought she had been “in” too
long; her life had moved on; she was concerned about her weight. She attached
letters she had sent to local bodies suggesting improvements in local
facilities and a National Police Certificate dated 5 December
2001 stating that
there were no disclosable court outcomes recorded against her name
Evidence of P
P told the Board that the dosage of her depot
medication had been increased in March or April 2007 and as a result she felt
the time. Her medication had caused her to gain weight, she felt obese
and had pain in her hips and knees. It also made her feel
drowsy. She felt
robbed of her dignity. She said that she preferred to live without medication
and if she were deemed to be well
she would cease taking it. She would like to
stop her depot medication but would be prepared to take one oral antipsychotic
at night. She did not think that she had a mental illness, she was
qualified as a nurse and thought that psychiatric treatment was
brainwashing. She did not think that she had paranoid schizophrenia and stated
that not having rights made a person paranoid.
She criticised her treatment
saying that she was not able to talk to a psychiatrist at length and medication
was not the answer.
She said that she felt well, she had recently had an
enjoyable Mother’s Day with her family, she had a good group of friends
and she had made her first sale of radio advertising space.
Evidence of treating team
The report dated 14 April 2007 stated that P had a
history of mental illness dating back to 1985 with multiple admissions to
psychiatric
services in the years preceding 2005, a number of these following
periods of non-compliance with treatment. She had been discharged
involuntary status in December 2004 and following a period of non-compliance
with treatment had become intrusive, disorganised
and her mental state had
deteriorated, necessitating inpatient treatment in May 2005. The symptoms of
her illness included complex
systematised persecutory and grandiose delusional
beliefs involving psychiatric services and the media. These beliefs revolved
being accused of murdering a child, being featured in the media, being in
and used by them as
a “meal ticket”. When she became unwell she was increasingly
irritable, intrusive, inappropriate
and thought disordered. These symptoms were
reported as present in April 2007 and were noted in her clinical file. It was
that she had been agitated by the decision to increase her medication
and that at that time she did not believe she had a mental
illness or needed
treatment. The diagnosis was that she had paranoid schizophrenia with
significant disturbances of thought, mood
and perception.
The view expressed in the report was that P had residual symptoms when
receiving treatment and without adequate monitoring and treatment
these would
worsen, placing her at risk of being unable to function independently in the
community and to maintain work and relationships.
P maintained that she did not
have a mental illness or needed treatment despite many attempts to provide
psychoeducation about her
illness and declined to be involved in detailed
discussion about her treatment. She was receiving depot medication at the
and had been aggressive towards staff when unwell in the past. She had a
history of intermittent compliance with oral medication.
P was unable to
consent to treatment because she did not accept that she had a mental illness
and would not attend for treatment
or mental state review if she were not on a
community treatment order. When unwell she had been known to become angry with
she dealt with and this put her at risk of social rejection.
Ms EC told the Board that she had known P for 9 – 10 years. Prior to
April 2007, P’s depot medication had been reduced
and she had been
prescribed oral medication to be taken daily in addition to the depot
medication. Following the commencement of
this regimen, the symptoms noted in
the report developed. Following discussion with the consultant psychiatrist,
medication was increased. On the day of the hearing, P was much
calmer and Ms EC attributed this to the increase in medication.
unwilling to attend a dietician or exercise to help her deal with her weight.
No weight loss had been noted when she
did not receive medication for five
months prior some years previously. Ms EC told the Board that she thought
P’s mental state
had improved considerably since April 2007. If P
remained well, the treatment team would consider not extending her community
order in November.
The treatment plan
The treatment plan contained the names of the
members of the treating team. It was to be reviewed in September 2007 and
reports were to be made every six months. It was noted that P had
refused to sign the plan because she disagreed with it. The diagnosis
prescribed medication were noted. The treating team’s plan was to
maintain P at home, to continue depot medication due
to non-adherence with oral
medication, to monitor her mental state, when possible to provide
psychoeducation and to coordinate psychiatric
reviews, hearings and medical
appointments. P was to attend for her injections and appointments with members
of the treating team
and to look for a general practitioner to attend for her
physical health needs. Failure to attend for her injections might result
revocation of her community treatment order.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
When deciding whether a person appears to have a mental illness, the Board
will consider whether the person has recently exhibited
symptoms usually
associated with a recognised mental illness and will also take into account the
effects of any treatment received
in controlling those symptoms (
review of AB
(1988) 1 MHRBD (Vic) 40,
Re the review of AM
MHRB 238). In conducting a review,
requires the Board to
have regard primarily to the patient’s current mental condition
and to consider the patient’s medical and psychiatric
history and social
circumstances”
The Board accepted that P had a history of mental illness which was
manifested in persecutory and delusional beliefs involving psychiatric
and staff, the media and concerns about murdering a child. The Board further
accepted the history that these symptoms
became far less intrusive when P
received adequate antipsychotic medication and she was then able to work and
enjoy social and family
relationships. The Board accepted that earlier this
year when the dose of antipsychotic medication was reduced, P developed
suspicion of psychiatric services and staff and her delusional beliefs
antipsychotic medication was increased there was a corresponding improvement in
her mental state. In view of the long
history of her mental illness, the
opinions of the qualified medical staff involved in her treatment, her recent
manifestation of
positive symptoms and the improvement in her mental state when
her medication was increased, the Board could not accept her view
that she did
not have a mental illness. The Board was satisfied that P did appear to have a
mental illness and that this illness
was characterised by significant
disturbances of thought, mood and perception.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
In considering the requirement for treatment and its immediacy the Board has
regard to the likelihood of imminent relapse and its
possible severity and the
degree of disruption to be expected from the cessation of treatment (
review of RD
(1997) 2 MHRBD
(Vic) 425). The criterion also calls for
the Board to consider the extent of any adverse responses to treatment (
the appeal of PX
(1996 2 MHRB (Vic) 334) and whether the required treatment
is available to the patient (
Re the appeal of DWP
(1989) 1 MHRBD
The Board accepted that P’s mental state deteriorated significantly
when she did not receive antipsychotic medication, had recently
deteriorated
when the dose was reduced and had improved when it had increased. When she
became unwell the delusional content of
her thinking was distressful for her,
she became distrustful, agitated and disorganised resulting in disruption to her
social relationships. It appeared from her history that P often
ceased treatment when not an involuntary patient and this resulted
deterioration in her mental health that she had required inpatient admission to
The Board understood P’s concerns about weight gain, which she related
to her medication but it was not clear that this was
solely related to her
treatment. P did not appear to the Board to be excessively overweight and the
Board accepted that there were
other ways of dealing with this problem other
than ceasing her antipsychotic medication. P also complained that her
medication made
her drowsy and she felt unwell. The extent of these symptoms
was not clear and at the time of the hearing she was able to manage
busy life despite her treatment.
P complained of the infrequency and shortness of her consultations with her
consultant psychiatrist. Ms EC stated that on occasions
P was unwilling to talk
to staff including her psychiatrist. The Board accepted that more flexible and
frequent psychiatric consultations
might be of benefit to P, but considered that
nevertheless the treatment she required to maintain her mental health was being
by the psychiatric service currently treating her.
The Board was satisfied that P required immediate treatment in the nature of
antipsychotic medication, review and monitoring of her
mental state by qualified
staff. The Board was further satisfied that any adverse effects of her
medication did not outweigh the
beneficial effects and that the treatment
required could be obtained by making her subject to a community treatment order.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for her health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
Among the issues the Board looks at when considering this criterion are the
therapeutic benefits of involuntary treatment, the likelihood
of deterioration
in the patient’s mental health if the patient does not have treatment on
an involuntary basis and the timeframe
for such deterioration.
P told the Board that she would stop taking her antipsychotic medication if
she were deemed to be well. She also said that she wished
to stop her depot
medication. She said that she was prepared to continue to take oral medication
but the Board accepted that as
recently as April 2007, oral medication in
conjunction with depot medication had been ineffective in controlling the
symptoms of
P’s illness. It was very unlikely that the same oral
medication in the absence of injectable medication would be adequate.
noted that at the time P’s symptoms were becoming sufficiently intrusive
to be noted by staff at the psychiatric
service as being apparently beyond
P’s control and recognition. The Board accepted that on a number of
occasions in the past,
P had not been compliant with her treatment, resulting in
the need for readmission to inpatient or involuntary treatment. The Board
satisfied that P would not voluntarily accept any or adequate medication and if
she were not an involuntary patient she would
cease accepting adequate
medication and as a result would experience a substantial deterioration in her
mental health within a very
short period of time. Accordingly, the Board
considered that as a result of P’s mental illness involuntary treatment
to a community treatment order was necessary to prevent a deterioration
in P’s mental health.
Has P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
When looking at whether a person is able to consent to treatment the Board
will consider such matters as whether the person has an
understanding of the
broad nature and symptoms of his or her illness, whether the person understands
the purpose and effect of treatment
prescribed and whether as a result of such
understanding, the patient’s compliance with treatment is likely be
maintained in
the absence of an involuntary treatment order.
P did not understand or accept that she had a mental illness and did not
think that any benefit flowed from her current treatment.
She distrusted
psychiatry and mental health staff. While she stated that she would be prepared
to accept oral medication, the Board
was not satisfied that she was in any way
committed to this form of medication and its use had been unsuccessful in the
past either
due to its failure to control her symptoms or her failure to take it
as prescribed. The Board was satisfied that treatment necessary
to maintain P
current state of improved mental health included review and monitoring of her
mental state and the use of antipsychotic
medication. The Board considered that
P had insufficient understanding of her illness and its treatment to be able to
her necessary treatment.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
In considering this criterion the Board will take into account the state of
the person’s mental health, his or her compliance
with treatment, the
availability of adequate and appropriate psychiatric services and the social
networks and support systems of
the patient (R
e the review of EF
MHRBD (Vic) 346).
P was suspicious and distrustful of psychiatric service staff. She believed
that her treatment caused unpleasant side effects and
did not provide any
positive benefits for her. In the past, she had not been able to manage her
treatment as a voluntary patient.
It was unlikely that she would continue to
accept the treatment and medication required to maintain good mental health.
Her psychiatric
history indicated that if she were to become unwell, she was
likely to come to the attention of the psychiatric services, but the
considered that treatment which occurred only when she was seriously unwell did
not constitute adequate treatment for her mental
P said she felt that she was robbed of her dignity by involuntary treatment.
The Board understood this but thought that there was
a greater loss of dignity
when her symptoms deteriorated to the point that she required involuntary
inpatient treatment, as occurred
when she failed to accept treatment
consistently. Currently, P was being treated pursuant to a community treatment
order, which meant
that she was able to live in her home and to work and
socialise as she wished. The Board noted that members of the treating team
would consider continuing P’s treatment in the absence of a community
treatment order if she were able to maintain her current
state of good mental
health and for some further months considered this to be an appropriate plan.
The Board was satisfied P could not receive adequate treatment for her mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom
of decision and action.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan had been developed after
proper consideration of P’s wishes and the benefits
and disadvantages of
other forms of treatment and the treatment proposed was intended only to promote
and maintain P’s health
and well-being.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board considered that P’s treatment plan was capable of
implementation and was being implemented by her current mental health
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan was
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
criteria were met and the treatment required for P could be
obtained through her being subject to a community treatment order, the
made the determination set out on page 1.
Dated the 1
day of June 2007
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter