URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2019/201.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fitzherbert v Department of Health and Human Services (Review and Regulation) [2019] VCAT 201 (11 February 2019)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
REVIEW AND REGULATION LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO.
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(4)(a)(ii),
– Access sought to documents relating to maintenance and cleaning at
public housing tower – Whether documents exempt
as internal working
documents or documents of a business, commercial or financial undertaking
exposing the agency or undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage – Meaning
of an “officer”.
Margaret Fitzherbert MP
Secretary, Department of Health and Human
JOINED PARTY
GJK Facility Services
R Tang, Member
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
14 January 2019
DATE OF ORDER AND REASONS
11 February 2019
Fitzherbert v Department of Health and Human Services (Review and
Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 201
The decision of the Respondent is varied, with effect
28 days from this day, to provide the Applicant with access to unredacted copies
of documents 2 to 8, 10 to 17 and 19 to 20, save for redaction of any personal
information that would otherwise be exempt under
section 33(1)
of Information Act 1982
or material falling outside the scope of the
applicant’s request under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr D Williams QC, of Counsel
For Respondent
Mr M Batskos, Solicitor
For Joined Party
Mr C Dale, Solicitor
29 January 2018, Ms Fitzherbert made a request (
FOI Request
Department of Health and Human Services (
) for access
A copy of all documents, briefs and correspondence, whether
written or electronic, regarding maintenance and cleaning at 332 Park
South Melbourne, including maintenance and cleaning logs created from January 1,
2014 until the date of my request.
proceeding originally commenced as an application under
Freedom of Information Act 1982
) for review of a deemed
refusal by the Department to grant access to the requested documents. However,
on 16 May 2018, the Department
‘decided to grant access in part to the
documents’, subject to exemptions claimed under sections 30(1), 33(1),
34(1)(a)(ii)
and 34(1)(b) of the FOI Act. Further, under section 25 of the FOI
Act, the Department removed information that ‘post-dates
the date of your
request’ which was ‘regarded as irrelevant’.
3 August 2018, the Tribunal ordered that the application be amended to be an
application for review of the decision by the Department
on 16 May 2018.
Further, on 10 September 2018, the Tribunal joined GJK Facility Services
) – the party responsible for cleaning at 332 Park Street,
South Melbourne – as a party to the proceedings and approved
the conduct
of the proceedings based on a sample of documents.
Department filed a document entitled Further Schedule of Sampled Documents on 9
November 2018 (
Sample Document List
) setting out a list of 20 sample
documents for the purposes of the hearing. Broadly, these can be categorised as
Description
Exemptions claimed
Maintenance log (38 pages)
s 34(4)(a)(ii) (in respect of the description of works, job or unit prices
and total prices)
2, 3, 9, 10, 18
Emails between Department staff regarding cleaning
ss 30(1), 34(1)(b),
34(4)(a)(ii)
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17
Emails to or from contractor regarding cleaning
ss 30(1), 34(1)(b)
34(4)(a)(ii)
Emails from Department staff to contractor and other Department staff
regarding cleaning
ss 30(1), 34(1)(b), 34(4)(a)(ii)
hearing was held on 14 January 2019. The Department indicated that it would now
provide Ms Fitzherbert with the maintenance log
(document 1) including the
description of works carried out, but maintaining the redactions of personal
information (which the applicant
no longer seeks) and the job or unit prices and
total prices for the works. The Department also indicated that it is was no
claiming exemption under section 34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act in relation
to documents 2 to 20.
were two witnesses:
Ms Fitzherbert
who confirmed her witness statement dated 19 December 2018 (
evidence as to her interest in the documents; and
Mr Benjamin
Gullquist, an Assistant Director from the Department. He confirmed his witness
statement dated 23 November 2018 (
) and gave evidence about the
exemptions claimed by the Department.
did not call any witnesses or file any evidence.
submissions from the parties, I reserved my decision.
Background to FOI Request
to 24 November 2018, Ms Fitzherbert was a Member of the Victorian Parliament
representing the Southern Metropolitan Region in
the Legislative
2017 and 2018, she chaired an inquiry into the public housing renewal program
conducted by the Legal and Social Issues Committee
of the Legislative
public housing estate located at 332 Park Street, South Melbourne (
Towers Estate
) is located in the Southern Metropolitan Region electoral
boundaries and Ms Fitzherbert’s evidence is
Throughout my
term in Parliament I received numerous constituency enquiries from many
residents of Park Towers about issues at the
property. In most cases, these
constituents highlighted what they regard as inadequate maintenance and cleaning
standards at the
property, which led to poor amenity, increased crime and
violence, and diminished safety for residents.
Fitzherbert believes there are ‘important questions, deserving of informed
public debate’ regarding high-rise public
housing estates like the Park
Towers Estate, such
community, through the Department of Health and Human Services (the Department)
providing housing maintained to an appropriate
standard to a large number of
vulnerable Victorians, housed in these large high-rise estates, who are
dependent on the Department
maintenance of these large public housing estates being conducted in a timely
and cost-effective manner?; and
(c) Does the
high-rise apartment model, favoured for construction of public housing in the
1960s and 1970s, remain an appropriate
means of delivering housing to
Victoria’s public housing tenants today?
Fitzherbert says she made the FOI Request (and similar requests for other public
housing properties) in December 2017 ‘[b]ecause
of the constituent
enquiries which I received, and my interest in public housing as a public policy
Ms Fitzherbert was not re-elected at the November 2018 Victorian State Election,
she continues to have an interest in the
topic of public housing generally, and
the Park Towers Estate in particular. For example, an article she wrote was
published in
the Sunday Age on 23 December 2018 entitled “High-rise
nightmare in focus after years of
Overview of freedom of information regime
object of the FOI Act is to ‘extend as far as possible the right of the
community to access information in the possession
of the Government of Victoria
and other bodies constituted under the law of
this end, a general right of access to information held by the government and
its agencies is established by section 13 of the
FOI Act, subject to certain
exemptions set out in Part IV of the Act. The exemptions provided are those
‘necessary for the
protection of essential public interests and the
private and business affairs of persons in respect of whom information is
and held by
the FOI Act, the relevant agency bears the onus of establishing that its
decision was justified or that VCAT should give a decision
adverse to the
Exemption for internal working documents
Sample Document List indicates that the Department claims all of the documents,
other than the maintenance log, are exempt under
section 30(1) of the FOI Act.
That section provides an exemption for documents
the disclosure of
which under this Act—
(a) would disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation
prepared by an officer or Minister, or consultation or
deliberation that has
taken place between officers, Ministers, or an officer and a Minister, in the
course of, or for the purpose
of, the deliberative processes involved in the
functions of an agency or Minister or of the government; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest.
a Summary of Evidence handed up by Mr Batskos (for the Department) suggests that
the exemption is particularly pressed for
documents 9 to 10 and 16 to 20 noting
that based on the evidence of Mr Gullquist:
contains some statements of opinion and reflects consultation between officers
of the Department about a particular cleaning issue
and what is understood by a
particular phrase describing a type of cleaning, with a view to determining
whether something is a cleaning
issue or repair issue which is often a
‘grey’ area. The second line of the most recent email in the chain
contains an
opinion which is based on a factual error which would be misleading
to release ([GWS] [24]).
Document 10
contains consultation or deliberation between staff of the
Department including statements of opinion which they should be free to
without concern about possible public release ([GWS] [25]).
Document 16
is a series of emails between the contractor and the
Department in relation to a resident of Park Towers raising concerns about the
cleaning contractor. It contains some advice from the Department to the
contractor as to future dealings with the resident ([GWS]
Document 17
is a series of emails between the contractor, the
Department, and a Park Towers resident providing a response to the resident as
[to] the next step after document 16 ([GWS] [27]).
Document 18
is an email chain attaching a ministerial briefing which
had attached to it a draft letter. It contains advice from a Department
Officer which, based on usual practice [Mr Gullquist says he] understand[s]
would reflect an instruction or advice provided
from the Minister’s
Office. [Mr Gullquist believes] from standard practice that the draft letter was
never sent by or on behalf
of the Minister ([GWS] [28]).
Document 19
is a collection of emails between 2013 and August 2015
which were forwarded by a Department staff member to a staff member of the
contractor on 12 August 2015, where the collection of emails considered together
provides a commentary on issues which have arisen
over time in relation to the
contractor ([GWS] [29]).
Document 20
is an email chain between a Departmental staff member and
a member of staff of the contractor ([GWS] [30]).
Communications between staff of Department and GJK
can be observed that a number of the documents claimed to be exempt under
section 30(1) of the FOI Act involve communications between
Department staff and
staff of GJK. This raises a question as to whether staff of GJK can be regarded
as ‘officers’ so
that such communications could be seen as involving
‘consultation or deliberation that has taken place between
Department notes that the definition of officer in section 5 of the FOI Act
applies to ‘any person employed by or for the
agency’, and contends
that this ‘can extend to independent contractors engaged to provide
services to or on behalf of
closing, Mr Williams (for Ms Fitzherbert) contended that section 30(1) of the
FOI Act could not apply to such communications, as
the relevant GJK staff
‘are not employed by or for [the Department]’, rather they are
‘employed by an independent
contractor to do the independent
contractor’s work’. The fact that the work is performed under
contract with government
does not mean that the people performing that work
become officers of the agency.
reply, Mr Batskos (for the Department) pointed out that it has long been
accepted that the definition of officer extends to consultants
independent contractors.
contends that staff of GJK will be officers to the extent they are performing
functions under the contract with the Department
and communicating with it.
Alternatively,
Mr Batskos submits that section 35(1)(a) of the FOI Act – which provides
that document can be exempt if the information
was communicated in confidence
and would be exempt if generated by an agency – can operate together with
section 30(1) to exempt
the documents.
response to the respondent’s alternative submission, Mr Williams says
section 35(1)(a) of the FOI Act requires a wholly different
enquiry and the
respondent’s attempt to raise it in closing submissions should not be
entertained. Further, he notes that
section 35(2) provides that section 35 does
not apply to information acquired by an agency from a business, commercial or
undertaking that relates to matters of a business, commercial or
financial nature.
is true that the term ‘officer’ has been given a broad
interpretation by the Courts and Tribunal and can extend to
consultants and even
lawyers engaged by an agency. However, there are limits. In
Department of Human
Tribunal considered that an auditor was an officer when the auditor was engaged
by a disability service provider to prepare an
audit report to be provided to
the relevant agency for the purpose of determining whether to continue the
provider’s funding.
However, Member Proctor (now Deputy President) said
in relation to the provider itself:
I do not accept that AAI is an
officer of DHS. Unlike the auditor, it is not in substance engaged to provide
opinion advice or recommendation
to DHS. DHS engages it via a service agreement
to provide services to disabled people.
GJK is engaged by the Department to provide cleaning services. GJK in turn
engages its employees to undertake the cleaning,
and other employees to manage
the cleaning and the contractual arrangements with the Department. This does
not involve, and there
is no evidence that the contractual arrangements require,
the provision of opinion, advice or recommendation by GJK or its staff
Department. As such, I find that the staff of GJK are not
‘officers’ of the Department.
relation to the operation of section 35(1)(a) of the FOI Act, I have not been
provided with a copy of the contractual arrangements
between the Department and
GJK and so cannot form any view on whether the communications between them are
covered by obligations
of confidentiality. Contrary to Mr Batskos’
submission, paragraph 23 of Mr Gullquist’s witness statement does not
any basis to imply or infer that such communications were made in
confidence.
I also accept Mr Williams’ submission that section 35(2) of the FOI Act
would operate to prevent access to section
35 in the present case.
Accordingly,
I dismiss the claims for exemption under section 30(1) of the FOI Act except in
relation to the documents relating to
communications wholly within the
Department, as considered below.
Documents 2 and 3
is no specific evidence given by Mr Gullquist in relation to documents 2 and 3.
Having examined the documents, while one might
argue at a stretch that they
include matters of consultation or deliberation, there is no evidence –
and it is hard to see
how – disclosure of these documents would be
contrary to the public interest given they are routine communications about
required at the Park Towers Estate. I dismiss the claim for exemption
under section 30(1) in respect of these documents.
noted above, the Department’s concern with document 9 is that it
contains some statements of opinion and reflects consultation
between officers of the Department about a particular cleaning issue
and what is
understood by a particular phrase describing a type of cleaning, with a view to
determining whether something is a cleaning
issue or repair issue which is often
a ‘grey’ area. The second line of the most recent email in the
chain contains an
opinion which is based on a factual error which would be
misleading to release
response, Mr Williams says that something which is in the ‘grey’
area is the ‘very sort of thing which it is
in the public interest to have
a debate or discussion about’ and that there ‘is a public interest
in being clear’.
Mr Williams suggests that if there are aspects of the communication which
involve mistake or misunderstanding, then the
Department should explain it,
noting that ‘factual error is not a ground for exemption’.
have reviewed document 9 and it is clear to me that this communication discloses
matter in the nature of consultation or deliberation
that has taken place
between officers as part of the deliberative processes of the Department.
balance, having regard to the matters being communicated, which are sensitive, I
am satisfied that disclosure of this communication
would be contrary to the
public interest. While there is material contained within the communication
which might be able to be released,
it would not be meaningful and, as such, it
is not appropriate to exercise the discretion in section 25 of the FOI Act to
the document in part.
Accordingly,
I affirm the exemption under section 30(1) of the FOI Act as claimed in relation
to document 9.
Document 10
noted above, the Department’s concern with document 10 is that it
contains consultation or deliberation between staff of the
Department including statements of opinion which they should be free to
without concern about possible public release
have reviewed document 10 and it is clear to me that this communication
discloses matter in the nature of opinion as part of the
deliberative processes
of the Department.
some of the views are expressed in a casual manner, the matters being discussed
appear to be of an ordinary nature related to
the cleaning of the Park Towers
Estate, and I am not convinced that it would be contrary to the public interest
for those opinions
to be made public. I dismiss the claim for exemption under
section 30(1) of the FOI Act in respect of this document.
Document 18
noted above, the Department’s concern with document 18 is that it
an email chain attaching a ministerial briefing which had
attached to it a draft letter. It contains advice from a Department Liaison
Officer which, based on usual practice [Mr Gullquist says he] understand[s]
would reflect an instruction or advice provided from
the Minister’s
Office. [Mr Gullquist believes] from standard practice that the draft letter was
never sent by or on behalf
of the Minister
have reviewed document 18 and it is clear to me that this communication
discloses matter in the nature of consultation or deliberation
that has taken
place between officers as part of the deliberative processes of the Department.
is a ministerial briefing with a draft letter. The evidence available suggests
that the draft letter was not sent out.
regard to the sensitivity of the issues discussed, the seniority of those
involved in the communication, and that it is a draft
document which might have
the potential to mislead, I am satisfied that disclosure of this document would
be contrary to the public
Accordingly,
I affirm the exemption under section 30(1) of the FOI Act as claimed in relation
to document 18.
Exemption for documents which would expose business,
commercial or financial undertaking unreasonably to disadvantage
Sample Document List indicates that the Department claims exemption under
section 34(1)(b) of the FOI Act in relation to documents
16 to 20. That section
provides an exemption for a document
if its disclosure under this
Act would disclose information acquired by an agency or a Minister from a
business, commercial or financial
undertaking and the information relates
(a) trade secrets; or
(b) other matters of a business, commercial or financial nature and the
disclosure of the information would be likely to expose the
undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage.
have already determined that document 18 is exempt under section 30(1) of the
FOI Act, so it is unnecessary to consider that document
any further.
have read documents 16, 17, 19 and 20, which clearly deal with information
acquired by the Department from GJK (a business, commercial
or financial
undertaking) relating to matters of a business, commercial or financial nature.
This is also confirmed by Mr Gullquist
who says that:
the documents
contain information about the business or commercial affairs of the contractors.
The information has been received from
those contractors and relates to work
they have done, were doing or ought to have been doing under the respective
contracts with
them at the relevant time.
only issue in dispute is whether the disclosure of the information would be
likely to expose GJK unreasonably to disadvantage.
the Department’s written submissions, it is contended that the disclosure
of these documents would unreasonably expose GJK
to disadvantage having regard
identity of the applicant and the use to which the information would or may be
put by that applicant, and the likelihood that
the information could be
published more widely;
nature of the information and the context in which it appears, bearing in mind
some information has already been released to the
circumstances in which the information was obtained by the Department, including
as part of its administration and enforcement
of contracts to ensure that they
are properly performed;
outcome of the process of consulting the business concerned and the presence in
the proceeding as a joined party of the contractor
to defend disclosure of
information about them;
disclosure may cause any person stress, anxiety or embarrassment;
current relevance of the information; and
there is any public (as distinct from a purely private or personal) interest in
disclosure or non-disclosure.
previously noted, GJK did not call any witnesses or file any evidence of its
own. Mr Dale, who represented GJK at the hearing,
noted that he had not seen
all of the documents and contended that the ‘best assessment for the last
limb [of section 34(1)(b)
of the FOI Act, namely whether disclosure would expose
GJK unreasonably to disadvantage] is from the documents themselves’.
Accordingly, Mr Dale invited the Tribunal to view the documents and form a view
as to whether any inference could be drawn as to
potential disadvantage.
Dale suggested, taking account of the evidence of Mr Gullquist, the following
matters would support such a finding:
information in the documents was provided in confidence;
information relates to a particular point in time and there are natural ebbs and
flows in performance under a contract;
government needs to be robust in ensuring compliance; and
the information was provided to GJK’s competitors, GJK would be exposed to
disadvantage in terms of any re-tender or other
closing, Mr Williams observed that there was no evidence of disadvantage to GJK
and no such disadvantage should be inferred if
it were ‘no more than
exchanges between the Department and contractor about what work needed to be
done’. He also observed
that in terms of any tender situation, the
‘government already has the information whether adverse or
favourable’.
assessing whether disclosure of information would expose an undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage, I may take account of the
matters in section 34(2)
of the FOI Act as follows:
(a) whether the information is generally
available to competitors of the undertaking;
(b) whether the information would be exempt matter if it were generated by an
agency or a Minister;
(c) whether the information could be disclosed without causing substantial
harm to the competitive position of the undertaking; and
(d) whether there are any considerations in the public interest in favour of
disclosure which outweigh considerations of competitive
disadvantage to the
undertaking, for instance, the public interest in evaluating aspects of
government regulation of corporate practices
or environmental
and of any other consideration or considerations which in the opinion of the
agency or Minister is or are relevant.
is little doubt that information in documents 16, 17, 19 and 20 is not generally
available to GJK’s competitors and may
cause GJK some embarrassment
because the communications largely relate to work that needed to be done at the
Park Towers Estates,
and frank views from the Department as to the performance
of GJK in relation to such work.
I am not satisfied on the evidence presented that the disclosure of the
information would cause substantial harm to the competitive
position of GJK.
This is because there is an absence of direct evidence from GJK as to the impact
of disclosure and because, as
Mr Williams observes, the Department (and
therefore the government more generally) is aware of the information from its
own records.
deficiencies in the performance by GJK of its obligations under the cleaning
contract are obviously issues which will be
of concern to residents of the Park
Towers Estate and legitimate matters of wider public interest in terms of the
state and condition
of high-rise public housing in Victoria. I am satisfied,
based on the evidence given by Ms Fitzherbert, that she retains an interest
advancing genuine debate about public housing in Victoria notwithstanding that
she is no longer a member of the Victorian Parliament.
Accordingly,
I dismiss the claims for exemption under section 34(1)(b) of the FOI Act in
relation to documents 16, 17, 19 and 20.
Exemption for documents of a business, commercial or
financial undertaking exposing agency unreasonably to disadvantage
Department claims exemption under section 34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act in
relation to the job or unit prices and total prices for
items of work in the
maintenance log (document 1). That section provides an exemption for a document
(ii) in the case of an agency engaged in trade or
commerce—information of a business, commercial or financial
that would if disclosed under this Act be likely to expose the agency
unreasonably to disadvantage;
Office of Housing, within the former Department of Human Services, has
previously been found to be engaged in trade or commerce
It was not contended
that the position of the Department in relation to these proceedings is any
Accordingly,
the issue to consider in this case is whether the release of the additional
information in document 1 would expose the
Department unreasonably to
disadvantage. Unlike section 34(1)(b), there is no list of matters to be
considered in this regard.
However, I accept the Department’s submissions
that relevant considerations
the nature of
the information;
circumstances in which the information was obtained or created;
the likelihood
of the information being information that the person concerned would not wish to
have disclosed without consent;
whether the
information has any current relevance;
whether there is
any public interest in disclosure or non-disclosure; and
the identity of
the applicant and the likely motives of the applicant.
his witness statement, Mr Gullquist identifies the disadvantage to the
Department in the following
prices, unit prices and total prices are disclosed, that will enable the
recipient of that information to compare those
to the schedule of rates publicly
released as part of the invitation to tender documents. In doing so, it will
enable a person to
ascertain what percentage difference increase from the
schedule of rates the Department is willing to negotiate or accept in appointing
a maintenance contractor. ...
... It might well happen that [tenderers] would then submit tenders for
amounts that are artificially higher than would otherwise
be the case.
Further, it should be noted that paying for maintenance and cleaning is
self-funded from tenant rent. ... Therefore, if the costs
of responsive
maintenance of cleaning are driven up because tenderers en masse submit higher
tenders than they would otherwise, the
Department would then have to spend more
of the finite budget which it has ... for those services.
Williams challenged Mr Gullquist on two aspects of his evidence.
Mr Williams suggested that the explanation above (as to the reasons for
withholding past pricing information from tenderers
in future) was inconsistent
with Mr Gullquist’s acceptance that the government seeks to engage with
tenderers on an equal footing.
after the evidence revealed that the maintenance contract had been re-let in
2018, Mr Williams suggested that the information
as to pricing from 2014 to
early 2018 (being under a previous tender) lacked currency, particularly as the
next tender may not happen
until 2024 if all extensions apply.
relation to the first point, Mr Gullquist did not accept that the failure to
provide previous pricing was inconsistent with treating
tenderers equally, as
they all receive the base schedule of rates the Department is willing to
relation to the second point, Mr Gullquist said that if every tenderer knows the
particular percentage above the schedule of rates
that the Department has
accepted in the past, future tenderers may – and are likely to –
take that percentage increase
as a minimum, resulting in artificially higher
1 is a maintenance log in the form of a table of maintenance jobs, with a
separate row or rows for each new job. Each row
includes a description of the
work to be undertaken, the quantity, the job or unit price and the total price.
If there is more than
one item of work in a job, then there is also a total for
all of the items.
response to queries from me, Mr Gullquist clarified that both the tender
schedule of rates and final contract include a single
unit price for both goods
and services to be provided by the maintenance contractor in respect of a given
work item (eg. for a washing
machine and its installation). Accordingly, by
comparing that unit price to the Department’s proposed rates in the tender
schedule, it would be possible for competitors of the contractor to determine
what the Department had previously accepted by way
of mark-up. Similarly,
because the quantity of work items is disclosed, the provision of the total
price would allow the job or
unit prices to be discerned. In the case of
multiple work items in the one job, there would still be valuable information on
average mark-up across a number of work items.
there was no re-tender in 2018, there is no doubt in my mind that the release of
the information would unreasonably disadvantage
the Department. The question is
whether this is impacted by the re-tender.
the currency of financial information is likely to go down over time, it is more
likely to be the case in relation to absolute
prices than relative prices. For
instance, if the Department had been willing to accept a 15% premium to its
schedule of rates in
the earlier tender period, and had managed to get this down
to 10% with the 2018 tender, then that older information would continue
value at the time of the next tender.
regard to the evidence of Mr Gullquist, I am satisfied that the disclosure of
the pricing information in document 1 would unreasonably
disadvantage the
Department in future maintenance tenders. Accordingly, I affirm the exemption
under section 34(4)(a)(ii) of the
FOI Act as claimed in relation to the pricing
information in document 1.
Conclusion and orders
the reasons set out above, I find that:
the pricing
information in document 1 is exempt under section 34(4)(a)(ii) of the FOI Act
(noting that the Department has agreed to
release the description of the
documents 9 and
18 are exempt documents under section 30(1) of the FOI Act; and
the remaining
documents (documents 2 to 8, 10 to 17 and 19 to 20) are not exempt and should be
vary the decision of the Department accordingly.
Document 18 only.
Document 17 only.
Excluding document 4.
, 23 December
2018, p 32.
FOI Act s 3.
Ibid s 3(1)(b).
Ibid s 55(2).
Respondent’s Statement
of Legal Contentions dated 23 November 2018 (
Referring to E. Nekvapil,
Administrative Law
Vol 2 [FOI.5.180] and the authorities
cited therein.
[2012] VCAT 722.
RSLC [4.15].
Kosky v Department of
Human Services
(1998) VAR 420.
RSLC [3.12].
GWS [17]-[20].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter