URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2006/2048.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Honeywood v Department of Human Services (General) [2006] VCAT 2048 (11 October 2006)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. G279/2006
Freedom of Information – Extract of Cabinet document – Deleted
Portions of Document still Practicable to Release - Section
of Information Act
Section 28(1)(b)
Freedom of Information
Section 28(1)(d)
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act
Phillip Honeywood, MP
Department of Human Services
Justice Stuart Morris, President
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
25 September 2006
DATE OF ORDER
11October 2006
Honeywood v Department of Human Services (General)
[2006] VCAT 2048
1 The decision under review is affirmed save that access is granted under
Freedom of Information Act
to the draft briefing
note from the Secretary of the Department of Human Services to the Premier of
Victoria, subject to the deletions
from the body of that document that have
already been made by the department, except that paragraph 13 is to be included
in the copy
of the document to which access is granted.
2 The order of the tribunal is stayed for 28 days from 25 September
Stuart Morris
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant for Review
Mr D Turner of counsel (direct brief)
For Respondent
Mr J Pizer of counsel (direct brief)
(given orally at the hearing and
subsequently revised)
1 The applicant seeks access to certain documents concerning accounting
irregularities at Melbourne Health. One document that fits
the description was
a draft “briefing note” to the Premier, which is said to be exempt
Freedom of Information Act
by reason of it being a
document that contains an extract of a Cabinet submission. Whether this is so
is the first issue in the
case. A second issue is whether certain other
documents, which have not been identified as being within the request, should
been disclosed by the respondent.
2 In May 2005 Melbourne Health, which is a public health service incorporated
pursuant to the
Health Services Act
, notified the Department of
Human Services of some accounting irregularities. Three firms of independent
experts were then commissioned
by Melbourne Health to conduct investigations
into various aspects of those irregularities.
3 In June 2005, Susan Janine Riley, who was then a senior project officer with
the department, prepared a submission for the Expenditure
Review Committee of
Cabinet (“the ERC”). Ms Riley prepared this submission on behalf of
the Minister for Health. She
gave evidence, which I accept, that she prepared
the Cabinet submission for the purpose of it being submitted by the Minister to
the ERC for consideration by the ERC. A copy of the Cabinet submission was
tendered to the tribunal as a confidential exhibit.
I have examined the Cabinet
submission; and, having examined it, this reinforces Ms Riley’s evidence
that she prepared the
Cabinet submission for the purpose of it being submitted
for consideration by the ERC. Ms Riley also gave evidence that she understood
that on or about 22 June 2005 the Minister for Health presented the Cabinet
submission to the ERC; that the ERC considered the submission;
and that the ERC
made a decision in relation to it.
4 As part of the considerations of the tribunal I have also considered the draft
briefing note, on a confidential basis. By reference
to that document, as well
as Ms Riley’s evidence, I find that the ERC did consider the Cabinet
submission and did make a decision
in relation to it.
5 By about early September 2005 the three firms of independent experts
commissioned by Melbourne Health had completed their investigations
and produced
final reports. However each of these firms had prepared interim reports before
Ms Riley prepared the Cabinet submission
in June 2005. Further the final
reports essentially confirmed the content of the interim reports, although, no
doubt, they added
additional matters and amplified matters that had previously
been reported on.
6 On 7 September 2005 an officer of the Department of Premier and Cabinet sent
an email to Ms Riley requesting further information
investigations that had been carried out. Ms Riley discussed this request with
the Under Secretary of Health. Subsequently
a decision was made within the
department that Ms Riley should prepare a briefing note which would be formally
under the name of
the Secretary of the Department and which would be directed to
the briefing of the Premier. This document was prepared and was submitted
the Secretary although it was ultimately not forwarded on to the Premier. It is
this document, which I will call the briefing
note, which is the principal
document the subject of the proceeding.
7 On 23 February 2006 the applicant wrote to the Freedom of Information Officer
of the department stating:
Pursuant to the
Information Act
I request access to copies of all briefing notes,
emails and memoranda for the preparation of a briefing to the Premier regarding
accounting irregularities at Melbourne Health in the period from 1 September
2005 to 31 December 2005.
That request did not receive a response from the department within the time
specified in
of the Act. As a consequence, for the purpose of
applying to the tribunal for review, there was a deemed refusal to provide
to the documents sought by the request. However on 6 June 2006, after
the deemed refusal had come into effect, the team leader of
the Freedom of
Information Unit within the department made a decision in relation to the
application to access documents.
8 In his letter dated 5 June 2006 to the applicant the Freedom of Information
Officer said in part:
The Program Area has conducted a search and
located the following documents relevant to your request:
• Emails between departmental officers and emails between officers of the
department and the Department of Premier and Cabinet
• A draft briefing addressed to the Premier of Victoria from the Secretary
of the department
• A draft covering memorandum from the Under Secretary of Health to the
Secretary requesting endorsement and signature to the
briefing referred to
• A note from the department’s correspondence
The documents have been assessed in
accordance with the FOI Act by the department’s Freedom of Information
Unit to determine
whether they could be released to you in full or released to
you in part or whether they were fully exempt from release.
With the exception of the draft briefing to the Premier, all of the remaining
documents falling within the scope of your request can
be released to you;
please find these enclosed. The draft briefing to the Premier is however exempt
from release, specifically,
the following provisions of the FOI Act apply:
The Freedom of Information officer then set out various provisions of the Act
which were said to make the briefing note an exempt
Documents other than the briefing
9 I propose to deal first with the question of whether there are documents,
other than the briefing note, which have not been released
and which are
relevant to the request. The applicant submitted that the reports of the three
independent experts were within the
request and that the tribunal had power to
review a decision, or a deemed decision, refusing to grant access to these
10 Although this matter was only lightly touched by argument, I am inclined to
the view that the tribunal does have jurisdiction
to consider whether or not a
document, which has not been identified by a department as a document within a
request, is in fact a
document which is within a request. Reference was made in
argument to the decision of Justice Hedigan in
Victoria Police v
but I think that
case is principally concerned with circumstances where there is no debate as to
the relevance of a document, but
the issue is whether or not the document is
missing or can be found. In any event, I propose to proceed on the basis that
the tribunal
has jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
11 Mr Jason Pizer of counsel for the department submitted that the reports of
the three accountants - and I suppose this relates
to both the interim reports
and the final reports - were not documents that were within the scope of the
request. In particular,
he submitted that these documents would not ordinarily
be described as “briefing notes, e-mails and memoranda”.
12 Section 17(2) of the Act provides that a request shall provide such
information concerning the document as is reasonably necessary
to enable a
responsible officer of the agency to identify the document. Certainly the
description contained in the applicant’s
letter of 23 February 2006
appeared to be sufficient to enable a number of documents to be identified and
all but one of them released.
None of the documents which were identified were
the reports of the investigating accountants. Further, until today, there
to have been no suggestion by the applicant that the department’s
failure to identify and deal with the reports of the accountants
involves some
misapplication or misinterpretation of the request.
13 I find that the request did not and does not embrace the reports of the three
independent accounting experts. I make this finding
in the absence of all the
information that might be ideally desirable, as there has not been placed in
evidence before the tribunal
copies of those reports. Rather I am reliant upon
a description of what these experts have found, such description being contained
in the Cabinet submission and in the briefing note. The reports are on
“emails”. Nor would they properly be regarded
as “briefing
notes”. The latter expression is usually used in the context of
government. It typically refers to a document
designed to inform a senior
official or a minister of information that the senior official or minister ought
to know or needs to
make a decision. When accounting irregularities are
discovered within a public entity and, as a result, independent experts are
commissioned to investigate aspects of the irregularities, a document prepared
by those experts about the irregularities and what
remedial action ought be
taken, is not a document that would ordinarily admit the description of a
briefing note. Rather, common
parlance, especially in this State, would be to
describe such a document as a report.
14 The third word used in the request is the word “memoranda”.
Although this is a word of some generality it is ordinarily
used to describe
documents such as informal letters, documents designed to explain other
documents and the like. It certainly is
not the type of word that is ordinarily
used to cover a substantial document prepared by some outside consultant which
provides the
results of an investigation. In common parlance in this State the
word that is used for such a document is, as I have said, a report.
15 There is a further problem with the argument advanced by the applicants in
relation to these documents, and that is this. The
request sought access to
copies of briefing notes, emails and memoranda
for the preparation of a
briefing to the Premier
regarding accounting irregularities at Melbourne
Health. Based on the material before the tribunal I could not find that the
accountants’
reports were designed to be for the preparation of a briefing
to the Premier. The fact that the Premier was briefed was incidental
subsequent upon the preparation of these documents. The documents were prepared
to further good governance and proper accountability
in a public health entity
and were for the benefit of that entity and the department. The
accountants’ reports were not designed
to be foundational documents to
enable the Premier to be briefed.
16 Finally, before leaving this matter, I make this observation. The fact that
the matter was not raised until today inevitably
weakens the applicant’s
submission that the accountants’ reports were within the request. Much
preparation has been
put in by the parties in relation to the hearing today; and
it has been based upon the proposition that just one document is in dispute,
namely the briefing note. I think that by leaving the question until today
inevitably I have gained the impression that this submission
is somewhat of an
afterthought. I do not readily accept the explanation that the Freedom of
Information Unit within the Leader of
the Opposition’s office has lacked
efficiency or competence. Rather I think that the desire to obtain the
accountants’
reports has only been belatedly recognised. The fact of the
matter is that it is simply too late to alter the request beyond the
scope which it originally had.
The briefing
17 The principal claim in relation to the briefing note was that it was exempt
under section 28(1)(c) of the Act. This provides
that a document is an exempt
document if it is a document that contains “extracts” from a
document referred to in section
28(1)(a), (b) or (ba). In turn the department
relies upon section 28(1)(b) which provides that a document is an exempt
if it is a document that has been prepared by a minister, or on his or
her behalf, or by an agency, for the purpose of submission
for consideration by
the Cabinet. Essentially the department’s contention is that the Cabinet
submission is an exempt document
by reason of section 28(1)(b); and that the
briefing note is an exempt document because it contains extracts from the
Cabinet submission.
18 I accept the submission that the Cabinet submission is an exempt document
under section 28(1)(b) of the Act. It was prepared
on behalf of the Minister
for Health for the purpose of being submitted to the ERC for consideration by
the ERC. The ERC is a committee
of Cabinet and is to be regarded as Cabinet by
reason of section 28(7) of the Act. I note in passing that whether or not the
submission was actually considered by the ERC does not determine whether
or not the Cabinet submission is an exempt document; but,
in this particular
case, I find that the Cabinet submission was considered by ERC.
19 The question of whether a document contains extracts from a Cabinet
submission has not been authoritatively determined. In
Smith v Department of
Sustainability and Environment
I commented that it would appear that a document cannot “contain extracts
from” a Cabinet document if it was created
before the preparation of the
Cabinet document. In
Mildenhall v Department of
suggested that a document will “contain extracts from” a Cabinet
document if it contains a quotation or paraphrase
of that document. Commonly a
document that is an extract from another document will contain an attribution to
the other document,
but I accept that the absence of an attribution will not be
fatal. The question will need to be determined by reference to all the
evidence. In particular, the absence of an attribution will not be fatal where
there is direct evidence before the tribunal of a
process of extracting content
from a Cabinet submission to be included in a document which is claimed to be
exempt under section
28(1)(c) of the Act.
20 That brings me now to consider the specific evidence about the preparation of
the briefing note. Ms Riley gave evidence that
when it came to prepare the
briefing note, she personally undertook the exercise by operating her computer.
She gave evidence that
she opened an electronic copy of the Cabinet submission
that she had earlier prepared and cut and pasted content from that document
prepared the briefing note. Her evidence referred to specific paragraphs in the
briefing note and explained how the cut and
pasting process operated in relation
to these particular paragraphs. It is unnecessary to go through this evidence
paragraph by
paragraph. It is sufficient for me to find that Ms Riley extracted
a significant number of paragraphs from the Cabinet submission
and pasted those
paragraphs into the briefing note she was preparing, sometimes making subtle
changes, but on many occasions not
making any changes at all. In making this
finding I can go beyond the content of paragraph 13 of the witness statement
by Ms Riley. I am in the fortunate position (which, for obvious
reasons, has not been available to the applicants) of actually being
read and compare the two documents in question. That process confirms what Ms
Riley said in paragraph 13 of her witness
statement, namely that the briefing
note was substantially prepared by a process of cut and paste, or perhaps more
accurately copy
and paste, from the Cabinet submission.
21 In a sense this finding is not surprising. Common experience tells us that
when a person is required to prepare a document, the
content of which is
substantially the same as a document that that person has previously prepared,
the availability of computer technology
and the common ability to use that
technology, means that people do use copy and paste techniques in preparing
documents. Uncharitably
this might be known as recycling an earlier document.
It is a practice that one has observed from time to time with politicians,
possibly even with judges, and it would not be surprising if it was used by
public servants.
22 It follows that the briefing note is an exempt document under section
28(1)(c) of the Act, as it is a document that contains extracts
from a document,
namely a Cabinet submission, which is an exempt document under section 28(1)(b).
23 Before I pass this question it is necessary to say something about a
particular issue that has been raised by the applicant.
The applicant pointed
out that the final reports prepared by the three accountants post-dated the
preparation of the Cabinet submission.
Thus, they said, relying upon my
comments in
Smith v Department of Sustainability and Environment
briefing note could not contain extracts from the Cabinet submission if it
contained content which described or set out the
findings of the final reports
of the accountants. That much is clearly right. But there is no evidence that
the briefing note did
this. The evidence was that the final recommendations and
findings of the accountants confirmed the recommendations and finding
interim reports. I note that if the final recommendations or findings merely
repeated the interim recommendations or findings,
at least in respect of the
issue that was the subject of the briefing of the Premier, then it would have
been possible for the briefing
note to contain extracts from the Cabinet
submission.
24 Having regard to my conclusion on section 28(1)(c) of the Act it is
unnecessary for me to deal with the department’s submissions
in relation
to section 28(1)(d), except in one minor respect. That minor respect is that
there are two sentences in the briefing
note in relation to which the department
claims that the disclosure of the document would involve disclosure of a
decision of the
ERC. Having reviewed the two sentences in question, which are
in paragraph 21 and 22, I uphold the department’s contention.
sentences in question not only confirm my earlier finding that the ERC did
consider the Cabinet submission, but make it
clear that the ERC made a decision
in relation to the Cabinet submission and record the content of that decision.
Because it is
unnecessary to go further in relation to section 28(1)(d) of the
Act I will leave to another day what is meant by the expression
deliberation” of the Cabinet.
Practicable to
access edited document
25 I now want to turn to consider whether it is practicable to grant access to a
copy of the document with deletions so as to make
the copy not an exempt
document. This question arises by reason of section 25 of the Act. In various
cases the tribunal has advanced
principles which might be adopted in deciding
what is meant by the expression “it is practicable”. For example,
been said that it will not be practicable to grant access to the copy of
a document with exempt material deleted if the adapted document
“devoid of context”:
Kotsiras v Department of Premier and
“meaningless and possibly even need the reader of the document to draw
erroneous conclusions”:
Koch v Swinburne
meaningless or would “lead to unnecessary speculation as to what was
Thwaites v Department of Human
or “meaningless,
misleading or unintelligible”:
Stewart v Department of Tourism, Sport
and the Commonwealth Games
26 Perhaps I could add my own tentative thoughts. I think the concept of it
being “practicable” involves two essential
elements. First, it
involves consideration of the ease of undertaking the task of making deletions
so as to make a copy of the document
not an exempt document. Second, it
involves considering the efficacy of the outcome of undertaking such an
exercise, that is whether
it would result in the adapted document being a
meaningful document.
27 In the present case the exercise is slightly complicated by the fact that the
department has already made deletions and has released
a copy of the document,
with deletions. The department acknowledges that there remains some small parts
of the document which do
not contain material that would make those parts exempt
if considered in isolation; but says that to grant access to those parts
not be practicable, principally because they would stand in isolation and not be
meaningful. To assist me the department has
prepared a document which consists
of a coloured up version of the briefing note. The portion which has been
shaded in green represents
parts of the document that have already been
released. The parts that have been shaded in yellow represent matters in
which an exemption is claimed under section 28(1)(d) of the Act, an
exemption that I have upheld. The content that is unshaded represents
for which an exemption is claimed under section 28(1)(c) of the Act, again an
exemption which I have upheld. The parts of
the document shaded orange are
parts which the department says are not exempt if considered in isolation, but
which it says ought
not be released as they would have no meaning unless exempt
portions were also the subject of access.
28 It is necessary to consider these claims on an individual basis. The first
line in paragraph 2 of the document would, if released,
add nothing of
consequence or meaning. The last sentence of paragraph 8 of the document only
makes sense if one is aware of the
first sentence of paragraph 8 of the
document, a sentence which I find would, if considered in isolation, be exempt.
In relation
to paragraphs 16 and 17, my conclusion is that these paragraphs
depend on paragraph 15 for meaning. It is not practicable to grant
access to a
document containing paragraphs 16 and 17, but not paragraph 15, in a way that
gives those paragraphs meaning. I make
a similar finding about the last
sentence in paragraph 19 and the second half of paragraph 22.
29 I return now to paragraph 13. I find that it is practicable to grant access
to a copy of the document which includes paragraph
13. Mr Pizer submitted that
paragraph 13 would lack meaning if it was not part of a document that also
included paragraph 14. I
do not agree. Paragraph 13 is concerned with the
commissioning of Ferrier Hodgson, whereas paragraph 14 is concerned with
made by Ferrier Hodgson. In my view a document that refers to the task
that an accountant has been asked to perform has meaning
in the absence of
knowing what the accountants actually found. I regard the relationship between
paragraphs 13 and 14 the same as
that between paragraphs 9 and 10; and note that
the department decided to provide access to paragraph 9 but not to paragraph 10.
I agree with Mr Pizer that two wrongs do not make a right, however in my mind
the more important consequence of what has been released
(paragraph 9) is that
it has provided a context in which to consider whether other parts of the same
document may be released with
meaning. Perhaps what is more relevant in the
context of paragraph 13 is not whether or not paragraph 9 has been released, but
the fact that the heading immediately before paragraph 13 has been
released. Essentially all paragraph 13 does is amplify the words
in brackets in
that heading.
Stuart Morris
[1999] VSC 534
15 VAR 443.
[2006] VCAT 1228
Unreported, Member Glover, 16
April 1999.
[2003] VCAT 472
[2004] VCAT 1513
Unreported, VCAT Nedovic PM 15
December 1998 at 26
[2003] VCAT 45
[2003] 19 VAR 363
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter