URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v Pynt No. 2 [1998] VADT 27 (16 November 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Tribunal No. 187 of 1997
ERIC CLAYTON
Complainant
GORDON PYNT
1st Respondent
& RUSTRAND PTY LTD
2nd Respondent
MS C. McKENZIE
, Deputy President
TRANSCRIPT OF DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 16 NOVEMBER 1998 AT 10.17 AM
MR CLAYTON appeared on his own behalf.
MR G. PYNT appeared on behalf of the Respondents.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I said that I would deliver an oral decision at about
this time and I do so. I have to say before I begin that the
order is not yet
prepared, but it will be as soon as I complete these reasons. If the parties
want to wait for it, I'll do it right
then and there, but if not, I'll have it
prepared and signed and we'll post it to the parties. I should begin by saying
that I find
that in one respect this complaint is substantiated, but in all
others I dismiss it. I now give my reasons.
This is a complaint lodged by Mr Clayton with the Equal Opportunity
Commission, which I will call the Commission, on 19 August 1997.
It is lodged
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
, which I will call the 1995 Act. The
Commission declined to entertain the complaint because it lacked substance, it
could have been
dealt with more appropriately by another tribunal and related to
incidents occurring more than 12 months before the lodgement of
The complaint was referred to the then Anti Discrimination Tribunal on
31 October 1997. A preliminary conference was held on 12 March
1998 and in
accordance with directions given by the Tribunal at that conference, particulars
of complaint and defence were subsequently
filed and served. The respondents
applied unsuccessfully to have the complaint struck out. The decision of the
Tribunal on that application
was dated 30 June 1998.
On 1 July 1998 the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
which I will call the VCAT Act, and the Tribunals and Licensing Authorities
Miscellaneous Amendments Act 1998, which I will call
the Miscellaneous
Amendments Act, came into operation. The effect of these, among other things, is
to abolish the Anti Discrimination
Tribunal, to create the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, which I will call VCAT, to confer on VCAT the
exercised by the ADT.
The effect of clause 9(1) of schedule 2 of the Miscellaneous Amendments
Act is that where a proceeding like this complaint is pending
before the ADT
immediately before 1 July 1998, then it is deemed to have been commenced before
VCAT. Anything done by VCAT or the
parties in relation to the proceeding is
deemed to have been done by or in relation to VCAT and VCAT has the powers,
duties and functions
that the ADT had before 1 July 1998.
The complaint has come on for hearing today. Mr Pynt appeared in
person as also as representative for Rustrand Pty Ltd, which is
respondent, and of which he and his wife are the only directors. Mr Clayton
appeared in person. The complaint claims discrimination
on the ground of imputed
impairment in the provision of accommodation. It relates to events alleged to
have occurred in 1995.
In 1995 the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
was in force, but the complaint
itself is made under the 1995 Act, that is under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
That Act came into operation substantially on 1 January 1996. The effect of
s.218 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
is that a complaint may be lodged under
that Act in respect of conduct occurring before that Act commenced. If that
conduct would
constitute a contravention, both of the now repealed
Opportunity Act 1984
, and I will call that the 1984 Act, and also of the 1995
I now turn to the legislation. Read as a whole, this complaint claims
direct discrimination. Dealing first with the 1995 Act, s.4
defines "attribute"
as an attribute in s.6. It defines "accommodation" as including a boarding house
or hostel. It defines "detriment"
as including humiliation. It defines
"discrimination" as having the meaning given in part 2. It defines "impairment"
as meaning,
among other things, paragraph (d), "a malfunction of a part of a
body including (i) a mental or psychological disease or disorder."
Section 6 provides, "The following are the attributes on the basis of
which discrimination is prohibited in the areas of activity
set out in part 3."
Paragraph (b) relates to impairment. Section 7(1) provides that, "Discrimination
means direct or indirect discrimination
on the basis of an attribute." Section
7(2) relevantly provides, "Discrimination on the basis of an attribute includes
discrimination
on the basis, (d) That a person is presumed to have that
attribute, or to have had it at any time."
Section 8(1) provides, "Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats
or proposes to treat someone with an attribute less favourably
than the person
treats or would treat someone without that attribute, or with a different
attribute, in the same or similar circumstances."
Sub-section (2) relevantly
provides, "In determining whether a person directly discriminates, it is
irrelevant, (b) whether or not
the attribute is the only or dominant reason for
the treatment as long as it is a substantial reason."
The effect of s.8 (2)(a) and s.10 is that motive, or awareness of
discrimination on the part of the alleged discriminator are irrelevant.
50 is included in part 3 of the Act which contains prohibitions on
discrimination. It provides relevantly, "A person must
not discriminate against
another person, (b) by denying or limiting access by the other person to any
benefit associated with the
accommodation, (c) by evicting the other person from
the accommodation, (f) by subjecting the other person to any other detriment
connection with the accommodation provided to that person."
Section 102 relevantly provides, "If a person while acting as an agent,
(a) contravenes a provision of provision of part 3 or, (b)
engages in conduct
that would, if engaged in by the person's principal, contravene a provision of
part 3, both the person and the
principal must be taken to have contravened the
provision." Although the terminology of the 1984 Act is slightly different, its
is substantially the same. I summarise its effect here.
The full text of the relevant portions of that legislation is set out in
the Tribunal's decision on the strike out application of
30 June 1998. Section
30(2) paragraph (a) and (b) of the 1984 Act make discrimination, among other
things, on the ground of status
unlawful in the same circumstances as s.50
prohibits discrimination. Section 17(1) sets out when a person discriminates
against another
person on the ground, among other things, of status. Its
provisions are similar to the provisions of s.8 of the 1995 Act except that
under s.17(2) the comparison must be in circumstances that are the same, or not
materially different rather than the same or similar.
But for the purposes of
this case, the effect is probably the same.
The effect of s.4(7) is that if conduct occurs on two or more grounds
and one of them is status, among other things, and status is
a substantial
ground for the conduct, then the conduct is taken to be on the ground of status.
Under s.4(1) there are a number of
definitions. They include impairment which,
in paragraph (d) means "malfunction of a part of the body" and the definition of
malfunction
of a part of the body includes a mental or psychological disease or
disorder. Paragraph (f) of the definition of impairment includes
an impairment
imputed to a person. The effect of s.34(1) of the 1984 Act is broadly similar to
that of s.102.
To summarise, Mr Clayton will succeed in his claim applying to his case
the provisions that I have just set out. Mr Clayton will
succeed in his claim
if, on the balance of probabilities, he can prove that he was evicted or
subjected to a detriment, or that his
access to a benefit was limited or denied
in connection with accommodation and that when that happened, by so doing the
respondents,
on the basis of a psychological disorder they imputed to him,
treated him less favourably than they would a resident of that accommodation
whom they did not impute a similar impairment. If Mr Pynt acted as Rustrand's
agent and committed this conduct, then both Mr
Pynt and Rustrand Pty Ltd, which
I will call Rustrand in these reasons for decision, will both be liable because
of the effect of
s.102 of the 1995 Act and s.34(1) of the 1984 Act.
I turn now to my findings of fact. These are based on the evidence of Mr
Pynt and Mr Clayton who were the only witnesses to give
evidence at this
hearing. Rustrand, at the relevant time, was the lessee of premises at 87
Westbury Street. The company operated
the premises as a rooming house. It is a
relatively small house with about eight rooms. The rooms open from a central
hallway and
run from either side of that hallway. There is also a bungalow which
is occupied by a resident.
Mr Pynt is one of the two directors of Rustrand, the other is his wife.
The directors meet to make major decisions for the company,
but for daily and
routine matters Mr Pynt makes the decisions alone without holding directors
meetings or referring back to the other
director. I find that in the day to day
and routine running of the company Mr Pynt is the agent of Rustrand.
In January 1995 Mr Clayton came to the rooming house as a resident. On
20 January 1995 the St Kilda Rooming House Tenants Association
acting on Mr
Clayton's behalf issued a breach of duty notice to Mr Pynt under the
Houses Act 1990
claiming breach of duty by the rooming house proprietor by
permitting unauthorised entry to Mr Clayton's room and the shifting of
property located there.
It is clear from the evidence that Mr Clayton believed that this
interference took place and believed, and still believes, that the
then rooming
house residential manager, whose name was Mr Polglase, was responsible because
it was only Mr Clayton and he who had
keys to the room. He also stated in
evidence that he believed that someone had entered his room and adulterated his
shampoo with
cleaning fluid.
It is clear from Mr Pynt's evidence that he believed Mr Clayton's
allegations to have been imaginary and not founded on fact and
that based on
this belief and having seen a notice on Mr Clayton's car reading, "I am being
physically and psychologically harassed",
Mr Pynt had formed the belief that Mr
Clayton had some kind of mental or psychological disorder. Shortly after
receiving the breach
of duty notice Mr Pynt rang the Inner South Community
Mental Health Service, which I will call Inner South in these reasons for
and inquired of it whether Mr Clayton was a client. The service said
that he was. Mr Clayton denies that he was a client of that
Mr Clayton asserts, and I accept, that within a few days of the issue of
the breach of duty notice, and I am satisfied after the
telephone call was made
by Mr Pynt, Mr Clayton was visited by two staff from the Inner South service
inquiring whether he needed
assistance. He replied that he did not and the
people left. From his evidence, Mr Clayton was plainly upset by this visit. In
evidence Mr Clayton claims that subsequent events, which I shall come to
shortly, were the direct result of this visit. There is
nothing in my view in
the evidence to indicate that these subsequent events were in any way linked to
this visit and I find that
they were not.
On the evidence I find that the Inner South service did visit Mr Clayton
after the contact with Mr Pynt, but I am unable to find
whether that visit was a
direct result of that contact. It appears from the evidence also that Mr Pynt
so much out of concern for Mr Clayton, but because he
wanted to use information that it gave him to enable him to answer the breach
duty notice and in support, it seems to me from the evidence, of his allegations
that Mr Clayton's complaints were imaginary rather
than real. I am satisfied
that Mr Pynt did not ask or expect Inner South to visit Mr Clayton and I am
satisfied that any detriment
caused to Mr Clayton by that visit was not caused
by conduct of Mr Pynt, but it was an independent decision of Inner South. It
that this part of the complaint is not substantiated.
In late January 1995 Mr Pynt came to Mr Clayton's room. Mr Clayton
gave evidence that Mr Pynt knocked loudly at his door. Mr Pynt
denies this,
but said he did knock at the door, but he admits that he was angry at the time
because Mr Clayton had issued a breach
of duty notice rather than complain to
him directly and that he, Mr Pynt, had come to raise the matter with Mr Clayton.
On the whole
of the evidence I find that Mr Pynt did in fact knock loudly at Mr
Clayton's door. It is not in dispute that Mr Pynt then raised
with Mr Clayton
the fact that he had gone to the Rooming House Tenants Association rather than
complain to him.
The evidence then is that Mr Clayton slammed, according to Mr Pynt, and
shut, according to Mr Clayton, the room door in Mr Pynt's
face. There has been
no dispute that Mr Pynt then displayed his anger by shouting at Mr Clayton
through the closed door. Mr Clayton
gave evidence that this visit made him
frightened. I am not satisfied that this incident constituted less favourable
treatment on
the ground of Mr Clayton's imputed impairment, although I accept
that the incident may well have upset Mr Clayton.
On the evidence as a whole I am satisfied that the incident did not
occur because of any imputation of impairment to Mr Clayton,
but because Mr Pynt
was angry that Mr Clayton had made a complaint to the Rooming House Tenants
Association and issued a breach of
duty notice. Whether or not the anger was
reasonable, it was not in my view discriminatory, so the claim is not
substantiated on
that point.
I now come to the events of 17 March 1995. Mr Clayton gave evidence
that the resident manager of the rooming house at the time, whose
Michael Webster, had been verbally abusive to him on a number of occasions. Mr
Webster was not called to give evidence at
this hearing. Mr Clayton gave
evidence that at about 11 a.m. on 17 March, Mr Webster made a rude gesture
at Mr Clayton's car while
Mr Clayton was driving in Westbury Street. Mr
Clayton says that he took photos then of Mr Webster. He says that he then
entered the
rooming house and then asserts that Mr Webster pushed him while he
continued to take photos of Mr Webster so that his camera and
mobile phone fell
to the ground.
He asserts that he then threw a punch at Mr Webster, but missed him. He
asserts that the confrontation lasted less than a minute
and that it ended by
the two men separating and Mr Clayton going back to his room. Mr Clayton
gave evidence that he called the St
Kilda police who attended and then left. He
then gave evidence that at about 5 p.m. on that day the police returned with a
assessment team; in fact, a team from Inner South and that he was removed
from the premises and taken to Royal Park Hospital where
he remained as an
involuntary patient for some four weeks.
Mr Clayton tendered in evidence, and it is part of exhibit A, a copy of
the referral made by Mr Webster to the Inner South service
and on that referred
there is a statement that the referral was made at 12.20 p.m. on 17 March.
Mr Webster in his referral mentions
that Mr Clayton had threatened to get
him, (although Mr Clayton didn't deal with that matter in his evidence), and
also states that
he had a cut on his hand.
I find that after the 11 a.m. incident Mr Webster did refer the matter
to the Inner South team. I accept Mr Clayton's evidence that
the Inner South
team and the police did not again attend until some four and a half hours after
that referral took place, although
I am satisfied that they attended as a result
of the referral. There is no evidence that would disprove that that is before
On the next day, that is on 18 March 1995, according to Mr Pynt's
evidence Mr Webster reported to him the incident of the previous
day. He saw Mr
Webster's hand and describes the cut as small and agrees that it could have been
in any way by some accidental contact
made by Mr Webster himself, by an object
or in some other way. Mr Pynt's evidence, which I accept, is that he then tried
Mr Clayton. He rang Clarendon Street Clinic, which is a psychiatric
clinic which refused to disclose information to him. He rang
Royal Park Hospital
on 28 March and on being told that Mr Clayton was there, asked for details
of his medical condition and indicated
that he did not want Mr Clayton to return
to the rooming house.
Mr Clayton's doctor, Dr Theobald, informed Mr Clayton of this
and this time
spoke to Dr Theobald herself. He asked her when Mr Clayton's goods would be
removed. Again Dr Theobald informed Mr
Clayton of this conversation. Mr
Clayton gave evidence that he believed he had no right to go back to the rooming
house, that he
had continued via his daughter to have his rent paid while in
hospital, but that after the second contact between Mr Pynt and the
hospital, he
arranged for his goods to be removed and stopped paying rent.
Mr Pynt gave evidence that Mr Clayton, through his daughter, had
attempted to pay rent but that the payment had not been accepted,
but he also
couldn't recall whether it was two weeks or one week's rent that had been
offered. On this point we prefer the clearer
evidence of Mr Clayton. Mr Clayton
was discharged from hospital at the end of April 1995. Before his discharge the
social workers
at Royal Park Hospital had found him alternative accommodation.
He took up this accommodation on leaving hospital.
It is not in dispute that Mr Pynt did not notify the Residential Tenancy
Tribunal that he had evicted Mr Clayton for immediate threats
violence, nor did he obtain from the Residential Tenancy Tribunal a possession
order under the
Rooming Houses Act
to authorise the eviction. In August 1995 Mr
Clayton applied to the Residential Tenancy Tribunal for return of his bond and
compensation
for unlawful eviction, that is eviction otherwise than in
accordance with the Act. The Residential Tenancy Tribunal awarded him $600
compensation.
On 14 September 1995 Mr Pynt wrote to the Director of Clinical Services
of Royal Park Hospital again asking for details of Mr Clayton's
condition in March 1995. His request was refused on the grounds that to grant it
would be to disclose confidential information,
and that was done by a letter
dated 18 September 1995 which is part of Exhibit A.
Mr Pynt gave evidence that the reason for his not wishing for Mr Clayton
to return to his rooming house was not any imputed impairment
to Mr Clayton, but
rather the wishes expressed to Mr Pynt by other residents that Mr Clayton
not return and also Mr Clayton's violent
behaviour on 17 March. I do not accept
on the whole of the evidence that these were the only reasons for Mr Pynt's
conduct. First,
none of the residents were called to give evidence about their
wishes in respect of Mr Clayton's return.
Second, I am satisfied that Mr Clayton was only evicted after the
second contact made between the Royal Park Hospital and Mr Pynt
and that up to
then Mr Pynt had either himself or by his manager on his behalf been accepting
rent from Mr Clayton. Third, on the
evidence I am satisfied that Mr Pynt has
been preoccupied with Mr Clayton's state of mental health and that is shown by
his conduct
with the Inner South service in January 1995, his contacts with the
Royal Park Hospital in March 1995 and his letter to the Director
of Clinical
Services of Royal Park in September 1995.
Fourth, Mr Pynt himself gave evidence that he did not himself see what
happened on 17 March 1995, that the cut to Mr Webster's hand
was not serious and
that he did not notify or obtain a relevant order from the Residential Tenancy
Tribunal to authorise his conduct.
In my view this indicates, and I am satisfied
that Mr Pynt really did not regard Mr Clayton's conduct on 17 March as
such a serious
threat to safety that it could be the only reason for evicting Mr
Clayton 11 days later.
I am satisfied that although there may have been other reasons for the
eviction, such as wishes expressed by the residents to Mr
Pynt and a perceived
threat of, albeit a minor threat, to safety on the part of Mr Pynt, I am
satisfied that these may have played
some part in the decision to evict Mr
Clayton, but I am also satisfied on the whole of the evidence that a substantial
that decision was Mr Pynt's perception that Mr Clayton had a
mental and psychological disorder and also, Mr Clayton's admission to
where people with mental disorders would normally be treated.
Although Mr Pynt said in evidence that he would have treated anyone who
behaved as Mr Clayton did in the same way, I do not accept
his evidence on this
point. I am satisfied on the whole of the evidence that Mr Pynt had not believed
Mr Clayton to have a psychological
disorder and if he had not known that Mr
Clayton had been removed to a hospital where those with mental disorders were
normally treated,
Mr Pynt would have regarded the incident of 17 March as far
less serious than he in fact did and would not have proceeded to
On these grounds I find that a substantial ground for the eviction was
what Mr Pynt perceived as an impairment which Mr Clayton had,
a psychological
impairment. I find that there has been a contravention by Mr Pynt of s.50 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
and its corresponding previous provision, s.30(2) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
. I note that Mr Clayton has only sought damages and
no other order. Under s.136 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
the Tribunal, if
it finds a complaint substantiated, may award compensation to compensate a
complainant for loss, damage or injury
suffered in consequence of the
contravention.
There is no evidence before me that Mr Clayton has suffered financial
loss because of this contravention. Indeed, he has been compensated
amount of $600 in respect of the unlawful eviction part of this contravention of
the Act. He attributes all his subsequent
difficulties to Mr Pynt's conduct, but
I am not satisfied on the evidence that there is any ground for being able to
rate any subsequent
difficulties that Mr Clayton has had to that
contravention.
Mr Clayton gave evidence that he felt humiliated by what had happened to
him, but put this feeling aside and did his best to go on
with his life. It
seems to me that on the whole of the evidence, to compensate for discrimination,
which is after all this Act, is
aimed out; this Act is not aimed at unlawful
eviction per se although it is one element of discrimination, this Act is aimed
favourable treatment on the ground of imputed impairment which occurred
via the eviction. To compensation for that, it seems to me
that an appropriate
amount to award to Mr Clayton is $200.
I should add that I have considered whether s.80(1)(a) of the
Opportunity Act 1995
might apply, which excludes from the operation of the Act
discrimination on the basis of impairment if it is reasonably necessary
protect the safety of any person. Mr Pynt did not in terms raise this defence,
but taking into account that he is an unrepresented
person, I have considered
whether it might apply and in my view, on the evidence before me, there is
insufficient evidence to bring
this conduct into the scope of
s.80(1)(a).
Because I have said that Mr Pynt was acting as Rustrand's agent in his
conduct, it follows that both Mr Pynt and Rustrand will be
jointly and
severally liable, and that will find expression in my orders. For the rest, in
all other respect, I find this complaint
not to be proven and I dismiss it.
These two parties being unrepresented I make no order for costs. I will now, if
the parties are
happy, go and prepare an order. Do you want me to post it to
you, Mr Pynt and Mr Clayton, or do you want me to prepare it now and
MR PYNT: You can post it, thank you.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: And Mr Clayton?
MR CLAYTON: Post it.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Post it to you.
MR CLAYTON: M'mm.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Very well. Thank you very much indeed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter