URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-058 [2006] VMHRB 10 (27 October 2006)
07-058 [2006] VMHRB 10 (27 October 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Institute of Forensic Mental Health
[2006] VMHRB 10
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Prof C R Williams
Ms R Ravech
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(e) community treatment order – less restrictive of
decision and action - parole conditions
P has been diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and mixed
substance use disorder. P has an extensive forensic history.
On 26 September
2001, P was sentenced to eight years imprisonment with a non-parole period of
five years for the offence of attempted
murder of both of his parents by
P was released on parole in November 2005 with one of his parole conditions
“That you reside at Thomas Embling Hospital, Yarra Bend Road Fairfield
Victoria until otherwise determined by the Centre Manager.”
Ms Manova submitted on P’s behalf that the Board should exercise its
power to order the authorised psychiatrist make a community
treatment order.
Section 36(4)
of the Act provides:
“If the Board confirms the involuntary treatment order, the Board may
order the authorised psychiatrist to make a community
treatment order for the
patient within a reasonable period specified by the Board, if the Board
considers that the treatment required
for the person can be obtained through the
making of a community treatment order.”
(1) The Board was satisfied that P appears to be mentally ill, and that the
mental illness has been diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia
and mixed substance
use disorder.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P's mental illness requires immediate
treatment and that treatment can be obtained by P being subject
involuntary treatment order.
(3) P’s history in relation to compliance, and his current attitude to
treatment, support Dr AS’s view that P is not capable
of giving informed
consent to necessary treatment.
(4) The view of the Board was that the treatment required for P cannot at the
present point in time be provided through the making
of a community treatment
order. The Board accepted the opinion of Dr AS that adequate treatment on a
community treatment order requires
a level of co-operation, which is not at this
stage present on the part of P.
(5) There is a second reason why P is unable to receive adequate treatment
for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive of
his freedom of decision
and action than as an involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment
order. It is P’s clear
wish to leave hospital, and he would be likely to
do so if he was discharged from involuntary status or if the Board were to order
that a community treatment order be made. If that were to occur, then P would
be in breach of his parole. In such event it is likely
that his parole would be
revoked and that he would be returned to the prison system. In the
Board’s view, P would not receive
adequate treatment for the mental
illness within the confines of the prison system, and the prison system is more
restrictive of
his freedom of decision and action than is Thomas Embling
Hospital. Further, the status of involuntary patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order on parole is less restrictive of a person’s freedom of
decision and action than the status of prisoner whose
parole has been
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
P was represented by Ms D Manova, Barrister, briefed by Victoria Legal
Date of Decision:
27 October 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Victorian Institute of Forensic Mental Health
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
27 October 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to an involuntary treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Professor C R Williams
Community Member: Ms R Ravech
Psychiatrist Member: Dr T Gidley
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 27 October 2006:
Doctor: Dr AS
Legal representative: Ms D Manova, briefed by Victoria Legal Aid
Other: CD, nurse
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary treatment order was
The Board therefore confirmed the involuntary treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
27 October 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continued to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to an
involuntary treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
1. Clinical file of P.
on Involuntary Status dated 24 October 2006, prepared by Dr AS and presented to
Plan of P dated 9 August, prepared by Dr AS and presented to the Board.
evidence at the hearing.
of P, dated 26 September 2006 and lodged with the Board on 27 September
if, having regard to the criteria specified in
, the Board
is not satisfied that the continued involuntary treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order is necessary, the
Board must order that the person be discharged from the involuntary treatment
order. Therefore,
the Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by P being subject to an involuntary treatment
of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P necessary for his health or
safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or mental condition
or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P has been diagnosed as suffering from paranoid
schizophrenia and mixed substance use disorder.
P was first diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia in 1995. He has been
admitted to Maroondah Psychiatric Unit on four occasions,
and to Thomas Embling
Hospital on four occasions. Relapses have been characterised by delusions of
reference from the television
and radio, paranoid beliefs regarding the CIA,
auditory hallucinations, formal thought disorder, and impaired insight and
P has a past history of depression and affective insanity. P has a
history of polysubstance abuse including marijuana abuse from
the age of 15 and
heroin abuse from the age of 19.
P has an extensive forensic history. Prior to the incident that resulted in
his current admission he had some 32 convictions including
a number of assaults,
breach of intervention orders and offences involving damage to property. He had
served seven short periods
of imprisonment.
On 26 September 2001, P was sentenced to eight years imprisonment with a
non-parole period of five years for the offence of attempted
murder of both of
his parents by stabbing.
P was released on parole in November 2005 with a condition that he reside at
Thomas Embling Hospital until a discharge plan and establishment
of a treatment
plan were able to be put into operation. At that time P was admitted as an
involuntary patient to Thomas Embling
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Manova stated that she would not be submitting on
behalf of P that he should be discharged as an involuntary patient. Ms Manova
submitted that the Board should exercise its power to order the authorised
psychiatrist make a community treatment order.
Section 36(4)
“If the Board confirms the involuntary treatment order, the Board may
order the authorised psychiatrist to make a community
treatment order for the
patient within a reasonable period specified by the Board, if the Board
considers that the treatment required
for the person can be obtained through the
making of a community treatment order.”
The Chair of the Board raised the issue of the connection of the status of P
as an involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment
order and his
parole. Ms Manova put to the Board that her instructions were that as P was an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order it was for the
Board to determine whether he should be discharged either altogether or on a
community treatment order.
The Chair wished further information on the point,
and adjourned the hearing to enable the parole documents to be sought.
When the hearing resumed, the parole order, dated 5 August 2005, was provided
for the Board. One of the terms of parole stated:
“That you reside at Thomas Embling Hospital, Yarra Bend Road Fairfield
Victoria until otherwise determined by the Centre Manager.”
The view of the Chair of the Board is that the situation would thus be as
follows. The terms of parole do not remove the matter from
the jurisdiction of
the Board. Thus the Board must consider whether to continue P as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order, whether to discharge P from
involuntary status or, as submitted by Ms Manova, order that a community
treatment order
be made. However, an order discharging P altogether or ordering
a community treatment order would be likely to be of limited benefit
parole order does not require P to remain at Thomas Embling until the Mental
Health Review Board determines otherwise;
it requires him to remain ‘until
otherwise determined by the Centre Manager’. Thus if an order discharging
absolutely or on a community treatment order was made by the Board
contrary to the opinion of the Centre Manager, then P would be
entitled to leave
the hospital. If he were to do so, however, P would be in breach of his parole
and likely to be returned to prison.
Evidence of P
P gave evidence to the Board. P expressed himself
as angry at his continued detention at Thomas Embling. He stated:
“I am rehabilitated. I have done my time. I am getting harder and
more bitter. I am sick and tired of being on a unit in
Evidence of treating team
Dr AS gave evidence to the Board. The evidence of
Dr AS may be summarised as follows:
We are seeking to prepare P for discharge. His attitude and lack of
co-operation presents a problem. A set back occurred in July
of this year when
he was granted unescorted leave, failed to return when due and engaged in
substance abuse. We are nonetheless
continuing the plan of seeking to prepare P
for return to the community. He now has weekly excursions in the company of
We would hope for a discharge before Christmas, but that may prove too
ambitious. The attitude, temper and level of co-operation
of P remain a
problem. In one incident he abused the consultant psychiatrist and called her
a whore. He recently lost his temper
and dressed me down in circumstances where
other members of staff thought back up might be necessary because of possible
The Chair put to Dr AS the question whether at the present point in time the
treatment required for P ‘can be obtained through
the making of a
community treatment order’
). Dr AS responded:
“The answer is an emphatic ‘no’. It is not just a matter
of the incident in July or incidents involving particular
outbursts of temper.
The proper management of P’s illness requires a degree of co-operation
which is which is at present absent.”
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board was satisfied that P appears to be mentally ill, and that the
mental illness has been diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia
and mixed substance
use disorder.
In the section of his report dealing with current mental state, Dr AS
“At times of high stress or conflict P becomes intensely angry and at
such times he is abusive and threatening. P’s mood
is somewhat labile and
he often expresses himself in a manner that he aptly terms as
‘catastrophising’, although this
is less evident at the present
time. He tries hard to avoid losing his temper and to express the words he
knows are required. He
currently does not show evidence of formal thought
disorder or perceptual disorder or delusions.”
Although P does not currently exhibit formal thought disorder or perceptual
disorder or delusions, the well-documented history of
P’s mental illness
provides ample evidence supporting the opinion of Dr AS and the treating
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by P being subject to an involuntary treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P's mental illness requires immediate treatment
and that treatment can be obtained by P being subject
to an involuntary
treatment order.
P is currently receiving appropriate anti-psychotic medication. Plans have
been developed and are in the process of being implemented
for P’s return
to the community and for his treatment in the community when that occurs.
Because of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P
necessary for his health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of
the public?
The Board was satisfied that because of P’s mental illness, involuntary
treatment of P is necessary for his health or safety
and for the protection of
members of the public.
P has an extensive history of mental illness. The illness has been
characterised by P ceasing compliance with medication and relapsing.
forensic history demonstrates that when unwell he represents a significant risk
to members of the public.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
The Board was satisfied that P is unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness.
In the section of his report dealing with consent to necessary treatment, Dr
“He elected to stop clozapine on the basis of unacceptable subjective
side effects. A few weeks ago I wrote: currently P is
in agreement with
treatment goals and plan, now he disagrees with the plan. He has considerable
insight into his illness. He may
lose insight quickly during relapse and when
very angry.”
P’s history in relation to compliance, and his current attitude to
treatment, support Dr AS’s view that P is not capable
of giving informed
consent to necessary treatment.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
The Board was satisfied that P is unable to receive adequate treatment for
the mental illness in a manner less restrictive of his
freedom of decision and
action than as an involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order.
The Board considered whether, as submitted by Ms Manova, the Board should
order discharge of P on a community treatment order. The
view of the Board was
that the treatment required for P cannot at the present point in time be
provided through the making of a community
treatment order. The Board accepted
the opinion of Dr AS that adequate treatment on a community treatment order
requires a level
of co-operation, which is not at this stage present on the part
There is a second reason why P is unable to receive adequate treatment for
the mental illness in a manner less restrictive of his
freedom of decision and
action than as an involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order.
It is P’s clear wish
to leave hospital, and he would be likely to do so if
he was discharged from involuntary status or if the Board were to order that
community treatment order be made. If that were to occur, then P would be in
breach of his parole. In such event it is likely
that his parole would be
revoked and that he would be returned to the prison system. In the
Board’s view, P would not receive
adequate treatment for the mental
illness within the confines of the prison system, and the prison system is more
restrictive of
his freedom of decision and action than is Thomas Embling
Hospital. Further, the status of involuntary patient subject to an involuntary
treatment order on parole is less restrictive of a person’s freedom of
decision and action than the status of prisoner whose
parole has been
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan.
The treatment plan specifies psychiatric medication as follows: risperidone
consta 25 mg fortnightly, olanzapine 30 mg, fluoxetine
The treatment plan also provides as follows:
stability of mental state with use of anti-psychotic medication and other
psychiatric medication as clinically needed. Ensure
compliance with
anti-psychotic medication.
medical assessment and treatment as required to promote physical health.
leave plan with access to community leave as clinically appropriate.
with primary nurse on a rehabilitation program that incorporates strategies to
meet his individual needs, for example, developing
links with external
providers, drug and alcohol counselling and anxiety management.
5. Continue discharge planning process with relevant services.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board was satisfied that the plan is capable of being implemented by the
approved mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met, the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (59.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter