Objections lodged through facsimile transmission (GEN-003) [1994] VICSROGEN 2 (31 May 1994)
Revenue Rulings
Objections lodged through
facsimile transmission
Revenue Ruling GEN.003
The various legislation administered by the State
Revenue Office provide rights of objection to
assessments, and in some instances, to
determinations and notices of decision issued by the
Commissioner of State Revenue.
Requirements for the lodgement of a notice of
objection are provided for in the legislation and
these requirements must be met to ensure a valid
objection. (See Revenue Ruling PT.036, FID.013
and LT.001.)
This ruling outlines the requirements for lodgement
of a valid objection by facsimile.
The State Revenue Office will accept objections
which are faxed to the Office.
An objection lodged through facsimile transmission
will be treated as having been sent by the person
objecting and received by the Office on the day of
the transmission if it is during business hours, on a
business day, or otherwise, on the following business
day. A correct and complete transmission report
should be obtained by the person sending the
objection in order to confirm the transmission.
The original objection document should be received
by the State Revenue Office either by post or
personal lodgement within a reasonable time after
the facsimile transmission. The original document
must be identical to the faxed copy received by
the Office.
Any objection received by the Office through the
facsimile should include a cover sheet stating:
• the notice, assessment or determination being
objected to;
• the name of the taxpayer objecting;
• the name, address and telephone number of
the sender;
• the number of pages transmitted; and
• the name and telephone number of the person
to contact in the event of any problem in the
transmission/receipt of the document.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue