Payroll tax exemption for schools (PTA-032) [2008] VICSROPTA 10 (1 June 2008)
Revenue Rulings
Payroll tax exemption for schools
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Revenue Ruling PTA032
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
and harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria
Section 49 of the Act provides an exemption for
the wages paid by organisations set out in Division 1
of Schedule 2 of the Act. Division 1 of Part
3 of Schedule 2 of the Act provides an exemption
in Victoria for wages paid by certain schools, school
councils, educational service providers and Group
Training Organisations.
Clause 10(a) of Schedule 3 of the Act extends
the exemption to certain private schools or colleges
that do not fit into Division 1 of
of Schedule 2
of the Act. In addition, Clause 10(b) of Schedule 3
of the Act preserves an exemption offered under
section 10(1)(da)
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
it was amended in 2002.
These provisions represent one of the minor areas
in which the Victorian and NSW legislation are not
fully harmonised. Therefore, the exemption for schools
provisions only apply in Victoria.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain
the operation of the payroll tax exemption in Victoria
for wages paid by certain schools, colleges and
educational service providers.
Clause 14(1) of Schedule 2 – registered private
primary and secondary schools
Non-Government schools within the meaning
Education and Training Reform Act 2006
that are registered under that Act are eligible for the
exemption provided they operate on a not-for-profit
basis. The exemption is restricted to wages paid
or payable to a person in relation to the provision
of education within that school.
Examples of schools that would be eligible for
exemption under this clause would include most
conventional private primary or secondary schools.
Clause 10(a) of Schedule 3 – schools and colleges
Clause 10(a) of Schedule 3 of the Act extends
the exemption for wages paid by certain private
schools or colleges that do not fit into the category
contained in clause 14(1) of Schedule 2 of the Act.
The exemption applies to a school or college that
satisfies the following conditions:
• It operates on a not-for-profit basis
• It is not carried on by or on behalf of the State
of Victoria
• It provides education at or below secondary level
• The majority of students are aged under 19 years,
• It must have been in existence as a school
or college that conformed to the above criteria
before 27 May 1997.
The exemption is limited to wages paid or payable
to a person in relation to the provision of the
secondary level education.
An example of a school or college that would be
eligible for exemption under this clause would
be an organisation offering specialist career tuition
in drama for school age students and providing
education at or below secondary level.
Clause 10(b) of Schedule 3 – schools and colleges
Clause 10(b) of Schedule 3 of the Act preserves
an exemption offered under section 10(1)(da) of
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
before it was amended by
State Taxation Legislation (Further Amendment)
2002. The amendment took effect from 1 July 2002.
The exemption applies to wages paid or payable to a
school or college that satisifes the following conditions:
• It operates on a not-for-profit basis
• It is not carried on by or on behalf of the State
of Victoria
• It provides education predominantly at or below the
secondary level
• It is not a technical school or technical college, and
• It must have been in existence as a school
or college that conformed to the above criteria
before 27 May 1997.
Commissioner of State Revenue
The exemption is limited to wages paid or payable
to a person in relation to the provision of the
secondary level education.
An example of a school or college that would be
eligible for exemption under this clause would
be an adult educational service that provides
predominantly secondary education, such as
Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) subjects.
Clause 15 of Schedule 2 – educational service
Clause 15 of Schedule 2 of the Act provides
an exemption for wages paid by a not-for-profit
educational service provider that provide an
educational service in connection with the curriculum
of schools or colleges that are exempt under
the previously-mentioned provisions of the Act.
The exemption is restricted to wages paid or payable
to a person for the provision of the educational service.
An example of an organisation that would be eligible
for exemption under this clause is an organisation
that provides services such as outdoor education,
music, drama, vocational or life skill programs
to exempt private primary and secondary schools.
Meaning of not-for-profit
For the purposes of this exemption, not-for-profit
means that the school, college or educational service
provider must not conduct its activities for the profit
or gain of the individual members of its governing
body or organisation. In addition, assets must
not be distributed to the individual members
of its governing body or organisation in the event
of the winding-up or dissolution of the school,
college or educational service provider.
If there is any doubt regarding the status of a school,
college or educational service provider, please apply
to the Commissioner of State Revenue for a private
ruling in accordance with Revenue Ruling GEN.009.
This Revenue Ruling is effective from 1 July 2007.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling