Employment Agency Contracts - Allowances and reimbursements paid to on-hired workers (PT-116) [2005] VICSROPT 4 (1 April 2005)
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
') was amended
State Taxation Acts (Tax Reform) Act 2004
introduce changes to the employment agency contract
provisions from 1 January 2005.
2. Under the new provisions, the employment agent is
liable for pay-roll tax under an employment agency
contract on payments made to, or in relation to, service
providers (on-hired workers), as well as on the value of
any fringe benefits provided and superannuation
contributions made on behalf of these on-hired workers.
3. The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the correct pay-roll
tax treatment of allowances and reimbursements paid
(under an employment agency contract) by an
employment agent to their on-hired workers.
4. Payments of allowances and reimbursements made
under an employment agency contract by employment
agents to their on-hired workers, are to be treated in the
same manner as allowances and reimbursements paid
by employers to their employees.
5. Allowances have always been included in the definition
of 'wages' under
section 3(1)
allowance is usually paid by an employer to compensate
an employee for an expense associated with their
employment, as compensation for unusual or
unfavourable working conditions, or in recognition of
additional skills. Examples of such allowances include
travelling, accommodation, uniform, tea, meal, dirt and
first-aid allowances.
6. As a general rule all allowances are fully taxable for Pay-
roll Tax purposes. The only allowances that are not
wholly taxable are travelling allowances, accommodation
allowances and living away from home allowances. For
details on the treatment of these allowances see
Revenue Ruling PT.089
Exempt Allowances
7. Reimbursements differ from allowances and can be
described as business expenses incurred by employees
on behalf of their employer.
8. A reimbursement will not attract Pay-roll Tax provided
the payment has the following characteristics:
at the time it is paid, a business related
expense has already been incurred by the
employee (or a payment in advance is made) and
a receipt relating to the expense is provided to the
employer; and
the expenditure by the employee was incurred in
the course of the employer's business; and
the precise amount of the expense is reimbursed.
9. However, any reimbursement that is taxable for fringe
benefits tax purposes will be subject to Pay-roll Tax
regardless of the above criteria. Furthermore, any
reimbursements that are exempt benefits under the
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986
will be exempt
from Pay-roll Tax.
10. For further information on allowances and
reimbursements, please refer to Revenue Ruling PT.059
Allowances and Reimbursements.
11. In summary, the treatment for Pay-roll Tax purposes of
allowances and reimbursements paid, under an
employment agency contract, by an employment agent
to an on-hired worker is as follows:
Allowances are fully taxable for Pay-roll Tax purposes,
except for the following allowances:
accommodation,
travelling, and
living away from home allowances
Reimbursements
Payments that fall into this category are not taxable
they have a taxable value for Fringe Benefits Tax
12. Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the SRO is made on the merits
of each individual case having regard to any relevant
ruling. All rulings must be read subject to Revenue
Ruling GEN.01.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling No. PT.116
Employment Agency Contracts
Allowances and reimbursements paid to on-hired workers
Revenue Ruling PT.116
Commissioner of State Revenue