Land used for primary production (LT-005) [1993] VICSROLT 5 (30 September 1993)
Revenue Rulings
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
Please continue over page
Land used for
primary production
Revenue Ruling LT.005
Replaced by LT.010
There are three sections in the
Land Tax Act 1958
which exempt land used for primary production from
land tax, these being sections 9(1)(ga), 9(1)(h), and
9(1)(ha). Each section requires different criteria to
be satisifed, and confusion often arises as to how
each section is to be applied.
The legislation defines land used for primary
production to include land used primarily for one or
more of the following activities:
• Cultivation thereof for the purpose of selling the
produce of such cultivation;
• Maintenance of animals or poultry thereon for
the purpose of selling them or their natural
increase or bodily produce;
• Keeping of bees thereon for the purpose of
selling their honey;
• Commercial fishing, including the preparation
for such fishing or the storage or preservation of
fish or fishing gear; and
• Cultivation or propagation for sale of plants,
seedlings, mushrooms or orchids.
The business of primary production means the
business of one or more of the activities
described above.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide an
explanation of the primary production exemption
sections of the legislation.
There are three situations in which land used for
primary production will be exempt from land tax.
1. Land wholly outside the metropolitan area -
Section 9(1)(ga)
Land which is wholly outside the metropolitan
area will be exempt provided it is used for
primary production.
2. Land at least partly within the metropolitan
area, but not in an urban zone - Section 9(1)(h)
Land which is wholly or partly within the metropolitan
area, but none of which is within an urban zone will
be exempt provided it comprises one parcel of land,
and it is used for primary production.
3. Land at least partly within the metropolitan
area, and at least partly zoned urban - Section
Land comprised in one parcel which is wholly or
partly within the metropolitan area and at least part
of which is within an urban zone will be exempt
where the land is used solely or primarily for the
business of primary production and certain
criteria are satisfied
. The criteria to be satisfied
are different depending upon whether the land is
owned by a proprietary company or by a natural
person (persons), and are as follows:
a. Land owned by a proprietary company:
• All shares are beneficially owned by natural persons;
• The main undertaking of the company is primary
production of the type conducted on the land; and
• All dividends distributed during the last three
years or since commencement of the
or since the incorporation of the company
were made to the holders of the issued ordinary
share capital in proportion to the paid up value
of their share holdings, and at least 60 per cent
of those dividends were paid to persons normally
engaged in a substantially full time capacity in
the business of primary production.
In circumstances where no dividends have been
declared during the three periods described above,
60 per cent or more of the ordinary share capital
must have been beneficially owned for one of those
periods by persons normally engaged in a substantially
full time capacity in the business of primary production; or
ON THE MOVE
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
C E A S E D 30 November 1995
b. Land owned by one or more natural persons:
• All of those persons are normally engaged in a
substantially full-time capacity in the business of
primary production of the type conducted on the
• In the case of the land being owned by two or
more natural persons;
At least one of those persons is normally
engaged in a substantially full time capacity
in the business of primary production of the
The other owners are relatives of the person
normally so engaged; and
No other person is normally so engaged on
that land; or
• In the case of the land being owned by one or
more natural persons;
A relative of the person, or each of the
persons is normally engaged in a substantially
full-time capacity in the business of primary
production conducted on the land; and
No other person is normally so engaged on
The concept of a person being ‘normally engaged,
in a substantially full-time capacity’ in a business of
primary production (as referred to above) excludes
mere casual or intermittent employment, and
requires the business to be the person’s principal
activity. There should be regular participation in
the business for a considerable part of that
person’s time.
Note: The term ‘relative’ in respect of a person is
defined in section 9(1H) of the Act to mean:
• a spouse or de facto spouse of the person;
• a lineal ancestor or lineal descendent of the
person, or of the spouse or de facto spouse of
the person;
• a brother or sister, or child of a brother or sister,
of the person or of the spouse or de facto
spouse of the person;
• a spouse or de facto spouse of a child of
the person; or
• a spouse or de facto spouse of a brother or sister
of the person.
It should be noted that all exemptions under these
sections apply to land, and not to landholders.
Therefore, if a landholder owns more than one
parcel of land, each parcel must be considered
separately.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue