Landholder Provisions - Declared Wholesale Unit Trust Schemes (DA-062) [2012] VICSRODA 10 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – Declared Wholesale
Unit Trust Schemes
Revenue Ruling DA.062
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on
relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(including a wholesale unit trust scheme) that has
land holdings in Victoria with an unencumbered
value of $1 million or more.
A wholesale unit trust scheme is defined in section
3 of the Act as a unit trust scheme that is registered
under Division 6 of
of Chapter 3 of the Act as a
wholesale unit trust scheme, an imminent wholesale unit
trust scheme or a declared wholesale unit trust scheme.
Sections 89Q
of the Act provide for the
registration of a unit trust scheme as a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme. These sections allow
a unit trust scheme to overcome anomalies associated
with its status under the Act when it is effectively
wholesale in nature and purpose but fails to meet
the necessary criteria for registration as such.
sections 89Q
of the Act, the trustee
of a unit trust scheme may apply for registration
and the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) may register the scheme as a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme if the Commissioner
is satisfied that the scheme meets the criteria for
registration. The criteria for registration as a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme are –
(a) the scheme should be registered as a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme; and
(b) registration is not being sought for the purpose of, or
as part of a scheme or arrangement with a collateral
purpose of, avoiding or reducing duty otherwise
chargeable under
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
In considering an application for registration, the
Commissioner is permitted under
section 89Q(3)
of the Act to take into account any matter he
considers relevant.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the factors
the Commissioner will take into account when
determining whether a scheme should be registered
as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme and the
circumstances in which the Commissioner is likely
to make such a determination.
The factors the Commissioner will consider when
making a determination as to whether a unit trust
scheme should be registered as a declared wholesale
unit trust scheme include (but are not limited to) -
• The purpose and nature of the scheme and
whether it is effectively wholesale;
• Whether the scheme was established for a
particular investor or for a specific type of investor,
i.e. public, professional or institutional investors;
• Whether units in the scheme have been offered
to retail investors or restricted to professional and
institutional investors;
• The degree of ownership and/or control a
particular investor or group of related investors
has/have over the scheme;
• The percentage of units in the scheme held by
qualified investors either alone or together with
associated persons;
• The value of each unit holder’s subscription under
the scheme;
• The direct and indirect land holdings of the
scheme, including the unencumbered value
of each land holding; and
• The factors restricting the scheme’s ability to
satisfy the criteria of a wholesale unit trust scheme
and whether the scheme is eligible to be registered
as an imminent wholesale unit trust scheme.
Generally, the Commissioner would be satisfied that
a scheme should be registered as a declared wholesale
unit trust scheme where the scheme does not quite
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
meet the criteria for registration as a wholesale
unit trust scheme but is otherwise considered to
be wholesale in nature and purpose. Conversely, the
Commissioner would not be satisfied that a scheme
should be registered as a declared wholesale unit
trust scheme if the scheme does not currently meet
any of the relevant criteria for registration as a
wholesale unit trust scheme but may or is expected
to meet some or all of the criteria sometime in the
future. Such a scheme may wish to consider its
eligibility for registration as an imminent wholesale
unit trust scheme under
section 89T
of the Act.
In determining whether a unit trust scheme is
effectively wholesale, the Commissioner will not look
beyond the registered unit holders of the scheme.
The only exception is where a unit holder is a bare
trustee, nominee or custodian separately holding units
in the scheme for different beneficial owners (including
qualified investors under
section 89P
of the Act) who
could call for the units at any time. In all other cases,
the Commissioner will not look through the registered
unit holders in order to characterise the scheme as
one that should be registered as a declared wholesale
unit trust scheme.
Where the Commissioner finds a scheme is effectively
wholesale, the Commissioner is more likely to be
satisfied that the scheme should be registered as
a declared wholesale unit trust scheme if its failure
to qualify as a wholesale unit trust scheme is at the
margin and/or due to factors beyond its control.
Factors beyond the control of a scheme will not include
acquisitions of interests in the scheme that prevent
the scheme from qualifying as a wholesale unit trust
scheme, unless the acquisitions were not contemplated
by the acquirers (e.g. a redemption or cancellation of
units/shares that gives rise to acquisitions by associated
persons that the Commissioner has accepted should
not be aggregated for duty purposes under section
78(2) of the Act). However, factors beyond the control
of the scheme may include restrictions on the scheme’s
ability to create and issue new or further units so as to
satisfy the criteria for registration as a wholesale unit
trust scheme.
Examples 1, 2 and 3 are situations where the
Commissioner would be inclined to register a unit trust
scheme as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme.
A property fund was established five years ago
to provide professional and institutional investors
with investment and diversification opportunities
in real property-based securities. Among other
things, the fund’s investments include the indirect
ownership of three properties in Victoria and New
South Wales worth $100 million each. As the fund
does not intend to acquire any further property, it
is closed to new investments. However, an existing
repurchase facility allows for some limited trading
of existing units. Currently, the fund has 20 unit
holders, none of whom, either alone or together
with associated persons, hold 20% or more of the
units in the scheme and 15 of whom are qualified
investors holding 65% of all the units on issue.
Such a scheme may be considered wholesale in
nature as it is structured, owned and operated in
a manner that is consistent with the criteria of a
wholesale unit trust scheme under the Act. If the
trustee of the scheme is restricted in creating and
issuing new or further units in the scheme so as to
immediately come within the criteria of a wholesale
unit trust scheme, the Commissioner would be
inclined to treat the scheme as one that should
be registered as a declared wholesale unit trust
scheme, provided the trustee uses the repurchase
facility to ensure the qualified investor holding rate
is maintained, if not increased, over time. However,
if there are no restrictions on the creation or
issue of new or further units, registration may be
conditional on the trustee issuing new or further
units to qualified investors within an agreed time
A unit trust scheme that has been owned and
operated by members of the same family for
some time has decided to register as a managed
investment scheme and issue a product disclosure
statement (the PDS) to a targeted group of
institutional investors. The PDS identifies that the
scheme owns one significant industrial property
worth $75 million and that two other properties
worth $15 million each have been secured through
various option agreements with the current owners.
The offer of units under the PDS closes over-
subscribed, with institutional investors meeting the
description of qualified investors in
section 89P(1)
of the Act obtaining 90% of all the units on offer.
Of all the applicants that acquired units, only five
were successful in obtaining a subscription of units
to the value of $3 million or more. Subsequent
to the allocation of units to applicants, the owner
of one of the properties that the scheme was to
acquire exercised its right to withdraw the property
from sale. Consequently, the scheme is unable
to satisfy the wholesale unit trust land holding
and/or subscription requirements for registration.
Given that the scheme falls just short of these
requirements, the Commissioner would be inclined
to register the scheme as a declared wholesale unit
trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme has applied and been
registered as an imminent wholesale unit trust
scheme under the Act. Despite only attracting
investments from qualified investors under an
information memorandum made available through
a number of fund managers, the scheme is
unable to satisfy the criteria of a wholesale unit
trust scheme upon expiration of the registration
period because of a shortfall in subscriptions and
the underwriter being required to take up 40% of
the units in the scheme. In such circumstances,
the Commissioner may register the scheme as
a declared wholesale unit trust scheme on the
condition that the underwriter’s interest in the
scheme (or at least 10% of its interest in the
scheme) is sold or diluted in favour of qualified
investors within an agreed time frame. It is
important to note that in these circumstances,
registration will take effect from a date determined
by the Commissioner and will not be backdated to
the start date of the imminent wholesale unit trust
scheme registration period.
Examples 4, 5 and 6 are situations where the
Commissioner would not be inclined to register a
scheme as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme that was established for and
owned by a particular investor (who is a qualified
investor under
section 89P(1)
of the Act) has
decided to offer a 49% interest in the scheme to
the public as its property portfolio has grown to
include five A grade hotel properties valued at
$50 million ($10 million each). The scheme
registers as a managed investment scheme and
issues a product disclosure statement for the offer
of units to the public. After the allocation of units
to applicants, the scheme has 500 unit holders
of which three unit holders (including the initial unit
holder) are qualified investors holding 61% of all
the units on issue. Of the three qualified investors,
the initial unit holder for whom the scheme was
established holds 51% of the units in the scheme.
The other two qualified investors each hold 5% of
the units in the scheme. In such circumstances, the
Commissioner would not be inclined to register the
scheme as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme
as the scheme was and still is controlled by the
initial unit holder and is not wholesale in nature
or purpose.
After undertaking a number of retail offerings,
a unit trust scheme that owns a sizeable and
valuable portfolio of properties has decided to also
seek funds from wholesale clients. An information
memorandum is prepared and distributed
among a select group of fund managers. The
documentation indicates that this will be the first
and only time there will be an exclusive offer of
units to wholesale clients. After the allocation of
units to wholesale clients, the scheme has 1,000
unit holders of which 50 are qualified investors
holding 45% of the units in the scheme. One of
the qualified investors holds 25% of all the issued
units in the scheme with the remaining 49 holding
20%. As non-qualified investors hold a substantial
percentage of the units in the scheme, the
Commissioner would not be inclined to register the
scheme as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme that is controlled by a group
of qualified investors has applied for registration
as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme for the
purpose of ensuring that a trust in which it owns
units can qualify for registration as a wholesale
unit trust scheme. In these circumstances, the
Commissioner would not be satisfied that the
registration is not being sought as part of a
scheme or arrangement to avoid or reduce duty
otherwise chargeable under
of Chapter 3
of the Act.
The above examples are provided as a guide only
and are not exhaustive. The Commissioner will
consider each application based on its own facts
when determining whether or not a unit trust scheme
should be registered as a declared wholesale unit trust
In all cases the onus is on the applicant to provide
the Commissioner with the necessary information in
order to make an informed decision on whether the
unit trust scheme meets the criteria to be registered
as a declared wholesale unit trust scheme. To assist
applicants in applying for such registration, the
Commissioner has developed an application form
which is available on the State Revenue Office website
(Duties Form 59). Please note that the Commissioner
will not process an application for registration unless
the relevant form is completed in full and submitted
with all relevant documentation and information.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must
be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
Commissioner of State Revenue