Stamp duty on declaration of trust (SD-108) [2000] VICSROSD 7 (1 December 2000)
Revenue Rulings
Stamp duty on declaration of trust
Revenue Ruling SD.108
Replaces SD.015
Revenue Ruling SD.015 has been revised to reflect
the abolition of deed duty from 1 May 1997.
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) imposes stamp duty
on instruments of settlement.
Uncertainty exists as to whether a Declaration of
Trust by deed is dutiable as a settlement under
Heading IX of the Third Schedule to the Act, or is
a deed not subject to duty.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the
circumstances where duty is payable under
Heading IX of the Third Schedule to the Act, and
to clarify the status of a Declaration of Trust that
was executed as a deed prior to the abolition of
deed duty on 1 May 1997.
This ruling is effective from 1 May 1997.
If the Declaration of Trust is one whereby a person
settles property upon someone else (a trustee) for
the benefit of a third party (beneficiary), stamp duty
is payable under Heading IX of the Third Schedule
to the Act.
Where a Declaration of Trust evidences the
purchase of a property by one person on behalf of
another, evidence will be required in the form of a
statutory declaration to support a submission that
the declaration does not attract duty under
Heading IX of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The statutory declaration should contain
information stating who contributed the purchase
moneys, the source of these moneys, together with
the reason why the property was purchased in the
name of the trustee. Copies of relevant financial
statements, which evidence the source of these
moneys, should accompany the statutory
declaration.
However a Declaration of Trust which is executed as
a deed before 1 May 1997 will be chargeable with
deed duty unless chargeable with duty under
another section of the Act.
To ensure that a declaration of trust is duly stamped
the Declaration of Trust should be lodged for the
opinion of the Commissioner of State Revenue.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01
Commissioner of State Reveue
December 2000