Excluded debits - Government bodies (DT-006) [1997] VICSRODT 1 (1 February 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Section 26 of the
Debits Tax Act 1990
provides for the issue of certificates of exemption in
respect of the bank and non-bank financial
institution accounts of State or Commonwealth
government departments, State or Commonwealth
authorities, municipal corporations or other local
governing bodies (hereafter referred to generally as
‘government bodies’). A certificate of exemption
will, however, only be issued where the Commissioner
is satisfied that all debits made or to be made to the
account fall, or are likely to fall within sub-paragraph
(a)(ix) of the definition of ‘excluded debits’ in section
3(1) of the Act.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide guidance as
to the types of debits that qualify as ‘excluded debits’
under sub-paragraph (a)(ix) of
section 3(1)
Sub-paragraph (a)(ix) of the definition of ‘excluded
debits’ provides that debits to accounts of
government bodies do not qualify as ‘excluded
debits’ either where:
the sole or principal function of the
government bodies is to carry on an activity
in the nature of a business (whether or not
for profit); or
the debit is in relation to a transaction or
transactions entered into by the government
bodies in connection with the carrying out of
an activity in the nature of a business
(whether or not for profit). This does not
include debits relating to those activities
which form a minor or insignificant part of
the functions of the government body.
Essentially, the scope of the exemption covers
government bodies that do not primarily carry on
business undertakings, so that such bodies are
eligible for an exemption in respect of their
non-business activities and any business activity that
forms a minor or insignificant part of its functions.
(a) Activity in the Nature of a Business
Whether an activity is one in the nature of a business
is a question to be determined on the facts of each
case. There is an abundance of case law on what
constitutes ‘a business’ or ‘carrying on a business’
to assist with this determination. Even if the
government body does not make a profit from a
particular activity, the fact that the activity is of a
businesses would indicate that the activity is in the
nature of a business. An activity will be deemed to
be in the nature of a business where the goods or
services are supplied to the public for payment
(section 3(4)
of the Act).
Certain goods or services may be prescribed as
‘excepted’ goods or services and the activity of
providing such ‘excepted’ goods or services for a
charge does not automatically constitute an activity
in the nature of a business. To date no ‘excepted’
goods or services have been prescribed.
(b) ‘Minor’ or ‘Insignificant’ Business Activity
Government bodies are eligible for a certificate of
exemption not only in respect of their non-business
activities but also in respect of any business activity
that forms a minor or insignificant part of their
functions. For example, a local council is entitled to
an exemption for those bank accounts which are
used for business activities such as operating a
swimming pool where, viewed overall, that activity
represents a minor part of the council’s functions.
On the other hand, a council that carries on a
substantial electricity supply undertaking will not be
eligible for exemption in respect of debits relating to
that activity.
If a government body starts to include debits relating
to business activities which represent more than a
minor or insignificant part of its functions in an
existing ‘exempt’ account, the government body’s
certificate of exemption may be revoked (see section
26(3) of the Act).
Excluded debits - Government
Revenue Ruling DT.006
Ceased - 30 June 2005
ON THE MOVE
Where any government body has any doubts
whether its business activities represent a minor or
insignificant part of its functions, the matter should
be referred to this Office for resolution.
Business Units within Government Bodies:
It is 12 years since this exemption, in its present
form, was introduced. Prior to the amendment, the
common practice among government bodies was
to conduct their business activities through their
main operating accounts. Accordingly, such an
account was not eligible for an exemption certificate.
The exemption was then adapted to reduce the
administrative burden on government bodies in
paying Debits Tax on those non-business debits and
subsequently claiming a refund.
It is a much more common practice now for
government bodies to set up individual business
units, with their own bank accounts, which apply on
their own behalf to this Office for this exemption. In
these circumstances, this Office will consider the unit
as a business entity on its own. Any activity, for which
a separate business unit is established, will not be
treated as a ‘minor’ or ‘insignificant’ business activity
of a government body. The rationale for this decision
is that it is evident from the Second Reading speech
that the policy of taxing all business activities of
government bodies ensures equality of tax treatment
with private sector competitors. That rationale has
not changed and if government bodies elect to set
up individual business units, those units must
operate on a level playing field with their private
sector competitors.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ceased - 30 June 2005