Money for money exemption -Purchase of bank cheques (FID-050) [1998] VICSROFID 2 (1 May 1998)
Revenue Rulings
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the
circumstances in which funds received by a
financial institution for the purchase of bank
cheques will be exempt from primary duty.
Section 18(3)(g) of the
Financial Institutions Duty
(the Act) exempts from duty ‘a receipt of
money, being cash or cheque, by a registered
financial institution in exchange for which the
financial institution forthwith gives, to the person
from whom it received the money, cash or cheque
of the same value as the money received, being a
receipt in respect of which an entry is not made in
an account kept by the financial institution in the
name of that person’.
Traditionally, the State Revenue Office (SRO) has
taken a narrow reading of this provision. Under a
narrow reading, when a customer buys bank
cheques, the exemption is restricted to situations
where the customer makes payment in cash or
cheques. The SRO received an industry
submission which indicated that such a narrow
application of the exemption produces results
which unnecessarily restrict commercial banking
practices. The submission sought to extend the
exemption to amounts received for the purchase
of bank cheques as a result of an instruction to
debit a customer’s account.
Further concerns have been raised that the
wording of the exemption requires the customer or
agent to attend the financial institution to receive
the bank cheques. The SRO recognises that such
a requirement is onerous and impractical.
Therefore, this ruling clarifies the application of
section 18(3)(g) of the Act to an exchange of
money for money involving the purchase of bank
cheques and, in particular, how payment for those
cheques can be made and how they can be
provided by the financial institution.
Money, either cash or cheque, received by a
registered financial institution from a person, in
exchange for cash or cheques of the same value, is
exempt from duty under section 18(3)(g) of the Act.
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
the exemption applies to payments for bank cheques
made by an instruction to debit a customer’s account
or through electronic funds transfer.
The exemption applies only to an amount received up
to a value equal to that of the bank cheques provided
by the financial institution. It does not exempt any
fees received by the financial institution for the
services provided. Further, the money received by the
financial institution must be credited to its own
account and not to the account of the person to
whom it has given the bank cheques.
The exemption will also apply to situations where a
financial institution is authorised by a customer to
dispatch bank cheques to a third party or give the
cheques to a courier for dispatch. To that end, the
SRO accepts that a bank or courier, authorised to
dispatch the bank cheques by a customer, is acting as
the customer’s agent.
The exemption does not apply to the purchase of a
stored value card or similar store of electronic funds.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Money for money exemption -
Purchase of bank cheques
Revenue Ruling FID.050