Explanations and status of revenue rulings (GEN-001) [1993] VICSROGEN 1 (1 June 1993)
Revenue Rulings
A revenue ruling system was introduced on 1 July
1992 as a method of publishing and disseminating
decisions on the interpretation of the legislation
administered by the State Revenue Office.
It is essential to note that rulings issued by the State
Revenue Office are not a conclusive statement of the
law in that particular area. They represent the
interpretation of the law that the Office is applying
over the period the ruling is effective.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the status
and effect of revenue rulings issued by the State
Revenue Office.
A revenue ruling will be issued in respect of a
decision which satisfies the following criteria.
• It provides an interpretation, guideline,
precedent, practice or procedure to be followed
in making a decision that affects the rights or
liabilities of persons or organisations paying
taxes, duties or levies under the laws
administered by the State Revenue Office.
• It is of general application and does not relate
solely to an individual situation.
A revenue ruling will replace existing rulings,
memoranda and other forms of departmental advice
on the subject matter of the ruling.
In using revenue rulings, it should be recognised that
they cannot supplant the terms of the law.
Statements or declarations by the Commissioner of
State Revenue do not have the effect of an estoppel
against the operation of the law.
While revenue rulings are compiled with care and
are intended to assist in the interpretation of revenue
laws in given circumstances, they may be overruled
by legislative amendments to the law, or by decisions
of appellate tribunals or courts.
However, where the circumstances in an individual
case accord with those circumstances outlined in a
ruling, the Commissioner will give effect to the ruling
until it is replaced, where to do otherwise would
increase the tax or duty payable by a client.
Accordingly, where clients rely on a revenue ruling
which applies to their circumstances, which is
subsequently overruled by a decision of a court or
tribunal or by a legislative amendment, and have
underpaid tax or duty as a consequence, then no
retrospective adjustment will be sought and a
replacement revenue ruling will be issued with a
prospective date of operation.
This will occur notwithstanding the fact that a ruling
does not have the force of law. A client always
retains the right to challenge an assessment that is
based upon an application of a ruling.
The issue date on rulings merely indicates the date
that the ruling was distributed to the public. Unless
otherwise stated within the body of the ruling, the
interpretation of the law outlined in the ruling will
apply both retrospectively and prospectively.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
Explanation and status of
revenue rulings
Revenue Ruling GEN.001