Assessments - Period of Retrospectivity (GEN-012) [2002] VICSROGEN 1 (1 October 2002)
STATE REVENUE OFFICE VICTORIA
Assessments – Period of Retrospectivity
Revenue Ruling GEN.012
Replaces GEN.011
This ruling makes a minor amendment to and
replaces GEN.011. It refers to TAA.006, which
replaced TAA.005.
Similar to GEN.011, this ruling is to inform both
taxpayers and their advisers of the policy
concerning the period of retrospectivity to be
applied for all assessments issued under the Acts
administered by the State Revenue Office (SRO).
All Acts administered by the SRO provide powers
to raise assessments for tax outstanding for past
periods, regardless of how long those periods
may be. These powers reflect a principle that,
despite the failure to recognise the existence of
their tax liabilities or to pay tax liabilities when
they fall due, taxpayers are responsible for the
payment of unpaid tax liabilities.
It is the SRO’s view that it is appropriate to
impose some limitations on the period of
retrospectivity to be applied when assessing a
taxpayer’s liability for unpaid taxes to ensure that:
• no unreasonable financial burden is
placed on taxpayers where the liability
arose from genuine error, oversight or
ignorance; and
• general equivalence between the periods
for assessments and refunds will be
maintained.
However, the SRO does not consider that any
limitation should apply when a taxpayer’s unpaid
taxes arise from an intentional disregard of a
taxation law (Refer to TAA.006 - Interest and
Penalty Tax for examples of what is meant by
intentional disregard of a taxation law).
This ruling is effective from 1 September 2002
(inclusive).
The policy stated in this ruling applies to all
assessments raised under SRO administered
Acts. In this ruling, a period of retrospectivity
means the period ending on the date of an event,
which identifies a taxpayer’s liability to pay tax,
and for which the SRO will seek to recover any
tax outstanding. Assessments may also be raised
to recover any tax owing for periods following the
period of retrospectivity.
Reference Date for Period of Retrospectivity
As a general rule, the SRO will limit the period of
retrospectivity for an assessment (or a series of
assessments) to a 3 year period. The period of
retrospectivity is determined by reference to the
date of a voluntary disclosure, the date on which
an investigation commenced or the date on
which a taxpayer is advised of a tax liability,
whichever occurs first. A voluntary disclosure is
made when the SRO receives the written
voluntary disclosure.
An investigation commences when the taxpayer
is informed in writing, that an investigation
relating to the taxpayer will be carried out. A
taxpayer is considered to have been advised of a
tax liability on receipt of advice from the SRO by
various means, which include a private ruling, a
notice of decision, or any other written advice
indicating that a liability exists.
Variations to this general rule apply to
assessments for pay-roll tax and land tax.
For pay-roll tax, the period of retrospectivity must
include three (3) complete financial years. For
example, if a voluntary disclosure is made in
March 2001, the period of retrospectivity will
include the three financial years ending on 30
June 2000 plus the following eight (8) months
ending in February 2001. An exception for pay-
roll tax arises when an employer pays tax,
payable in Victoria, to another jurisdiction by
mistake. Where that other jurisdiction refunds the
tax overpaid for a period which exceeds the
normal period of retrospectivity, the SRO will
raise an assessment to match the period for
which tax was refunded.
For land tax, the period of retrospectivity will be
the three calendar years preceding the event
which identified a taxpayer’s liability to pay land
tax. A calendar year runs from 1 January to 31
The period of retrospectivity will be extended
where a taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure
but there is an unreasonable delay between the
recognition of the liability and its disclosure. The
SRO recognises that a taxpayer may need some
time to confirm that a liability exists or to quantify
the tax owing, particularly where the taxpayer
wishes to seek advice from external tax
practitioners. Where the SRO is responsible for an
unreasonable delay in finalising its investigation
and advising the taxpayer of any liability
identified, the commencement date of the period
of retrospectivity will be adjusted to reflect that
delay. Where the SRO and the taxpayer both
agree that the SRO should obtain external
advice, to establish whether the taxpayer has a
tax liability, an agreed date for the
commencement of the period of retrospectivity
will be negotiated.
Documents presented for stamping
For documents liable to duty, this policy is
relevant only in instances where the SRO
identifies documents for which the correct
amount of duty has not been paid in full. A
person can always present a document for
stamping and the payment of any applicable
duty, regardless of whether the document was
executed within the last three years or not.
Intentional disregard of taxation law
The period of retrospectivity for assessments of
tax, outstanding as a result of the taxpayer’s
intentional disregard of a taxation law, will not be
limited to 3 years. Instead, tax will be assessed
for the maximum period permitted by the
legislation to ensure that no taxpayer profits from
such conduct.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 2002
Document Outline
Assessments – Period of Retrospectivity
Revenue Ruling GEN.012
Replaces GEN.011
Documents presented for stamping
Intentional disregard of taxation law