Financial Institutions duty In respect of Reinvestment of Term Deposits (FID-039) [1996] VICSROFID 3 (1 October 1996)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Term deposits are amounts lodged with a financial
institution for a specified term and are subject to
financial institutions duty (FID) either as a receipt
(dutiable at 0.06%) or as a short-term dealing.
A concessionary rate of duty (0.005%) is imposed on
the average daily liability in respect of a short-term
dealing receipt. Section 7 of the Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982 (the Act) defines a short-term dealing
and also provides for the calculation of average
daily liability.
Previously, many financial institutions have
encountered difficulties in determining the liability
to FID upon reinvestment of term deposits.
The legislation was not specific as to whether the
reinvestment constituted a receipt.
Initially, a reinvestment was subject to duty where a
new account was created or credited upon
reinvestment. New accounts were identifiable by
the existence of a new account or deposit number.
This had the potential for different FID
consequences for a reinvested term deposit
depending on the financial institution’s
accounting procedures.
Section 11A was inserted into the Act to provide
certainty and consistency in the application of the
Act on the reinvestment of term deposits.
Accordingly, liability to FID on a reinvested amount
is now no longer based on whether a new account
was created or credited upon reinvestment.
Submissions have been received stating that the
term ‘dutiable receipt’ in Section 11A(2) of the Act
gives the unintended effect that a short-term dealing
receipt rolled over or reinvested as a short-term
dealing will attract primary duty, instead of
continuing to attract concessionary duty.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the
application of duty to the reinvestment of term
deposits under section 11A of the Act.
Although not defined in the Act, the term
“reinvestment “ is taken to refer to the renewal or
retention by a financial institution of the whole or
part of a term deposit at the end of the specified
period for which the term deposit was previously
made. A term deposit therefore must have a
specified or fixed term. An ‘at call’ deposit is not
regarded as a term deposit.
Section 11A(1) of the Act provides that where a term
deposit which is not a short-term dealing is
reinvested as an amount which does not constitute
a short-term dealing, no additional duty is payable.
For example, $40,000 for 6 months (0.06%)
reinvested for a further 6 months will not attract duty.
However, duty is payable at the concessionary rate
if a term deposit which is not a short-term dealing
is reinvested as an amount that constitutes a
short-term dealing. For example, $70,000 for
12 months (0.06%) rolled over for a period of
3 months (0.005%).
Under section 11A(2) of the Act, an amount
received as a short-term dealing and then reinvested
in whole or in part will be a dutiable receipt.
To clarify this matter, the Commissioner has ruled
that where a term deposit which constitutes a
short-term dealing is reinvested in whole or in
part as a short-term dealing, duty is imposed at
the concessionary rate. For example, $75,000 for
3 months (0.005%) reinvested for a further
3 months (0.005%).
However, where a short-term dealing receipt is
reinvested as an amount which does not constitute
a short-term dealing, duty is payable on the
reinvested amount at the primary rate of duty.
For example, $70,000 invested for 3 months
(0.005%) is reinvested in full for 8 months (0.06%).
Financial Institutions duty In
respect of Reinvestment of
Term Deposits
Revenue Ruling FID.039
ON THE MOVE
Where, on maturity, funds are retained by a financial
institution by means of crediting to a current account
of the customer, such crediting is not exempt under
section 11A of the Act and constitutes a deemed
receipt under section 9 of the Act.
However, there are instances where term deposits
may not be reinvested immediately on maturity,
for example, when the customer fails to provide
instructions to the financial institution. In this
instance, this Office will accept that a reinvestment
has occurred provided the term deposit is reinvested
within one month of maturity and is backdated
to commence on the date of maturity of the
original deposit.
Variations prior to reinvestment
This ruling applies only to reinvestment of a term
deposit at the end of the term. Variations to a term
deposit prior to the end of the term will, where there
is a receipt, constitute a new term deposit and
attract duty accordingly.
Reinvestment prior to the date of the ruling
The Commissioner has ruled that section 11A of the
Act operates in accordance with this ruling from
20 December 1994. Prior to this date, duty was
payable on the reinvested principal of term deposits
where the reinvestment was credited to a new
account. This Office will not pursue the outstanding
duty in respect of term deposits that were reinvested
prior to that date where the failure to pay was a
result of an unclear or ambiguous provision in
the legislation.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue