The provision of finance - hire purchase, finance leasing and floor plan finance (FID-049) [1998] VICSROFID 1 (1 March 1998)
Revenue Rulings
The purpose of this Ruling is to indicate to
organisations, which may be required to register as
financial institutions under the
Financial Institutions
1982 (the Act), that certain activities are
considered to be ‘the provision of finance’.
Section 3 of the Act defines a financial institution as
a person whose sole or principal business activities in
Victoria are the borrowing of money and the provision
of finance. The provision of finance is further defined
in section 4.
For some time, the State Revenue Office (SRO) held
the view that the definition of the provision of
finance was an exhaustive definition and did not
include activities such as finance leasing, hire
purchase and that type of bailment arrangements
referred to as floor plan finance, even though such
activities would be accepted as forms of finance by
the finance sector.
In applying this interpretation, the SRO became
aware of a number of anomalies. Some organisations
in the finance sector were required to register as
financial institutions, whereas others were not.
Organisations, engaged in both financing and
non-financing activities, were faced with different
registration requirements depending on their legal
structures. Finally, an organisation engaged wholly in
financing activities, not all of which were classed as
‘provision of finance’, could find its requirement to
register as a financial institution would change as its
mix of financing activities varied over time. A number
of questions from taxpayers and practitioners
reinforced concerns about these matters.
After obtaining further legal advice, the SRO now
considers that the definition is not exhaustive and
wishes to ensure that taxpayers are aware of its
revised position. The revised position removes many
of the anomalies described above and provides a
more transparent interpretation of the meaning of
‘provision of finance’.
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
hire purchase, finance leasing and that type of
bailment arrangements known as floor plan finance
are activities which fall within the meaning of
‘provision of finance’ as defined in section 4 of the
Act. Therefore, when an organisation determines
whether it is required to register as a financial
institution, these activities should be included as the
provision of finance for the purpose of assessing its
sole or principal business activities.
This ruling applies from 1 March 1998. Where this
ruling overrides a private ruling previously given to
a taxpayer, the taxpayer is entitled to rely on that
private ruling until the commencement date of this
ruling. This assurance is in accordance with the
advice contained in Revenue Ruling GEN.05 which
deals with the status of private rulings.
The SRO will not seek to recover duty for periods
before this ruling has effect from taxpayers, who
have not previously obtained a private ruling on their
status as financial institutions but are now required
to register as financial institutions solely because of
their activities in floorplan finance, hire purchase
and finance leasing.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
February 1998
ON THE MOVE
The provision of finance - hire
purchase, finance leasing and
floor plan finance
Revenue Ruling FID.049