Promissory Notes - Average daily liability (FID-046) [1997] VICSROFID 7 (31 May 1997)
Revenue Rulings
A registered short-term money market operator is
liable to pay duty on short-term dealings by applying
the rate of 0.005 per cent in respect of its average
daily liability during a month under section 20 of the
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
Section 7(2) of the Act provides that the average
daily liability of a registered financial institution,
which is not entitled to maintain a short-term dealing
account, is to be determined by the reference to the
formula A/3B:
• A = the sum of the daily closing balances of the
liability of the financial institution to each person
in respect of amounts received whether within or
outside Victoria from that person in the course
of short-term dealings, other than balances that
are less than $50,000.
• B = the number of days in the month.
Section 7(1) of the Act defines when an amount is
received in the course of short-term dealings. For the
purposes of section 7 (1)(c) of the Act, the amount
that is received in respect of the issue of a
promissory note is the amount paid by the promisee
to the promisor upon the note being issued.
For example, where a promissory note, with a face
value of $100,000 was negotiated by the insurer
for $95,000, the amount received upon issuing
was $95,000.
However, section 7(2) of the Act requires the
average daily liability to be calculated based on the
liability of a short-term money operator ‘in respect
of’ amounts received from short-term dealings.
The question then arises as to the liability of an
operator in respect of the issue of a promissory note.
Should it be the amount received by the operator or
the face value of the promissory note which the
operator is obliged to pay upon its maturity?
This ruling therefore clarifies the liability of a
registered short-term money market operator in
respect of a promissory note issued by that operator
for the purposes of calculating its average daily liability.
There have been judicial views that strongly
suggest that the phrase ‘in respect of’ in the
context of section 7(2) of the Act should receive a
wide interpretation.
On that basis, an amount received by a short-term
money market operator from the issue of a
promissory note gives rise to a liability
in respect of
that receipt, notwithstanding that the amount of the
liability is greater than the amount of the receipt.
Therefore, in calculating the average daily liability of
a short-term money market operator, reference must
be made to the face value of any promissory note
issued rather than any proceeds received by that
operator upon the issuing of that note.
For example, the liability of the issuer of a
promissory note with a face value of $100,000,
which is negotiated for $95,000 is the amount of
$100,000. The receipt of $95,000 gives rise to a
liability to pay $100,000 upon maturity of that note.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Promissory Notes - Average
daily liability
Revenue Ruling FID.046