Landholder Provisions - Acquisitions of Interests in a Landholder (DA-056) [2012] VICSRODA 4 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – Acquisitions of
Interests in a Landholder
Revenue Ruling DA.056
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on relevant
acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings in
Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million or
A person makes a relevant acquisition in a landholder
if the person acquires an interest in the landholder -
(a) that is of itself a significant interest (i.e. an interest
of 20% or more in a private unit trust scheme,
50% or more in a private company or a wholesale
unit trust scheme or 90% or more in a listed
company or a public unit trust scheme); or
(b) that when aggregated with other interests
acquired by the person, an associated person or
any other person in an associated transaction
results in an aggregation that amounts to a
significant interest in the landholder.
If a person has made a relevant acquisition in
a landholder, a relevant acquisition also arises
each time the person, associated person(s) or any
other person(s) whose interest was aggregated
in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (b)
above acquires a further interest in the landholder
(irrespective of the size or timing of the acquisition of
the further interest).
With respect to a landholder that is a private
company, private unit trust scheme or wholesale unit
trust scheme, a relevant acquisition can also arise if a
person acquires an economic entitlement in or control
over the landholder.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide
guidance on the meaning of the term 'interest' and to
explain how and when an interest may be acquired.
The Ruling also sets out who may be liable for duty
on an acquisition of an interest in a landholder and
in what circumstances an acquisition may be exempt
from duty under the Act. The Ruling does not deal
with the acquisition of an economic entitlement under
of the Act or control under
What is an interest for the purposes of
Chapter 3 of the Act?
Section 79(1)
of the Act defines an ‘interest’ in a
landholder to mean an entitlement by a person
(other than as a creditor or other person to whom
the landholder is liable), whether directly or through
another person, to a distribution of property from the
landholder on a winding up of the landholder.
Usually, the only persons (other than creditors)
entitled to a distribution of property on the winding up
of a landholder are the persons who are registered as
the members (share or unit holders) of the landholder
Affinity Health Ltd v Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue
[2005] NSWSC 663).
However, for
the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act, a
person may have an interest in a landholder even
if the person is not registered as a member of the
landholder. This is because it is sufficient, for the
purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act, for a
person to have an entitlement to a distribution of
property on a winding up of a landholder through
another person. An example of this is where shares or
units in a landholder are held on behalf of a person
by a trustee.
Typically, a person’s entitlement to a distribution
of property on the winding up of a landholder
is referable to a share or unit holding in the
landholder that entitles the person (whether directly
or through another person) to receive property on
the winding up of the landholder. To determine the
extent of a person’s interest in a landholder in such
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
circumstances, it is necessary to consider what the
relevant share or unit holding in the landholder
would entitle the person to receive as a proportion
of the property distributed on a winding up of the
landholder. This evaluation is to be made on the
basis of a notional winding up of the landholder
immediately after the acquisition of the interest by
the person. The focus is on the person’s proportional
entitlement to share in a distribution of the property
of the landholder, whatever the property might be on
a winding up of the landholder. The evaluation is not
concerned with what a person would actually receive
(if anything) on a winding up of the landholder or
whether or not the person has a proprietary interest
in the property (including the land holdings) of the
landholder. All that is required to be determined is
the percentage the interest represents in terms of an
entitlement to a distribution of the property of the
landholder on a winding up of the landholder.
When determining the extent of a person’s interest
in a landholder, regard must also be had to the
maximisation of entitlement provisions contained
section 89H
of the Act. These provisions provide
that the correct evaluation of the entitlement of
a person (referred to as an 'interested person') to
participate in a distribution of property on the winding
up of a landholder is the greater of the following
two calculations, unless the Commissioner of State
Revenue (the Commissioner) determines otherwise –
(a) a distribution carried out in accordance with the
constitution of the landholder, and with any law
relevant to the distribution, as in force at the time
of distribution; and
(b) a distribution carried out after the interested
person, and any other person whom the interested
person has power to direct with respect to such a
distribution or who is, in relation to the interested
person, an associated person, had exercised all
powers and discretions exercisable by them -
i. to effect or compel an alteration to the
constitution of the landholder; and
ii. to vary the rights conferred by units or shares
in the landholder; and
iii. to effect or compel the substitution or
replacement of units or shares in the
landholder with other units or shares in it –
in such a manner as would maximise the value of
the entitlement.
It is considered that the above provisions only apply to
maximise the entitlement of a person over and above
a distribution carried out in accordance with the
landholder’s constitution if the person (or any other
relevant person that is associated or under the control
of the person) is in a position to exercise control
over the landholder and its constitution. In all other
instances, the extent of a person’s interest is to be
determined by reference to a distribution carried out
in accordance with the constitution of the landholder.
How can a person acquire an interest?
Section 80(1)
of the Act provides that a person
acquires an interest in a landholder if the person
obtains the interest beneficially, including if the
person’s interest increases in the landholder
regardless of how it is obtained or increased.
Without limiting this section,
section 80(3)
provides that a person is taken to obtain an interest
beneficially even if the person obtains the interest as
trustee of a trust.
For the avoidance of doubt,
section 80(7)
Act declares that a transfer of a unit or share is not
necessary for a person to acquire an interest in a
landholder. As a result, a person (including the trustee
of a trust) can acquire an interest in a landholder by
any means, including the purchase, gift, allotment,
issue, cancellation, redemption or surrender of a
unit or share, the abrogation or alteration of rights
pertaining to a unit or share, the payment of an
amount owing on a unit or share and a change in the
beneficial ownership of a unit or share. As mentioned
earlier, a person can also acquire an interest through
another person, such as a trustee.
Consequently, where the acquisition of an interest
is by the trustee of a trust, the person(s) on whose
behalf the interest was acquired (i.e. the beneficiary
or beneficiaries under the trust, depending on the
terms of the trust) in addition to the trustee of the
trust may be considered to have obtained an interest
for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
To reduce compliance costs and prevent double
duty issues arising, Revenue Ruling DA.055 sets out
various concessions that may apply when more than
one person is considered to have acquired an interest
for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
Similarly, to prevent the indiscriminate aggregation
of interests acquired by a person acting in different
capacities (i.e. as trustee of different trusts and/or
in the personal capacity of the person), the person
is treated under
of Chapter 3 of the Act as
a separate person in respect of each capacity the
person has acquired an interest in a landholder. It
should be noted however that this treatment does
not prevent the aggregation of interests acquired by
such a person if the person may be regarded as an
associated person in respect of any of the capacities
in which the person has acquired an interest in the
landholder. An example of this is where a person
separately acquires interests in the same landholder
on behalf of two private unit trust schemes that have
common beneficiaries. In such circumstances, the
interests may be aggregated to determine whether a
relevant acquisition has been made in the landholder
because the person, although treated as a separate
person, is an associated person in respect of each of
the capacities in which the person has acquired an
interest in the landholder.
When does a person acquire an interest?
A person (including the trustee of a trust) acquires an
interest for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the
Act on obtaining an interest beneficially, that is on
obtaining an entitlement (whether directly or through
another person) to a distribution of property from a
landholder on the winding up of the landholder.
Generally, a person will obtain an interest in a
landholder on completion of the agreement for the
acquisition of shares or units in the landholder and
not on the date the person is entered on the register
of members of the landholder. An example of this
is where A has completed its purchase of all of B’s
shares in a landholder. Even though the sale has
completed (A has paid B the purchase price in full
and received a registrable transfer), the register has
not yet been updated and the shares still remain
registered with B. As a constructive trust arises in
favour of A on full payment of the purchase monies,
A would be regarded as having an entitlement
through B to the property of the landholder on a
winding up of the landholder. Accordingly, A would
be considered to have acquired an interest in the
landholder on the date it completed its acquisition of
B’s shares.
However, in certain circumstances, it is recognised
that a person’s right to the enjoyment of an interest
in a landholder may be provided in advance of the
date of completion of the relevant agreement or
withheld even after the person has been entered onto
the register of members of the landholder. If, under
an agreement for the acquisition of shares or units
in a landholder, a person becomes entitled to the
benefit of the shares or units prior to the completion
of the agreement (such as the date of execution
of the agreement or payment of a deposit under
the agreement), the person will be considered to
have obtained an interest in the landholder at that
earlier time and not on the date of completion of the
agreement. Conversely, even if a person has been
entered onto the register of members of a landholder,
the person’s right to participate in a distribution of
property on the winding up of the landholder may be
withheld pending a payment from the person. This
is particularly relevant in cases involving the issue or
purchase of unpaid or partly paid shares or units in
a landholder. Whilst the issue of shares or units by
a landholder normally confers a right to participate
in a distribution of property on a winding up of the
landholder, the capacity to enjoy this right may be
withheld until the shares or units have been paid up,
either fully or to a specified extent. In such cases,
an acquisition will be taken to have occurred when
the required payment is made (see
Commissioner of
Stamp Duties (Qld) v MIM Holdings Ltd
Exempt acquisitions
Section 89D
of the Act sets out exemptions from
duty for certain acquisitions of interests in a
landholder. It is important to note that an acquisition,
whether exempt under
section 89D
of the Act or
not, is nevertheless an acquisition of an interest
in a landholder which may be taken into account
in determining whether a relevant acquisition has
occurred in the landholder. This is in contrast to the
excluded from the operation of the landholder
provisions by
section 78(5)
of the Act and clauses
31(2) and 31(3) of Schedule 2 of the Act.
section 89D(a)
of the Act, a person’s
acquisition of an interest in a landholder is treated
as an exempt acquisition if the means by which the
person acquired the interest would have resulted in
no ad valorem duty being payable under Chapter 2
of the Act had the subject of the acquisition been a
transfer of the land of the landholder to the person.
By virtue of this section, all the exemptions in Chapter
2 of the Act can apply to exempt acquisitions of
interests liable to duty under
of Chapter 3 of
the Act. To determine if an acquisition of an interest
in a landholder is exempt under
section 89D(a)
the Act, it is necessary to assume for the purposes
of the exemptions in Chapter 2 of the Act that the
subject of the acquisition is land instead of an interest
in the landholder. It is not necessary to substitute the
actual parties to the transaction with a hypothetical
transaction involving the landholder. For example, a
transfer of an interest in a landholder from husband
to wife is treated as a transfer of the land of the
landholder from the husband to the wife and not a
transfer of land from the landholder to the wife. As
a transfer from husband to wife is exempt from duty
of Chapter 2 of the Act, section
89D(a) of the Act would apply to treat the transfer of
the interest in the landholder as an exempt acquisition
for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
Generally, no duty is payable on an exempt
acquisition of an interest in a landholder at the time
of its acquisition. This, however, does not mean
that an exempt acquisition is quarantined from
aggregation and/or duty at a latter point in time,
for example when there is a subsequent acquisition
of an interest in the landholder by either the same
person and/or an associated person. Unless the
Commissioner determines otherwise, an exempt
acquisition may become liable to duty on the basis
of aggregation with subsequent acquisitions. As
mentioned earlier, this is because exempt acquisitions
are not one of the types of interests that are excluded
from aggregation and liability to duty under section
78(5) of the Act or clauses 31(2) and 31(3) of
Schedule 2 of the Act.
An example of when an exempt acquisition may
become liable to duty because of the acquisition
of a subsequent interest in a landholder is the
exempt transfer of an interest from husband to wife
immediately before the husband acquires another
interest in the landholder. In such circumstances,
there is no basis for not aggregating and assessing
the wife’s acquisition with the subsequent acquisition
made by the husband. It should be noted that the
duty implications of this approach are identical
to those that would have arisen had the husband
continued to hold his earlier interest.
As a safeguard against the indiscriminate aggregation
of interests acquired by associated persons, the
Commissioner has discretion under
section 78(2)
disaggregate interests if satisfied that the interests
were acquired and will be used independently and
were not acquired and will not be used for a common
purpose. Where an anomalous duty outcome arises,
the Commissioner also has a discretion under section
89E of the Act to limit the amount of duty payable
on a relevant acquisition to the duty that would be
payable under Chapter 2 on a transfer of the land of
the landholder. For information on the operation of
the concession under
section 89E
of the Act, please
see Revenue Ruling DA.055.
An example of where the Commissioner would be
inclined to exercise the discretion to disaggregate
interests acquired by associated persons is where
a relevant acquisition arises on the aggregation of
an interest acquired by a son (from the executors
of the Will of his recently departed father) with an
earlier interest acquired independently by a remote
relative of the son. Even though the son’s acquisition
is exempt pursuant to
section 89D(a)
of the Act,
no exemption applies to the relative’s acquisition.
However, as the interests of the son and the relative
were acquired independently, the Commissioner
would be inclined to disaggregate the interests
section 78(2)
such that no duty would be
payable on the relative’s acquisition, unless there is
evidence to suggest that the interests will not be used
independently or will be used for a common purpose.
Another example of where the Commissioner would
be inclined to exercise the discretion to disaggregate
interests under
section 78(2)
of the Act is when a
relevant acquisition in a landholder arises on the
aggregation of interests acquired by persons that are
regarded as associated persons only because of the
interests they acquired and/or hold in the landholder.
In these circumstances, the Commissioner would also
be inclined to treat those persons as if they were not
associated persons for the purposes of determining
whether the landholder is a widely held trust or
wholesale unit trust scheme. This position is in line
with the Commissioner’s ability to determine that a
landholder that does not strictly meet the criteria for a
widely held trust or wholesale unit trust scheme may
be registered as a declared public or wholesale unit
trust scheme under the Act. However, it is important
to note that if the relevant persons are associated by
virtue of some relationship other than the interests
they acquired and/or hold in the landholder, the
Commissioner may not be inclined to treat the
persons as if they were not associated persons both
for the purposes of determining the status of the
landholder under the Act and/or whether a relevant
acquisition has occurred in the landholder.
Commissioner of State Revenue
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act in
relation to their particular circumstances, the taxpayer
may contact the Landholder Acquisitions Branch at
the State Revenue Office or request a private ruling
in accordance with Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In
all cases, the onus is on the taxpayer to provide the
Commissioner with the necessary information to
enable an informed decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must
be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.