Land Rich Provisions - Acquisitions of Interests in a Landholder (DA-049.V1) [2009] VICSRODA 1 (1 February 2009)
Revenue Ruling DA.049
The land rich provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) impose duty whenever
a person makes a relevant acquisition in a land rich
landholder.
A land rich landholder is a private company, a private
unit trust scheme or a wholesale unit trust scheme that
has land holdings in Victoria with an unencumbered
value of $1 million or more, and its land holdings in
all places (whether within or outside Australia) comprise
60% or more of the unencumbered value of all the
landholder’s property (other than excluded property).
A person makes a relevant acquisition in a land rich
landholder if the person acquires an interest in the
landholder -
(a) that is of itself a significant interest (i.e. an interest
of 20% or more in the case of a landholder that
is a private unit trust scheme or 50% or more in
the case of a landholder that is either a private
company or wholesale unit trust scheme); or
(b) that, when aggregated with other interests acquired
by the person, an associated person or any person
in an associated transaction on the same day or
within 3 years of the acquisition of the interest by
the person, results in an aggregation that amounts
to a significant interest in the landholder.
Once a person has made a relevant acquisition in a
land rich landholder, a relevant acquisition will also
arise each and every time the person or an associated
person acquires a further interest in the landholder
(irrespective of the size or timing of the acquisition of
the further interest).
Details on what constitutes an “interest” and how
it may be acquired are set out in
sections 76
of the Act.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide
guidance on the meaning of the term interest and
to explain how and when an interest may be acquired.
The Ruling also sets out who may be liable for duty
on an acquisition of an interest in a landholder and
in what circumstances an acquisition may be exempt
from duty under the Act.
What is an interest for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act?
Section 76(1)
of the Act defines an "interest" in
a landholder to mean an entitlement by a person
(other than as a creditor or other person to whom
the landholder is liable), whether directly or through
another person, to a distribution of property from
the landholder on a winding up of the landholder.
Usually, the only persons (other than creditors)
entitled to a distribution of property on the winding
up of a land rich landholder are the persons who
are registered as the members (share or unit holders)
of the landholder (see
Affinity Health Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2005] NSWSC 663).
However, for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of
the Act, a person may have an interest in a landholder
even if the person is not registered as a member of
the landholder. This is because it is sufficient, for the
purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act, if a person
has an entitlement to a distribution of property on
a winding up of a landholder through another person.
An example of this is where shares or units in a
landholder are held on behalf of a person by a trustee.
Typically, a person’s entitlement to a distribution
of property on the winding up of a landholder
is referable to a share or unit holding in the landholder
that entitles the person (whether directly or through
another person) to receive property on the winding
up of the landholder. To determine the extent of
a person’s interest in a land rich landholder in such
circumstances, it is necessary to consider what the
relevant share or unit holding in the landholder
would entitle the person to receive as a proportion
of the property distributed on a winding up of the
landholder. This evaluation is to be made on the
basis of a notional winding up of the landholder
immediately after the acquisition of the interest by
the person. The focus is on the person’s proportional
entitlement to share in a distribution of the property
of the landholder, whatever the property might be on
a winding up of the landholder. The evaluation is not
concerned with what a person would actually receive
(if anything) on a winding up of the landholder or
whether or not the person has a proprietary interest
Revenue Rulings
Land Rich Provisions – Acquisitions of Interests
in a Landholder
Ruling history
Issued date
February 2009
Dates of effect
in the property (including the land holdings) of the
landholder. All that is required to be determined is
the percentage the interest represents in terms of
an entitlement to a distribution of the property of
the landholder on a winding up of the landholder.
When determining the extent of a person’s interest
in a land rich landholder, regard must also be had
to the maximisation of entitlement provisions
contained in
of the Act. These provisions
provide that the correct evaluation of the entitlement
of a person (referred to as an “interested person”) to
participate in a distribution of property on the winding
up of a landholder is the greater of the following
two calculations, unless the Commissioner of State
Revenue (the Commissioner) determines otherwise –
(a) a distribution carried out in accordance with the
constitution of the landholder, and with any law
relevant to the distribution, as in force at the time
of distribution; and
(b) a distribution carried out after the interested
person, and any other person whom the interested
person has power to direct with respect to such
a distribution or who is, in relation to the interested
person, an associated person, had exercised all
powers and discretions exercisable by them –
i. to effect or compel an alteration to the
constitution of the landholder; and
ii. to vary the rights conferred by units or shares
in the landholder; and
iii. to effect or compel the substitution or
replacement of units or shares in the landholder
with other units or shares in it –
in such a manner as would maximise the value of
the entitlement.
It is considered that the above provisions only apply
to maximise the entitlement of a person over and
above a distribution carried out in accordance with the
landholder’s constitution if the person (or any other
relevant person that is associated or under the control
of the person) is in a position to exercise control
over the landholder and its constitution. In all other
instances, the extent of a person’s interest is to be
determined by reference to a distribution carried out
in accordance with the constitution of the landholder.
How can a person acquire an interest?
Section 77(1)
of the Act provides that a person
acquires an interest in a land rich landholder if the
person obtains the interest beneficially, including if the
person’s interest increases, in the landholder regardless
of how it is obtained or increased. Without limiting this
section 77(2AA)
of the Act provides that a
person is taken to obtain an interest beneficially even if
the person obtains the interest as trustee of a trust.
For the avoidance of doubt,
section 77(3)
Act declares that a transfer of a unit or share is
not necessary for a person to acquire an interest
in a landholder. As a result, a person (including the
trustee of a trust) can acquire an interest in a land rich
landholder by any means, including the purchase, gift,
allotment, issue, cancellation, redemption or surrender
of a unit or share, the abrogation or alteration of
rights pertaining to a unit or share, the payment of an
amount owing on a unit or share and a change in the
beneficial ownership of a unit or share. As mentioned
earlier, a person can also acquire an interest through
another person, such as a trustee.
Consequently, where the acquisition of an interest
is by the trustee of a trust, the person(s) on whose
behalf the interest was acquired (i.e. the beneficiary
or beneficiaries under the trust, depending on the
terms of the trust) in addition to the trustee of the
trust may be considered to have obtained an interest
for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
To reduce compliance costs and prevent double duty
issues arising, Revenue Ruling DA.044 sets out various
concessions that may apply when more than one
person is considered to have acquired an interest
for the purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
Similarly, to prevent the indiscriminate aggregation
of interests acquired by a person acting in different
capacities (i.e. as trustee of different trusts and/or
in the personal capacity of the person), the person
is treated under
of Chapter 3 of the Act as a
separate person in respect of each capacity the person
has acquired an interest in a land rich landholder.
It should be noted however that this treatment does
not prevent the aggregation of interests acquired by
such a person if the person may be regarded as an
associated person in respect of any of the capacities
the person has acquired an interest in the landholder.
An example of this is where a person separately
acquires interests in the same land rich landholder
on behalf of two private unit trust schemes that have
common beneficiaries. In such circumstances, the
interests may be aggregated to determine whether
a relevant acquisition has been made in the landholder
because the person, although treated as a separate
person, is an associated person in respect of each
of the capacities the person has acquired an interest
in the landholder.
When does a person acquire an interest?
A person (including the trustee of a trust) acquires
an interest for the purposes of
of Chapter 3
of the Act on obtaining an interest beneficially, that
is on obtaining an entitlement (whether directly or
through another person) to a distribution of property
from a landholder on the winding up of the landholder.
Generally, a person will obtain an interest in a land
rich landholder on completion of the agreement for
the acquisition of shares or units in the landholder
and not on the date the person is entered on the
register of members of the landholder. An example
of this is where A has completed its purchase of all
of B’s shares in a land rich landholder. Even though
the sale has completed (A has paid B the purchase
price in full and received a registrable transfer), the
register has not yet been updated and the shares still
remain registered with B. As a constructive trust arises
in favour of A on full payment of the purchase monies,
A would be regarded as having an entitlement through
B to the property of the landholder on a winding up
of the landholder. Accordingly, A would be considered
to have acquired an interest in the landholder on the
date it completed its acquisition of B’s shares.
However, in certain circumstances, it is recognised
that a person’s right to the enjoyment of an interest
in a land rich landholder may be provided in advance
of the date of completion of the relevant agreement
or withheld even after the person has been entered
onto the register of members of the landholder. If,
under an agreement for the acquisition of shares or
units in a land rich landholder, a person becomes
entitled to the benefit of the shares or units prior to
the completion of the agreement (such as the date of
execution of the agreement or payment of a deposit
under the agreement), the person will be considered
to have obtained an interest in the landholder at that
earlier time and not on the date of completion of the
agreement. Conversely, even if a person has been
entered on the register of members of a landholder,
the person’s right to participate in a distribution of
property on the winding up of the landholder may
be withheld pending a payment from the person.
This is particularly relevant in cases involving the issue
or purchase of unpaid or partly paid shares or units
in a landholder. Whilst the issue of shares or units
by a landholder normally confers a right to participate
in a distribution of property on a winding up of the
landholder, the capacity to enjoy this right may be
withheld until the shares or units have been paid up,
either fully or to a specified extent. In such cases,
an acquisition will be taken to have occurred when the
required payment is made (see
Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (Qld) v MIM Holdings Ltd
(1999) 99 ATC 5084).
Exempt acquisitions
Sections 85(1)
and (2) of the Act set out exemptions
from duty for certain acquisitions of interests in a
land rich landholder. It is important to note that an
acquisition, whether exempt under
section 85(1)
of the Act, is nevertheless an acquisition of an interest
in a land rich landholder which may be taken into
account to determine whether a relevant acquisition
has occurred in the landholder. This is in contrast to
the types of interests/acquisitions that are specifically
excluded from the operation of the land rich provisions
section 79(8)
of the Act.
section 85(1)(a)
of the Act, a person’s
acquisition of an interest in a land rich landholder
is treated as an exempt acquisition if the means by
which the person acquired the interest would have
resulted in no ad valorem duty being payable under
Chapter 2 of the Act had the subject of the acquisition
been a transfer of the land of the landholder to the
person. By virtue of this section, all the exemptions
in Chapter 2 of the Act can apply to exempt
acquisitions of interests liable to duty under
of Chapter 3 of the Act. To determine if an acquisition
of an interest in a land rich landholder is exempt under
section 85(1)(a)
of the Act, it is necessary to assume
for the purposes of the exemptions in Chapter 2 of the
Act that the subject of the acquisition is land instead
of an interest in the landholder. It is not necessary to
substitute the actual parties to the transaction with
a hypothetical transaction involving the landholder.
For example, a transfer of an interest in a land
rich landholder from husband to wife is treated
as a transfer of the land of the landholder from
the husband to the wife and not a transfer of land
from the landholder to the wife. As a transfer from
husband to wife is exempt from duty under section
43 of Chapter 2 of the Act,
section 85(1)(a)
would apply to treat the transfer of the interest in the
land rich landholder as an exempt acquisition for the
purposes of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
Generally, no duty is payable on an exempt acquisition
of an interest in a land rich landholder at the time
of its acquisition. This, however, does not mean that
an exempt acquisition is quarantined from aggregation
and/or duty at a latter point in time, say for example
when there is a subsequent acquisition of an interest
in the landholder by either the same person or
an associated person. Unless the Commissioner
determines otherwise, an exempt acquisition may
become liable to duty on the basis of aggregation
with subsequent acquisitions. As mentioned earlier,
this is because exempt acquisitions are not one of the
and liability to duty under
section 79(8)
of the Act.
An example of when an exempt acquisition may
become liable to duty because of the acquisition
of a subsequent interest in a land rich landholder
is the exempt transfer of an interest from husband
to wife immediately before the husband acquires
another interest in the land rich landholder. In such
circumstances, there is no basis for not aggregating
and assessing the wife’s acquisition with the
subsequent acquisition made by the husband. It should
be noted that the duty implications of this approach
are identical to those that would have arisen had the
husband continued to hold his earlier interest. Where
the duty outcome is harsh and unjust, the exempt and/
or subsequent acquisition may not be subject to duty
even though it forms part of the relevant acquisition
in the land rich landholder. Depending on the
circumstances of the matter, the Commissioner may
determine to apply the just and reasonable exemption
section 85(2)
of the Act and not assess any part
of the relevant acquisition to duty or to limit the duty
payable to only the non-exempt part of the relevant
acquisition (i.e. the subsequent acquisition in the
above example).
section 85(2)
of the Act, a person’s acquisition
of an interest in a land rich landholder may be treated
as an exempt acquisition if the Commissioner so
determines, being satisfied that the application of Part
2 of Chapter 3 of the Act to the acquisition in that
particular case would not be just and reasonable. It is
considered that this section provides the Commissioner
with a measure of discretion to deal with unforeseen
consequences, anomalies or unexpected outcomes
arising from the application of
3 of the Act to the facts of a particular case. As a
result, the section is not considered to have a broad
application and can only be applied in a manner
that does not defeat the legislative objectives of Part
2 of Chapter 3 of the Act. Generally, the discretion
section 85(2)
of the Act will only be exercised
in cases where the acquisition of an interest in a land
rich landholder is dutiable because of an anomaly,
unintended consequence or harsh outcome in the
application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
An example of a case where the Commissioner would
be inclined to apply the just and reasonable exemption
section 85(2)
of the Act is to the relevant
acquisition that arises on the aggregation of an
interest acquired by a wife (from the executors to the
Will of her recently departed husband) with an earlier
interest acquired by her son. Even though the wife’s
acquisition is exempt pursuant to
section 85(1)(a)
the Act, no exemption applies to the son’s acquisition.
However, as the relevant acquisition only arises
because of the husband’s unfortunate demise and the
wife’s exempt acquisition, the Commissioner considers
it would be harsh to assess any duty on the relevant
acquisition. Accordingly, the Commissioner would be
inclined to apply the just and reasonable exemption
section 85(2)
of the Act and exempt the son’s
acquisition from duty. There is no need to exempt the
wife’s acquisition under
section 85(2)
of the Act as
it is already exempt under
section 85(1)(a)
of the Act.
It is important to note that while the Commissioner
will treat the son’s acquisition as exempt in the above
circumstances, the acquisition may not receive the
same treatment if the son or any associated person
including his mother (i.e. the wife in the above
example) were to acquire a subsequent interest in
the land rich landholder. In such circumstances, there
is no basis for not aggregating and assessing the son’s
initial acquisition with other interests acquired by the
son or an associated person. In contrast, the wife’s
acquisition will always be treated as exempt under
section 85(1)
of the Act no matter what subsequent
acquisitions occur in the landholder because of the
circumstances under which it was acquired by her.
However, as previously mentioned, the acquisition
may still be taken into account to determine whether
any subsequent acquisition by the wife and/or an
associated person should be charged with duty.
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act
in relation to their particular circumstances, the
taxpayer may contact the Land Rich Unit at the
SRO or request a private ruling in accordance with
Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all cases, the onus is on
the taxpayer to provide the Commissioner with the
necessary information to enable an informed decision
to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
February 2009
Commissioner of State Revenue