Recruitment Agencies / Placement Agencies / Job Placement Agencies (PTA-029) [2008] VICSROPTA 7 (1 June 2008)
Revenue Rulings
Recruitment Agencies / Placement Agencies /
Job Placement Agencies
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Revenue Ruling PTA029
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
and harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria
A recruitment agency is an agency that places
a worker with an employer who is a client of the
agency. Recruitment agencies may also be known
as placement agencies or job placement agencies.
A typical contractual arrangement in a recruitment
agency situation is as follows:
• A contract or agreement exists between the agency
and the client and/or the agency and the worker,
• A contract or agreement exists between the worker
and the client.
A recruitment agency is different from an employment
agency (or labour hire agency). Under an employment
agency (or labour hire) arrangement, a contract exists
between the agency and its client, and the agency and
the worker, but there is no contract between the client
and the worker. Employment agency arrangements are
governed by Division 8 of
of the Act.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to clarify who
bears the payroll tax liability in circumstances where
a recruitment agency places a worker with an employer
who is a client of the agency.
In a recruitment agency situation, there is usually
a contract or agreement between the client and
the worker. The relationship between the client and
the worker could be that of an employer/employee
(whether full-time, part-time or casual) or principal/
contractor. The nature of the relationship between
the client and the worker is determined by referring
to the contract and applying the common law
principles which distinguish between employees and
contractors. In either case, the client is responsible
for any payroll tax liability arising from payments made
to the worker.
If the relationship between the worker and the client
of the agency is that of an employee and employer,
all amounts paid by the client for the services provided
by that employee are wages and are subject to payroll
tax. This is also the case even if the client pays the
worker via the recruitment agency.
If the relationship between the worker and the client
is one of contractor and principal (or where the worker
provides services via a company) the payroll tax liability
of the client is determined by the contractor provisions
in Division 7 of
of the Act.
Under these circumstances, the recruitment agency
is not liable for payroll tax on wages paid to a worker
who has been placed with a client. The employment
agency provisions in Division 8 of
do not apply to a recruitment agency, they only apply
to employment agency arrangements where there
is no contract or agreement between the worker
and the client.
This Revenue Ruling is effective from 1 July 2007.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue