Transfer of dutiable property from a deceased estate (DA-051) [2010] VICSRODA 2 (1 March 2010)
Revenue Ruling DA.051
Section 10(1)
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) defines
the term ‘dutiable property’ to include an interest
under a will or codicil of a deceased person disposing
of property. A transfer of such an interest constitutes
a dutiable transaction under
of the Act and
is subject to duty unless an exemption applies.
Section 42(1)
of the Act exempts from duty a transfer of
dutiable property not made for valuable consideration
by the legal personal representative of a deceased
person to a beneficiary, where the transfer is made
under and in conformity with the trusts contained in
a will or arising on an intestacy, or the transfer relates
to a property that is the subject of a trust for sale
contained in the will of the deceased person.
Section 42(2)
of the Act exempts from duty the
vesting of any dutiable property by virtue of section
Administration and Probate Act 1958
(which deals with the vesting of dutiable property in
the executor or administrator to whom probate or
administration has been granted).
Section 42(3)
of the Act exempts from duty a
transfer of dutiable property not made for valuable
consideration by a legal personal representative of a
deceased person to a beneficiary to the extent that
the transfer is made in satisfaction of the beneficiary’s
entitlement arising under the will of the deceased
person or arising on an intestacy.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain the
operation of
of the Act following legislative
amendments made to it by the
State Taxation Acts
Amendment Act 2009
. It also explains the different
approaches applied by the State Revenue Office (SRO)
in determining the dutiable value of property where
the exemptions in section 42 of the Act are found not
The underlying policy intent behind section 42 of the
Act is to exempt from duty the transfer of otherwise
dutiable property from a deceased estate, so long as
the transfer is made pursuant to the last wishes of the
Whether the exemptions in section 42 apply, and to
what extent, is not always clear where beneficiaries
agree to alter the distribution of gifts under a will or
on an intestacy. Depending on the circumstances of
a particular matter, there are two possible approaches
that can be applied by the SRO in determining these
questions. These approaches are referred to as the
‘Each Asset’ approach and the ‘All Assets’ approach.
The ‘Each Asset’ approach
This approach is applied to transfers of specific gifts
of identified property to nominated individuals in the
will of the deceased. A transfer is exempt from duty
to the extent of the beneficiary’s entitlement in the
property transferred. Duty is imposed on the amount
by which the entitlement to the property is exceeded.
A will provides that ‘Tom gives his property Whiteacre
(valued at $500,000) to Sarah and his shares (valued
at $400,000) and cash ($100,000) to Nicole’. The
parties enter into a Deed of Family Arrangement to
swap gifts.
The legal personal representative transfers Whiteacre
to Nicole and the shares and cash to Sarah.
As Nicole was not entitled to Whiteacre under the will,
using the ‘Each Asset’ approach, Nicole received 100
per cent more than her entitlement to the property.
As such, section 42 of the Act does not apply and
duty will be assessed on the full value of the property
transferred to Nicole (i.e. $500,000).
The ‘All Assets’ approach
This approach is applied to transfers of residuary gifts
under a will (that is, gifts that remain after distribution
of the specific gifts, often to a class of beneficiaries
in set proportions) and to transfers of property on
A transfer is exempt to the extent of the beneficiary’s
entitlement to the assets of the estate. Duty is
imposed on the amount by which such entitlement
is exceeded.
The residual estate under a will comprises cash
($100,000) and land (valued at $150,000), totalling
Revenue Rulings
Transfer of dutiable property from a deceased
Ruling history
Issued date
DA.013, DA.018
Dates of effect
The will provides that the deceased’s surviving
children, John and Michael, are entitled to the residual
estate in equal shares, being $125,000 each. By a
Deed of Family Arrangement the land is transferred
to John and the cash to Michael.
Applying the ‘All Assets’ approach, as the land
transferred to John (valued at $150,000) exceeds his
entitlement in the residual estate under the will by
$25,000, duty is assessed on this additional amount.
If, in this example, the cash amount was $150,000
and the land was valued at $100,000, and assuming
the same Deed of Family Arrangement, duty would
not be payable by John as the value of the land is only
$100,000 (i.e. $25,000 less than John’s entitlement
under the will). Duty would not be payable by Michael
either, even though he has exceeded his entitlement
by $25,000, as cash does not constitute dutiable
property under the Act.
A will provides that ‘Tom gives all his estate to
Sarah and Nicole in equal shares’. The residuary
estate comprises land (valued at $500,000), shares
(valued at $400,000) and cash($100,000), totalling
$1,000,000.
The beneficiaries enter into a Deed of Family
Arrangement and the legal personal representative
transfers the land to Sarah and the shares and cash
Applying the ‘All Assets’ approach, Sarah and Nicole
are entitled to $500,000 each. As the land is valued
at $500,000, Sarah’s entitlement in the residual estate
has not been exceeded. An exemption under section
42 of the Act applies and no duty is payable.
Transfers made under a will for consideration
The entitlement of a beneficiary under a will may be
conditional upon a payment being made.
Where a beneficiary’s entitlement is conditional upon
the beneficiary paying certain monies, either to the
estate or a third party, the terms of the will must be
strictly complied with for the exemption to apply.
A testator with two children, Steve and Jane,
bequeaths Blackacre (valued at $200,000) to her son
Steve on condition that he pays $100,000 to his sister
Jane. If Steve pays the $100,000 to Jane and takes
a transfer of Blackacre, it is treated as exempt under
section 42 of the Act. This is because the transfer of
Blackacre to Steve is considered to have been made in
conformity with the will.
If, however, Steve only pays $80,000 to Jane, this is
not considered to be in comformity with the will. As
a result, section 42 would not apply and the transfer
of Blackacre would be fully dutiable.
A testator bequeaths Greenacre (valued at $500,000)
to Nicole on condition that she pays $100,000 to
John. Nicole assigns her right to Greenacre to Michael.
Michael pays $100,000 to John and subsequently
takes a transfer of Greenacre. As the transfer is not
in strict conformity with the will, section 42 of the Act
does not apply. The transfer is assessed to full
ad valorem duty on $500,000.
Claims made under Part IV of the
Administration and
Probate Act 1958
In some cases a transfer of dutiable property by the
legal personal representative of a deceased person
may arise pursuant to an order made as a result of an
application to the Supreme Court or the County Court
under Part IV of the APA for the proper maintenance
and support of a person for whom the deceased had
responsibility to make provisions. The Court can make
an order for such provisions to be made out of the
estate of a deceased person, which may involve the
transfer of dutiable property.
Section 97(4) of the APA provides that an order made
by the Court under Part IV of the APA has effect as a
variation to the deceased’s will or the intestacy rules.
Accordingly, where a transfer of dutiable property by
the legal personal representative of a deceased person
pursuant to a court order made under Part IV of the
APA is in conformity with the order, the transfer will be
exempt from duty under section 42 of the Act.
However, if an order is made by the Court dismissing
a Part IV application (for example, where the parties
have settled the distribution of the estate out of
Court), there is no variation to the will or intestacy
rules. Where this occurs, the entitlement to the
exemptions contained in section 42 of the Act will
depend on the facts and circumstances of each
individual case.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
Commissioner of State Revenue