Cash Management Unit Trusts -Subscription Monies and Reinvested Earnings (FID-047) [1997] VICSROFID 8 (1 October 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
The managers of cash management trusts have
sought clarification as to whether funds received as
subscriptions for units in the trusts and interest
paid by the issue of further units qualify as
short-term dealings.
It is likely that both the manager and the trustee of
a public cash management trust will be registered
financial institutions under the
Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982
(the Act). As one of its statutory
functions, the manager collects subscription monies
for the issue of units in the unit trust. The manager is
obliged to account for the subscriptions and pass
them on to the trustee. Notwithstanding that
frequently subscribers are requested to make
cheques payable to the trustee and the manager
deposits the cheques directly to the trustee’s bank
account, the manager is liable for FID on the receipt
of the subscriptions (unless the trust deed appoints
the manager to receive the subscriptions as agent for
the trustee). However, when the trustee receives the
funds from the manager, the receipt is exempt under
section 18(3)(j) so duty is paid only once each time a
person pays subscription monies.
The manager of a cash management trust, which is
also a registered short-term money market operator,
needs to establish whether subscription monies
received are short term dealings or receipts dutiable
at the primary rate. Section 7 of the Act defines
receipts which qualify as short term dealings and are
eligible for concessionary duty. In particular, sub
section 7(1)(a) refers to an amount received where:
• “the amount is an amount of cash of not less
than $50,000 received by that person by way of
loan, advance or deposit repayable by him -
ii. within 185 days; or
iii. at call after a term of not more than
not being an amount received by a bank by way
of deposit repayable on demand or for the credit
of a current account kept by it for another person”.
In some cash management funds, the number of
units issued in the trust will directly equate to the
dollar amount invested and the redeemable value of
the units will remain constant with the real value
affected only by inflation and not by market forces.
For these funds, subscriptions for units received by
the manager can be properly described as deposits
received by a financial institution other than a bank.
As unit holders in unit trusts are normally entitled to
require the manager to redeem or repurchase their
units at call, the subscription monies of such trusts
are deposits at call within the meaning of sub
section 7(1)(a).
Unit holders may elect to have the income, or
interest earned from their investments, reinvested in
the trust. In the situation where the unit holders are
credited with further units equal to the dollar amount
of income earned, the units can be regarded as
money and the crediting of a unit holder’s account
will be a receipt within the meaning of section 9(1A).
Cash Management Unit Trusts -
Subscription Monies and
Reinvested Earnings
Revenue Ruling FID.047
ON THE MOVE
Where the manager of a public cash management
unit trust receives a subscription payment of
$50,000 or more for units in the trust, the amount
received will qualify as an amount received in the
course of short term dealings as a deposit at call
under sub section 7(1)(a), provided that the units are
redeemable at call and directly equate to the dollar
amount invested.
Income earned from the investment in the cash
management trust, which is reinvested in the trust,
will be a new receipt under section 9(1A) when the
unit holder’s account is credited with a further
number of units. Again, the additional units must
directly equate to the dollar amount of interest
earned. Where the amount of income to be credited
to the unit holder is equivalent to $50,000 or more,
it also will qualify as a short term dealing under
section 7(1)(a).
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1997