Land Used Exclusively for Charitable Purposes (LT-011) [1997] VICSROLT 1 (31 May 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Section 9(1)(d) of the
Land Tax Act 1958
provides an exemption for land used by a charitable
institution exclusively for charitable purposes.
The purpose of this ruling is to outline the types of
landholder and land use which will qualify for
exemption under section 9(1)(d) of the Act.
To qualify for exemption, the land must be used by a
charitable institution exclusively for charitable
purposes. In
Commissioner for Special Purposes of
Income Tax v Pemsel [1891] AC 531
‘Charitable
purposes’ was identified as comprising the following
four categories:
i) relief of poverty;
ii) advancement of education;
iii)advancement of religion; or
iv) other purposes beneficial to the community
If the land is used by the body for (ii), (iii) or (iv)
above, it must generally be for the benefit of the
public as a whole, or a section of the public to
which any member of the public may belong.
This condition is not necessary if the land is used by
the body for (i) above.
Land may be exempt if it is:
1. leased from the Crown and used by a charitable
institution exclusively for charitable purposes;
2. owned by a charity and subsequently leased to
another charity that uses the land exclusively for
charitable purposes;
3. owned by a non-charity and subsequently leased
to a charity which uses the land exclusively for
charitable purposes; or
4. owned by an organisation and let to or occupied
by, a person whose use of the land is ancillary
to the charitable purpose of the organisation.
The exemption will not extend to land, or a
portion of land, which is used for business,
banking or insurance purposes.
No exemption will be granted where land is owned
by a charity and is leased or occupied for business
purposes by an organisation (charity or non-charity).
It is not sufficient for the rent or the proceeds of the
business to be used for a charitable purpose as the
exemption applies only when the land is used
exclusively for charitable purposes.
The exemption will also not be granted where the
assets of the organisation can be distributed to the
members on the winding-up of that organisation.
Requirements for Exemption
To obtain an exemption under section 9(1)(d) of
the Act, a written application must be made to
the Commissioner of State Revenue, clearly stating
the grounds on which the exemption is sought.
Full details of the location and ownership of the
land must be provided. If the property is the subject
of a lease, the lessor details must be provided.
Documentation which should accompany the
application includes:
where the body seeking the exemption is
incorporated: the Certificate of Incorporation
and Memorandum and Articles of Association.
financial statements for current and past
three financial years;
details of the organisation’s aims, objectives
details of prior State Revenue Office
exemption approvals to the organisation;
other information to indicate that the
organisation is charitable, such as a
description of services provided; and
evidence of a wind-up clause stating that
assets will be:
(i) passed onto another charitable
organisation in the event of wind-up
(ii) assets will not be distributed to members
of either organisation;
Land used exclusively for
Charitable Purposes
Revenue Ruling LT.011
ON THE MOVE
details of the use of the land;
promotional material; and
any relevant information on exemptions
granted by other state or
Commonwealth jurisdictions.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue