Paid Parental Leave (PTA-037) [2010] VICSROPTA 5 (1 December 2010)
Revenue Ruling PTA.037
The Commonwealth Government’s Paid Parental
Leave (PPL) scheme was introduced by the
Parental Leave Act 2010
. The scheme provides
eligible working parents of children born or adopted
on or after 1 January 2011 with a maximum of 18
weeks of government funded paid parental leave
at the National Minimum Wage. Where an eligible
parent has worked for the same employer for at
least 12 continuous months, the employer must
make the PPL payments to the employee.
PPL payments, made by an employer, are made
with funds the employer has received from the
Commonwealth Government and are not payable
to an employee unless the Commonwealth has
provided sufficient funds in advance. In addition,
employers are not required to make superannuation
payments in relation to PPL payments and
employees do not accrue leave entitlements during
the period of the PPL.
This Ruling clarifies how PPL payments are to be
treated for payroll tax purposes.
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act) prescribes
that wages are liable for payroll tax if they are
paid or payable to an employee for or in relation
to services provided by the employee (or in
anticipation of future services to be provided by
the employee).
Even though PPL payments are paid by employers,
the Commissioner of State Revenue is of the view
that they do not constitute wages under the Act
and are therefore not liable to payroll tax as they
are not paid by the employer in respect of services
provided by the employee (or in anticipation of
future services to be provided by the employee).
Rather, PPL payments are Commonwealth
Government payments that employers are asked to
pay on behalf of the Commonwealth Government.
Please note that revenue rulings do not have the
force of law. Each decision made by the State
Revenue Office is made on the merits of each
individual case having regard to any relevant
ruling. All revenue rulings must be read subject to
Revenue Ruling GEN.01
Revenue Rulings
Paid Parental Leave
Payroll Tax Act 2007
December 2010
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ruling history
Issued date
December 2010
Dates of effect