Landholder Provisions - Valuation of Land Holdings (DA-060) [2012] VICSRODA 8 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions –
Valuation of Land Holdings
Revenue Ruling DA.060
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty
on relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings
in Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million
In determining whether a company or unit trust
scheme is a landholder (and the amount of duty
payable on a relevant acquisition), the value of
its land holdings must be ascertained. In certain
circumstances, the company or unit trust scheme’s
land holdings may include land held by linked entities
and discretionary trusts and land deemed to be owned
as a result of uncompleted agreements.
For information on the constructive ownership of land
through linked entities, please refer to Revenue Ruling
DA.058. For information on the constructive ownership
of land through discretionary trusts, please refer
to Revenue Ruling DA.059.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to identify
the type of valuation evidence and the circumstances
in which such evidence may be required by the
Commissioner of State Revenue (the Commissioner)
when determining whether a company or unit trust
scheme is a landholder and the amount of duty
(if any) payable on a relevant acquisition. The Ruling
also sets out the circumstances that may result
in a referral of a matter to the Valuer-General
or another competent valuer for valuation.
Land Holdings
Section 72(1)
of the Act defines a ‘land holding’
as an interest in land other than the estate or interest
of a mortgagee, chargee or other secured creditor
or a profit à prendre. ‘Land’ is not defined in the Act.
Interpretation of Legislation
(Vic), ‘land’ for the purpose of the Act
includes land covered with water, and any estate,
interest, easement, servitude, privilege or right
in or over land, such as a lease.
Section 73(1) of the Act provides that ‘land’ includes
anything fixed to the land, whether or not the item –
(a) constitutes a fixture at law; or
(b) is owned separately from the land; or
(c) is notionally severed or considered to be legally
separate to the land as a result of the operation
of any other Act or law.
However, the Commissioner can determine that ‘land’
does not include a thing fixed to the land if the thing
is owned by someone other than the owner of the
land or an associated person of the owner of the land
and the thing is not used in connection with the land.
Section 89G specifies that the provisions in Chapter
2 of the Act for ascertaining the value of transfers
chargeable with ad valorem duty apply in the same
way to the value of land holdings for landholder
purposes. Accordingly, section 22 of the Act (contained
in Chapter 2), which defines ‘unencumbered value’,
is relevant when determining the unencumbered value
of a landholder’s land holdings.
The statement of financial position (balance sheet)
of a company or unit trust generally records the value
of assets, including land holdings, on a historical cost
basis. The Commissioner’s view is that historical cost
is not necessarily reflective of unencumbered value.
The Commissioner considers that the most accurate
method of determining the unencumbered value
of a company or unit trust scheme’s land holdings
is by way of valuation. Therefore, the Commissioner
may require a person who is liable to duty to provide
a valuation by a competent valuer under section 273
of the Act. The Commissioner considers a competent
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
valuer for these purposes to be either a certified
practising valuer who is a member of the Australian
Property Institute or a member of the Real Estate
Institute of Victoria Ltd with sworn valuer accreditation.
The Commissioner will generally require a taxpayer
to obtain and provide a valuation from a competent
valuer on any one or more of the company or unit
trust scheme’s land holdings if:
(a) the value of the land holding, as estimated by
the taxpayer, is above $1 million or is low in
comparison with its municipal capital improved
value (irrespective of its estimated value); or
(b) the land holding was acquired by the company
or unit trust more than 12 months before the date
of the relevant acquisition; or
(c) the taxpayer has submitted a valuation from
a competent valuer where:
(i) the valuation provides a value for the land more
than 12 months before the date of the relevant
acquisition; or
(ii) the valuation provides a value for the land
within 12 months of the date of the relevant
acquisition but the valuation has not taken into
account planning approvals or permits obtained
or other improvements made to the land prior
to the date of the relevant acquisition.
The Commissioner may also require the taxpayer to
provide a valuation from a competent valuer pursuant
to section 273 of the Act in any other circumstances the
Commissioner considers necessary. Such circumstances
may include a valuation of a leasehold interest where a
company or unit trust scheme's status as a landholder is
dependent on the value of such an interest.
Referral to Valuer-General or other competent valuer
The Commissioner may refer a matter for valuation to
the Valuer-General or another competent valuer under
section 273(2) of the Act. The circumstances in which
the Commissioner will consider referring a matter for
valuation include (but are not limited to) when:
(a) a taxpayer provides informal valuation information
(e.g. a letter of appraisal from a real estate agent);
(b) a taxpayer provides formal valuation information
(e.g. a valuation from a competent valuer) which
the Commissioner considers does not accurately
reflect the unencumbered value of the company
or unit trust scheme’s land holdings.
If the Commissioner obtains a valuation from the Valuer-
General or another competent valuer, the taxpayer
may be liable to pay the cost of the valuation in the
circumstances set out in section 273(3) of the Act.
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of Part 2 of Chapter 3 of the Act in
relation to their particular circumstances, the taxpayer
may contact the Landholder Acquisitions Branch at
the State Revenue Office or apply for a private ruling
in accordance with Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all
cases, the onus is on the taxpayer to provide the
Commissioner with the necessary information to enable
an informed decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
Commissioner of State Revenue