Application of Charitable Exemption in Relation to Opportunity Shop (LT-013) [1999] VICSROLT 2 (1 May 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Application of Charitable
Exemption in Relation
to Opportunity Shops
Revenue Ruling LT.013
Section 9(1)(d) of the
Land Tax Act 1958
provides an exemption from land tax for land which
is used by a charitable institution exclusively for
charitable purposes. Revenue Ruling LT. 011
provides an explanation of the types of land-holder
and land use which qualify for exemption under
this provision.
Some issues have been raised in relation to the
applicability of this exemption to land used by
charitable organisations for the purposes of running
opportunity shops.
It has been held in the decisions in
Birmingham City Council
(House of Lords 1976) and
Trustees of the Superior Council of Australia of the
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul v Goulburn City
NSW L R 1974) that the term ‘used for
charitable purposes’ means used for purposes
directly related to the achievement of the objects of
the charity, as opposed to used for the purposes of
receiving, raising or earning money for the charity.
As was noted on page 659 of the decision in
Trustees of the Superior Council of Australia of the
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul v Goulburn City
“The real test, … appears to be whether the
purposes for which the land is used are those
purposes which characterise the claimant for
exemption as a “public charity”, or are concomitant,
or ancillary, or incidental, to those purposes…”
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the treatment
of opportunity shops in relation to the exemption.
For charitable organisations to be eligible to receive
a land tax exemption for land used by them for
operating an opportunity shop, all the following
criteria must be satisfied:
• the activities conducted in the opportunity shop
must specifically meet the aims and objectives of
the organisation’s charitable work.
The opportunity shop must, therefore, through
its operations, directly provide relief of poverty,
as distinct from raising funds which may be
applied to programs for disadvantaged persons;
• goods must be sold at nominal prices;
• goods sold by the opportunity shop must be
predominantly donated to the charity; and,
• goods sold must be predominantly secondhand.
Other factors may be taken into account in support
of an application for exemption. These may include,
for example, whether the opportunity shop is
staffed by volunteers and operates with limited
trading hours.
Land-holders seeking exemption from land tax for
land used for this purpose should follow the
requirements for exemption set out in Revenue
Ruling LT. 011.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner Of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE