Interest and Penalty (TAA-003) [1997] VICSROTAA 3 (1 July 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Taxation Administration Act 1997
into effect on 1 July 1997 and consolidates the
administrative provisions of the
Pay-roll Tax Act
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
Debits Tax Act 1990
. These Acts are defined as
‘taxation laws’ under the TAA. The purpose of the
TAA is to provide a consistent approach to the
administration of these taxes and duties in Victoria.
This ruling outlines the circumstances and process
under which interest and penalties will be applied
under the TAA.
Most SRO tax Acts incorporate a principle of
self-assessment, together with powers to
impose penalties for non-compliance.
The principle requires taxpayers to exercise
reasonable care in calculating their tax
liabilities, and paying these on time. In both
self-assessing and other cases, interest and
penalties deter non-compliance by making it
unprofitable to taxpayers. They promote
equity among taxpayers by ensuring that
those who meet their tax obligations are not
disadvantaged with respect to those who fail
to do so. They also compensate the
Government for being denied the use of
funds to which it is entitled.
The SRO must exercise discretionary powers
in applying interest and penalty provisions so
as to best serve the interests of Victoria and to
meet contemporary standards of ethical, fair and
sensible tax administration. This policy seeks to
achieve these objectives through consistent
application of interest and penalty provisions
across different revenue lines and between
taxpayers; by matching the level of penalty
to the degree of culpability of the taxpayer
and by providing incentives for taxpayers to
disclose voluntarily.
Application of policy
This policy governs the imposition and
remission of interest and penalties, within the
legal framework of the
Taxation Administration
. It is intended to provide a consistent
approach across revenue lines affected by the
TAA which, in turn, will afford equity to
taxpayers and protection to SRO staff.
The TAA, and therefore this policy, applies to
the following Acts from 1 July 1997:
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
Debits Tax Act 1990
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
In October 1995, the SRO issued a penalty
policy; the Compliance Penalty Policy.
Revenue lines previously dealt with under the
Compliance Penalty Policy and not specified in
paragraph 4 (above) will continue to be
administered in accordance with the guidelines
detailed in that policy.
This policy will govern penalties imposed after
1 July 1997. Any voluntary disclosure
concession offers under Compliance
Assistance Programs (CAP) announced before
this date will be honoured if the offer would
be more favourable to the taxpayer than the
concessions under this policy.
Administration
Delegated SRO staff will assess, remit or
cancel interest and/or penalties. They will be
accountable for making decisions in
accordance with this policy and having regard
to the facts of individual cases.
Interest and penalties
Revenue Ruling TAA.003
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
In accordance with the SRO Taxpayers’
Charter, the SRO will start from the
presumption that taxpayers have dealt with
their tax affairs openly and honestly and that
consequently any error has arisen from
ignorance or mistake rather than from
deliberate intent. SRO staff will assist
taxpayers by explaining the provisions of
this policy.
This policy is to be applied with commonsense
and having regard to its intent. SRO Officers
will be responsible for identifying situations
where its strict application would be unjust
or unreasonable.
Tax defaults
For the purposes of the
Taxation Administration
and this policy, a tax default is
defined as ‘A failure by a taxpayer to pay, in
accordance with a taxation law, the whole or
part of tax that the taxpayer is liable to pay.’
Tax defaults include both late payments and
underpayments of tax.
underpayment
is where the amount of
tax paid is less than the amount that the
taxpayer is liable to pay under the relevant tax
Act or where no payment has been made.
A late payment occurs where the correct
amount of tax is received by the SRO after the
due date for payment, either the date
specified in the legislation or in a notice of
assessment. A tax default comprising an
underpayment which is also paid late will be
regarded as an underpayment for the
purposes of this policy.
Offsetting overpayments and underpayments
In any case where a net tax liability is
determined by offsetting underpayments and
overpayments of tax, any interest or penalty
will be calculated on the net rather than the
total amount of tax unpaid.
How is interest calculated?
If a tax default occurs, interest is calculated
on a daily basis from the end of the last day
for payment until (and inclusive of) the day
upon which payment is made (section 24(1)
of the TAA).
Interest is payable on unpaid primary tax and
on unpaid penalty tax, but is not payable on
any unpaid interest ie. there will be no
interest on interest (section 24(2) of the TAA).
The interest rate
The interest rate applied will consist of
two components:
market rate
component; and
premium rate
market rate
is the rate published in the
Commonwealth of Australia Gazette
section 214A of the
Income Tax Assessment
(Commonwealth); or a rate
specified by order of the Minister published
in the Government Gazette. The market
rate applicable for 1 July 1997 to
31 December 1997 is 9.8 per cent a year.
Subsequent changes in this rate will be
advised in SRO publications.
The market rate component ensures that the
Government is reimbursed for the financing
cost incurred through the late payment
of revenue.
premium rate
is a component intended
to act as an incentive for timely payment,
being a fixed rate of 8 per cent a year (section
25(b) of the TAA).
How will interest be applied in practice?
In normal circumstance both components
of the interest rate (ie. for the period 1 July
1997 to 31 December 1997 a total rate
of 17.8 per cent a year) will be applied to all
late payments and underpayments of tax.
Where an assessment which includes interest
is issued, the amount of interest will remain
fixed until the due date for payment shown on
the assessment.
Minimum amount of interest
If the interest amount calculated in respect of
any one assessment is less than $20, no
interest will be imposed (section 26 of
Remission of interest - market rate component
The market rate component will be fully
remitted if the taxpayer can demonstrate that
the tax was paid to another taxing authority
in error and that full payment was received by
the other taxing authority on or before the
prescribed due date for payment.
Remission of interest - premium rate component
The premium rate component will be fully
remitted in cases where the market rate
component is remitted.
Please continue over page
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
The premium rate component will be also
be fully remitted if:
the taxpayer took reasonable care to
comply with taxation law (paragraphs
the tax default arose from unforeseen
circumstances outside the taxpayer’s
control (paragraphs 34 to 36);
the taxpayer made a voluntary disclosure
(paragraphs 42 to 48); or
the SRO materially contributed to the tax
default by providing false or misleading
advice (paragraphs 54 to 56).
Imposition of penalty tax
The TAA imposes penalty tax on all tax
defaults except where the Commissioner of
State Revenue is satisfied that reasonable
care has been taken to comply with the
taxation law or that the default occurred
solely because of circumstances beyond the
taxpayer’s control. The rate of penalty tax
varies depending on the degree of
culpability of the taxpayer.
Penalty tax is imposed on unpaid primary
tax and in addition to any interest, but it is
not imposed on any unpaid penalty tax
or interest.
The Commissioner of State Revenue may
remit penalty tax by any amount and this
policy defines the circumstances in which
this discretion will be exercised.
Penalty tax is imposed whether the tax
default was caused by an act or omission
of the taxpayer or of a person acting on
behalf of the taxpayer.
The following table sets out the rates of
penalties imposed under section 30, 31
and 32 of the TAA.
Reasonable Care
Where the Commissioner of State Revenue is
satisfied that a taxpayer has taken reasonable
care no penalty will apply. The standards of
reasonable care expected are that taxpayers
should keep complete and accurate records,
make diligent efforts to understand and comply
with the law, seek expert advice about uncertain
or complex matters as necessary and deal openly
and honestly with the SRO, including making
genuine efforts to bring all relevant information
to the attention of the SRO.
Factors such as the taxpayer’s commercial
experience, knowledge of tax legislation, access
to expert advice and familiarity with the English
language will be taken into account in determining
whether the taxpayer has met the standards of
reasonable care.
A taxpayer will not be recognised as having
taken reasonable care where the tax default is
primarily attributable to the taxpayer, or to a
person acting on the taxpayer’s behalf:
not understanding or misinterpreting
the legislation;
overlooking a requirement of a particular
provision of the legislation;
making errors in the keeping of records or
preparation of returns (including errors
in calculation);
failing to follow a public ruling of which the
taxpayer is aware, except where the taxpayer
can demonstrate there was a reasonable doubt
particular situation;
failing to seek expert advice or a private ruling
on a complex issue;
failing to obtain a formal decision in relation to
a tax liability where the liability is contingent on
the Commissioner of State Revenue’s approval
or exercise of a discretion (for example, the
exclusion of a member from a group); or
causing, or contributing to, unreasonable
delays in bringing matters before the court
for resolution.
Interest will be charged at the market rate on a
tax default where the taxpayer has taken
reasonable care but the premium rate interest
component will be fully remitted (paragraph 24).
Concealment
Investigation
Investigation
Reasonable care; or
Circumstances
beyond taxpayer’s
Failure to take
reasonable care
but no intentional
disregard of the law
Intentional
of a taxation law
Please continue over page
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
Please continue over page
Circumstances beyond a taxpayer’s control
No penalty will apply if the Commissioner
of State Revenue is satisfied that the tax
default occurred solely because of
circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s
control or the control of a person acting on
behalf of the taxpayer.
This will include:
postal or delivery delays (but not where
the taxpayer could have arranged other
means of delivery because of knowledge
of the likelihood of a delay);
fires, floods or other natural disasters;
unavailability of key personnel because of
sudden resignation, ill-health or
computer system breakdowns, including
third party systems such as Electronic
Funds Transfer systems.
The default must have occurred solely
because of the circumstances set out in
paragraph 34. If a lack of reasonable care
by the taxpayer or by a person acting on
the taxpayer’s behalf also contributed to
the default the normal level of penalty tax
will apply.
Circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s
control should normally only affect one
liability as the taxpayer should be able to
make alternative arrangements except in
the most extreme situations.
Interest will be charged at the market rate
on a tax default where the default is due to
circumstances outside the taxpayer’s
control but the premium rate interest
component will be fully remitted
(paragraph 24).
Intentional disregard of a taxation law
Intentional disregard of taxation law will
include situations where, on an objective
view of the facts, a tax default is caused
wholly or partly by a deliberate act or
omission by the taxpayer or by a person
acting on the taxpayer’s behalf.
The penalty in such cases is 75 per cent.
If, given the same set of facts and
circumstances, a reasonable person would
have realised that there was a tax liability
and that the act or omission would lead to
non-compliance, the taxpayer will be presumed
to have acted with intentional disregard of the
law. It will not be necessary to establish that the
taxpayer has acted dishonestly.
Examples of conduct which demonstrate an
intentional disregard of the law are:
the use of contrived or artificial tax avoidance
schemes which prove to be legally flawed;
tax evasion or fraud;
knowingly making false or misleading
statements or keeping false records;
knowingly concealing relevant facts;
ignoring a private ruling or a public ruling of
which the taxpayer is aware, except where the
taxpayer can demonstrate there was a
reasonable doubt about the applicability of
the ruling to the particular situation; or
failure to satisfy a tax liability after being
alerted to its existence, either by the SRO or
another person.
A repeated tax default in relation to the same
or a closely related issue will create a
presumption that the taxpayer has intentionally
disregarded the law, unless the taxpayer can
satisfy the Commissioner of State Revenue that
any subsequent default was solely due to
reasons other than a deliberate act or omission
by the taxpayer or a person acting on
their behalf.
Reduction in penalties-disclosure before
an investigation
The amount of penalty tax is to be reduced by
80 per cent (that is to an effective rate of 5 per
cent or 15 per cent) if, before the Commissioner
of State Revenue informs the taxpayer, in
writing or verbally, that an investigation relating
to the taxpayer is to be carried out, the taxpayer
discloses to the Commissioner of State Revenue
sufficient information to enable the nature and
extent of the tax default to be determined.
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
Please continue over page
For the purposes of voluntary disclosure, a
member of a taxpayer grouping will be deemed
to have been informed of an investigation if
any member of that grouping has been
informed. It will not be acceptable for a
member of a taxpaying group to claim voluntary
disclosure concessions in circumstances where
another member has been advised of
an investigation.
Voluntary disclosures must be in writing.
They must identify the taxpayer (and a
taxpayer grouping, if applicable) and include
a full and frank statement of the period and
amount of the default, the facts in relation to
the disclosure, and an explanation of how the
error occurred.
The SRO will normally treat voluntary
disclosures as being complete and accurate
and will not target taxpayers making voluntary
disclosures for investigation. Unless there is
evidence to the contrary, penalty tax rate
applicable to a voluntary disclosure before
investigation will be 5 per cent. However, the
SRO may also make further inquiries into a
voluntary disclosure if there are grounds to
believe that it may be incorrect or incomplete
(either to the taxpayer’s or SRO’s benefit). If a
voluntary disclosure is found not to be full
and frank, the normal level of penalty
appropriate for the default will be imposed,
unless the taxpayer can establish that the
failure to completely disclose the liability arose
from circumstances outside the taxpayer’s control.
Interest will be charged at the market rate on
a tax default where the taxpayer has made a
voluntary disclosure but the premium rate
interest component will be fully remitted
(paragraph 24).
Reduction in penalties - disclosure during
an investigation
The amount of penalty tax is to be reduced
by 20 percent (that is to an effective rate of
20 per cent or 60 per cent) if, after the
Commissioner of State Revenue informs the
taxpayer (being an individual taxpayer or a
member of a taxpayer grouping), in writing or
verbally, that an investigation relating to the
taxpayer is to be conducted and before such
investigation is completed, the taxpayer
discloses to the Commissioner of State Revenue,
in writing, sufficient information to enable the
nature and extent of the tax default to
be determined.
An investigation is completed when the
Commissioner of State Revenue has provided
the taxpayer (being an individual taxpayer or
the nominated member of a taxpayer grouping)
with the appropriate exit letter. A voluntary
disclosure after this, in relation to other
defaults, will be accepted as a disclosure
before investigation, as long as there was no
concealment or hindrance during the audit
and the facts on which the voluntary
disclosure was based first came to the
taxpayer’s attention after completion of
the investigation.
Interest will be charged at the market rate on
a tax default where the taxpayer has made a
voluntary disclosure but the premium rate
interest component will be fully remitted
(paragraph 24).
Increase in penalty - concealment
The amount of penalty tax may be increased
by 20 per cent (that is to an effective rate of
30 per cent or 90 per cent) if, after the
Commissioner of State Revenue has informed
the taxpayer that an investigation is to be
carried out and before the investigation is
completed, the taxpayer took steps to prevent
or hinder the Commissioner of State Revenue
from becoming aware of the nature and
extent of the tax default in whole or part
(section 32(2) of the TAA).
A taxpayer will be deemed to have taken steps
to prevent or hinder the Commissioner of
State Revenue if the taxpayer:
deliberately damages or destroys records
required to be kept under the taxation law to
which the investigation relates; or
without reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to
comply with a requirement made by the
Commissioner of State Revenue for the
purposes of determining the taxpayer’s tax
liability; or
hinders or obstructs and authorised officer
performing the functions of determining the
taxpayer’s tax liability.
Minimum amount of penalty
No penalty tax will be imposed if the amount
in respect of any one default is less than $20.
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
Remission of penalty tax
The Commissioner of State Revenue will remit
penalty tax in full where the taxpayer can prove
that the tax was paid to another taxing authority
in error and that full payment was received by
the other taxing authority on or before the
prescribed due date for payment.
Penalty tax will be remitted in full if the SRO
has materially contributed to an error by
providing incorrect or misleading advice to a
taxpayer who has relied on the advice to
determine a tax liability. The SRO will
recognise such a compromise situation when
the advice given was such that a taxpayer
exercising reasonable care would believe that
it could be relied on to determine the liability,
that the advice was applicable to the facts
of the particular case; and
that it was not so clearly incorrect as to
raise a question in the mind of a reasonably
prudent person.
Generally, the SRO will only recognise written
advice as binding on the SRO. Claims that
taxpayers acted on the basis of verbal advice
will be assessed on their merits and in the
light of available evidence of the exact
nature of the advice and the circumstances
in which it was given.
Failure to provide advice or to issue a ruling
will not be recognised as compromising the
SRO, except where a taxpayer has asked the
SRO for advice on the correct interpretation
of a particular issue. In such a situation the
taxpayer will be accorded the protection of
having taken reasonable care until the SRO
provides the requested advice.
If a late payment results solely because of
circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control
or the control of a person acting on behalf
of the taxpayer, no penalty will apply
(paragraphs 34 to 36).
Taxpayers may object to any SRO decision to
impose penalty or interest under the objection
provisions of the TAA. Objections must be
lodged in writing with the Commissioner of
State Revenue within 60 days from the
service of the notice of assessment and set
out fully the grounds of the objection.
Interest will continue to accrue throughout
the period that the objection is under
consideration but will not become payable
until such time as the objection is determined.
Commissioner of State Revenue
November 1997
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001