Lease Provisions - Meaning of consideration (DA-053) [2010] VICSRODA 3 (1 December 2010)
Revenue Ruling DA.053
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) was amended with
effect from 21 November 2008 to ensure that certain
leasing arrangements concerning land in Victoria are
not used as a mechanism to avoid duty.
sections 7(1)(b)(v)
and (va) of the Act, duty
is payable on the grant, transfer or assignment of a
lease if consideration (other than the rent reserved on
the grant of the lease) is paid or agreed to be paid in
respect of the lease or in respect of:
a) a right to purchase the land or a right to a transfer
of the land;
b) an option to purchase the land or an option for the
transfer of the land;
c) a right of first refusal in respect of the sale or
transfer of the land;
d) any other lease, licence, contract, scheme or
arrangement by which the lessee, transferee
or assignee, or an associated person of the lessee,
transferee or assignee, obtains any right or interest
in the land that is the subject of the lease other
than the leasehold estate.
In determining the duty payable on a dutiable
transaction concerning a lease referred to in sections
7(1)(b)(v) and (va) of the Act,
section 20(3)
that the dutiable value is the greater of –
(a) any consideration (being the amount of a
monetary consideration or the value of a non-
monetary consideration) other than rent reserved
that is paid or agreed to be paid; and
(b) the unencumbered value of the land that is subject
to the lease.
The purpose of this Ruling is to provide guidance
on the meaning of the term ‘consideration’ under
sections 7(1)(b)(v)
and (va) of the Act and to explain
what factors the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) will take into account in determining
whether consideration has been paid or agreed to be
paid for the purposes of the provisions. The Ruling
also provides a number of examples on what will and
will not constitute consideration for the purposes of the
provisions.
For guidance on the general application of the lease
provisions, please see Revenue Ruling DA-052. For
information on the types of payments that may qualify
as payments of rent, please see Revenue Ruling
The term ‘consideration’ is not defined in the Act.
There is, however, an abundance of authority which
shows that in a stamp duty context the word has a
broad meaning and includes all things that a party
would receive in order to move a transaction. In the
context of the lease provisions, the term refers to all
monetary or non monetary consideration, which is
consistent with the reference in
section 20(3)
Act to ‘monetary consideration and the value of a non-
monetary consideration’ in determining the dutiable
value of a lease referred to in
sections 7(1)(b)(v)
of the Act.
The provision of non-monetary consideration can
include covenants given by a lessee to a lessor (or an
associated third party) under the terms of a lease or a
separate but connected agreement to the lease. Often
these covenants are provided to secure the right to use
the land under the lease and will have nil or nominal
value. However, covenants can have a significant value
where they require the lessee to undertake substantial
works to improve the land and those improvements
become the property of the lessor at the end of the
lease. For example, where a lease requires a lessee to
fit out the premises or to construct other improvements
on the premises such that the improvements will
become the property of the lessor at the end of the
lease, the value of the improvements may be regarded
as consideration.
In determining whether any covenant given in respect
of the grant, transfer or assignment of a lease or a right
or option to acquire the underlying land constitutes
consideration for the purposes of the relevant provisions
of the Act, the Commissioner will have regard to the
following factors –
a) the nature and circumstances of the transaction
as a whole, including the rights, obligations and
responsibilities of the parties to the transaction
(whether contained in one or more agreements);
Revenue Rulings
Lease Provisions - Meaning of ‘Consideration’
Ruling history
Issued date
November 2010
Dates of effect
The Commissioner recognises that circumstances
may arise in which it would be inappropriate to
treat valuable covenants made by a lessee under a
lease as consideration. One such case involves a
bona fide security arrangement. For example, the
Commissioner would not regard as consideration the
provision of finance by a mortgagee in consideration
of the grant of a mortgage of a leasehold estate
where the mortgage occurs by way of the transfer or
assignment of an unregistered lease of Victorian land
or by way of the grant of a sub-lease. In each case,
the financier's interest in the leasehold estate is subject
to the mortgagor's right to have the leasehold estate
reconveyed to it or the sub-lease terminated upon
repayment of the secured moneys.
The following examples illustrate what constitutes
consideration under the lease provisions. Examples 1,
2 and 3 are situations where the Commissioner would
consider there to be consideration under the lease
provisions. Examples 4, 5 and 6 are situations where
the Commissioner would not consider there to be
consideration under the lease provisions.
Example 1 – Payment of premium
ABC is the owner of a rundown inner city office
building valued at approximately $10 million. XYZ
has approached ABC with a view of securing exclusive
possession of the property in order to renovate the
building and sub-lease the various floors. ABC agrees
to grant XYZ a 99 year peppercorn lease over the
building in return for XYZ paying $10 million to a party
associated to ABC. Despite the payment not being
made directly to ABC, it nevertheless would constitute
consideration for the grant of the lease.
Example 2 – Assumption of debt liabilities
ABC is a commercial development company which
holds significant levels of debt. XYZ is interested
in buying or securing a favourable long term lease
over one of the retail properties owned by ABC. In
consideration of ABC granting a favourable long
term lease over the retail property, XYZ agrees to
assume the liability under a loan facility held by ABC
valued at $5 million. Although XYZ has not made a
monetary payment for the granting of the lease, the
Commissioner would consider the assumption of the
liability as consideration for the grant of the lease.
Example 3 – Positive covenant to undertake major
capital works
ABC is under financial distress and the owner of a
vacant CBD site which has received planning approval
for a 20 level office and residential tower development.
ABC’s only major asset is the land which has been
valued at $10 million. XYZ is a developer and has
agreed with ABC to construct the tower at its own cost.
Under the arrangement, ABC is to grant XYZ a 199
year peppercorn lease over the land. In return, XYZ
will grant to a subsidiary of ABC a sub-lease over three
floors of the development upon its completion. The
terms of the sub-lease are similar to the head lease
b) the value of the covenant (in terms of its benefit to
the lessor and/or cost to the lessee, including
associated persons of the lessor and lessee) relative
to the value of the underlying land;
c) whether the covenant imposes a positive obligation
on the lessee to make improvements to the
land which is the subject of the lease or is merely a
permissive right subject to the consent of the
d) where a covenant requires the lessee to make
improvements, the nature of the improvements and
whether they will yield a long-term enduring
benefit to the lessor or are merely made to allow the
lessee to fully use and enjoy the land for the
permitted purpose during the lessee’s tenancy;
e) the rent payable under the lease and whether it is at
a market rate; and
f) the term of the lease.
Where covenants are the subject of a separate
agreement the Commissioner will have regard to
whether there is adequate consideration supporting
the mutual promises and obligations of the parties
and whether any part of the consideration and/
or the covenants can be or should be construed as
consideration in respect of the leasing arrangement.
Where the covenants are not supported by adequate
consideration it is likely that the Commissioner will
regard the value of the covenants as consideration for
the lease arrangement.
Where a lease permits, but does not require, a lessee to
modify or improve the leased premises for its use and
enjoyment, the value of the modifications/improvements
would generally not be regarded as consideration for
the lease even if the terms of the lease provide that
the modifications/improvements become the lessor’s
property on expiration of the lease. Similarly, ‘make
good’ payments on the conclusion of a lease will
generally not be regarded as consideration under the
lease provisions.
If an arrangement provides a positive obligation on the
lessee to make improvements to the leased premises
and the improvements are to become the lessor’s
property on expiration of the lease it is more likely that
the covenant concerning those improvements would
constitute consideration for the lease. In determining
whether such a covenant constitutes consideration for
the grant of a lease, the Commissioner will consider the
likely value of the improvements on expiration of the
lease. If the value of the improvements on expiration
of the lease is negligible the covenant requiring the
lessee to make the improvements would generally not
be regarded as consideration for the lease. A reversion
date that is in the distant future will ordinarily reduce
the value of the works or improvements to the lessor
and therefore the likelihood of them constituting
consideration for the lease.
Example 6 – Arrangements where lessee may
undertake works
ABC owns a CBD site valued at approximately $1
million. XYZ wishes to acquire the site as an outlet
for its successful designer label retail business. ABC
agrees to grant XYZ a 10 year standard commercial
lease over the site. Under the lease, XYZ may after
obtaining the consent of ABC carry out structural works,
improvements and modifications to the premises. Upon
the grant of the lease, XYZ seeks and obtains ABC’s
consent to undertake a fit out of the premises. The
purpose of the fit out is to bring the premises in line
with all other high end retail outlets run by XYZ and
its chain of operators. The fit out is estimated to cost
$100,000 and will revert to ABC on the expiration of
the lease unless XYZ decides or is directed by ABC to
remove the works. It is expected that value of the fit
out will be nominal on the expiration of the lease and
not removed by XYZ unless directed by ABC. Given
this and the fact that the grant of the lease was not
made conditional on XYZ undertaking the fit out,
the Commissioner would not regard the fit out as
constituting consideration for the grant of the lease.
The above examples and considerations are provided
as a guide only and are not an exhaustive list of the
matters or factors the Commissioner may consider
in determining the application of
sections 7(1)(b)(v)
and (va) of the Act. A taxpayer who is uncertain of
the application of these provisions to their particular
circumstances may apply to the Commissioner for a
private ruling in accordance with the guidelines set out
in Revenue Ruling GEN-009. In each case, the onus is
on the taxpayer to provide the Commissioner with the
necessary information to make an informed decision as
to whether the grant, transfer or assignment of a lease
is a dutiable transaction under Chapter 2 of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN-001.
in that it is for a period of 199 years (less one day) at
an annual peppercorn rental. On expiry of the lease
arrangements, all the improvements which are required
to be maintained by XYZ are to revert to ABC. The
present value of the rent that the subsidiary of ABC
will be able to generate from its sub-lease of three
floors on completion of the tower has been valued
at approximately $10 million. Whilst the anticipated
reversion date of the head lease is far in the future, the
requirement on XYZ to maintain the building ensures
that it would have more than a nominal value on
expiration of the head lease. Accordingly, the covenant
to fund, build and maintain the tower may be regarded
as constituting consideration for the grant of the lease.
In any event, the covenant by XYZ to grant a subsidiary
of ABC a sub-lease over three floors of the development
on its completion would be regarded as valuable
consideration for the grant of the head lease.
Example 4 – Sale of business
ABC conducts a manufacturing business on premises
which are leased from DEF under the terms of a
standard commercial lease. The lease does not provide
ABC with any rights to acquire the property in the
future whether by way of transfer, option or right of first
refusal. ABC enters into a business sale agreement
with XYZ to transfer or assign all of the assets of the
manufacturing business, including the commercial lease
of the premises upon which the business is conducted.
Under the business sale agreement the purchase price
has been apportioned between the business assets
and, to ensure the enforceability of the arrangements
between the parties, nominal consideration of $1 has
been allocated to the assignment of the commercial
lease of the premises. In such circumstances, the
Commissioner would not consider there to have been
consideration paid for the assignment of the lease
as it is recognised that the nominal sum allocated to
the assignment is solely for the enforceability of the
arrangement.
Example 5 – Positive covenant to undertake minor
capital works
ABC is the owner of a double fronted shop, with an
approximate value of $1 million. XYZ wishes to lease
half the site to establish a café business. ABC agrees
to grant XYZ a standard commercial lease over half
the site on the condition that XYZ contributes 50% of
the costs (capped to $10,000) to construct a partition
between the two shop fronts. A standard commercial
lease is executed by the parties reflecting the above
arrangement and the fact that the improvements are
not tenant’s fixtures and are the property of ABC.
Given the nature and value of the improvements relative
to the value of the land, the Commissioner would
regard XYZ’s cost contribution not to be consideration
for the grant of the lease but rather a payment for and
in connection with its intended use of the land.
November 2010
Commissioner of State Revenue