Special Land Tax (LT-008) [1995] VICSROLT 1 (1 June 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Special land tax
Revenue Ruling LT.008
Land Tax Act 1958
imposes an annual
tax on the unimproved value of all Victorian land
owned by a taxpayer, which includes land leased
from the Crown and land subject to a life tenancy,
as at midnight on 31 December in the year prior to
the year of assessment (subject to the threshold
value). However, the Act provides several exemptions
for landowners.
Section 10 of the Act provides for the application of
special land tax in cases where land which is exempt
under specific sub-sections of section 9(1) ceases to
The purpose of this ruling is to outline when and
how such lands will be assessed for special land tax.
Section 10(1) provides for the application of special
land tax at the rate of five per cent of the
unimproved value of certain exempt land which
ceases to be exempt under paragraphs (b), (g), (h),
(ha) or (i) of section 9(1). Land which ceases to be
exempt under other paragraphs of section 9(1) will
not attract special land tax. Special land tax is
imposed only once (as opposed to the normal land
tax) and is calculated on the unimproved value of
the land on the date on which it ceases to be
exempt. The unimproved value of land for special
land tax purposes is the site value as defined in the
Valuation of
Land Tax Act 1960
as at the date the
land ceases to be exempt.
Special land tax is applicable only to land which
ceases to be exempt as land:
• vested in a public statutory authority;
• vested in a body which promotes cultural,
sporting or recreational facilities or objectives;
• used for primary production (except primary
production land located wholly outside the
metropolitan area);
• used as a mine.
The cessation of an exemption usually results from
the land being sold to a purchaser who does not
have an exempt status, or from a change in the
use of the land, such as when land changes from
primary production land to land subdivided
for housing.
It should be noted that where primary production
land located wholly outside the metropolitan area
ceases to be exempt, the land will not become liable
to special land tax. However, if that land ceases to
be exempt as a consequence of being rezoned into
the metropolitan area, and the owner is then
granted a subsequent exemption for primary
production land located at least partly within the
metropolitan area whether or not in an urban zone,
the owner should be aware that should the new
exemption cease at some later stage, special land
tax will become payable on that land at that
later stage.
When the land loses its exempt status immediately
upon, or within 60 days of, a change in ownership,
special land tax is payable by the person who was
the owner immediately before that change of
ownership. In all other cases, special land tax is
payable by the person who is the owner at the time
the exemption ceases.
Where special land tax is payable, a separate
assessment is issued.
Section 10(1C provides that special land tax will not
apply to land which was previously exempt as land
vested in a public statutory authority where:
• the unimproved value does not exceed the
relevant general exemption level; and
• the land is proposed to be used by the owners
as a principal place of residence.
ON THE MOVE
Section 10(1D) which was inserted by the
(Revision) Act 1991
, prevents liability for special land
tax in respect of land which ceases to be exempt due
to an amendment to section 9.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue