Termination Payments (PT-111) [2004] VICSROPT 6 (1 December 2004)
Section 3(1)
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
(the Act) was
amended from 1 July 2001 to impose pay-roll tax on
accrued annual leave, long service leave and eligible
termination payments (ETP) paid as a result of
termination of an employee's service.
2. The purpose of the ruling is to clarify which termina-
tion payments are subject to pay-roll tax since 1 July
Eligible termination payments
3. An amount, paid or payable by an employer, as a
result of the termination of employment, is subject to
pay-roll tax if it falls within the definition of an ETP
under section 27A of the
Income Tax Assessment Act
(the ITAA). The payment is subject to pay-roll
tax to the extent that it would have constituted income
tax assessable income had it been paid directly to the
employee irrespective of whether it is paid to the
employee or another person or body (including a
payment into a roll-over fund).
4. ETP's paid by employers may include payments for:
Unused sick leave or rostered days off;
Payment in lieu of notice or service contract
Compensation for loss of employment or wrongful
Ex gratia payments or "golden handshakes"; and
Bona fide redundancy or approved early
retirement scheme payments in excess of the
income tax free limits.
5. The payments described in paragraph 4 are some of
the more common components of ETPs. If employers
are not sure if a particular termination payment is an
ETP, they should contact the Australian Taxation
6. The amount subject to pay-roll tax is the whole of the
ETP paid by the employer, whether paid to the
employee or to a roll-over fund, that would be income
tax assessable income of the employee. Consequently,
the amount subject to pay-roll tax is the whole of the
ETP paid by the employer less any component which
would be exempt income if paid directly to the
Bona fide redundancy payments and approved early
retirement scheme payments
7. In some circumstances, a payment arising from the
termination of employment may constitute either an
approved early retirement scheme payment under
section 27E of the ITAA or a bona fide redundancy
payment under section 27F of the ITAA. Such a
payment is exempt from pay-roll tax to the extent that
it is exempt from income tax. Any amount of an
approved early retirement or bona fide redundancy
payment paid in excess of the income tax free limits,
is subject to income tax as an ETP and is therefore
subject to pay-roll tax (see paragraph 9).
8. If employers are uncertain if a particular termination
payment constitutes a bona fide redundancy payment
or an appoved early retirement scheme payment, they
should contact the Australian Taxation Office for
Invalidity payments
9. The post June 1994 invalidity component of an ETP
made as a result of the termination of employment
due to the disability of the employee is income tax
free and is not subject to pay-roll tax. Employers
should contact the Australian Taxation Office for the
calculation of the invalidity component of an ETP.
Accrued annual leave and long service leave
10. All accrued annual leave and long service leave paid
to an employee upon termination of the employee's
services (including a bonus, loading or other
additional payment relating to that leave) is subject to
pay-roll tax.
11. Accrued sick leave paid upon termination of
employment forms part of an ETP and is considered
in the previous section.
12. Leave payments to a continuing employee are subject
to pay-roll tax.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is made
on the merits of each individual case having regard to any
relevant ruling. All rulings must be read subject to
Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling No. PT.111
76 775 195 331
Revenue Ruling PT.111
Termination Payments
Replaces PT.083 & PT.088
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 2004