Transfer of real property under a voluntary liquidation (SD-093) [1998] VICSROSD 3 (1 December 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Transfer of real property
under a voluntary liquidation
Revenue Ruling SD.093
This ruling provides advice on when the
Commissioner of State Revenue will be satisfied
that a voluntary liquidation of a company is not
being undertaken as a means of transferring real
property and gaining the concession from duty
available under section 72(3) of the
The concession may apply when a shareholder of
a company receives real property as part of the
distribution of assets occurring under the voluntary
winding up of the company. Essentially the
concession reduces duty payable on the transfer to
the extent that the shareholder is exchanging an
asset in the form of shares for another in the form
of real property. There are many reasons for the
voluntary liquidation of a company but there have
been instances where such action has been taken
to avoid the stamp duty normally payable on a
transfer of real property. Anti avoidance provisions
were inserted into Section 72 of the Act to ensure
that the concession was not abused. This ruling
explains the SRO’s views on when a taxpayer can
expect the concession to apply.
Under the concession, the value of the property is
reduced by a deduction before calculating the
duty payable (section 72(6)). The shareholder
must seek the deduction by making a written
application to the Commissioner before the
property is transferred (section 72(3)).
The Commissioner may not approve the
application unless satisfied that the company is
not being wound up in connection with a scheme
or arrangement intended to use the means of a
voluntary winding up of a company to effect a
transfer of real property and thereby reduce the
stamp duty otherwise payable on the transfer
(section 72(4)).
Section 72(5) sets out the factors that the
Commissioner may consider when deciding
whether to approve an application. They include:
(a) the duration of the shareholder’s
shareholding in the company;
(b) whether or not the shareholder held shares in a
related corporation of the company that owned
the real property before it was owned by the
(c) the period for which the real property has been
owned by the company or a related corporation
of the company;
(d) any dealing in shares of the company or a
related corporation of the company—
(i) by the shareholder or a related corporation of
the shareholder;
(ii) by a previous owner of the real property;
(e) whether there is any commercial efficacy to an
arrangement or scheme of transactions involving
any one or more of—
(i) the company;
(ii) the shareholder;
(iii) a related corporation of the company or the
shareholder;
(iv) a substantial shareholder (within the meaning
of Part 6.7 of the Corporations Law) of a
person referred to in sub-paragraph (i), (ii)
in relation to the winding up, other than to
reduce the stamp duty otherwise payable on
the conveyance;
(f) any other matters he or she considers relevant.
The premise for this ruling is that a voluntary
liquidation of a company is unlikely to form part of a
scheme to avoid stamp duty on the transfer of real
property where:
• the real property distributed to a shareholder had
been held by that company for a period of three
• the transferee had been a shareholder for three
• the transferee’s shareholding had not increased
markedly within the previous year, and
• the real property had not been acquired by the
liquidated company from a party linked to the
transferor or the transferee.
but there have
on has been taken
rmally payable on a
ayable on a
y. Anti avoidance provisions
. Anti avoidance provisions
Section 72 of the Act to ensure
ection 72 of the Act to ensure
ssion was not abused. This ruling
ssion was not abused. This ruling
he SRO’s views on when a taxpayer can
e SRO’s views on when a taxpayer
t the concession to apply.
concession to apply.
Under the concession, the value of the property i
Under the concession, the value of the prop
reduced by a deduction before calculating th
reduced by a deduction before calculating t
duty payable (section 72(6)). The shareh
duty payable (section 72(6)). The share
must seek the deduction by making
uction by making
application to the Commissioner
o the Commissione
property is transferred (secti
nsferred (sect
The Commissioner ma
The Commissione
application unless
application unles
not being wou
not being wou
owned by the
owned by the
the real property has been
eal property has been
mpany or a related corporation
mpany or a related corporation
aling in shares of the company or a
ling in shares of the company
ated corporation of the company—
corporation of the company—
(i) by the shareholder or a related corporatio
(i) by the shareholder or a related corporatio
the shareholder;
the shareholder;
(ii) by a previous owner of the real p
ous owner of the real
(e) whether there is any commerc
whether there is any commer
arrangement or scheme o
arrangement or scheme o
any one or more of—
(i) the company
(i) the compa
(ii) the sha
(ii) the sha
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
The Commissioner has ruled that an application for a
deduction from stamp duty made under section 72(3)
of the Act will be approved where:
• the person appointed as liquidator of the company
is a registered liquidator under section 1282(2) of
the Corporations Law, and
• the transferee shareholder has owned shares in the
company to be liquidated for the past three years,
• the transferee has not acquired additional shares in
the company to be liquidated within the past year
(except by means of a bonus issue or as part of a
dividend reinvestment plan), and
• the real property to be transferred has been owned
by the company to be liquidated for the past three
• no person has held an interest in the real property
to be transferred within the past three years where
that person is any of the following;
a) the transferee,
b) a related corporation of the transferee,
c) a related corporation of the company to be
d) a substantive shareholder (within the meaning
of Part 6.7 of the Corporations Law) of a
person referred to in a), b) or c) above or the
company to be liquidated,
unless other evidence demonstrates that the transfer is
a scheme, or part of a scheme to avoid stamp duty.
The application for a deduction must be accompanied
by a copy of the special resolution whereby members
agreed to wind up the company voluntarily together
with a statement signed by the liquidator providing
details of;
• the name of the liquidator, date of appointment,
and whether appointed by the members or the
• the date, time and place of the meeting of
members at which a special resolution was passed
to place the company into voluntary liquidation,
• the reasons for placing the company into voluntary
liquidation,
• whether a declaration of solvency was provided by
the directors and, if so, the date on which it was
lodged with the ASC,
• whether a meeting of creditors has been held and,
if so, the date, time and place of such meeting,
• details of the transferee’s shareholdings in
the company to be liquidated for the past
three years, and
• details of ownership of the real property to
be transferred for the past three years.
Where real property is distributed to a
shareholder under a voluntary winding up of a
company in circumstances which do not meet
the above conditions, the Commissioner may
still approve an application for a deduction.
Further information will be sought from an
applicant including, but not limited to, any
contracts or agreements between the company
to be liquidated, a related corporation, or any
other party, concerning the real property to be
distributed under the winding up.
The concession will apply to the owners of flats
who convert their property holdings from
company title (where an owner holds shares in,
rather than a title to, the property) to the more
modern strata title. This process entails placing
the company into voluntary liquidation to
distribute the newly divided property to the
relevant shareholders. Even though it may not
be possible to satisfy all of the above conditions
for such transfers, the deduction would be
routinely approved.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 1998
within the meaning
orations Law) of a
n a), b) or c) above or the
n a), b) or c) above or the
liquidated,
ence demonstrates that the transfer is
nce demonstrates that the transfe
r part of a scheme to avoid stamp duty.
part of a scheme to avoid stamp
pplication for a deduction must be accompanied
n for a deduction must be accom
a copy of the special resolution whereby membe
a copy of the special resolution whereby me
agreed to wind up the company voluntarily tog
agreed to wind up the company voluntarily tog
with a statement signed by the liquidator p
with a statement signed by the liquidator p
details of;
• the name of the liquidator, da
• the name of the liquidator, d
and whether appointed by
the date, time a
the date, time a
ween the company
een the company
d corporation, or any
ng the real property to be
ng the real pro
r the winding up.
the winding up.
ssion will apply to the owners of flats
sion will apply to the owners
onvert their property holdings from
vert their property holdings from
mpany title (where an owner holds shares in,
itle (where an owner holds shares in,
rather than a title to, the property) to the more
rather than a title to, the property) to the more
modern strata title. This process entails pla
modern strata title. This process entails pl
the company into voluntary liquidation
mpany into voluntary liquidation
distribute the newly divided proper
bute the newly divided prope
relevant shareholders. Even th
relevant shareholders. Even th
be possible to satisfy all of
be possible to satisfy all o
for such transfers, the
routinely approve
routinely approv
Please note
Please note
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001