Non-Bank Financial Institutions Cheque Facilities (DT-003) [1995] VICSRODT 2 (31 October 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Debits Tax Act 1990
(the Act) imposes tax on all
taxable and eligible debits to accounts that may
provide a cheque facility.
Many non-bank financial institutions (NBFI) provide
payment orders or other cheque type facilities for the
use of their customers. Typically, an agreement exists
between a bank and NBFI under which:
• the members of the NBFI are authorised to draw
cheques on the NBFI’s settlement account with
the bank. The settlement account is bulk debited
by the bank with an amount equal to the
aggregate value of cheques presented on a daily
• the bank supplies the NBFI with details of the
individual cheques presented, to allow it to debit
individual members’ accounts to the value of
the cheques written;
• the NBFI deposits funds into the settlement
account on a daily basis with an amount
representing the current day’s presented
cheques drawn by members, and any adjustments.
This ruling considers the imposition of Debits Tax on
the debiting of:
customers’ own accounts
settlement account
with the bank.
This ruling replaces the Australian Taxation Office
Debits Tax Ruling MT2039, with effect from
1 January 1995.
of the Act, tax will be imposed
on a debit to an account which has a cheque facility.
For an instrument to be considered a ‘cheque’ it
must be drawn by, or on behalf of, the account
holder or holders.
The debiting of the customer’s own account with a
NBFI does not give rise to a taxable debit as the
cheque is not directly drawn on the customer’s own
account with the NBFI (it is drawn on the NBFI’s
settlement account).
In regard to the settlement account, it has been
argued that the instruments provided by the cheque
purposes of the Act, as the instruments are not
signed by the account holder (the NBFI). It has,
however, been upheld by the courts that in these
circumstances an agency relationship exists between
a NBFI and its members (see
Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
23 ATR 121)
. The cheques are therefore drawn by
the NBFI’s members on behalf of the account holder
(the NBFI).
As the settlement account makes provision for a
cheque facility, all debits to this account are subject
to debits tax. Under the provisions of
Act, tax is payable and calculated for each individual
account transaction in respect of that single debit.
Therefore, even though the bank may debit the
settlement account only once each day for the total
of all cheques presented for that day, debits tax is
payable on each cheque covered by the single debit.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Non-Bank Financial Institutions
Cheque Facilities
Revenue Ruling DT.003
Ceased - 30 June 2005