Land Used for Primary Production (LT-010) [1995] VICSROLT 3 (1 December 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
There are three sections in the
Land Tax Act 1958
(the Act) which exempt land used for primary
production from land tax, these being sections
9(1)(ga), 9(1)(h) and 9(1)(ha). Each section requires
different criteria to be satisfied, and confusion often
arises as to how each section is to be applied.
The legislation defines land used for primary
production to include land used primarily for one or
more of the following activities:
• the cultivation thereof for the purpose of selling
the produce of such cultivation;
• the maintenance of animals or poultry thereon
for the purpose of selling them or their natural
increase or bodily produce;
• the keeping of bees thereon for the purpose of
selling their honey;
• commercial fishing, including the preparation for
such fishing or the storage or preservation of
fish or fishing gear; and
• the cultivation or propagation for sale of plants,
seedlings, mushrooms or orchids.
The business of primary production means the
business of one or more of the activities
described above.
Any reference in the Act to land within the
metropolitan area is a reference to land within the
meaning of section 201 of the
Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of Works Act 1958.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide an
explanation of the primary production exemption
sections of the legislation.
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling LT.005.
There are three situations in which land used for
primary production will be exempt from land tax.
1. Land wholly outside the metropolitan area -
Section 9(1)(ga)
Land which is wholly outside the metropolitan area
will be exempt provided it is used for primary
production.
2. Land at least partly within the metropolitan
area, but not in an urban zone - Section 9(1)(h)
Land which is wholly or partly within the
metropolitan area, but none of which is within an
urban zone, will be exempt provided it comprises one
parcel of land and it is used for primary production.
‘Urban zone’ means a zone under a planning
scheme in force under the Planning and
Environment Act 1987
of a type declared by the
Governor in Council to be an urban zone. The
Governor in Council may by Order published in the
Government Gazette, declare specific types of zones
under planning schemes to be urban zones.
3. Land at least partly within the metropolitan
area, and at least partly zoned urban -
Section 9(1)(ha)
Land comprised in one parcel which is wholly or
partly within the metropolitan area and at least part
of which is within an urban zone will be exempt
where the land is used solely or primarily for the
business of primary production and certain
criteria are satisfied.
The criteria to be satisfied
are different depending upon whether the land is
owned by a company or by a natural person
(persons), and are as follows:
• Land owned by a company;
• The company must be a proprietary company;
• All shares are beneficially owned by
natural persons;
• The main undertaking of the company is
primary production of the type conducted on
the land; and
• All dividends distributed during the previous
three years or since the incorporation of the
company were made to all holders of the issued
ordinary share capital in proportion to the paid
up value of their share holdings and at least 60
Land Used For Primary Production
Revenue Ruling LT.010
Replaces: LT.005
ON THE MOVE
per cent of those dividends were paid to persons
normally engaged in a substantially full time
capacity in the business of primary production.
In circumstances where no dividends have been
declared during the two periods described above,
ordinary shares representing more than 60 per cent
of the share capital must have been beneficially
owned for one of those periods by persons normally
engaged in a substantially full time capacity in the
business of primary production.
Land owned by natural persons:
In the case of the land being owned by one natural
person (‘the owner’):
a. the owner is normally engaged in a substantially
full-time capacity in the business of primary
production of the type conducted on the land; or
b. a relative of the owner is normally engaged in a
substantially full-time capacity in the business of
primary production conducted on the land
(whether or not the owner is also normally so
engaged) and no other person is normally so
engaged on that land.
In the case of the land being owned by two or more
natural persons (‘the owners’):
a. at least one of the owners is normally engaged
in a substantially full time capacity in the
business of primary production of the type
conducted on the land, the other owner or
owners are relatives of the owner(s) normally so
engaged and no other person is normally so
engaged on that land; or
b. a relative of each of the owners is normally
engaged in a substantially full-time capacity in
the business of primary production conducted on
the land (whether or not any of the owners is
also normally so engaged) and no other person
is normally so engaged on that land.
The concept of a person being ‘normally engaged,
in a substantially full-time capacity’ in a business of
primary production (as referred to above) excludes
mere casual or intermittent employment, and
requires the business to be the person’s principal
activity. There should be regular participation in
the business for a considerable part of that
person’s time.
Note: The term ‘relative’ in respect of a person, is
defined in section 9(1H) of the Act to mean:-
• a spouse or de facto spouse of the person
• a lineal ancestor or lineal descendant of the
person or of the spouse or de facto spouse of
the person;
• a brother or sister, or a child of a brother or
sister, of the person or of the spouse or de facto
spouse of the person;
• a spouse or de facto spouse of a child of the
• a spouse or de facto spouse of a brother or sister
of the person.
It should be noted that all exemptions under
these sections apply to land, and not to landholders.
Therefore, if a landholder owns more than one parcel
of land, each parcel must be considered separately.
A parcel of land, as referred to by exemptions (2)
and (3), refers to lands which are contiguous or
which are separated only by a road, railway or other
similar thoroughfare, and which are owned by the
same person.
It should be noted that land which is exempt under
either exemption (2) or (3) and which subsequently
ceases to be exempt, will become liable to
at the rate of five per cent of the
unimproved value of the land. This tax is imposed
only once (as opposed to the annual tax) and is
calculated on the unimproved value of the land on
the date on which the land ceases to be exempt.
Land which was exempt under exemption (1) and
which subsequently ceases to be exempt, will not
become liable to
special land tax
. However, where
land ceases to be exempt under exemption (1) as a
consequence of being rezoned into the metropolitan
area, and the owner is then granted a new
exemption under exemption (2) or (3), the owner
should be aware that should the new exemption
cease at some later stage,
special land tax
become payable on that land at that later stage.
(See Revenue Ruling LT.008).
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue