Contractors - 90-Day Exemption (PTA-035) [2009] VICSROPTA 1 (1 March 2009)
Revenue Ruling PTA035
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
and harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria
and New South Wales.
The contractor provisions are in Division 7 of Part
3 of the Act. These provisions provide for certain
contractors (whether incorporated or not) to be
deemed employees (under what are defined as
‘relevant contracts’) and for payments to those
contractors to be treated as wages for the purposes
of the Act. Most contracts for the provision of services
are ‘relevant contracts’.
However, there are six possible exemptions that
may exclude payments under such contracts from
the definition of wages. One of the exemptions is
a contract for the provision of services by a person
providing the same or similar services to a principal
under the contract for no more than 90 days in
a financial year
(section 32(2)(b)(iii)
of the Act).
In addition to explaining the operation of the
exemption under
section 32(2)(b)(iii)
of the Act (90-day
exemption), the purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to set
out a replacement method (the Replacement Method)
approved by the Commissioner of State Revenue
(the Commissioner) in determining the application of
the 90-day exemption where a principal encounters
difficulty in determining the actual number of days that
a contractor has rendered services in a financial year.
The 90-day exemption
If a relevant contract involves the provision of services
by a person providing the same or similar services
to a principal under the contract for no more than
90 days in a financial year, it is an exempt contract
section 32(2)(b)(iii)
of the Act. For the purposes
of this exemption:
• the carrying out of any work on a given day will
count as a full day, and
• the days worked do not have to be consecutive,
it is the total number of days worked during the
financial year that is relevant.
Once the 90-day limit is exceeded, the total payments
made to that contractor during the financial year,
including payments made for the work performed
in the first 90 days, is subject to payroll tax.
Where a principal encounters difficulty in determining the
actual number of days on which services are rendered,
the Replacement Method may be used. The Replacement
Method does not require the calculation of the number of
days for which services are provided.
Replacement Method
Under the Replacement Method, a formula is used
to calculate the estimated remuneration a contractor
would receive from an employer for 90 days of service.
If the actual amount earned by the contractor is less
than or equal to the amount calculated using the
formula, the 90-day exemption will be accepted
as being applicable to that contract.
The formula is Y = A x B x C x D where:
Y= The estimated remuneration for 90 days of service
A= The highest hourly rate for the classification
in that industry according to the respective pay
scale summary that is available on the Workplace
Authority website (www.workplaceauthority.gov.au)
B= Average number of hours worked per working day
C= 120 per cent (this accounts for an additional
20 per cent for the types of payment not typically
received by contractors such as sick pay, holiday
pay, overtime)
It should be noted that in comparing the actual
remuneration received by a contractor with the
estimated remuneration derived using the formula
(i.e. Y), the actual amount may be reduced by any
allowable deduction determined by the Commissioner
(please refer to Revenue Ruling PTA018 for the
relevant deductions).
By allowing for the allowable deduction, the wages
ordinarily payable to an employee for 90 days
of work in that industry are comparable with the
labour-only component of the actual amounts paid
to the contractor in question.
Revenue Rulings
Contractors – 90-Day Exemption
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
In October 2007, New Homes Pty Ltd (New Homes)
engaged a ceiling plasterer to perform a contract under
which an amount of $15,000 (exclusive of GST) was
paid, which included the supply of various materials
needed for the job. The ceiling plasterer worked for
New Homes for an average of 6 hours per day.
New Homes finds it difficult to determine the actual
number of days the ceiling plasterer worked during the
2007/08 financial year. New Homes decides to adopt
the highest hourly rate for the classification based on
the pay scale summary of the National Building and
Construction Industry Award 2000 (the Award).
Labour-only Component of Contract Price
The actual labour-only component after subtracting
20 per cent (deduction allowable for wall and ceiling
plasterers according to Revenue Ruling PTA018) is
calculated as follows:
$15,000 minus $3000 (being 20 per cent
of $15,000) = $12,000
According to the Workplace Authority website, the pay
scale summaries that best match the work undertaken
by ceiling plasterers are the Award and the Australian
Workers’ Union Construction and Maintenance Award
2002. The highest hourly rate for a full-time employee
under each award is $18.82.
As a result, the estimated remuneration for 90 days
of service provided by the ceiling plasterer under the
contract is calculated to be:
$18.82 x 6 x 120% x 90 days = $12,195
In this instance, the labour-only component ($12,000)
paid to the ceiling plasterer is less than the estimated
remuneration ($12,195) calculated using the formula.
Therefore, the 90-day exemption applies to exempt
that payment from payroll tax.
Pay scale summary
In applying the Replacement Method, employers must
identify the pay scale summary that best matches the
scale summary to be used is the summary applicable
at the commencement of the contract and if the same
contract continues into the following financial year, the
pay scale summary to be used in that financial year
must have been in force at the commencement of that
financial year (unless it no longer exists). Records must
be kept regarding the pay scale summary used for
each contractor for a period of five years.
Where no comparable pay scale summary exists,
employers who can provide a satisfactory alternative
rate may seek a private ruling from the State Revenue
Office (SRO).
Please note that Revenue Rulings do not have the
force of law. Each decision made by the SRO is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All Revenue Rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue