Stamp Duty on Leases and GST (SD-105) [2000] VICSROSD 4 (1 October 2000)
Revenue Rulings
Stamp Duty on Leases and GST
Revenue Ruling SD.105
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the
assessment of stamp duty on leases after the
introduction of the GST.
Heading VIII of the Third Schedule to the
charges stamp duty in respect of leases.
The amount of duty charged is based on the
amount payable as 'rent' under the lease.
With the introduction of the Goods and Services
Tax (GST), the question arises whether stamp duty
is payable on the GST component of the rent.
From 1 July 2000, a person making a taxable
supply, including the lessor of commercial premises,
is liable to pay 10 per cent GST on the value of
that supply except where the supply is GST-free
under the transitional arrangements. The value of
the taxable supply is equal to the GST-exclusive
consideration for the supply or 10/11ths of the
GST-inclusive consideration. For example, where
the GST-inclusive consideration is $22,000, the
value of the taxable supply is $20,000 and GST
According to the Australian Taxation Office's
Taxation Determination GSTD 2000/10, the lessor
under a commercial lease is liable for GST on the
outgoings in relation to a single supply.
Although it is the view of the State Revenue Office
that "rent" means contractual rent and includes all
outgoings, it has been the practice of the Office not
to include outgoings payable under the lease as
rent unless such outgoings are expressly referred to
and included as rent. However, this practice will not
extend to treat GST an excludable outgoing.
Therefore, stamp duty is charged on the GST-
inclusive rent in the lease, without any discount for
GST (if any) payable by the lessor. This applies
irrespective of whether the lease was entered into
before, on or after 1 July 2000.
Where outgoings are payable by the lessee, stamp
duty will not be charged on that proportion of GST
payable by the lessor in respect of outgoings.
Where, under a lease agreement, a GST liability is
separately identified and an amount labelled as
'rent' does not include GST, stamp duty will be
assessed on the total (GST-inclusive) amount and
not on the GST-exclusive amount.
If an amount labelled as 'rent' excludes GST but the
parties agree that the lessee will indemnify the
lessor for the lessor's GST liability (if any), stamp
duty will be assessed on the sum of the amount
labelled as rent and the lessor's GST liability.
In order to determine the amount of GST-inclusive
rent under a lease, the Office may require
additional information such as a Tax Invoice or a
statement under s. 83A of the
Stamps Act 1958
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 2000
GST-exclusive
upply or 10/11ths of the
sideration. For example, where
sive consideration is $22,000, the
he taxable supply is $20,000 and
According to the Australian Taxation Office
Taxation Determination GSTD 2000/10, th
commercial lease is liable for
on to a single su
Although it is th
that "rent" m
his applies
was entered into
was entered into
ayable by the lessee, stamp
ayable by the lessee, stamp
arged on that proportion of GST
rged on that prop
e lessor in respect of outgoings.
lessor in respect of outg
under a lease agreement, a GST liability is
nder a lease agreement, a GST liability is
arately identified and an amount labelled as
dentified and an amount labelled as
'rent' does not include GST, stamp duty will be
rent' does not include GST, stamp duty will be
assessed on the total (GST-inclusive) amoun
assessed on the total (GST-inclusive) amou
not on the GST-exclusive amount.
the GST-exclusive amount.
If an amount labelled as 'rent' exc
n amount labelled as 'rent' ex
parties agree that the lessee
parties agree that the lessee
lessor for the lessor's GST
lessor for the lessor's GS
duty will be assessed
labelled as rent
labelled as rent
In order to
Ceased - 30 June 2001