Debits tax liability for involuntary transfers of accounts (DT-009) [1999] VICSRODT 1 (1 February 1999)
Revenue Rulings
ON THE MOVE
Debits tax liability for involuntary
transfers of accounts
Revenue Ruling DT.009
Debits Tax Act
(the Act) imposes tax on
withdrawals from accounts with a cheque drawing
This ruling clarifies the State Revenue Office’s
position on debits made to close or re-establish
customer accounts which are instigated by the
financial institution which keeps the accounts.
For various reasons, financial institutions may
need to transfer the balance of a customer’s
account to a ‘new’ account. This may occur when
financial institutions amalgamate or close existing
branches, replace or update existing computer
systems or withdraw products. The debits needed
to close or re-establish accounts with cheque
facilities attached generally attract debits tax.
In the case of the transfer of accounts due to a
branch closure, amalgamation or restructure, a
specific exemption is provided by paragraph (da)
in the definition of an ‘exempt debit’ in
of the Act.
This ruling concerns other situations where
accounts are transferred in circumstances outside
the control of the account holders and provides
consistency with the practice of providing relief
from financial institutions duty in similar
circumstances.
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
debits tax is not payable on debits made to close or
re-establish customer accounts where a financial
institution has instigated such action because of the:
introduction of a new computer system;
replacement or integration of existing computer
systems; or
withdrawal or replacement of a particular product;
which requires the renumbering or replacement of
customer accounts.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
February 1999
Ceased - 30 June 2005