Lease Provisions - General Application (DA-052) [2010] VICSRODA 4 (1 August 2010)
Revenue Ruling DA.052
Duties Act 2000
(‘the Act’) was amended with
effect from 21 November 2008 to ensure that certain
leasing arrangements concerning land in Victoria are
not used as a mechanism to avoid duty.
sections 7(1)(b)(v)
and (va) of the Act, duty
is payable on the grant, transfer or assignment of a
lease if consideration (other than the rent reserved on
the grant of the lease) is paid or agreed to be paid in
respect of the lease or in respect of:
a) a right to purchase the land or a right to a transfer
of the land;
b) an option to purchase the land or an option for the
transfer of the land;
c) a right of first refusal in respect of the sale or
transfer of the land;
d) any other lease, licence, contract, scheme or
arrangement by which the lessee, transferee or
assignee, or an associated person of the lessee,
transferee or assignee, obtains any right or interest
in the land that is the subject of the lease other
than the leasehold estate.
section 7(1)(b)(ii)
of the Act, duty is also payable
on the surrender of a lease of the kind referred to in
the above provisions.
A ‘lease’ is defined in
of the Act to mean ‘a
lease of land in Victoria or an agreement for a lease of
land in Victoria’. The term ‘land’ is defined in section
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
include buildings and other structures permanently
affixed to land, land covered with water, and any
estate, interest or right in or over land.
The purpose of this Ruling is to provide guidance on
the operation of the lease provisions and to outline
the factors the Commissioner will take into account in
determining their application. The Ruling also provides
a number of examples to illustrate the application of the
provisions to certain common situations involving leases.
When will the lease provisions apply?
The lease provisions are designed to apply to
arrangements by which a lease of land in Victoria is
used to effectively transfer rights in the underlying
land and/or the economic benefits of the land, similar
to a sale and purchase transaction.
Accordingly, the lease provisions can apply irrespective
of the form and terms of a lease and whether it
concerns land used for commercial or residential
purposes in Victoria and/or is a sub-lease or
concurrent lease of such land. The provisions can also
apply even if the leasing arrangement arises because
of statutory, planning or other restrictions on a dealing
in the freehold.
Nevertheless, the provisions will only apply where
consideration is paid or agreed to be paid in respect
of a leasing arrangement under which the lessee,
transferee, assignee or any associated person acquires
valuable rights and/or benefits in relation to the
underlying land. Typically, such rights and benefits may
include the right to acquire, develop and sub-lease the
underlying land and/or to receive the rents and profits
of the land or any development on it. Where such rights
and benefits are obtained under a leasing arrangement,
they are considered equivalent to the rights and benefits
that would be obtained by a purchaser of the land over
the term of the lease. The consideration paid, or agreed
to be paid, is for the acquisition of these valuable rights
and is in contrast to the rent payable under the lease,
which is often minimal.
For a liability to arise in respect of a leasing
arrangement under which market rent is payable,
consideration needs to be paid for the acquisition of
rights and/or benefits in relation to the underlying land
over and above the right to use and occupy the land
for the term of the lease. However, for a lease under
which less than market rent is payable, the right to use
and occupy the land may be sufficient to subject the
arrangement to duty, provided consideration is paid
or agreed to be paid in respect of the arrangement.
Ultimately, this will depend on the nature of the lease
and the extent to which it vests economic benefits in
the lessee, transferee, assignee or an associated person.
Revenue Rulings
Lease Provisions - General Application
Ruling history
Issued date
August 2010
Dates of effect
Exemptions, concessions and exclusions
The Act sets out numerous exemptions, concessions
and exclusions from the application of the lease
provisions. These include –
a) Section 7(3AA) which excludes from the operation
of the Act the grant, transfer, assignment or
surrender of a lease creating or giving rise to a
residency right in a retirement village within the
meaning of the
Retirement Villages Act 1986
Section 7(3AAB)
which excludes from the
application of the lease provisions a lease granted
as a result of the exercise of an option for a further
term where the option was provided for by a lease
which was granted before 21 November 2008 and
the lease required the payment of consideration for
the exercise of the option.
c) Sections 32Y,
, 41B, 50B, 57G(2) and 58(3)
which ensure that all the existing exemptions and
concessions applicable to dutiable transactions
under Chapter 2 of the Act apply in respect of the
lease provisions.
which exempts from duty the grant,
transfer, assignment or surrender of a lease for
a site, or a site and a caravan, in a caravan park
registered in accordance with the regulations made
under section 515 of the
Residential Tenancies
, provided a caravan is located or to be
located on the site and is used or intended to be
used as the principal place of residence of the
lessee or intended lessee, and
e) Section 57 which exempts from duty the transfer
of land to a lessee, transferee or assignee or
the enlargement of a term into fee simple under
section 153
Property Law Act 1958
duty was paid under the lease provisions in respect
of the grant, transfer or assignment of a lease over
When is duty payable?
Duty is payable within 3 months of the occurrence of a
dutiable transaction in respect of dutiable property.
A dutiable transaction in respect of a lease occurs
upon its grant, transfer, assignment or surrender.
Under the Act, a dutiable transaction in respect of a
lease is chargeable with duty on the greater of the
amount of the consideration paid or agreed to be
paid and the unencumbered value of the land that is
subject to the lease.
The grant, transfer or assignment of a lease for which
consideration has been paid or agreed to be paid in
respect of a right or option to acquire the underlying
land is dutiable at the time of grant, transfer or
State Taxation Acts Further Amendment Act 2011
amended the
Duties Act 2000
to provide that the period
for payment of duty for dutiable transactions and relevant
acquisitions occurring on or after 1 April 2012 is within 30
days after the liability to pay the duty arises.
Consistent with the policy intent of the lease
provisions, the liability of a transfer or assignment of
a lease referred to in section 7(1)(b)(v) of the Act will
be determined with reference to the application of
section 7(1)(b)(va) of the Act. Generally, it would not
be regarded as a transfer of dutiable property under
section 7(1)(a) of the Act unless it is a transfer or
assignment of a Crown leasehold estate as defined in
section 3 of the Act.
What factors will the Commissioner take into
account in determining the application of the lease
provisions?
In determining whether a leasing arrangement is
dutiable under sections 7(1)(b)(v) and (va) of the Act, the
Commissioner will have regard to the following factors –
a) the nature and circumstances of the transaction
as a whole, including the rights, obligations and
responsibilities of the parties to the transaction;
b) the nature and value of the rights and benefits
acquired under the leasing arrangement, including
the ability of the lessee, transferee, assignee or an
associated person to generate profit rental from
the underlying land or otherwise receive the rents
and profits of the land;
c) the consideration paid or agreed to be paid in
respect of the lease or in respect of a right to acquire
the underlying land relative to the value of land;
d) the rent payable under the lease and whether it is
at a market rate; and
e) the term of the lease and the ability of the lessee,
transferee or assignee to extend, renew or continue
in its possession of the land.
When will the lease provisions not apply?
As the lease provisions are designed to apply to
arrangements by which a lease is used to effectively
transfer valuable rights in the underlying land and/or
the economic benefits of the land, they will not apply
to ordinary commercial and residential leases which
only require the payment of rent. For information on
what types of payments may qualify as payments of
rent, please see Revenue Ruling DA-050.
Generally, the lease provisions will also not apply to
a transfer or assignment of an ordinary commercial
lease for which nominal consideration is paid as part
of a bona fide sale of a business which is conducted
on the leased premises. In such circumstances, it is
recognised that a nominal sum of money may be
attributed to the transfer or assignment of the lease
purely for the enforceability of the arrangement
between the parties. Consistent with the policy
underlying the lease provisions, a transfer or
assignment of a lease in these circumstances would
generally not be regarded as being used to effectively
transfer rights in the underlying land. It should be
noted however that this position may not apply where
the lease includes a right to acquire the property
during the term or on expiry of the lease.
property, comprising the residential apartments, to
various sub-lessees, including X, who acquired his lease
prior to the commencement of the lease provisions.
The sub-lessees do not acquire shares in ABC, so the
arrangement is not a land use entitlement. Y wishes to
acquire an apartment in Mount Hotham for use as a
holiday home and pays
X the sum of $500,000 for a transfer of X's sub-lease,
which has 30 years to run with no obligation to pay rent
other than to make contributions in respect of certain
taxes, charges and maintenance expenses associated
with the property. The transfer of the sub-lease from
X to Y is dutiable under the lease provisions as it
effectively vests ownership of the apartment in Y for the
next 30 years.
Example 3 – Grant of concurrent lease
ABC is the lessor and XYZ is the lessee under a
standard commercial lease under which only market
rent is payable. The term of the lease is ten years
coupled with nine options for XYZ to renew for a
further ten years. As such, the lease could potentially
run for 100 years. ABC grants a concurrent lease to
DEF under which DEF effectively stands in the shoes
of the lessor, ABC. The consideration in respect of
the grant of the concurrent lease is $10 million, which
reflects the net present value of the income stream
from the property in perpetuity. The grant of the
concurrent lease would be dutiable under the lease
provisions as it effects a sale and purchase of the
economic benefits (i.e. the right to receive all the rents
and profits) of the land in perpetuity between ABC and
Example 4 – Grant of lease for consideration in
addition to rent reserved
ABC is the owner of land in the CBD with a market
value of $5 million which has been refurbished for use
as a pub. ABC has advertised the premises as available
for lease and has been inundated with offers. One
such offer is from XYZ which has offered a premium
of $100,000 to secure a lease over the property
in addition to the payment of market rent. Having
accepted XYZ’s offer, ABC grants XYZ a standard
commercial lease for a period of seven years with two
options for further terms of seven years. Under the
lease, XYZ does not obtain any rights or benefits in
relation to the underlying land other than the right to
use and occupy the land. Ordinarily, the grant of a lease
for consideration other than rent reserved would be
dutiable under the lease provisions. However, consistent
with the policy underlying the lease provisions, the grant
of the lease in this example will not be chargeable with
duty. Despite consideration being paid, XYZ has not
obtained valuable rights or benefits in relation to the
land other than the right to exclusive possession. When
regard is had to the transaction as a whole including
the consideration paid relative to the market value of
the land, it is apparent that XYZ has paid the premium
to secure the right to use and occupy the premises
over the term of the lease. In such circumstances,
the Commissioner would regard the premium as a
payment for the use of the land.
assignment irrespective of whether such right or
option has been exercised at that time. However,
where additional consideration equivalent to the full
unencumbered value of the land is required to be paid
upon or following the exercise of the right or option,
the Commissioner will generally only require the lessee,
transferee or assignee to pay the duty liability if and
when the right or option to acquire the land has been
exercised. In such circumstances, it is considered that
the lessee, transferee or assignee has not acquired
valuable rights in the land equivalent to ownership and
will only do so upon the exercise of the right or option
and payment of the full purchase price of the land. If
a lessee, transferee or assignee elects to pay duty in
accordance with this concession, interest at the market
rate only may be payable under the arrangement.
In all other cases (where additional consideration less
than the full unencumbered value of the land is payable
on the exercise of the right or option), duty will be
payable at the time of the grant, transfer or assignment
of the lease on the greater of the consideration paid or
the unencumbered value of the land. Where full duty
has been paid on a lease, any subsequent transfer of
land to the relevant lessee, transferee or assignee would
not be separately chargeable with duty.
Examples on the application of the lease provisions
The following examples illustrate the application of the
lease provisions to certain common situations involving
leases. Examples 1, 2 and 3 are situations where the
Commissioner would regard the lease provisions as
being applicable. Examples 4, 5 and 6 are situations
where the Commissioner would regard the lease
provisions as not being applicable. Examples 7 and 8
illustrate the application of exemptions under the Act
and examples 9 and 10 consider the timing of when
duty is payable.
Example 1 – Grant of long term lease
ABC is the owner of prime CBD real estate including
an office tower, which is run down and in need of
refurbishment. XYZ, a development company, wishes
to acquire the property, refurbish the office tower
and lease out the various floors. Instead of acquiring
the freehold, which has an estimated market value
of $10 million, XYZ takes a long term lease of the
property from ABC in consideration of the payment
of a premium of $10 million and at an annual rent of
$10. Under this arrangement, XYZ has acquired the
right to develop the property and receive all the rents
and profits from the land and its development for the
duration of the lease. As consideration equivalent to
the value of the property was paid to ABC for the lease,
the grant of the lease to XYZ would attract duty on the
basis of a value of $10 million.
Example 2 – Transfer of sub-lease over alpine ski
resort apartment
ABC is the lessee under a lease of land at Mount
Hotham upon which a ski resort, including ten
residential apartments, is located. ABC operates the
ski resort and has entered into ten sub-leases of the
payment of a premium. X occupies the caravan and
the caravan site as his principal place of residence.
The grant of the lease to X is exempt from duty as X
occupies the site as his principal place of residence.
Example 9 - Lease with an option to purchase land
for consideration equivalent to full market value
during or on expiry of lease
ABC is the lessor of land valued at $5 million. XYZ
wishes to establish and conduct a manufacturing
business on the premises. This will require XYZ to
expend a considerable sum on plant and equipment
so XYZ agrees, in addition to rent reserved, to pay
consideration by way of a premium of $5,000 to
ABC for an option to purchase the premises at the
conclusion of the lease in five years time. Upon
exercise of the option XYZ is required to pay to ABC
consideration equivalent to the full market value
of the land when the option is exercised. In these
circumstances, the Commissioner will allow XYZ to
defer payment of duty until the option to purchase is
exercised. If the duty (including any applicable interest)
is paid on the lease when the option to purchase is
exercised, the subsequent transfer of land from ABC to
XYZ will not be separately chargeable with duty.
Example 10 - Lease with a right to acquire land for
less than market value during or on expiry of lease
ABC leases land with a market value of $1.5 million
to XYZ. On the grant of the lease, XYZ paid ABC
consideration of $1 million for the right to acquire the
land during the term of the lease or upon expiry of
the lease. On the exercise of the right to acquire the
land XYZ is only obligated to pay the balance of the
unencumbered value of the land, being $500,000. In
these circumstances, duty is payable at the time the
lease is granted on the greater of the consideration
paid or agreed to be paid and the unencumbered
value of the land, being $1.5 million.
The above examples and considerations are provided
as a guide only and are not an exhaustive list of the
matters or factors the Commissioner may consider in
determining the application of the lease provisions. A
taxpayer who is uncertain of the application of these
provisions to their particular circumstances may apply
to the Commissioner for a private ruling in accordance
with the guidelines set out in Revenue Ruling GEN-
009. In each case, the onus is on the taxpayer
to provide the Commissioner with the necessary
information to make an informed decision as to
whether the grant, transfer, assignment or surrender
of a lease is a dutiable transaction under Chapter 2 of
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN-001.
Example 5 – Transfer of lease on sale of business
ABC conducts a manufacturing business on premises
which are leased from DEF under the terms of a
standard commercial lease. The lease does not
provide ABC with any rights to acquire the property in
the future whether by way of transfer, option or right of
first refusal. ABC enters into a business sale agreement
with XYZ to transfer or assign all of the assets of the
manufacturing business, including the commercial
lease of the premises upon which the business is
conducted. Under the business sale agreement the
purchase price has been apportioned between the
business assets and, to ensure the enforceability of
the arrangements between the parties, consideration
of $1 has been allocated to the assignment of the
commercial lease of the premises. As only nominal
consideration has been paid in respect of a lease which
does not provide the lessee with any valuable rights
and benefits in relation to the land other than the right
to use and occupy the land at a market rate of rental,
the assignment of the lease from ABC to XYZ would
not be dutiable under the lease provisions.
Example 6 - Surrender of old lease and grant of
ABC owns a shopping centre and has granted a
lease of one of its shops to XYZ. Other than the
rent reserved, XYZ has not paid or agreed to pay
any consideration in respect of the grant of the
lease. Due to the expansion of another tenant, ABC
requests XYZ to relocate to a new shop within the
centre. To induce XYZ to move, ABC agrees to
pay XYZ $10,000 in relocation expenses. Having
accepted the relocation, XYZ surrenders the lease
over the old shop and accepts a grant of a lease
over the new shop in respect of which it does not
pay or agree to pay any consideration other than the
rent reserved. The surrender of the old lease is not
dutiable as no consideration other than rent reserved
was paid or agreed to be paid in respect of its grant
to XYZ. Similarly, the grant of the new lease to
XYZ is not liable to duty. In such circumstances, the
Commissioner would not regard the payment to XYZ
of $10,000 in relocation expenses as consideration in
respect of the grant of the new lease.
Example 7 – Sale and transfer of lease between
Mr X owns an alpine ski resort apartment under a
long term lease which does not require the payment of
rent. The market value of the apartment is $500,000.
Mr X transfers the lease over the apartment to his wife
in return for the payment of $500,000. Provided no
other person takes or is entitled to take an interest in
the property under the transfer of the lease to Mrs X,
it is exempt from duty under section 43 of the Act as it
is a transfer of dutiable property between spouses.
Example 8 – Grant of lease on sale of a caravan
ABC owns land on which it operates a registered
caravan park. ABC grants a lease of one of the
caravans and caravan sites to X in consideration of the
August 2010
Commissioner of State Revenue