Refunds (BF-004) [1994] VICSROBF 4 (30 September 1994)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
The refund provisions of the
Business Franchises
(Tobacco) Act 1974
(the Act) were amended in
1992 as a result of the
Royal Insurance Australia
Ltd v Comptroller of Stamps (1992)
Securities Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (1992)
cases. (Note: The refund
provisions of this Act apply to both tobacco
licences and petroleum products licences.) As a
consequence of these amendments, any
application for a refund received by the State
Revenue Office on or after 15 August 1992 will
have the refund limited to a maximum period of
three years prior to the date of application.
Legal arguments have been raised recently that
licence fee payers (“fee payers”) can take action
outside the statutory refund scheme to recover
overpaid fees dating back more than three years.
Doubts have also arisen about the
interrelationship between the refund provisions
Limitation of Actions Act 1958
provides a one year limit on the beginning of legal
proceedings for the repayment of State taxes and
To remove these uncertainties, further
amendments were made to the refund provisions
The purpose of this Ruling is to explain the
changes made to the refund provisions.
Any application for a refund received by this Office
on or after 15 October 1993 must be made in
accordance with the requirements specified in the
Business Franchise (Tobacco and Petroleum
Products) Regulations 1992.
To assist applicants
for a refund, a refund application form has been
developed. This form can be obtained from the
State Revenue Office.
Under Section 19 of the Act, an application for refund
on grounds other than the invalidity of a provision of
the Act, must be made within three years of the
payment of the amount sought to be refunded.
If a refund is claimed by reason of the invalidity of a
provision of the Act, recovery action is subject to the
provisions of the
Limitation of Actions Act 1958
such cases, proceedings for recovery of tax paid must
be commenced within 12 months of the payment of
the amount sought to be refunded.
A refund will not be paid to a fee payer where the
cost of the fee has been recovered from another
person, unless such monies are reimbursed within 90
days of the refund being made, to the person so
charged. However, the Commissioner has determined
that a fee payer will not be considered to have
recovered duty from or to have charged another
person duty merely because the cost of licence fees is
built into the price charged for the tobacco or
petroleum products, as the case may be. To constitute
a charge on another person, the fee payer would
need to directly and explicitly charge another person
for licence fees (for example a wholesaler’s invoice to
a retailer of tobacco may contain a separate
component for tobacco licence fees) or there would
have to be clear documentation to indicate that the
fee had been on-charged by the fee payer.
In addition, before a refund is paid in relation to
overpaid licence fees, the overpaid duty will be
applied to meet all other liabilities that the fee payer
has to the Crown, in respect of acts administered by
the Commissioner of State Revenue.
The Commissioner is required to make a decision on
the application for refund within three months of
receiving the application. If at the end of the three
month period, the Commissioner has not made a
refund to the applicant, the applicant may within
three months after that period, bring proceedings for
the recovery of the refund amount.
Revenue Ruling BF.004
ON THE MOVE
Where a decision is made by the Commissioner within
three months from the date of application and the
decision is to refuse the refund in part or in full, the
applicant may, within three months from the date of
decision, bring proceedings for the recovery of the
amount of refund refused.
‘Proceedings’ is defined in the Act for the purposes of
the refund provisions to include:
• seeking the grant of any relief or remedy in the
nature of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus or quo
warranto, or the grant of a declaration of right or
an injunction; or
• seeking any order under the
Administrative Law Act
This Ruling is effective from 15 October 1993.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue