Refunds (LT-007) [1993] VICSROLT 7 (15 October 1993)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Revenue Ruling LT.007
Replaces LT.006
The refund provisions of the
Land Tax Act 1958
(the Act) were amended in 1992 as a result of the
court decisions in
Royal Insurance Australia Ltd v
Comptroller of Stamps (1992)
David Securities
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (1992).
As a consequence of these amendments, any
application for a refund received by the State
Revenue Office on or after 15 August 1992 will
have the refund limited to a maximum period of
three years prior to the date of application. (See
Revenue Ruling LT.006.)
Legal arguments have been raised recently that
taxpayers can take action outside the statutory
refund period to recover overpaid taxes dating
back more than three years. Question have also
arisen about the interrelationship between the
refund provisions and the
Limitations of Actions
which provides a one year limit on the
beginning of legal proceedings for the repayment
of State taxes and charges.
Further amendments were made to refund
provisions in 1993 to clarify these issues.
The purpose of this Ruling is to explain the
changes made to the refund provisions.
Any application for a refund received by this Office
on or after 15 October 1993 has to be made in
accordance with the requirements specified in
Regulation 18 of the Land Tax Regulations 1988.
To assist land owners, a refund application form
has been developed. This form can be obtained
from the State Revenue Office.
Under Section 90AA of the Act, an application for
refund on grounds other than the validity of a
provision of the Act, must be made within three
years of the payment of the amount sought to be
If a refund is claimed by reason of the invalidity of a
provision of the Act, recovery action is subject to the
provisions of the
Limitations of Actions Act 1958.
such cases, proceedings for recovery of tax paid must
be commenced within 12 months of the payment of
the amount sought to be recovered.
A refund will not be paid to a land owner where the
cost of the land tax has been charged to or recovered
from another person, unless such monies are
reimbursed within 90 days of the refund being made,
to the person, so charged. However, the
Commissioner of State Revenue has determined that
a land owner will not be considered to have recovered
from or to have charged another person merely
because the cost of land tax is built into the price
charged by the land owner. To constitute a charge on
another person the land owner would need to directly
and explicitly charge another person for land tax (for
example through the terms of a lease agreement) or
there is clear documentation to indicate that the land
tax has been on-charged by the land owner.
In addition, before a refund is paid in relation to
overpaid land tax, the overpaid tax will be applied to
meet all other liabilities that the land owner has to the
Crown in respect of Acts administered by the
Commissioner of State Revenue.
The Commissioner is required to make a decision on
the application for refund within three months of
receiving the application. If the Commissioner has
not, at the end of the three month period, made a
refund to the applicant, the applicant may, within
three months of the end of the period, bring
proceedings for the recovery of the refund amount.
Where a decision is made by the Commissioner within
three months of the date of application and the
decision is to refuse the refund in part or in full, the
applicant may, within three months of the date of
decision, bring proceeding for the recovery of the
amount of refund refused.
ON THE MOVE
Proceedings are defined in the Act for the purposes of
the refund provisions to include:
seeking the granting of any relief or remedy in the
nature of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus or quo
warranto, or the granting of a declaration of right or an
injunction; or
seeking any order under the
Administrative Law
This ruling is effective from 15 October 1993.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue