Continuation of Land Tax Exemptions (LT-018) [2006] VICSROLT 1 (1 September 2006)
Continuation of Land Tax Exemptions
Revenue Rulings
Land Tax Act 2005
(the new Act) which came
into operation on 1 January 2006, is a rewrite of the
Land Tax Act 1958
(the previous Act). The new Act is
in modern language and structured in a more logical
manner. It also brings the administration of Land Tax
within the provisions of the
Taxation Administration Act
The new Act is not intended to impose major policy
changes although there are differences in its structure
and wording. Accordingly, the exemptions provided in
the previous Act are carried across into the new Act.
While there is no fundamental policy change to the
exemptions or the eligibility requirements, for many
exemptions the new Act requires the owner of land
to apply to the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) for the exemption. The fact that the
new Act explicitly states that a landowner should make
an application for and provide relevant information in
respect of an exemption reflects a longstanding tax
administration practice. It would be considered unusual
if a landowner did not have to make an application
or provide details substantiating their claims for an
exemption from tax.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide
clarification that landowners who were entitled to an
exemption under the previous Act will continue to be
entitled to the equivalent exemption under the new Act
without having to make a new application for the same
If a landowner is entitled to and has been granted
an exemption from Land Tax for a particular block of
land under the previous Act and there is no change in
circumstances since the granting of the exemption, the
requirements (if any) under the new Act for the same
exemption are taken to have been satisfied.
In this situation, this would mean that the exemption
for the land will continue to apply after the
commencement date of the new Act, whether or not
an application has been made under the new Act.
The previous Act requires a landowner to notify the
Commissioner if circumstances of the landowner
or the land have changed in a way that affects
the landowner’s eligibility for the exemption. This
requirement continues under the new Act.
An application made under the new Act for an
exemption will be processed in the usual manner. If the
exemption were to apply retrospectively, the landowner
may apply for a refund of any tax paid in the past
three years.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Revenue Ruling LT.018
September 2006
Commissioner of State Revenue