Conveyance of real Property to Trustee or Nominee (SD-101) [2000] VICSROSD 1 (1 March 2000)
Revenue Rulings
Conveyance of real property to
trustee or nominee
Revenue Ruling SD 101
Replaces SD.058
Please continue over page
Revenue Ruling SD.058 considered a number of
issues concerning the application of Exemption 18
of Heading VI of the Third Schedule to the
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) to transfers of real
property to the trustee of a unit trust and the
Supreme Court decision in
Comptroller of Stamps v.
Yellowco Five Pty Ltd
[1993] VicRp 90
(1993) 2 VR 529
(Yellowco).
The purpose of this ruling is to further clarify
questions that have arisen as a result of Yellowco.
Revenue Ruling SD.058 stated ‘The effect of
Comptroller of Stamps v. Yellowco Five Pty Ltd (1993)
was that for the exemption to apply, the
Commissioner must be satisfied that if the
conveyance is to a trustee of a trust, the terms of the
trust deed do not allow any future possibility of trust
property being held by the trustee as trustee for any
other person(s) in addition to, or other than, the
transferor.’
Exemption 18 has three requirements, and all must
be satisfied:
(a) The conveyance is to a trustee or nominee;
(b) The property is ‘to be held’ by that trustee or
nominee solely as trustee or nominee of the
transferor; and
(c) The property is to be held without any change in
beneficial ownership.
The Court in Yellowco made the following
• ‘ am aware that the construction which I would
place upon the exemption gives very little scope
indeed to the exemption, but that is simply a
consequence of the words used by the legislature.’
— Justice Fullager
• ‘Upon this interpretation Exemption (18) has, no
doubt, a very narrow field of operation.’ — Justice
Power of sale
The current exemption presumes that there will
ultimately be a re-transfer of the property to the
original owner. The Commissioner will, therefore,
refuse applications where the trustee has an
unrestricted power of sale.
A bare trust is a trust under which the trustee holds
property without any interest in it, other than an
interest existing by reason of the office and the legal
title of trustee. Apart from administration matters,
the only duty such a trustee has to perform is to
convey the property on demand to the beneficiary, or
as otherwise directed by the beneficiary. A bare trust
in favour of the transferor is therefore the only type
of trust which can satisfy the requirements of the
Discretionary Trust
The trustee of a discretionary trust, in accordance
with the terms of the trust, has wider powers to deal
with trust property than under a bare trust. As a
consequence the trustee has the discretion to
transfer the property other than to the transferor.
The Commissioner is of the view that for this reason
the exemption cannot apply to a discretionary trust.
trust, the terms of the
t, the term
y future possibility of trust
possibility of tr
y the trustee as trustee for any
the trustee as trustee for any
n addition to, or other than, the
addition to, or other than, the
tion 18 has three requirements, and all must
18 has three requirements, and
(a) The conveyance is to a trustee or nomine
(a) The conveyance is to a trustee or nomine
(b) The property is ‘to be held’ by that
‘to be held’ by that
nominee solely as trustee or no
ely as trustee or n
transferor; and
(c) The property is to be
beneficial owne
The Court in
The Court in
ion.’ — Jus
emption presumes that there will
emption presumes that th
be a re-transfer of the property to the
be a re-transfer of the property
al owner. The Commissioner will, therefore,
wner. The Commissioner will, therefore,
efuse applications where the trustee has an
fuse applications where the trustee has an
unrestricted power of sale.
unrestricted power of sa
A bare trust is a trust unde
A bare trust is a trust unde
property without any in
interest existing b
interest existing
title of trustee
itle of trustee
Ceased - December 2003
The Commissioner is also of the view that the
exemption will not apply where the trust is a unit
trust. Again, this is because, in accordance with the
terms of the trust, the trustee has wider powers to
deal with the property. In addition, under a unit trust,
a unit holder has an interest in the value of all the
property of the trust without interest in any specific
property. Consequently the trustee is under no
obligation to transfer property held by the trust back
to the transferor notwithstanding that the transferor
is also a unit holder.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ceased - December 2003