Landholder Provisions - Declared Public Unit Trust Schemes (DA-063) [2012] VICSRODA 11 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions –
Declared Public Unit Trust Schemes
Revenue Ruling DA.063
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty
on relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings
in Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million
A public unit trust scheme is defined in
of the Act to mean a listed trust, a widely held trust
and a registered declared public unit trust scheme.
A public unit trust scheme, however, does not include
a unit trust scheme that is, or was at any time,
a wholesale unit trust scheme or eligible for
registration as such.
Sections 89Q
of the Act provide for the
registration of a unit trust scheme as a declared
public unit trust scheme. These sections allow a unit
trust scheme to overcome anomalies associated with
its status under the Act when it is effectively public
in nature and purpose but fails to meet the necessary
criteria for recognition as such.
sections 89Q
of the Act, the trustee
of a unit trust scheme may apply for registration and
the Commissioner of State Revenue (the Commissioner)
may register the scheme as a declared public unit trust
scheme if the Commissioner is satisfied that the scheme
meets the criteria for registration. The criteria for
registration as a declared public unit trust scheme are -
(a) the scheme should be registered as a declared
public unit trust scheme; and
(b) registration is not being sought for the purpose
of, or as part of a scheme or arrangement with
a collateral purpose of, avoiding or reducing duty
otherwise chargeable under
of Chapter 3
of the Act.
In considering an application for registration,
the Commissioner is permitted under section
89Q(3) of the Act to take into account any matter
he considers relevant.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the factors the
Commissioner will take into account when determining
whether a scheme should be registered as a declared
public unit trust scheme and when he is likely to make
such a determination.
The factors that the Commissioner will consider when
making a determination as to whether a unit trust
scheme should be registered as a declared public
unit trust scheme include (but are not limited to)-
• The purpose and nature of the scheme and
whether it is effectively public;
• Whether units in the scheme were offered to the
public, or an appreciable section of the public;
• Whether the scheme was established for
a particular investor or group of investors;
• The degree of ownership and/or control
a particular investor or group of investors
has/have over the scheme;
• The total number of unit holders in the scheme
and whether units are widely held by persons
who are not associated with each other;
• The reasons the scheme is unable to qualify
as a public unit trust scheme and whether
this is due to factors beyond its control; and
• Whether the unit trust scheme was at any time
a wholesale unit trust scheme or eligible for
registration as such.
Generally, the Commissioner would be satisfied that
a scheme should be registered as a declared public unit
trust scheme where the scheme does not quite meet
the criteria of a public unit trust scheme but is otherwise
considered to be public in nature and purpose.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
In determining whether a unit trust scheme
is effectively public, the Commissioner will not look
beyond the registered unit holders of the scheme. The
only exception is where a unit holder is a bare trustee,
nominee or custodian separately holding units in the
scheme for different beneficial owners who could
call for the units at any time. In all other cases, the
Commissioner will not look through the registered unit
holders in order to characterise the scheme as one
that should be registered as a declared public unit
trust scheme.
Where the Commissioner finds a scheme is effectively
public, he is more likely to be satisfied that the scheme
should be registered as a declared public unit trust
scheme if its failure to qualify as a public unit trust
scheme is at the margin and due to factors beyond
its control. Factors beyond the control of a scheme will
not include acquisitions of interests in the scheme that
prevent it from qualifying as a public unit trust scheme
unless the acquisitions were not contemplated by the
acquirers (e.g. a redemption or cancellation of units/
shares that gives rise to acquisitions by associated
persons that the Commissioner has accepted should
not be aggregated for duty purposes under section
78(2) of the Act). However, factors beyond the
control of the scheme may include restrictions
on the scheme’s ability to create and issue new
or further units so as to come within the definition
of a public unit trust scheme.
Examples 1 and 2 are situations where the
Commissioner would be inclined to register a unit
trust scheme as a declared public unit trust scheme.
A managed investment scheme that is closed
to new investments and has 280 unit holders
all of whom acquired their interests pursuant
to a product disclosure statement issued to the
public and none of whom (whether individually
or together with any associated person) is entitled
to more than 20% of the units in the scheme.
Such a scheme may be considered public in nature
as it has a wide spread of public investors and is
structured, owned and operated in a manner that
is consistent with the criteria of a widely held trust.
If the trustee of the scheme is prohibited from
creating and issuing new or further units in the
scheme so as to come within the criteria of a public
unit trust scheme, the Commissioner would be
inclined to treat the scheme as one that should be
registered as a declared public unit trust scheme.
However, if there are no restrictions on the creation
or issue of new or further units, registration may
be conditional on the trustee issuing new or further
units to investors within an agreed time frame.
A unit trust scheme that has attracted 500 unit
holders under a product disclosure statement
issued to the public, is unable to satisfy the criteria
of a widely held trust due to the underwriter being
required to take up a shortfall of units in the
scheme. In such circumstances, the Commissioner
may register the scheme as a declared public
unit trust scheme on the condition that the
underwriter’s interest in the scheme is sold or
diluted within an agreed timeframe.
Examples 3, 4 and 5 are situations where the
Commissioner would not be inclined to register
a scheme as a declared public unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme with 100 unit holders,
one of whom holds a 70% interest in the scheme
as trustee of a managed investment scheme with
over 300 members. As the Commissioner does
not look beyond a registered unit holder of
a scheme where the registered unit holder is
the trustee of another unit trust scheme, he would
not be satisfied that there is a sufficient spread
of public unit holders in the unit trust scheme
to register it as a declared public unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme that is akin to a wholesale
unit trust scheme but unable to meet the qualified
investor holding requirements. As the nature of
the scheme is more wholesale than public, the
Commissioner would not be inclined to register
the scheme as a declared public unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme that is seeking registration as
a declared public unit trust scheme so that a trust
in which it owns units can qualify for registration
as a wholesale unit trust scheme. In these
circumstances, the Commissioner would not be
satisfied that the registration is not being sought as
part of a scheme or arrangement with a collateral
purpose of avoiding or reducing duty otherwise
chargeable under
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
The above considerations are provided as a guide only
and are not an exhaustive list. The Commissioner will
consider each application based on its own individual
facts when determining whether or not a unit trust
scheme should be registered as a declared public unit
trust scheme.
In all cases the onus is on the applicant to provide
the Commissioner with the necessary information
in order to make an informed decision on whether
the unit trust scheme meets the criteria to be
registered as a declared public unit trust scheme.
To assist applicants in applying for such registration,
the Commissioner has developed an application form
which is available on the State Revenue Office website
(Duties Form 60). Please note that the Commissioner
will not process an application for registration unless
the relevant form is completed in full and submitted
with all relevant documentation and information.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling.
All rulings must be read subject to Revenue
Ruling GEN.001.
Commissioner of State Revenue