Contraventions to short-term dealing accounts (FID-041) [1997] VICSROFID 2 (1 February 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Sections 26(4) and 26(5) of the
Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982
(the Act) regulate amounts which can
be credited to and debited from a short-term dealing
account. Section 32 of the Act imposes a payment
of primary duty (up to a maximum of $1,200) on
any amount paid into or out of the account in
contravention of sections 26(4) and (5).
In addition, section 26(6)(ba) empowers the
Commissioner to cancel a short-term dealing
account certificate if that short-term dealing account
has not been kept in credit at all times. This Office
interprets this as meaning that the daily closing
balance on the account must always be a credit
balance. The account balance may fluctuate from
credit to debit throughout the day, but the closing
balance must be a credit balance.
There has been some confusion about the penalties
which can be imposed when a debit, which is a
legitimate debit under section 26(5), results in a
debit closing balance. The purpose of this Ruling is
to clarify whether such a debit, even though it is a
payment made initially in accordance with section
26(5), is considered to be a contravention for the
purposes of section 32.
Where a debit, which is a legitimate debit under
section 26(5) of the Act, is made to a short-term
dealing account, results in the account having a
debit closing balance, the only ‘penalty’ which can
be imposed on the account holder is cancellation of
the short-term dealing account certificate for up to a
year (see section 26(6)(d)). No financial penalty
under section 32 of the Act will be imposed.
Making payments into and out of a short-term
dealing account which are not allowed under
sections 26(4) and (5) is one contravention of the
Act. Failing to keep a short-term dealing account in
credit is another. The former can give rise to both a
monetary liability and the cancellation of the
certificate of exemption. The latter can only give rise
to cancellation of the exempt status of the account.
Revenue Ruling FID.026 provides further details
regarding the maintenance of short-term dealing
accounts in a credit balance.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Contraventions to short-term
dealing accounts
Revenue Ruling FID.041