Application of the anti-avoidance provisions (DT-007) [1997] VICSRODT 2 (1 October 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling DT.005 and is
effective from 1 July 1997. The revised ruling
replaces references to repealed sections of the
Debits Tax Act 1990
(the Act) with references to
provisions of the
Taxation Administration Act 1997
which came into operation on 1 July 1997.
Section 5(1)(c)
of the Act charges tax, in certain
circumstances, on each eligible debit of not less than
$1 made to an account kept outside Victoria. Tax will
be imposed if the account holder (or one of the
account holders) is a resident of Victoria and the
account was used in connection with the avoidance
of liability for payments of the tax that would have
been charged if the debit had been made to an
account kept in Victoria. For what constitutes a
Victorian resident see
section 3(2)
of the Act.
Section 5(2)
of the Act also provides that there is no
avoidance if the debit is made to an account which
would attract a liability to a similar tax.
Section 5(2)
of the Act was amended by the
Tax (Amendment) Act 1993
to provide that
avoidance may still be concluded unless the tax
payable in the other jurisdiction is also payable at
the same rate as the Victorian debits tax.
Concerns have been raised with the State Revenue
Office that as a result of this amendment,
the anti-avoidance provisions may have adverse
implications for legitimate transactions which were
not intended to avoid tax.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the application
of the amended anti-avoidance provisions.
Section 5(1)(c) of the Act is not intended to apply to
the legitimate use of interstate accounts. In essence
it is intended to impose tax on transactions which the
Commissioner of State Revenue has reasonably
concluded, having regard to the surrounding
circumstances, are effected by means which avoid
the payment of debits tax in Victoria.
It is not possible to identify specific situations in
which avoidance would clearly be concluded, the
following factors will be considered by the
Commissioner in applying section 5(1)(c) of the Act:
1. the jurisdiction in which the account is held and
the rate of tax applicable (if any);
2. the extent of any established private and
commercial interests in that jurisdiction of the
resident of Victoria who would benefit from any
difference between the rate or amount of tax
payable in that jurisdiction and Victoria;
3. the existence of other accounts held by the
resident of Victoria in other jurisdictions and the
extent of established private and commercial
interests in those jurisdictions;
4. the source of the funds deposited to the account
and the nature of payments regularly made
from the account;
5. any reasons which may be given to the
Commissioner for the account being held
outside Victoria and for any specific payment,
or payments, being made from that account
rather than an account held in Victoria.
Where the Commissioner determines that the
account was used for avoidance purposes, an
assessment will be made and a notice of assessment
issued to the account holder in accordance with
Taxation Administration Act 1997
Application of the anti-avoidance
Revenue Ruling DT.007
Replaces Revenue Ruling DT.005
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
ON THE MOVE
In cases where it is not clear whether or not section
5(1)(c) of the Act applies and therefore if an account
holder is liable to pay debits tax under section 8(2),
a private ruling should be sought from the State
Revenue Office.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1997
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002