Conveyance of real property to trustee or nominee (SD-058) [1999] VICSROSD 1 (30 April 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
C E A S E D
October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
Conveyance of real property to
trustee or nominee
Revenue Ruling SD.058
Replaced by SD.101
The transfer or conveyance of real property generally
attracts a liability to stamp duty under Heading VI of
the Third Schedule to the
Stamps Act 1958
Act), unless an exemption applies.
Exemption 18 (the exemption) of Heading VI
exempts from duty any instrument for the
conveyance or transfer of real property which is
made by the transferor to a trustee or nominee to be
held solely as trustee or nominee of the transferor,
without any change in beneficial ownership.
In addition, an instrument of conveyance or transfer
of real property made by way of re-transfer to
the transferor in such a case is also exempt under
the exemption.
A particular difficulty which may arise is the
determination of whether a ‘change of beneficial
ownership’ is effected, within the meaning of the
exemption, when the conveyance is to a trustee of a
trust. Whilst upon execution of an instrument of
conveyance or transfer, the sole beneficiary
under the receiving trust may be the transferor,
the possibility of future additions or changes in
beneficiaries will affect the applicability of
the exemption.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify this issue,
particularly in light of the 1992 Supreme Court
decision in
Comptroller of Stamps v. Yellowco Five Pty
[1993] VicRp 90
(1993) 2 VR 529.
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling SD.028.
The Commissioner, in considering the application of
the exemption to a particular conveyance, will refer
to the terms of the trust deed in question.
The effect of
Comptroller of Stamps v. Yellowco Five
[1993] VicRp 90
(1993) 2 VR 529
was that for the exemption
to apply, the Commissioner must be satisfied that if
the conveyance is to a trustee of a trust, the terms of
the trust deed do not allow any future possibility of
trust property being held by the trustee as trustee for
any other person(s) in addition to, or other than,
the transferor.
In some instances a unit trust deed may incorporate
clauses which prevent, for example, extra unit
holders from being added to the trust, or existing
unit holders from transferring their unit holding.
This may create an impression that no possibility
exists of future changes in beneficial ownership of
the property transferred. If the trust permits variation
however, in order that other parties may receive a
beneficial interest under the trust subsequent to the
conveyance, then the exemption will not apply.
In such a case, duty will be payable upon the
conveyance(s), and upon any subsequent re-transfer
to the transferor, unless a further exemption applies.
In effect, it will be difficult to satisfy the requirements
of the exemption unless the transferee receives the
property as trustee of a fixed trust where the trust
deed or instrument does not provide for the issue of
further units or other future changes in beneficial
ownership. In addition, there can be no power of
variation under the trust that could allow the
possibility of an addition to, or removal of, existing
beneficiaries subsequent to the conveyance.
C E A S E D
October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
In all cases the decision of the Office will be based
on the terms of the relevant trust deed or
instrument.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
C E A S E D
October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999
C E A S E D October 1999