Land Rich Provisions - Constructive Ownership of Land Holdings and Other Property through Linked Entities (DA-046.V1) [2008] VICSRODA 4 (1 August 2008)
Revenue Ruling DA.046
The land rich provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of the
Duties Act 2000
(‘the Act’) impose duty on a relevant
acquisition of an interest in a land rich landholder.
A land rich landholder is a private company, a private
unit trust scheme or a wholesale unit trust scheme that
has land holdings in Victoria with an unencumbered
value of $1 million or more, and its land holdings in all
places (whether within or outside Australia) comprise
60% or more of the unencumbered value of all the
landholder’s property (other than excluded property).
In determining whether a landholder is land rich (and
the amount of duty payable on a relevant acquisition),
the landholder’s land holdings and other property are
not limited to land and other property directly owned
by the landholder. In certain circumstances, they may
include land and other property held by linked entities
and discretionary trusts.
A linked entity is defined in
of the Act to
mean any person or body, corporate or unincorporated,
that may hold property in its own right or for the
benefit of any person. The definition of a linked entity
includes a trust but does not include a natural person,
a public unit trust scheme or a listed company.
of the Act, a landholder may be
considered to be entitled to the land and/or other
property held by a linked entity or a chain or web of
linked entities. However, a landholder will not be taken
to be entitled to the land and/or other property of a
linked entity or linked entities unless the landholder
would be entitled to receive at least 20% of the land
and/or other property on a winding up of all the
relevant linked entities.
Where a landholder is entitled to receive at least 20%
of the land and/or other property of a linked entity or
a chain or web of linked entities on a winding up of
all the relevant linked entities, the value of the land
and/or other property that the landholder is considered
to hold through linked entities is that portion of the
unencumbered value of the land and/or other property
to which the landholder would be entitled on a winding
up of all the linked entities without regard to any of the
liabilities of the linked entities.
Winding up of a linked entity is defined in
of the Act to include any means by which the entity’s
property is divested in favour of the persons entitled to it
and, in the case of a linked entity that is a trust, includes
the vesting of the trust property in the beneficiaries.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain the
operation of the constructive ownership provisions in
relation to linked entities
(section 74
of the Act). This
Revenue Ruling does not deal with the constructive
ownership of land and/or other property through
discretionary trusts. For information on the tracing of
land and other property through discretionary trusts,
please see Revenue Ruling DA.033.
An entity can be linked to a landholder whether or not
the landholder holds a direct interest in the entity. If a
landholder does not hold a direct interest in an entity,
the entity may be a linked entity of the landholder
provided it is linked to other entities linked to the
landholder or to each other. An entity can be linked to
a landholder no matter how many interposed entities
exist between it and the landholder. Where an entity
is linked to a landholder through various interposed
entities, the entity and all interposed entities may be
linked entities of the landholder.
Even though a landholder may not hold a direct interest
in a linked entity, it may be deemed to be entitled to
the land and/or other property of the linked entity.
This is because a landholder’s entitlement to the land
and/or other property of a linked entity is based on its
entitlement to receive such property on a winding up
of all relevant linked entities and not necessarily to the
interest it holds in any of the linked entities.
A landholder’s entitlement to receive land and/or other
property through linked entities is determined on the
basis of a notional winding up of all linked entities
at the time of the making of a relevant acquisition
in the landholder. This determination is to be made
without regard to any of the liabilities of linked entities
at that time. It is also to be made on the basis that
the winding up of linked entities includes any means
Revenue Rulings
Land Rich Provisions – Constructive Ownership
of Land Holdings and Other Property through
Linked Entities
Ruling history
Issued date
August 2008
Dates of effect
February 2006
by which the entities' land and/or other property is
divested in favour of the person(s) ultimately entitled
to receive it. Consequently, a landholder’s entitlement
to receive land and/or other property through linked
entities is not a reference to what the landholder
would actually receive in monetary terms (if anything).
Rather, it is a reference to what the landholder
would be entitled to receive as an interest in the land
and/or other property of any of the linked entities if
such property was to be distributed to the person(s)
ultimately entitled to receive it on a winding up of all
the linked entities.
A landholder will not be considered to be entitled to
the land and/or other property of a linked entity or a
chain or web of linked entities unless it is entitled to
receive at least 20% of the land and/or other property
on a winding up of all the linked entities. Where the
landholder is entitled to receive at least 20% of the
land and/or other property of a linked entity or a chain
or web of linked entities, the value of the land and/or
other property that the landholder is considered to
hold through the linked entities is that portion of the
unencumbered value of land and/or other property to
which the landholder would be entitled on a notional
winding up of all the linked entities.
The examples below illustrate the operation of the
constructive ownership provisions and the 20%
threshold in the context of both chain and web linked
entity structures.
Example 1 - Chain Structure
In Example 1, a relevant acquisition has occurred
in a landholder that owns a 50% interest in Entity A
which owns a 35% interest in Entity B. Both Entities
A and B separately own land in Victoria. The land
owned by Entity A is valued at $10 million and the
land owned by Entity B is valued at $20 million. Under
the constructive ownership provisions, Entities A and B
are linked entities of the landholder. If Entities A and
B were wound up, the landholder would be entitled
to receive 50% of the land owned by Entity A and
17.5% [50% x 35%] of the land owned by Entity B.
As the landholder is entitled to receive at least 20%
of the land owned by Entity A on its winding up, the
constructive ownership provisions would operate to
deem the landholder to be entitled to a 50% interest
in land owned by Entity A, valued at $5 million [50%
of $10 million]. The landholder will not be deemed
to hold any interest in the land owned by Entity B
because its entitlement to receive an interest in that
land on a winding up of Entities A and B is less than
20%. Accordingly, the landholder’s interest in the land
owned by Entity B (17.5%; valued at $3.5 million) will
not be taken into account when determining whether
the landholder is land rich and/or the amount of duty
payable on the relevant acquisition in the landholder.
Example 1 illustrates that in a chain structure, if the
landholder indirectly holds an interest of less than 20%
in any one particular entity in the chain (even though
entities linked to the landholder directly or indirectly
hold at least 20%), the landholder’s entitlement to the
land and/or other property on a winding up of that
linked entity and entities below that point will be less
than 20%. In such circumstances, the land and/or
other property of those linked entities will not be taken
into account in determining whether the landholder
is land rich and the amount of duty payable on a
relevant acquisition in the landholder.
Example 2 - Web Structure
In Example 2, a relevant acquisition has occurred in a
landholder that owns a 90% interest in Entity A and a
19% interest in Entity B. Entities A and B, respectively
owns a 19% and an 81% interest in Victorian land
valued at $10 million. Under the constructive
ownership provisions, Entities A and B are linked
entities of the landholder. If Entities A and B were
wound up, the proportion of the land the landholder
would be entitled to receive through Entities A and B
(and therefore its interest in land) is 32.5% (being the
aggregate of a 17.1% interest [90% x 19%] through
Entity A and 15.4% interest [19% x 81%] through Entity
B). As the landholder is entitled to receive at least 20%
of the land owned by Entities A and B on a winding up
of both entities, the constructive ownership provisions
would operate to deem the landholder to be entitled
to a 32.5% interest in land, valued at $3.25 million
[32.5% of $10 million]. Accordingly, this deemed land
holding will form the basis of determining whether
the landholder is land rich and/or the amount of duty
payable on the relevant acquisition in the landholder.
Example 2 illustrates that in a web structure, even if
the landholder is entitled to an interest of less than
20% through any one particular linked entity or chain
of linked entities, the value of the land and/or other
property of that linked entity or chain of entities may
entitlement
entitlement
entitlement
still be traced through to the landholder as a result
of all other linked entities or chains of entities being
wound up. This is because it is necessary to calculate
the ultimate entitlement the landholder has in the land
and/or other property through all linked entities, and
not just through one linked entity or chain of entities.
Further assistance
If you require advice on the interpretation and
application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act in relation
to their particular circumstances, you may contact the
Land Rich Unit at the State Revenue Office or apply
for a private ruling in accordance with Revenue Ruling
GEN.009. In all cases, you bear the onus to provide
the Commissioner with the necessary information to
enable an informed decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
August 2008
Commissioner of State Revenue