Commissioner's discretion to exclude from a group (PTA-031) [2008] VICSROPTA 9 (1 June 2008)
Revenue Rulings
Commissioner’s discretion to exclude from a group
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Revenue Ruling PTA031
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the P
ay-roll Tax Act 1971
and harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria
Part 5 of the Act provides for the grouping of two
or more employers. The effect of grouping is that
only one payroll tax deduction can be claimed for
each group.
Broadly speaking, two employers will constitute
a group where:
1. the two employers are corporations which are
related to each other by virtue of section 50
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) (related
corporations), or
2. at least one employee of a business performs
any duties for or in connection with a business
conducted by another employer, or there
is an agreement between two employers for
the employee of one of them to perform duties
in the business conducted by the other employer
(sharing of employees), or
3. the same person has, or the same persons have
together, a controlling interest in two businesses
(common control), or
4. an entity has a controlling interest in a corporation
arising from tracing of interests in corporations
(tracing provisions).
To avoid anomalies which may arise from the strict
application of the grouping provision,
of the Act provides that an employer that is grouped
because of 2 (sharing of employees) or 3 (common
control) or 4 (tracing provisions) may apply
in writing to the Commissioner of State Revenue
(the Commissioner) to be excluded from the group.
However, corporations which are grouped under
1 (related corporations) are not eligible to apply
for an exclusion order.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain
the exclusion discretion available under section 79,
including the matters the Commissioner takes into
account in exercising the discretion.
In order to be granted an exclusion from a group, the
applicant employer must satisfy the Commissioner that:
1. The business is carried on independently
of businesses carried on by every other member
of the group, and
2. The business is not connected with the carrying
on of businesses carried on by any other member
of the group.
The matters that the Commissioner must have regard
• The nature and degree of the ownership and
control of the business,
• The nature of the businesses, and
• any other matters the Commissioner considers
The Commissioner must be satisfied that:
• there is not a continuous course of active
and significant relationship, in a business
or commercial sense, between the carrying
on of the applicant’s business and the carrying
on of businesses conducted by every other
member of the group, and
• the connections which do exist are no more
than casual, irregular or occasional occurrences.
The onus is on the employer who applies
for an exclusion order to prove these matters.
Commissioner of State Revenue
Matters taken into account
In making a decision, the Commissioner will consider
the nature and the extent of all relevant agreements
and dealings between the member and other members
of the group, including:
• the nature and extent of any commercial
transactions between the members, including
the value and percentage of the member’s total
business which is conducted with other members
of the group
• the extent to which members share resources,
facilities or services, including premises, staff,
management and accounting services
• the extent to which the member controls
or is involved in managerial decisions and day
to day administration of the other members
and the extent to which other members control
or are involved in managerial decisions and
day to day administration of the member
• the extent to which there are financial
interdependencies, including intra-group loans
or guarantees and common banking facilities,
and the terms and conditions attached to such
• the degree to which there is a connection between
a member and other members of the group
in the purchase or sales of goods and services
• the extent to which there is a connection between
the nature of the businesses of the member
and other members of the group, and
• the extent to which there is a connection between
the ultimate owners of the member and other
members of the group.
None of the matters listed above are determinative
in isolation from the other matters listed, nor are they
an exhaustive list of the relevant issues. Each case will
be considered on the basis of all of the relevant facts
and circumstances.
This Revenue Ruling is effective from 1 July 2007.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling