Objections Lodged Out of Time (TAA-004V2) [2012] VICSROTAA 1 (1 September 2012)
Objections Lodged Out of Time
Taxation Administration Act 1997
Revenue Ruling TAA.004 (version 2)
Taxation Administration Act 1997
(TAA) allows
a taxpayer who is dissatisfied with an assessment
(other than a compromise assessment) or certain
decisions of the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) to lodge a written objection with
the Commissioner (see
of the TAA). This
includes an objection to an assessment of a tax liability
arising under the
Duties Act 2000
Land Tax Act 2005
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Congestion Levy Act 2005
Planning and Environment Act 1987
The TAA states that an objection must be lodged
with the Commissioner within 60 days after the date
of service of the notice of assessment, or decision, on
the taxpayer, except as provided by
section 100
of the TAA).
Section 100
allows the Commissioner to permit a
person to lodge an objection after the 60-day period.
This section thereby confers a discretion upon the
Commissioner to permit the lodgement of an objection
out of time.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain how
the Commissioner applies
section 100.
This includes
the process by which a taxpayer may make an
application under
section 100
and the factors which
the Commissioner will generally consider to be relevant
in deciding whether or not to grant permission under
that section.
When is an objection lodged out of time?
An objection is taken to have been lodged out of time if
it is received by the Commissioner after the expiry of the
prescribed 60-day period (see
of the TAA).
The 60-day period runs from the date of service of the
notice of assessment, or decision, on the taxpayer.
The TAA defines an assessment to mean an assessment
made by the Commissioner under
(of the TAA) of
the tax liability of a person, and includes a reassessment, a
compromise assessment and a deemed assessment.
The TAA also states that a document (which includes
a notice of assessment) must be taken, unless the
contrary is proved, to have been served on a taxpayer
a) in the case of delivery in person – at the time
the document is delivered,
b) in the case of posting – 2 business days after
the day on which the document is posted, and
c) in the case of a facsimile or other electronic
transmission – at the time the facsimile or
transmission is received, subject to section
Notwithstanding the above, the Commissioner’s
practice is to accept objections received by post no
more than two business days after the expiration of the
60-day period as having been lodged within time.
Dutiable transactions lodged through Duties Online
Where the online duty payment system provided for by
Duties Act 2000
(known as Duties Online) is used in
respect of a dutiable transaction and the Commissioner
validates acceptance of the information submitted
by the taxpayer in relation to that transaction, the
Commissioner is deemed to have made and served an
assessment of the taxpayer’s duty liability in respect of
that transaction (see
section 125(1B)
of the TAA). The
deemed assessment is taken to have been served by
the Commissioner on the taxpayer at the time that the
user commits the dutiable transaction to payment (see
section 125A(3)
of the TAA).
When is it necessary to make an application
section 100?
It is necessary to make an application under section
100 of the TAA whenever an objection (other than an
objection to a valuation used by the Commissioner in
an assessment of land tax) is lodged out of time.
In some cases, a taxpayer may lodge an out of time
objection without also making an application under
section 125A(1)
Revenue Rulings
TAA.004 (version 2)
Ruling history
TAA.004 (version 2)
Issued date
September 2012
Dates of effect
September 2012
section 100.
Where this occurs, the taxpayer will be
advised to also lodge an application under section
100 as explained in this Revenue Ruling. If no such
application is received, the out of time objection will
be considered as invalid.
Objections to site value of land shown in a Land
Tax Assessment
The TAA does not allow for an out of time objection
to be lodged against a valuation used by the
Commissioner in an assessment of land tax (see
section 100(5)
of the TAA for valuations provided
by the Valuer-General). For valuations provided by
municipal councils, there is no mechanism to lodge an
out of time objection under Division 3 of
Valuation of Land Act 1960
Can an application under section 100 be made
prior to the expiry of the 60-day lodgement
An application under section 100 of the TAA should
only be made after the expiration of the 60-day period
for lodgement of the objection.
How is an application made under section 100?
An application under section 100 of the TAA must be
made by the taxpayer in writing (see section 100(2)).
Oral applications will not be accepted.
The application must state, fully and in detail, the
circumstances concerning, and the reasons for, the
failure to lodge the objection within the 60-day period
(see section 100(2)). This explanation should include
a detailed reference to the factors listed below, to
the extent that they are relevant to the taxpayer’s
circumstances, as well as to any other factors which
the taxpayer considers relevant to the Commissioner’s
exercise of the discretion conferred on him by section
It is preferable for the application to be accompanied
by the proposed objection itself (if not already lodged),
as the merits of the objection and the likely outcome
are relevant in determining an application under
section 100. In circumstances where providing the full
objection may impose significant cost on the taxpayer,
the grounds of objection may initially (i.e. at the time
of lodging the application under section 100) be
provided in summary form.
Is evidence in support of the application required?
The onus is on the taxpayer to establish why the
Commissioner should permit an objection to be lodged
after the expiration of the 60-day period. Accordingly,
the taxpayer should provide any evidence that is
considered to be relevant to the application.
The Commissioner expects the taxpayer to be able to
substantiate all the reasons provided in an application
under section 100.
What factors are relevant in determining the
application?
The Commissioner generally considers the following,
non-exhaustive list of factors to be relevant to an
application under section 100. Any other reason
or circumstance explaining the failure to lodge the
objection within time should also be detailed by the
taxpayer in the application. Each application will be
considered on its individual merits, taking into account
a combination of all relevant factors as stated below.
Merits and likely outcome of proposed objection
The Commissioner will have regard to the merits and
likely outcome of the proposed objection.
Reasons for lateness
Lateness caused by circumstances beyond
taxpayer’s control
If the delay in lodging the objection and the
application under section 100 was caused by
circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, the
Commissioner is more likely to grant permission under
section 100. Circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s
control may include (depending always upon the
individual case):
• postal or delivery delays due to strikes or
natural disasters (but not where the taxpayer
could have arranged other means of delivery
because of knowledge of the likelihood of such
• fires, floods or other natural disasters,
• unavailability of key personnel due to sudden
resignation, ill-health or death,
• computer system breakdowns, including third
party systems, and
• changes to applicable taxation laws resulting
from court decisions.
Lateness caused by a taxpayer’s representative
The fact that a taxpayer claims the delay in lodging an
objection has been caused by his or her representative
will not generally on its own be considered to be a
sufficient ground upon which to grant permission
under section 100 of the TAA. The Commissioner
TAA.004 (version 2)
expects that all taxpayers, including those that are
represented, are aware of the relevant time limits under
the TAA and that they would pro-actively seek to ensure
that their agents comply with such time limits.
The Commissioner accepts, however, that there may
be instances where it is appropriate to afford some
weight to this factor. This will particularly be the case
where the evidence submitted clearly shows that
despite the considerable efforts of the taxpayer, his or
her representative has nevertheless failed to lodge the
objection within 60 days.
Extent of lateness
The extent of the delay between the expiration
of the 60-day period and the date on which the
Commissioner received the application under section
100 will almost always be a relevant factor
Complexity of issues
The Commissioner will also have regard to whether the
issues involved in the assessment, decision or objection
are complex or novel.
Unawareness of 60-day time limit
The fact that a taxpayer claims to have been unaware
of the 60-day time limit for lodging an objection will
generally not on its own be considered to be a sufficient
ground for granting permission under section 100.
Information regarding objection rights (including the
time limit) is well publicised by the State Revenue
Office (SRO), including on each notice of assessment
itself, in SRO publications and on the SRO website,
www.sro.vic.gov.au
Any taxpayer who is uncertain about the objection
process may contact the SRO by phone or email.
Any other reason or circumstance
As stated above, all reasons or circumstances
explaining the failure to lodge the objection within
time should be detailed in the application and will be
considered.
What are the possible outcomes of an application
under section 100?
The Commissioner may decide to (see section 100(3)
of the TAA):
(a) grant permission to lodge an objection out of
time unconditionally,
(b) grant permission to lodge an objection out of
time subject to conditions, or
(c) refuse permission to lodge an objection out of
Is a decision by the Commissioner under section
100 reviewable?
A decision made by the Commissioner under section
100 to refuse permission (or to impose conditions
in relation to a grant of an application) is a non-
reviewable decision (section 100(4)) as defined in
of the TAA.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
September 2012
Commissioner of State Revenue
TAA.004 (version 2)