Short-term dealings - Overseas borrowings (FID-045) [1997] VICSROFID 6 (1 April 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the application
of the phrase ‘whether within or outside Victoria’
so that taxpayers can identify which receipts arising
from overseas borrowings are subject to concessionary
duty. This ruling replaces FID.019 and provides
more detailed information on the types of overseas
borrowings which may be subject to duty at the
concessionary rate.
Section 20 of the
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
(the Act) requires a registered short-term money
market operator to pay duty on short-term dealings
by applying the concessionary rate of duty (0.005
per cent) to its average daily liability. The formula for
calculating average daily liability is found in section
7(2) of the Act. For a registered financial institution,
other than a person registered only as a credit
provider, the formula for average daily liability is
A/3B where:
• A is the sum of the daily closing balances of the
liability of the financial institution to each person
in respect of amounts received,
whether within or
outside Victoria
, from that person in the course
of short-term dealings, other than balances that
are less than $50,000.00; and
• B is the number of days in the month.
Many financial institutions engage in short-term
dealings as part of their overseas borrowing
operations. A financial institution may receive funds
outside Australia from foreign currency deposits or
from the issue of short-term commercial paper,
medium term notes or Eurobonds. Subsequently, the
financial institution may receive funds in Australia
after that portion of the funds required for lending
operations in Australia has been exchanged for
Australian dollars. The financial institution must
identify which receipts associated with these activities
are short-term dealings and are required to be
included in the calculation of average daily liability.
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling FID.019 and is
effective from 1 April 1997.
For the calculation of duty on short-term dealings,
a registered financial institution is required to
include in its daily closing liabilities amounts
received ‘whether within or outside Victoria’.
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
these liabilities are to be restricted to amounts
borrowed by the financial institution which are
received in Australia. This means that an ‘amount
received in the course of short-term dealings’ will be
either physically received in Australia or credited to
an account in Australia (either a customer account
or an internal account). However, the mere
recording in a bank’s general ledger of liabilities
representing borrowings or deposits received
overseas from overseas fund raising activities will not
give rise to a receipt to which section 7 of the Act
applies. Therefore, foreign currency deposits
received overseas do not comprise short-term
dealings, even though they are recorded as liabilities
in an Australian financial institution’s general ledger.
Funds received in Australia in respect of short-term
commercial paper issued overseas may qualify as
amounts to which section 7(1)(c) applies. This is
because section 7(1)(c) refers to an amount received
‘in respect of’ the issue of securities, bills of
exchange, promissory notes and certificates of
deposit and there is legal precedent to show that the
words ‘in respect of’ should be interpreted widely.
It is the opinion of the Commissioner of State
Revenue that where there is a demonstrable
relationship between the receipt of funds in Australia
and the overseas issue of short-term securities, the
receipt will qualify as an amount received in the
course of short-term dealings, notwithstanding that
there has been an intermediate step to exchange the
borrowed funds into Australian dollars.
Short-term dealings - Overseas
Revenue Ruling FID.045
Replaces Revenue Ruling FID.019
For each financial institution which borrows overseas
to obtain funds for use within Australia, the question
of whether there is a link between the receipt of
funds in Australia and the funds received from the
issue of short-term securities overseas is one of fact
to be determined by the means used to bring the
funds ‘on shore’. In determining whether there is
such a link, factors which may be relevant are the
nature of any foreign exchange dealings to convert
the borrowed funds and the length of time which
elapses between the receipt of funds overseas and
the receipt of funds in Australia. A financial
institution, which is not sure whether its own
arrangements for receiving funds from overseas
borrowings result in receipts in Australia from
short-term dealings, should contact the State
Revenue Office for a private ruling.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue