Assessing Stamp Duty on Licence Agreements (SD-109) [2001] VICSROSD 1 (16 March 2001)
Revenue Rulings
SRO - ISO 9001 Quality Certified
Assessing stamp duty on licence agreements
Revenue Ruling SD.109
Replaces SD.067
Revenue Ruling SD.067 has been revised to reflect
the abolition of deed duty from 1 May 1997.
Heading VIII of the Third Schedule to the
(the Act) requires ad valorem duty to be
charged in respect of a lease unless an exemption
applies. Although there are no specific provisions in
the Act that deal directly with a licence agreement,
such an agreement may be liable for deed duty if
executed as a deed before 1 May 1997 and if it is
not chargeable with duty under another section of
Uncertainty often arises as to whether a
document should be treated as a lease or a
licence agreement.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the difference
between a lease and a licence for the purposes of
the Act and to outline the criteria the State Revenue
Office (SRO) considers when determining the
nature of an agreement.
This ruling is effective from 1 May 1997.
In essence, a lease provides the lessee with the right
to exclusive possession of the property concerned,
to the exclusion of all others, including the lessor.
However, a licence merely gives the licensee the
right to use the property, without the right to
exclusive possession.
Therefore, where a document grants exclusive
possession, it will be considered to be a lease and
duty will be charged in accordance with Heading
VIII of the Third Schedule to the Act. This will be
the case even where such an agreement is
described as a licence.
The test of exclusive possession is the dominant
factor in determining the nature of an agreement
and the SRO considers the following matters when
making a determination.
The substance and the form of the agreement:
whether the true effect of the agreement, read
as a whole and in light of surrounding
circumstances, is to grant a right to exclusive
possession of the premises irrespective of the
form of the agreement.
The labels and words used by the parties are
not conclusive of the nature of the agreement:
merely calling an agreement a ‘licence’ will not
make it one. A clause in an agreement stating
that there is no right to exclusive possession or
no interest in property is not relevant if the
effect of the agreement is that such a right is
The intention of the parties: this will be
ascertained by determining what rights, in
accordance with ordinary principles of
interpretation, the instrument creates.
The SRO will take into account all relevant
surrounding facts and circumstances in
considering the true nature of the agreement,
including any other agreements between the
The SRO will request any other information it
considers relevant for the purpose of making its
Each agreement will be considered individually
using the above principles. Matters relevant to one
agreement may not be relevant to another.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue