Credit entries to write off a bad debt (FID-056) [1999] VICSROFID 2 (1 April 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Credit entries to write off
Revenue Ruling FID.056
This ruling explains why a credit entry to a
customer's account to write off a bad debt is not a
receipt by the financial institution which keeps the
The State Revenue Office has been asked whether a
credit entry to a customer's account, made for the
purpose of writing off the balance as a bad debt, is a
deemed receipt under section 9(1A) of the
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
Section 9(1A) of the Act reads:
‘If a financial institution credits or causes to be
credited an amount of money to an account of a
person kept by it in Victoria, not being an amount
deposited by that person with the financial institution
for the credit of the account, that amount is
deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to have been
received by the financial institution at the time it is so
Section 9(1A) applies to situations where a financial
institution makes a credit entry to a customer's
account to transfer some of its own funds to the
customer. Once the credit entry is made, the
account holder has access to an amount of money
which he or she did not deposit to the account.The
amount of money can be withdrawn, transferred to
another account or used to reduce a debit balance.
Financial institutions frequently pay interest to their
customer's by crediting their accounts and such
credit entries are deemed receipts under
section 9(1A).
A credit entry made to a customer's account to write
off a bad debt is not made to provide the account
holder with an amount of money, as in fact the
financial institution may still actively pursue recovery
of the amount owing by the account holder. Rather
the credit entry is merely a bookkeeping entry, made
to transfer the balance to another account in order
to write it off as an expense. This entry recognises
that the balance is viewed as irrecoverable.
The Commissioner has ruled that a credit entry
made by a financial institution to a customer's
account to write off a bad debt is not an entry which
credits the customer's account with an amount of
money within the meaning of section 9(1A) of the
Act. Therefore, in these circumstances, a financial
institution is not deemed to have received money
under this section and no duty is payable on this
credit entry.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue