Principal Place of Residence Exemption - Substantial Business Activity (LT-012) [1999] VICSROLT 1 (1 May 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Principal Place of Residence Exemption
- Substantial Business Activity
Revenue Ruling LT.012
The purpose of this ruling is to provide guidance on
how the State Revenue Office will determine
whether a substantial business activity (or activities)
is conducted on land used as a principal place
of residence.
An exemption applies to owners who are natural
persons and use and occupy the land as their
principal place of residence and to land owned by
trustees (of certain types of trusts) where that land is
used and occupied as a principal place of residence
of a natural person who is a beneficiary of the trust.
Section 13I(1) of the
Land Tax Act 1958
provides that, in deciding whether to grant the
exemption the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) must first determine that a
substantial business activity is not being undertaken
on the land. Where part of the land is used for a
substantial business activity, the principal place of
residence exemption only applies to the extent that
the land is used for residential purposes.
This ruling identifies the factors that the
Commissioner will take into account when
determining whether a substantial business activity
is being undertaken on the land and the
significance of each of those factors.
Factors which indicate substantial business activity
Sub-section 13I(2) of the Act requires the
Commissioner to take into account the following
factors when determining whether a substantial
business activity is being conducted on land used by
a person as a principal place of residence:
• whether paid employees or contractors are
engaged in the business activities carried out on
the land (other than employees or contractors
who are relatives of, and normally reside with,
the owner);
• the amount of income that is derived from the
business activity carried out on the land; and
• the proportion of the land that is used, or
allocated, for business purposes.
The existence of any one of these factors is sufficient
for the Commissioner to determine that a
substantial business is being conducted at the land.
The relevance and weight to be given to these
factors will depend on the circumstances of
Evaluation of factors
In deciding whether a substantial business is
conducted on the land, the Commissioner initially
considers whether there are paid employees or
contractors (other than employees or contractors
who are relatives of, and normally reside with, the
owner) who work on the land as part of any business
carried out there. Normally, this factor alone will be
sufficient to determine that a substantial business
activity is conducted at the land, and the exemption
would therefore be restricted to that portion of the
land used for residential purposes.
In relation to the level of income derived from any
business activity conducted on the land, the
Commissioner would normally consider that
substantial business activity occurs on the land if the
gross income derived from the business activity
occurring on the land for the most recently
completed financial year (preceding the year of
assessment) is $30,000 or more.
In relation to the proportion of the land used for
business purposes, the Commissioner would
normally consider that substantial business activity
occurs on the land if more than 30 per cent of the
land, or 30 per cent of the area of a building
occupying the land, is used to conduct
business activity.
The Commissioner would not normally consider that
the operation of a home office, used only for the
purpose of keeping accounts and records of business
activities conducted elsewhere, constitutes a
substantial business activity for the purposes of
section 13I of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE