Landholder Provisions - Obligations on Making a Relevant Acquisition and Calculation of Duty (DA-055) [2012] VICSRODA 3 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – Obligations on Making
a Relevant Acquisition and Calculation of Duty
Revenue Ruling DA.055
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on relevant
acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings
in Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million
A person makes a relevant acquisition in a landholder
if the person acquires an interest in the landholder -
(a) that is of itself a significant interest (i.e. an interest
of 20% or more in a private unit trust scheme, 50%
or more in a private company or a wholesale unit
trust scheme or 90% or more in a listed company
or a public unit trust scheme); or
(b) that when aggregated with other interests acquired
by the person, an associated person or any other
person in an associated transaction results in an
aggregation that amounts to a significant interest
in the landholder.
If a person has made a relevant acquisition in a
landholder, a relevant acquisition also arises each time
the person, associated person(s) or any other person(s)
whose interest was aggregated in the circumstances
referred to in paragraph (b) above acquires a further
interest in the landholder (irrespective of the size or
timing of the acquisition of the further interest).
For information on the meaning of the term 'interest'
and details on how and when an interest may be
acquired, please see Revenue Ruling DA.056.
With respect to a private company, private unit trust
scheme or wholesale unit trust scheme, a relevant
acquisition can also arise if a person acquires an
economic entitlement in or control over the landholder.
When a person makes a relevant acquisition, duty
must be paid, and an Acquisition Statement (SRO
Duties Form 58) completed and lodged with the
Commissioner of State Revenue (the Commissioner),
within 30 days after the date of the relevant acquisition.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to identify
the concessions and assistance available to taxpayers
in meeting their obligations under
3 of the Act. The ruling sets out various lodgement
concessions and examples on the calculation of duty
on the application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act.
It also identifies certain duty concessions that may
apply, including where a landholder's land holdings
include leasehold estates and/or primary production
land. This Ruling does not deal with the calculation
of duty or the duty concessions that may apply
in relation to the acquisition of economic entitlements
of the Act or control under section
82 of the Act.
Requirement to lodge Acquisition Statement
and pay duty
of the Act provides that if a relevant
acquisition is made, either or both the person who
made the relevant acquisition, and the landholder
in which the acquisition was made, must prepare
and lodge an Acquisition Statement with the
Commissioner within 30 days after the date of the
relevant acquisition. Duty must also be paid within
30 days of the date of the relevant acquisition
otherwise a tax default will occur for the purposes
Taxation Administration Act 1997
In cases involving a relevant acquisition of an interest
by a trustee, both the trustee and the person(s) on
whose behalf the interest was acquired (the beneficiary
or beneficiaries) may each be considered to be the
person who acquired the interest and liable for the
payment of duty.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
To reduce compliance costs and to prevent double
duty issues arising, the Commissioner will not require
a landholder to separately lodge an Acquisition
Statement and pay duty if the person who made
the relevant acquisition lodges a statement and pays
the duty within the required timeframe. Where more
than one person may be considered to have acquired
the interest (such as an acquisition by a trustee
on behalf of a trust), the obligation will be satisfied
if either the trustee or the beneficiary lodges the
Acquisition Statement and pays the duty within
the required time.
If the landholder becomes aware that the person
who made the relevant acquisition does not intend
to lodge an Acquisition Statement, the Commissioner
will require the landholder to either complete and
lodge a statement itself, or cause the person who
made the relevant acquisition to complete and
lodge a statement. If neither lodges a statement
in accordance with
of the Act, penalties
may be imposed.
In cases involving the conversion of a private unit
trust scheme to a public unit trust scheme or a private
company to a listed company, it is the trustee of the
public unit trust scheme or the listed company that
is required to lodge the Acquisition Statement and
pay the duty, rather than the persons who made
the relevant acquisition.
Assistance to determine liability to duty
The duty on a relevant acquisition must be paid within
30 days of the date of the relevant acquisition otherwise
a tax default occurs for the purposes of the TAA.
If a taxpayer (that is, the person who made the relevant
acquisition or the landholder in which the acquisition
was made) requires assistance in determining its
liability under the landholder provisions, the taxpayer
may request the Commissioner to issue a private
ruling and/or an assessment. The Commissioner
will determine the taxpayer’s liability and make an
assessment of duty based on the information provided
by the taxpayer, and/or obtained by the Commissioner.
Where a taxpayer requests the Commissioner to issue
a private ruling and/or an assessment, the taxpayer
should estimate the duty payable on the relevant
acquisition and pay that amount before the end of
the 30 day period. Depending on the circumstances
of the matter, any underpayment of duty may attract
penalty tax and interest. In determining the penalty
tax and interest payable (if any), the Commissioner
will also take into account any delays in the provision
of information by the taxpayer that prevented
the Commissioner from promptly determining the
taxpayer’s full liability to duty. A taxpayer will not
be penalised for any delays in the determination
of its liability to duty by the Commissioner that are
not due to the taxpayer.
If a taxpayer fails to lodge an Acquisition Statement
and pay the required duty within the statutory 30 day
period, the Commissioner may impose penalty tax
and interest in accordance with
and the current ruling setting out the Commissioner’s
policy on the imposition of penalty tax and interest
under the TAA.
Duty calculation – Private landholders
A relevant acquisition in a private landholder (i.e. a
private company, private unit trust scheme or wholesale
unit trust scheme) is charged with duty at the same
rates that apply to land transfers under Chapter 2
of the Act. However, a different method of calculation
applies depending on whether the relevant acquisition
in the private landholder is the result of the acquisition
of a single interest, aggregated interests or a further
interest. A concession also applies when the value
of the landholder's Victorian land holdings is between
$1 million and $2 million. In such circumstances, the
duty chargeable in respect of a relevant acquisition
(whether the result of the acquisition of a single
interest, aggregated interests or a further interest)
is calculated in accordance with the phasing-in of
duty formula set out in
of the Act.
When a relevant acquisition in a private landholder
results from an acquisition that is of itself a significant
interest, or the acquisition of interests on the same
day that aggregate to a significant interest, section
86(1) of the Act provides that duty is charged on the
amount calculated by multiplying the unencumbered
value of all land holdings of the landholder in Victoria
at the date of acquisition by the percentage interest
acquired as a result of the relevant acquisition.
Example 1: Single acquisition of a significant
The duty payable on a relevant acquisition made
when a person acquires a 70% interest in a private
landholder which has $10 million in Victorian land
holdings is calculated as follows:
When a relevant acquisition arises from the
aggregation of an interest acquired by a person in a
private landholder with other interests acquired in the
landholder by the person, an associated person or any
other person in an associated transaction over time,
section 86(3)
of the Act provides that duty is charged
at the rates set out in Chapter 2 on the aggregate of
the amounts separately calculated in respect of the
interest acquired by the person and each of the other
interests that comprise the relevant acquisition that
were acquired in the 3 years preceding the acquisition
of the interest by the person.
Example 2: Aggregated acquisitions amounting
to a significant interest
The duty payable on a relevant acquisition of a
24% interest in a landholder that is a private unit
trust scheme comprising the aggregation of four
6% interests acquired over a four year period when
the Victorian land holdings of the landholder in
the first two years were valued at $8 million and in
the latter two years were valued at $10 million is
calculated as follows:
When a relevant acquisition has previously occurred in
a landholder, and a further interest is acquired in the
landholder, duty on the further interest is calculated
section 86(4)
of the Act by determining the
duty that would be chargeable on the prior interests
acquired plus the further interest and subtracting from
that amount the duty that would be chargeable in
respect of the prior interests. The reference to duty
chargeable is not a reference to duty actually paid
on the prior interests at the time of their acquisition,
but rather a reference to the duty that would be
chargeable under
section 86(1)
of the Act at the time
of the acquisition of the further interest.
Example 3: Acquisition of a further interest
A person made a relevant acquisition of a 25%
interest in a landholder that was a private unit trust
scheme and land rich in June 2010. At that time
the Victorian land holdings of the scheme were
valued at $10 million and the duty paid in respect
of the acquisition was $137,500 ($10 million x 25%
x 5.5%). In July 2012 that person acquired a further
10% interest in the scheme. By July 2012, the
value of the scheme's Victorian land holdings had
increased to $12 million. The duty payable on the
acquisition of the further interest is calculated
as follows:
Value of Landholder’s Vic Land Holdings
$10,000,000
Interest Acquired
Dutiable Value ($10m x 70%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable on Relevant Acquisition ($7m x 5.5%)
Value of Landholder’s Vic Land Holdings
in 4th year
$10,000,000
Interest Acquired in 4th year
Dutiable Value of Interest ($10m x 6%)
Value of Landholder's Vic Land Holdings
in 3rd year
$10,000,000
Interest Acquired in 3rd year
Dutiable Value of Interest ($10m x 6%)
Value of Landholder's Vic Land Holdings
in 2nd year
Interest Acquired in 2nd year
Dutiable Value of Interest ($8m x 6%)
Value of Landholder's Vic Land Holdings
in 1st year
Interest Acquired in 1st year
Dutiable Value of Interest ($8m x 6%)
Dutiable Value of Relevant Acquisition
(value of 4th, 3rd & 2nd year interests)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable on Relevant Acquisition
($1,680,000 x 5.5%)
Value of Scheme’s Vic Land Holdings in July 2012 $12,000,000
Sum of Further and Prior Interests
Dutiable Value of Further and Prior Interests
($12m x 35%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable on Further and Prior Interests
Dutiable Value of Prior Interest ($12m x 25%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Dutiable Payable on Prior Interest
($3m x 5.5%)
Duty Payable on Acquisition of Further Interest
($231,000 - $165,000)
Duty calculation – Public landholders
A relevant acquisition in a public landholder (i.e. a listed
company or public unit trust scheme) is chargeable
of the Act at a concessional rate
of 10% of the duty that would be chargeable under
Chapter 2 of the Act on a transfer of 100% of the
Victorian land holdings of the landholder. This is
the case, even if the relevant acquisition is not the
acquisition of an interest of 100% in the landholder.
The duty is calculated based on the value of the land
holdings of the landholder at the date of the relevant
acquisition.
The concessional rate of duty does not apply in respect
of a relevant acquisition in a listed company that been
listed for less than 12 months, a declared public unit
trust that has been registered as such for less than
12 months or a widely held trust that has satisfied the
definition of a widely held trust for less than 12 months.
In these circumstances, the duty will be calculated as if
the relevant acquisition was made in a private landholder.
Example 4: Acquisition in a public landholder
The duty payable on a relevant acquisition
where a bidder has acquired 95% of the shares
in a listed company under a takeover bid when
the Victorian land holdings of the scheme were
valued at $20 million is calculated as follows:
Value of Landholder’s Vic Land Holdings
$20,000,000
Deemed Interest Acquired
Dutiable Value of Interest ($20m x 100%)
$20,000,000
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty otherwise Payable on Interest
($20m x 5.5%)
Concessional Rate of Duty Payable
Duty Payable on Relevant Acquisition
($1.1m x 10%)
No further duty is payable if the bidder subsequently acquires
the remaining 5% of the shares in the company. This
concession only applies to the bidder and not to associated
persons of the bidder.
Duty concession for an anomalous duty outcome
Under section 89E of the Act, the Commissioner has
discretion to reduce the duty payable on a relevant
acquisition to an amount not less than the duty that
would be payable under Chapter 2 of the Act, had the
subject of the relevant acquisition been a transfer of the
land of the landholder to the person. This concession
applies to relevant acquisitions, other than through the
acquisition of an economic entitlement under
of the Act or control under
of the Act, where –
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the application
of the landholder provisions results in an
anomalous duty outcome; and
(b) the duty payable under the landholder provisions
is greater than the duty that would be payable
under Chapter 2 of the Act had the subject of the
relevant acquisition been a transfer of the land of
the landholder to the person.
The concession does not apply where a higher duty
outcome results from the intended application of Chapter
3 of the Act. However, it can apply in circumstances
where a landholder's land holdings include leasehold
estates and/or primary production land.
Leasehold estates/interests
Except for the types of leasehold estates specifically
defined as dutiable property in
section 10(1)
Act, the Commissioner recognises that leasehold
estates are not dutiable property for the purposes
of Chapter 2 of the Act. For landholder purposes,
however, the definition of a land holding in section
72(1) does not specifically exclude a leasehold
estate. In circumstances where a company or unit
trust scheme is the lessee of land, the value of the
leasehold estate must be included in the value of the
company or unit trust scheme’s land holdings when
determining whether it is a landholder. However,
the Commissioner has determined that duty will
not be calculated with reference to the value of any
leasehold estate unless it is a type that is dutiable
under Chapter 2 of the Act. Consequently, if a
person makes a relevant acquisition in a landholder
whose Victorian land holdings comprise:
(a) only leasehold estates that are not dutiable
property, no duty will be payable as the acquisition
of the interest is exempt under section 89D(a) of
(b) leasehold estates (none of which are dutiable
property) and freehold land, duty will be payable
with reference to the value of the freehold land
only as the concession in section 89E of the Act
will apply to exclude the non-dutiable leasehold
estates from the duty calculation; and
(c) leasehold estates (some or all of which are dutiable
property) and/or freehold land, duty will be payable
with reference to the value of all the landholder’s
land holdings that would be dutiable on a transfer
under Chapter 2 of the Act (both leasehold and
freehold estates).
Primary production land
In prescribed circumstances,
exempts from duty the transfer of land used for
primary production. By virtue of sections 89D(a)
and 89E of the Act, this exemption is relevant in
determining the duty consequences on relevant
acquisitions in landholders whose land holdings
include primary production land. Consequently,
where the conditions for the application of section
56 are satisfied, the Commissioner has determined the
following treatment in respect of a relevant acquisition
in a landholder whose Victorian land holdings comprise:
(a) only primary production land, the acquisition will
be exempt from duty under section 89D(a); and
Commissioner of State Revenue
(b) primary production land and non-primary production
land, duty will be calculated with reference to the
value of the non-primary production land only as
section 89E of the Act will apply to exclude the
primary production land from the duty calculation.
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act
in relation to their particular circumstances, the
taxpayer may contact the Landholder Acquisitions
Branch at the State Revenue Office or apply for
a private ruling in accordance with Revenue Ruling
GEN.009. In all cases, the onus is on the taxpayer
to provide the Commissioner with the necessary
information to enable an informed decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.