Assessments - Period of Retrospectivity (GEN-014) [2007] VICSROGEN 1 (1 December 2007)
Revenue Rulings
Assessments – Period of Retrospectivity
Revenue Ruling GEN014
Replaces GEN013
The Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) has power under the
Administration Act 1997
(TAA) to assess any tax
outstanding for past periods regardless of how long
these periods may be. Accordingly, taxpayers remain
responsible for any unpaid tax liabilities whether
or not they have recognised or are aware of those
tax liabilities.
In most cases, the Commissioner will limit the period
of retrospectivity to ensure that:
• general equivalence is maintained between
the refund period and period of assessing tax
arrears, and
• taxpayers are provided with some certainty on
their tax liability.
This limitation does not apply where:
• there was undue delay on the part of the
taxpayer between recognising a tax liability and
making a voluntary disclosure of the tax liability
to the Commissioner, or
• the taxpayer’s unpaid taxes arise from an
intentional disregard of a taxation law.
As part of the agreement between Victoria and
NSW to align their payroll tax legislation, Victoria
has moved from a three-year period to a five-year
period for refunds and reassessments from 1 July
2007. The change in the refund period has been
phased in. A taxpayer who made any overpayment
on or after 1 July 2004 can claim a refund up to
five years after the date of the overpayment.
To maintain parity with the phasing in of the five-
year refund period, the Commissioner has similarly
phased in the five-year retrospectivity period.
The five-year period of retrospectivity applies to
congestion levy, duties, land tax and payroll tax.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to clarify
the Commissioner’s position on the application of
the five-year retrospectivity period to the different
revenue lines.
The five-year retrospectivity period does not apply
to tax arrears which occurred before 1 July 2004
(unless the arrears arose as a result of undue delay or
intentional disregard of a taxation law). The period of
retrospectivity commences from the ‘Reference Date’,
which is the earliest date on which:
1. the Commissioner receives a voluntary
disclosure from a taxpayer
2. an investigation commenced, or
3. a taxpayer is advised of a tax liability.
A voluntary disclosure must be in writing. An
investigation commences when a taxpayer is informed
by the SRO in writing of an investigation to examine
the taxpayer’s compliance with one or more taxation
laws. However, where the SRO needs to conduct an
investigation on a person other than the taxpayer to
determine a possible tax default, the investigation
commences when the SRO notifies that person (not
the taxpayer) in writing of the investigation. A taxpayer
is considered to have been advised of a tax liability
upon receipt of written advice from the SRO
indicating that a tax liability exists (e.g. a private
The five-year period of retrospectivity applies in the
following manner to the revenue lines below.
Payroll tax
As payroll tax is calculated based on financial years,
the period of retrospectivity for payroll tax is also based
on financial years. The period of retrospectivity is the
financial year in which the Reference Date falls plus
the preceding four financial years (but not including
any underpayments prior to 1 July 2004).
Examples 1, 2 and 3 illustrate how the new period of
retrospectivity is phased in for payroll tax.
Example Reference Date
Period of retrospectivity
goes back to
An exception may arise when an employer pays
Victorian tax to another jurisdiction by mistake. If the
other jurisdiction refunds the tax overpaid for a period
that exceeds the SRO’s period of retrospectivity, the
SRO will issue an assessment to match the period for
which tax was refunded.
As land tax is assessed on a calendar year basis, the
period of retrospectivity for land tax is also based on
calendar years. The period of retrospectivity is the
current calendar year in which the Reference Date
falls plus the four preceding calendar years (but
not including any underpayments prior to the 2004
calendar year).
Examples 4, and 5 illustrate how the new period of
retrospectivity is phased in for land tax.
Example Reference Date
Period of retrospectivity
goes back to
2004 assessment
25 November 2008 2004 assessment
However, if a taxpayer has an outstanding land tax
liability and the SRO has not previously assessed the
taxpayer for land tax, the SRO will assess the taxpay-
er’s land tax liability only for the current calendar year.
This will not apply to matters involving special land
tax assessments or if the SRO is of the view that the
taxpayer has misled the SRO whether by withholding
information or providing inaccurate information rele-
vant to the land tax liability. For example, a taxpayer
not informing the SRO of a change to entitlement to
an exemption previously granted. In this instance, the
period of retrospectivity set out above will apply.
Congestion levy
As the congestion levy is assessed on a calendar year
basis, the period of retrospectivity is also based on
calendar years. The period of retrospectivity cannot go
back before the 2006 calendar year as the Congestion
Levy commenced on 1 January 2006. The period
of retrospectivity will progressively increase by one
calendar year until 2010 after which the five-year
period will apply.
(a) Dutiable Transactions / Relevant Acquisitions
Certain transactions are subject to duty. These include
transfers of land, a declaration of trust over land, and
acquisitions of certain interests in land rich landholders.
For transactions that give effect to or evidence a
dutiable transaction concerning dutiable property, or
an acquisition of an interest in a land rich landholder,
this Revenue Ruling is relevant only in instances where
the SRO, independently of the taxpayer, identifies
those documents/transactions in respect of which the
correct amount of duty has not been paid in full (e.g.
an investigation conducted by the SRO). A person can
always present a document or written statement
for stamping and the payment of any applicable duty,
regardless of whether or not the dutiable transaction
occurred within the last five years.
The period of retrospectivity applies to all dutiable
transactions and acquisitions of an interest in a land
rich landholder, which occur within five years of the
Reference Date. Where the Reference Date falls on
or after 1 January 2008, the five-year retrospectivity
period for dutiable transactions will not include any
transactions occurring prior to January 2005.
Examples 6, 7 and 8 illustrate how the new period of
retrospectivity is phased in for transactions subject to
Example Reference Date*
Period of retrospectivity
goes back to
Dutiable transactions
occurring on or after
Dutiable transactions
occurring on or after
Dutiable transactions
occurring on or after
*does not relate to a voluntary disclosure, as a person can always present
a document or written statement for stamping regardless of when the
dutiable transaction ocurred.
(b) Motor vehicle duty
Motor vehicle duty is payable on the lodging of an
application for registration of a new or previously
unregistered vehicle or application for a transfer of
registration of a previously registered vehicle. Therefore
the period of retrospectivity for motor vehicle duty
applies to all applications for registration or transfer of
registration lodged within five years of the Reference
Date. Where the Reference Date falls on or after 1
January 2008, the five-year retrospectivity period for
motor vehicle duty will not include any applications for
registrations or transfers lodged prior to January 2005.
Examples 9, 10 and 11 illustrate how the new period
of retrospectivity is phased in for motor vehicle duty.
Example Reference Date
Period of retrospectivity
goes back to
28 February 2008 Applications for
registration/transfer
lodged on or after
Applications for
registration/transfer
lodged on or after
Applications for
registration/transfer
lodged on or after
This Revenue Ruling does not apply to land tax retrospective assessing, where the Reference Date commences
on or after 1 January 2009. For an explanation on how liability for land tax is to be assessed retrospectively
under the TAA (from 1 January 2009), refer to Revenue Ruling LTA 007 '
Land Tax Assessments - Period of
Retrospectivity
(c) Return based duties
General Insurance and Life Insurance
As duty in respect of insurance is usually calculated
on a monthly basis, the period of retrospectivity will
also be based on a monthly basis. The period of
retrospectivity for registered insurers that lodge monthly
returns will be the month in which the Reference Date
falls plus the monthly returns going back five years.
Where the Reference Date falls on or after 1 January
2008, the five-year retrospectivity period for insurance
will not include any underpayments occurring prior to
January 2005.
Examples 12, 13 and 14 illustrate how the new period
of retrospectivity is phased in for registered insurers
lodging monthly returns.
Example Reference Date
Period of retrospectivity
goes back to
January 2005
monthly return
January 2005
monthly return
monthly return
The period of retrospectivity for insured persons
lodging annual returns will be the current financial
year and the four preceding financial years (but not
including any underpayments prior to 1 July 2004). See
examples under payroll tax.
Hire of goods duty
Although hire of goods duty was abolished from
January 2007, this Revenue Ruling applies to
underpayments for prior periods. Hire of goods duty
was calculated on a monthly basis and the period of
retrospectivity will also be based on a monthly basis,
except where the registered commercial hire business
lodges annual returns (see below).
The period of retrospectivity for a registered
commercial hire business that lodged monthly returns
will be the month in which the Reference Date falls
plus the monthly returns going back five years. Where
the Reference Date falls on or after 1 January 2008,
the five-year retrospectivity period for hire of goods
duty will not include any underpayments prior to
January 2005. See examples under general insurance.
The period of retrospectivity for a registered
commercial hire business that lodged annual returns
will be the financial year in which the Reference Date
falls plus the four preceding financial years (but not
including any underpayments prior to 1 July 2004). See
examples under payroll tax.
Undue delay
The SRO recognises that a taxpayer may need some
time to confirm that a liability exists or to quantify the
tax owing, particularly where the taxpayer wishes to
seek advice from external advisers. Where, however,
the SRO finds that there has been unreasonable delay
between the time of the recognition of a tax liability
and the time a taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure,
the period of retrospectivity may be extended beyond
the five-year period.
Where the SRO is responsible for an unreasonable
delay in completing its investigation and advising the
taxpayer of any liability identified or issuing a private
ruling to a taxpayer on a voluntary disclosure, the
commencement date of the period of retrospectivity
will be adjusted to reflect that delay. Where the SRO
and taxpayer both agree that the SRO should obtain
external advice to establish whether the taxpayer has a
tax liability, an agreed date for the commencement of
the period of retrospectivity will be negotiated.
Intentional disregard of a taxation law
The period of retrospectivity does not apply to a
tax liability arising from an intentional disregard of
a taxation law (refer to Revenue Ruling TAA.007).
Instead, a taxpayer will be assessed for the maximum
period permitted by the relevant Act to ensure that no
taxpayer benefits or profits from such conduct.
Commencement
This Revenue Ruling applies to a Reference Date which
occurs on or after 1 January 2008.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
December 2007
Commissioner of State Revenue