Status of Private Rulings (GEN-007) [1997] VICSROGEN 1 (1 October 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Status of private rulings
Revenue Ruling GEN.007
Replaced by: GEN.009
This Ruling, which replaces Revenue Ruling
GEN.05, has had some minor revisions to further
clarify the status of private rulings issued by the
Commissioner of State Revenue to a particular
The Commissioner of State Revenue issues two
are issued as part of the Revenue Rulings service
introduced by the State Revenue Office in June
1993 as a method of publishing and
disseminating decisions on the interpretation and
application of legislation administered by the
Office. (See Revenue Ruling GEN.01.) These
rulings detail the State Revenue Office’s position
or policy on a particular issue and are of general
application to taxpayers. Private rulings are issued
in response to specific requests by taxpayers, or
their representatives, seeking advice on the
interpretation of the legislation to a situation
encountered by a taxpayer.
This Ruling is to be read in conjunction with
Revenue Ruling SD.020, ‘Assessment of
unexecuted documents’.
The Commissioner will issue a private ruling at the
request of an individual taxpayer to assist that
person to comply fully with any of the Acts
administered by the State Revenue Office.
However, it is not appropriate for the
Commissioner to provide taxpayers with private
rulings which would enable them to practice tax
avoidance or to exploit ambiguities in the
legislation. Therefore, in some instances, requests
for private rulings may be refused.
Generally, a private ruling will not be issued to a
taxpayer who presents a hypothetical situation for
an opinion. Nor will a private ruling be issued to
evaluate alternatives and advise which option
results in the least liability for tax or duty.
The Commissioner may issue a private ruling on a
proposed course of action if the taxpayer is unable to
decide whether to proceed without receiving advice of
the State Revenue Office’s view of the tax
consequences. Before a ruling will be issued in these
circumstances, the taxpayer will be required to
identify all parties involved by name and address,
estimate the completion date for the proposed course
of action and provide all material facts. In addition,
the taxpayer will be required to submit a statement to
the effect that there is a genuine intention to proceed
with the proposed course of action unless the ruling
indicates that it would be impractical to do so, or
raises issues not previously addressed.
Once a ruling on a proposed course of action has
been given, there is always a possibility that the Office
may receive fresh legal advice or implement a change
of policy which would cause the Commissioner to find
that the ruling is incorrect before the taxpayer can
finalise the proposal. If this occurred, the
Commissioner would review all circumstances of the
case before deciding whether the ruling would be
withdrawn. Otherwise, the Commissioner will be
bound by the private ruling issued provided that the
completed course of action accords with all the
information given.
To obtain a private ruling a taxpayer, or their
representative, must lodge a written submission with
the Office detailing the issue in question, all other
parties involved and all relevant facts. The submission
should also state the applicant’s views of the
interpretation and application of the provisions in
question to their own circumstances, the rationale for
such views including arguments for and against, as
well as any relevant case law. The Commissioner will
review the information presented and may seek
further information from the taxpayer, or third parties,
before issuing a private written ruling on the matter.
In no circumstances, should a person construe oral
advice to be a private ruling.
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
The private ruling will have application only to the
taxpayer to whom it is issued and to the factual
situation presented. It cannot be relied upon as a
precedent by other taxpayers nor can a tax practitioner
rely on a private ruling obtained for one taxpayer as a
precedent for another.
The Commissioner will be bound by any private ruling
issued to a taxpayer provided that:
• the taxpayer and all relevant parties have been fully
identified;
• the taxpayer has made a full disclosure of all
material facts and information in the written
submission;
• the circumstances to which the ruling is applied are
identical to those represented to the Commissioner
in the written submission; and
• the taxpayer acts, or has acted, in accordance with
the ruling.
When the above requirements have been satisfied, the
only situations which would cause the Commissioner to
depart from an issued private ruling are:
• where the advice is subsequently overruled by a
court or tribunal;
• where there is a legislative amendment; or
• where the Commissioner has determined that a
particular ruling issued is incorrect.
In such cases, the ruling will be withdrawn from the
date of the decision of the court or tribunal (or such
later date as the Commissioner decides is appropriate),
the date of the amendment or the date of the
Commissioner’s determination respectively. If the
withdrawal of the ruling results in a new liability for the
taxpayer, tax or duty will be payable only from the date
on which the ruling is withdrawn.
The Commissioner will not be bound by a
private ruling where it is found that a taxpayer,
or their representative, has failed to provide all
material information which ought to have been
provided, or has misrepresented information
whilst seeking a private ruling. The ruling will be
considered never to have had application and
accordingly, the withdrawal of such a ruling
would have both a prospective and retrospective
effect. In cases where there has been a failure
to provide all material information, the
Commissioner will take into consideration the
role of the Office in obtaining further
information to determine the date of the
withdrawal of the ruling. However, the onus is
on the taxpayer, or their representative, to
provide all material information in the first
instance and to monitor all communications
from this Office which advise of legislative
amendments, judicial decisions and policy
In some instances, it may be necessary to give a
qualified ruling stating the Commissioner’s
current position but advising the taxpayer of the
possibility of a change of opinion. This would
occur when the State Revenue Office is awaiting
judicial interpretation of the same issue which
concerns the taxpayer and when it is known that
legislative amendments are contemplated. In
these situations, the onus will rest with the
taxpayer to monitor the continuing validity of the
private ruling.
If the facts or circumstances, as presented in the
submission, change after the private ruling has
been issued, the taxpayer, or their
representative, is required to contact the Office
to clarify whether the private ruling still applies.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1997
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998