No allowance for fuel additives (BF-003) [1994] VICSROBF 3 (31 May 1994)
Revenue Rulings
Business Franchises (Petroleum Products) Act
1979 (the Act) provides for the licensing and
payment of licence fees by petroleum retailers and,
in some cases, petroleum wholesalers. The fees, as
at 31 March 1994, are as follows: $50, plus
12.1 per cent of the value of the motor spirit sold
and 15.5 per cent of the value of the diesel fuel sold.
Motor spirit is defined under Section 2 of the Act
to mean ‘...gasoline and other petroleum or shale
spirit having a flash point of less than 23 degrees
Celsius when tested in an Abel Pensky closed test
apparatus but does not include aviation gasoline,
solvents, special boiling point spirits or liquefied
petroleum gas...’
Section 2 also defines diesel fuel to mean ‘a
petroleum or shale product used or capable of use in
propelling a diesel engined road vehicle.’
From time to time queries are received at the State
Revenue Office regarding new or proposed
petroleum products which contain a mixture of
motor spirit (or diesel fuel specifically) and an
additive. The question arises whether such a mixture
is still to be considered a motor spirit ( or diesel fuel
specifically) and if so, whether any allowance can be
made for the value of the product not attributable to
motor spirit (or diesel fuel).
The purpose of this ruling is to state the policy of the
Office in respect of this issue.
The Commisssioner of State Revenue has ruled that
no allowance should be made in respect of an
additive to a petroleum product (that is motor spirit
or diesel fuel), provided that the mixture satisfies the
relevant definition under Section 2 of the Act (see
above). Thus a diesel fuel which contains an additive
which, in itself, is not a petroleum or shale product
capable of propelling a diesel engined road vehicle,
will be classed as a diesel fuel if the mixture actually
sold or to be sold satisfies the statutory definition of
a diesel fuel (as above). On the other hand, a
mixture which does not satisfy the definition of diesel
fuel under section 2 of the Act due to the additive,
will not be classed as a diesel fuel.
The same principles apply in relation to an additive
to a motor spirit.
In all cases the licence fee will be charged on
100 per cent of the value of the product sold if the
product, taken as a whole, satisfies one of the
definitions (ie it is a diesel fuel or a motor spirit).
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
No allowance for fuel additives
in petroleum products
Revenue Ruling BF.003