Lease Provisions - Meaning of ‘Rent Reserved' (DA-050) [2010] VICSRODA 1 (1 March 2010)
Revenue Ruling DA.050
Section 7(1)(b)(v)
Duties Act 2000
was amended in 2009 (with effect from 21 November
2008) to ensure that certain leasing arrangements
are not used as a mechanism for avoiding duty.
section 7(1)(b)(v)
of the Act, duty is now
payable on the grant of a lease of land in Victoria
if consideration other than rent reserved is paid or
agreed to be paid, either in respect of the lease or
in respect of –
(a) a right to purchase the land or a right to a
transfer of the land;
(b) an option to purchase the land or an option
for the transfer of the land;
(c) a right of first refusal in respect of the sale
or transfer of the land;
(d) any other lease, licence, contract, scheme
or arrangement by which the lessee, or an
associated person of the lessee, obtains any
right or interest in the land that is the subject
of the lease other than the leasehold estate.
Section 3(1)
of the Act defines the term ‘rent reserved’
to mean the rent paid or payable during the term of
the lease and any amount paid or payable for the
right to use the land under the lease. The following
examples are cited in the definition as amounts paid
for the right to use the land under the lease –
(b) charges;
(d) maintenance;
(e) utilities;
(f) legal costs required to be paid by the lessee
on behalf of the lessor in relation to the grant
of the lease;
(g) insurance premiums;
(h) marketing costs;
(i) car park contributions.
The purpose of this Ruling is to provide guidance on
the meaning of the term ‘rent reserved’ and to explain
what factors the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) will take into account in determining
whether an amount payable under a lease falls
within that term. The Ruling also sets out additional
examples of payments made under a lease that would
qualify as payments for the use of land and therefore
rent reserved for the purposes of
section 7(1)(b)(v)
Rent is typically payable under a lease in periodic
instalments over the term of the lease. However,
the Commissioner recognises that it may be
commercially advantageous for a lessee to make
an upfront payment of rent on a discounted basis
at the commencement of a lease. Provided the
upfront payment is rent in advance and not other
consideration (such as a premium) for the grant of
the lease, the Commissioner will regard the payment
as a payment of rent under the lease.
In determining whether an upfront payment made
by a lessee to a lessor is rent or other consideration
for the grant of a lease, the Commissioner will have
regard to the nature and circumstances of the
transaction as a whole, including the value of the
underlying land the subject of the lease, the amount
paid and whether any portion of it is refundable on a
termination of the lease before expiry of the term, how
the payment was calculated and the duration of the
lease. Where a lessee can satisfy the Commissioner
that the upfront payment comprises the net present
value of a bona fide market rental over the term of the
lease and is not referable to the value of the freehold,
the Commissioner will regard the payment as rent
reserved. In considering this, the duration of the lease
will often be relevant because, for example, it would
not be usual for a lessee to fully pay the ‘rent’ in
advance on a long term lease such as a lease for 99
years. An upfront payment on the grant of a long term
lease is more likely to be capital in nature and based
on the freehold value of the underlying land rather
than the present value of the leasehold.
Besides rent, the definition of rent reserved under
section 3(1)
of the Act identifies other payments
made for the right to use land under a lease. The
Commissioner regards the items cited in the definition
as being illustrative of the types of payments which
Revenue Rulings
Lease Provisions - Meaning of ‘Rent Reserved’
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
fall within the meaning of rent reserved. The list is not
exhaustive and, depending on the terms of a particular
lease and the facts and circumstances of a particular
case, may include other amounts, provided they are
payments made by the lessee for or in connection with
the use of the land under the lease. Examples of other
items could include –
(a) a bond or guarantee paid by a lessee to a
lessor to secure the lessee’s obligations under
the lease, including 'make good' payments on
the conclusion of the lease;
(b) amounts paid by a lessee to a lessor in respect
of the installation or upgrade of services
and utilities (such as gas, water, telephone,
electricity);
(c) contributions to expenses for the maintenance
of common areas;
(d) promotional levies and security costs; and
(e) other costs required to be paid by the lessee
to or on behalf of the lessor (e.g. the legal
costs for drafting, executing and registering
the lease or the costs payable in relation to
the appointment of an independent expert
to resolve a dispute under the lease).
In determining whether any other payment falls within
the definition of rent reserved, the Commissioner will
have regard to the nature, size and frequency of the
payment. While the Commissioner recognises that the
form and manner of the payment may be relevant,
greater reliance will be placed on whether in substance
the payment was made for and in connection with the
right to use the land under the lease. To this end, the
Commissioner will consider whether the payment is in
relation to an obligation that arises within the lease
period and the lessee’s use of the land and not in
respect of an obligation that arises solely on the grant
of the lease.
The above examples and considerations are provided
as a guide only and are not an exhaustive list of the
matters or factors the Commissioner may consider in
determining the application of
section 7(1)(b)(v)
Act. A taxpayer who is uncertain of the application of
this section to their particular circumstances may apply
to the Commissioner for a private ruling in accordance
with the guidelines set out in Revenue Ruling GEN-
009. In each case, the onus is on the taxpayer
to provide the Commissioner with the necessary
information to make an informed decision as to
whether the grant of a lease is a dutiable transaction
under Chapter 2 of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN-001.
Commissioner of State Revenue