Access to Books and Power to Obtain Information (LT-003) [1993] VICSROLT 3 (1 June 1993)
Revenue Rulings
Access to books and power to
obtain information
Revenue Ruling LT.003
Authorised officers of the State Revenue Office
(SRO) possess broad enforcing powers in relation to
Land Tax Act 1958
. These powers are set down
in sections 72 of the Act.
Landowners or other persons who are requested to
supply information, or to allow access to such information
by an authorised officer, may be uncertain about the
nature or extent of these powers.
The purpose of this ruling is to outline the statutory
powers of authorised State Revenue Office officers.
An authorised officer of the State Revenue Office
(SRO) may exercise powers of access to books and
documents, and also the power to obtain
information as follows.
Access to books
Section 72 of the Act provides that an authorised
officer of the State Revenue Office can, at any
reasonable hour, enter premises and have full and
free access to any books, documents or other
papers, whether for examination or copying.
(Note: The statutory definition of ‘documents’ is
quite broad and extends to items such as computer
hard discs and floppy discs.)
This section does not limit an officer’s powers of
access to the premises of the taxpayer who is subject
to investigation. Officers may obtain access to the
premises of other persons who may hold records
of relevance to the investigations (for example,
accountants, solicitors or banks).
In all cases, the purpose of the access must be either
to determine whether the Act is being complied with
or to generally enforce its provisions.
Access to books or documents will however, be
limited by the extent to which legal professional
privilege can be validly claimed.
Power to obtain information
Section 72 of the Act enables the Commissioner, or
an authorised officer, to issue written notice to obtain
from any person such information as may be
necessary to determine any person’s liability or
entitlements under the Act. It may be requested by
the officer that the person furnish the information,
or attend and provide information by way of
an interview.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE