Application of section 4(1) to the direct entry systems (DT-002) [1995] VICSRODT 1 (1 August 1995)
Revenue Rulings
In certain circumstances, Section 4(1) of the
Tax Act 1990
(formerly section 3A of the
Administration Act 1982 (Commonwealth))
for the purposes of the Act, to deem a single debit to
an account, which has occurred because of two or
more account transactions, to be taxable as separate
debits which reflect those account transactions.
For some time there has been uncertainty regarding
the interpretation of this section and of the
circumstances in which it was intended to operate.
Particularly, there has been some doubt whether the
legislators intended that it should apply to a single
debit to a current account which results from
electronic pay-roll or account payment arrangements
that make use of the banks’ direct entry systems.
The Commissioner has extensively consulted with the
Commissioners of other States and Territories as well
as exchanging views with the Australian Bankers’
Association. It was agreed that there are equally
strong, yet conflicting, views on the interpretation of
the provision and a lack of clarity as to the intention
of the legislature when the provision was originally
introduced. However, there is sufficient indication
in the Explanatory Memorandum to enable the
Commissioner to adopt a purposive interpretation
of the section.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the application
of Section 4(1) to direct entry systems.
Section 4(1)
Debits Tax Act 1990
is essentially
to be interpreted as an anti-avoidance provision
and will, for example, apply to arrangements
involving single debits made to settlement accounts
held by non-bank financial institutions with banks.
This is a continuation of the interpretation formerly
outlined by the Australian Taxation Office in its
Ruling No. MT 2039.
However, where under a direct entry system, a single
set of instructions is given to a bank, which results
in multiple credits and a single debit, the debit will
be taken to have occurred because of a single
transaction. Consequently, such a transaction will
not be treated as separate debits under
section 4(1)
Debits Tax Act 1990
unless the Commissioner
determines the transaction occurred as part of an
arrangement to avoid tax.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Application of
section 4(1)
the direct entry systems
Revenue Ruling DT.002
Ceased - 30 June 2005