Objections to decisions, assessments and determinations (BF-001) [1994] VICSROBF 1 (28 February 1994)
Revenue Rulings
The Commissioner issues assessments,
determinations and notices of decision which may
affect a person’s liability to pay licence fees.
Sections 16 and 16A of the
Business Franchise
(Tobacco) Act 1974
(the Act) provide an avenue of
objection to assessments, determinations and
notices of decision made by the Commissioner, in
respect of tobacco licence fees or petroleum
licence fees.
The purpose of this ruling is to outline the
requirements for lodgement of a valid objection in
respect of tobacco licence fees or petroleum
products licence fees.
The requirements for lodgement of a valid notice
of objection are as follows.
• The notice must be posted to or lodged with
the Commissioner within 60 days of the
service of the assessment, determination or
notice of decision (in respect of an
assessment, determination or notice of
decision sent by mail the date of service will
be taken to be two days after the date of that
assessment, determination or notice of
• The notice must be in writing and must state
fully and in detail the grounds relied upon.
In relation to the above requirements, it should be
noted that the Commissioner has no discretion to
consider any objection received outside the 60 day
limit. (However, an objection sent by post will be
considered to have been received within the 60
days if it is received at the State Revenue Office no
later than two days after the expiration of the 60
day period). Furthermore the date of service of a
decision, notice or assessment will be considered
to be two days after the date of the document
under question, or such later date as is proved as
being the date on which the document was received.
Section 16(2) of the Act provides that the right of
objection to amended assessments is limited to the
imposition, by reason of the amended assessment, of
a fresh liability in respect of any particular or an
increase in existing liability in respect of any
particular.
The Commissioner will make a decision on all valid
objections and will provide written advice to the
objector advising of the decision.
Objectors will assist the Commissioner in reaching an
early resolution of objections where they provide
precise and detailed information in respect of the
matters that give rise to the objection to the
assessment, determination or decision in question.
Where the Commissioner considers it necessary, he
may request further information from the objector .
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Objections to decisions,
assessments and determinations
Revenue Ruling BF.001