Offsetting overpayments on monthly returns (DT-008) [1998] VICSRODT 1 (1 December 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Offsetting overpayments
on monthly returns
Revenue Ruling DT.008
This ruling identifies the circumstances in which
taxpayers may deduct overpayments from their
monthly debits tax payments and provides advice
on the interest and penalty provisions that apply
where amounts are deducted incorrectly.
Taxpayers who remit debits tax to the State
Revenue Office (SRO) by periodical return, do so
on a self assessing basis by calculating their own
tax liabilities and remitting payments to the SRO.
The SRO enables taxpayers to offset
overpayments
against tax payable for the next
return period, (up to $5,000 in any one month)
providing that they declare such amounts on their
return forms.
Circumstances which might cause an overpayment
include those where debits tax is paid on an
account that is retrospectively approved by the
Commissioner of State Revenue as an exempt
account. In these situations, the most efficient
method of dealing with the overpayment for both
the taxpayer and the SRO is to offset or adjust the
amount against the taxpayer’s future liabilities.
Taxpayers who remit debits tax and lodge returns
in accordance with section 28 of the
can offset overpaid tax up to a total of
$5,000, in any one month. Taxpayers who avail
themselves of this option will be required to keep
adequate records to enable the verification of any
adjustments forming part of their return.
To ensure compliance with the refund provisions of
Taxation Administration Act 1997
( the TAA):
• only overpayments of duty made within the
three years preceding the return period can be
offset against duty owing; and
• where the duty overpaid has been recovered
from another person the taxpayer must
reimburse that person within 90 days of
lodging the return.
If in any one month the overpaid amount is greater
than the total liability for the taxpayer’s next return
period, an application for refund of the full amount
must be made in accordance with the TAA.
Where any condition stipulated in this ruling has not
been met the SRO will consider that the taxpayer has
underpaid duty for the return period concerned.
Accordingly, an assessment will be issued and the full
amount (claimed by way of offset) will be subject to
interest and penalties in accordance with the Interest
and Penalties Revenue Ruling (TAA.003).
The SRO may permit taxpayers to offset an amount
greater than $5,000, where a taxpayer has applied
for and been granted a refund in excess of this
amount. In this instance the SRO may grant approval
for this amount to be applied as an offset against the
next month’s return.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 1998
ON THE MOVE
Ceased - 30 June 2005