Landholder Provisions - Constructive Ownership of Land Holdings through Linked Entities (DA-058) [2012] VICSRODA 6 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – Constructive
Ownership of Land Holdings through
Linked Entities
Revenue Ruling DA.058
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on
relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings
in Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million
In determining whether a company or unit trust scheme
is a landholder (and the amount of duty payable
on a relevant acquisition), the company or unit trust
scheme’s land holdings are not limited to land directly
held by the company or on behalf of the unit trust
scheme. In certain circumstances, they may include
land held by linked entities and discretionary trusts.
of the Act provides for the constructive
ownership of land through linked entities. A linked
entity is defined in
of the Act to mean
any person or body, corporate or unincorporated,
that may hold property in its own right or for the
benefit of any person. The definition of a linked entity
includes a trust but does not include a natural person.
of the Act, a company or unit trust
scheme (including a landholder) may be considered
to be entitled to land held by a linked entity or a chain
or web of linked entities. However, a company or unit
trust scheme will not be taken to be entitled to the
land of linked entities unless it has an entitlement
to at least 20% of the land on a winding up of all the
relevant linked entities.
For the purposes of
of the Act, a company
or unit trust scheme is taken to be entitled to land
through a linked entity or linked entities, if on the
winding up of all linked entities and without regard
to any liabilities of the linked entities, the company or
unit trust scheme would receive a distribution of any
of the property held by any of the linked entities. The
interest in land the company or unit trust scheme is
taken to be entitled to in such circumstances
is determined by reference to the proportion of the
property of the relevant linked entity or linked entities
the company or unit trust scheme would be entitled
to receive upon a winding up of all the linked entities.
Where a company or unit trust scheme is taken
to be entitled to at least 20% of the land through
a linked entity or a chain or web of linked entities,
the value of the interest in land that the company
or unit trust scheme is considered to hold through
such entities is that portion of the unencumbered
value of the land which is equivalent to the portion
of the unencumbered value of the property to which
the company or unit trust scheme would be entitled
(without regard to any liabilities of the linked entities)
on a winding up of all the linked entities.
Winding up of a linked entity is defined in
of the Act to include any means by which the entity’s
property is divested in favour of the persons entitled
to it and, in the case of a linked entity that is a
trust, includes the vesting of the trust property in the
beneficiaries.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain the
operation of the constructive ownership provisions
in relation to linked entities. This Ruling does not
deal with the constructive ownership of land through
discretionary trusts. For information on the tracing
of land through discretionary trusts, please see
Revenue Ruling DA.059.
An entity can be linked to a company or unit trust
scheme (including a landholder) whether or not the
company or unit trust scheme holds a direct interest
in the entity. If a company or unit trust scheme does
not hold a direct interest in an entity, the entity may
be a linked entity of the company or unit trust scheme
provided it is linked to other entities linked to the
company or unit trust scheme or to each other. An
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
entity can be linked to a company or unit trust scheme
no matter how many interposed entities exist between
it and the company or unit trust scheme. Where an
entity is linked to a company or unit trust scheme
through various interposed entities, the entity and
all interposed entities may be linked entities of the
company or unit trust scheme.
Even though a company or unit trust scheme may not
hold a direct interest in a linked entity, it may be taken
to be entitled to the land of the linked entity. This is
because a company or unit trust scheme’s entitlement
to the land of a linked entity is based on its entitlement
to receive a distribution of property on a winding up
of all relevant linked entities and not necessarily to
the interest it holds in any of the linked entities.
A company or unit trust scheme’s entitlement to
receive a distribution of property on a winding up
of all relevant linked entities is determined on the basis
of a notional winding up of all the linked entities at the
time of an acquisition of an interest in the company or
unit trust scheme. This determination is to be made
without regard to any of the liabilities of linked entities
at that time. It is also to be made on the basis that
the winding up of linked entities includes any means
by which the entities’ property is divested in favour
of the person(s) ultimately entitled to receive it. This
stipulation is a statutory fiction about entitlement to
property, not the consequences of actual winding up.
It is just the means by which the property of a linked
entity is attributed to another company or unit trust
scheme (including a landholder):
Snowy Hydro Ltd v
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2010] VSC 221
[2010] VSC 221
Consequently, a company or unit trust scheme’s
entitlement to receive a distribution of property
through linked entities is not a reference to what
it would actually receive in monetary terms (if
anything). Rather, it is a reference to what the
company or unit trust scheme would be entitled
to receive as a proportional interest in the property
of any of the linked entities if such property was
to be distributed to the person(s) ultimately entitled
to receive it on a winding up of all the linked entities.
Whatever that interest amounts to determines the
extent of the interest in land to which the company
or unit trust scheme is taken to be entitled through
the linked entities. The fact that such a distribution
of property and land is unlikely to occur is not relevant
for the purposes of
of the Act.
However, a company or unit trust scheme will not
be considered to be entitled to the land of a linked
entity or a chain or web of linked entities unless it
has an entitlement to at least 20% of the land on
a winding up of all the relevant linked entities. Where
the company or unit trust scheme is entitled to at least
20% of the land of a linked entity or a chain or web of
linked entities, the value of the land that the company
or unit trust scheme is considered to hold through
linked entities is that portion of the unencumbered
value of the land which is equivalent to the portion of
the unencumbered value of the property to which the
company or unit trust scheme would be entitled on a
notional winding up of all the relevant linked entities.
The examples below illustrate the operation of the
constructive ownership provisions and the 20% threshold
in the context of both chain and web linked entity
structures.
Example 1 – Chain Structure
In Example 1, a private company owns a 50% interest
in Entity A which owns a 35% interest in Entity B. Both
Entities A and B separately own land in Victoria. The
land owned by Entity A is valued at $10 million and the
land owned by Entity B is valued at $20 million. Under
the constructive ownership provisions, Entities A and
B are linked entities of the private company. If Entities
A and B were wound up, the private company would
be entitled to receive 50% of the property owned
by Entity A and 17.5% (50% x 35%) of the property
owned by Entity B. Accordingly, the private company
is taken to be entitled to 50% of the land owned by
Entity A and 17.5% of the land owned by Entity B. As
the private company is entitled to at least 20% of the
land owned by Entity A, the constructive ownership
provisions would operate to deem the private company
to be entitled to a 50% interest in land owned by
Entity A, valued at $5 million (50% of $10 million). The
private company will not be considered to be entitled
to any interest in the land owned by Entity B because
its entitlement to receive property from Entity B on a
winding up of all relevant linked entities (i.e. Entities
A and B) is less than 20%. Accordingly, the private
entitlement
entitlement
company’s interest in the land owned by Entity B
(17.5%, which equates to a value of $3.5 million) will
not be taken into account in determining whether it
is a landholder and/or the amount of duty payable on
any relevant acquisition in the private company.
Example 1 illustrates that in a chain structure, if
a company or unit trust scheme indirectly holds an
interest of less than 20% in any one particular entity in
the chain (even though entities linked to the company
or unit trust scheme directly or indirectly hold at least
20%), the company or unit trust scheme’s entitlement
to the property on a winding up of that linked entity
and entities below that point will be less than 20%.
In such circumstances, the land of those linked entities
will not be taken into account in determining whether
the company or unit trust scheme is a landholder
and/or the amount of duty payable on any relevant
acquisition in the company or unit trust scheme.
Example 2 – Web Structure
In Example 2, a private company owns a 90% interest
in Entity A and a 19% interest in Entity B. Entities A
and B respectively own a 19% and an 81% interest
in Victorian land valued at $10 million. Under the
constructive ownership provisions, Entities A and B
are linked entities of the private company. If Entities A
and B were wound up, the private company would
be entitled to receive 90% of the property owned
by Entity A and 19% of the property owned by Entity
B. Consequently, the private company is taken to be
entitled to a 32.5% interest in the land through Entities
A and B (being the aggregate of a 17.1% interest [90%
x 19%] through Entity A and 15.4% interest [19% x
81%] through Entity B). As the private company is
entitled to at least 20% of the land owned by Entities A
and B on a winding up of both entities, the constructive
ownership provisions would operate to deem the private
company to be entitled to a 32.5% interest in the
land, valued at $3.25 million (32.5% of $10 million).
Accordingly, this deemed land holding will form the
basis of determining whether the private company
is a landholder and the amount of duty payable on
any relevant acquisition in the private company.
Example 2 illustrates that in a web structure, even
if a company or unit trust scheme is entitled to an
interest of less than 20% through any one particular
linked entity or chain of linked entities, the value
of the land of that linked entity or chain of entities
may still be traced through to the company or unit
trust scheme as a result of all other linked entities
or chains of entities being wound up. This is because
it is necessary to calculate the ultimate entitlement the
company or unit trust scheme has in the land through
a distribution of the property of all linked entities, and
not just through one linked entity or chain of entities.
Further Assistance
If you require advice on the interpretation and
application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act in
relation to your particular circumstances, you may
State Revenue Office or apply for a private ruling
in accordance with Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all
cases, you bear the onus to provide the Commissioner
with the necessary information to enable an informed
decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue
Private Company
entitlement