Transactions not permitted for short-term dealing accounts (FID-044) [1997] VICSROFID 5 (1 April 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Investigators of the State Revenue Office frequently
find that registered short-term money market
operators are conducting their short-term dealing
accounts in contravention of the provisions of the
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
A person, who carries on a business in the
short-term money market in Victoria, may register
as a short-term money market operator. A short-term
money market operator, other than a registered
financial institution, is then able to operate a
short-term dealing account with a bank.
Amounts credited to a short-term dealing account
are exempt from primary duty in the hands of the
bank. Instead, the short-term money market
operator (the account holder) is required to pay
concessionary duty to the State Revenue Office
based on the average daily closing balance of the
short-term dealing account for each month.
As the concessionary charging regime is intended
only for short-term dealings, sections 26(4) and (5)
of the Act place restrictions on the amounts that can
be paid into and from short-term dealing accounts.
Section 26(4) restricts amounts paid to the credit of
a short-term dealing account to three types of
transactions, namely:
amounts received by the account holder in the
course of short-term dealings,
• amounts transferred from another Victorian
account of the account holder, and
• amounts transferred from another account of
the account holder held in a prescribed state
(at present there are no prescribed states).
Section 7 specifies the various receipts which qualify
as amounts received in the course of short-term
dealings. A recall of less than $50,000 from the
money market does not qualify as an amount
received in the course of short term dealings, but
may be an amount transferred from another
Victorian account of the short-term money market
operator (for example, an amount recalled from an
11am call account).
Section 26(5) restricts amounts paid to the debit of a
short-term dealing account to:
• amounts paid out in the course of
short-term dealings,
• amounts transferred to another Victorian
account of the account holder, and
• prescribed amounts (at present there are no
prescribed amounts).
A common mistake found by investigators is that
trade creditors are paid directly from short-term
dealing accounts.
The State Revenue Office acknowledges that
account entries made in error to short-term dealing
accounts usually occur through ignorance of the
transactions permitted by the Act, rather than
deliberate evasion. Therefore, the purpose of this
ruling is to identify some common misuses of short-
term dealing accounts and to indicate the
consequences of such misuse.
This ruling replaces FID.003.
Under section 26(4) of the Act, credit entries to a
short-term dealing account are not permitted for the
following transactions.
• Deposits of interest payments
• Deposits of the operator’s normal
trading receipts
• Transfers of amounts from another account of
the short-term money market operator kept
outside Victoria
• Recalls of amounts less than $50,000 from the
money market where the money market
investment is not another Victorian account of
the account holder.
Transactions not permitted for
short-term dealing accounts
Revenue Ruling FID.044
Replaces Revenue Ruling FID.003
ON THE MOVE
Under section 26(5) of the Act, debit entries to a
short-term dealing account are not permitted for the
following transactions.
• Payments to trade creditors of the short-term
money market operator
• Transfers of amounts to other accounts of the
short-term money market operator kept
outside Victoria.
Section 32 of the Act requires a short-term money
market operator to lodge an annual certificate listing
every transaction recorded in the short-term dealing
account which breaches the conditions applied by
sections 26(4) and (5). The operator is liable to pay
duty on each illegal transaction at the primary rate
of 0.06 per cent, to a maximum of $1200.
In addition, a penalty amount may be charged of
up to 200 per cent of the duty payable.
The Commissioner also has the power to cancel the
certificate for the short-term dealing account for a
maximum period of twelve months.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue