Rooming House Exemption - Commissioner's Guidelines (LT-017) [2005] VICSROLT 1 (1 August 2005)
The purpose of this ruling is to provide details of the
Commissioner's Guidelines for determining eligibility for
exemption for land which is used and occupied as a
rooming house.
An exemption has been provided from the 2004 Land Tax
year for land that is used and occupied as a rooming
house (within the meaning of the
Residential Tenancies
) that is registered under part XII of the
Section 9A of the
Land Tax Act 1958
(the Act) provides
that, in addition to satisfying the requirements stated in
the previous paragraph, the Commissioner of State
Revenue must be satisfied that the land is used and
occupied primarily for low cost accommodation by people
with low incomes. Section 9A(1)(c) provides authority for
the Commissioner to issue guidelines to enable this
determination.
This ruling outlines the criteria that must be satisfied to
ensure that the exemption applies to low cost
accommodation for people on low income.
The following guidelines apply in respect of an
entitlement to the exemption for land used and occupied
as a rooming house.
The types and location of premises in which low cost
accommodation may be provided.
The exemption will apply to all Victorian rooming houses
that comply with the definition in the
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
and are registered with local councils
Health Act 1958
Circumstances in which, and the arrangements under
which, the accommodation is provided.
At least 80 per cent of total accommodation must be
available for long-term residents (i.e. persons who reside
at the rooming house for at least three consecutive
months or any period totalling three months in a year)
and must be occupied or available for occupation only by
long-term residents in the taxation year.
Maximum tariff limits for the accommodation
The maximum tariff level applicable for rooming houses is
105 per cent of the Commonwealth aged pension rate for
full board and lodging and 70 per cent of the aged
pension rate for lodging only. This rate will be applicable
to both singles and couples depending on circumstances.
The tariff level for 2006 will be based on the pension level
for the September quarter 2005. Each year the level will
be based on the relevant previous September quarter
pension level.
For the 2004 and 2005 Land Tax years the maximum
pension level will be based on the pension rate for the
2005 March quarter.
The number and types of persons for whom the
accommodation must be provided
The exemption applies only to rooming houses occupied
by four or more residents and where none of those
residents are family members of either the owner or the
manager of the facility.
Special Land Tax
Section 10 of the Act provides for the application of
special Land Tax in cases where land, which is exempt
under specific provisions, ceases to be exempt. In relation
to land used and occupied as a rooming house, where a
previously granted exemption ceases this land will be
subject to special land tax. For more specific details about
how special Land Tax applies please refer to
Ruling LT.008
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is made
on the merits of each individual case having regard to any
relevant ruling. All rulings must be read subject to
Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Revenue Rulings
Rooming House Exemption – Commissioner's Guidelines
Revenue Ruling LT.017
Paul Broderick
Commissioner of State Revenue
August 2005