Liability of financial institutions for short-term dealing receipts from customers who hold exempt bank accounts (FID-037) [1996] VICSROFID 1 (30 June 1996)
Revenue Rulings
Sections 18(1) and (2) of the
Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982
(the Act) impose duty at the rate of
0.06 per cent, the primary rate of duty, on each
receipt of money in Victoria by a financial institution
with the maximum duty payable on a single receipt
limited to $1,200. Section 18(3)(c) exempts from
the primary rate of duty an amount received in the
course of short-term dealings by any registered
financial institution which is also a registered
short-term money market operator.
Section 20 of the Act requires short-term money
market operators to pay duty at the concessionary
rate on their short-term dealings. Duty is imposed by
applying the rate of 0.005 per cent to the operator’s
average daily liability for the month.
For some time, the SRO has applied these provisions
on the basis that a registered financial institution has
the option to treat an amount received which qualifies
as a short-term dealing (as defined by section 7(1))
as a receipt subject to duty at the primary rate of
0.06 per cent. Some holders of exempt bank accounts,
such as charities which have special accounts, then
considered that their bankers could treat amounts
received from them in the course of short-term
dealings as dutiable at the primary rate and also
entitled to the exemption afforded to receipts credited
to their exempt bank accounts.
This matter has been re-examined by the State
Revenue Office and this ruling explains the liability
for duty for financial institutions which receive
amounts in the course of short-term dealings from
customers who hold exempt bank accounts.
It is the view of the Commissioner that once a
registered financial institution elects to register as a
short-term money market operator, all receipts
which qualify as amounts received in the course of
short-term dealings are subject to duty at the
concessionary rate under section 20. The liability of
such a financial institution is not affected by the
status of the account holder, such as a charity, with
whom it has short-term dealings.
The Commissioner has ruled that every receipt of
money which qualifies as a short-term dealing by a
registered financial institution which is also a
registered short-term money market operator must
be taken into consideration for the calculation of
its average daily liability for payment of duty at the
rate of 0.005 per cent. This is despite exclusion
of the receipt from the primary rate of duty of
0.06 per cent under any of the classes of receipt in
sub-section 18(3).
Consequently, if a receipt falls within the definition of
receipts to which section 20 applies, duty is payable
at the short-term dealing rate notwithstanding that
the receipt may be sourced from, or ultimately
returned, to an exempt bank account.
This ruling applies from 1 September 1996.
Any taxpayer, who has previously received advice or
a private ruling from the State Revenue Office which
contradicts this ruling, is advised that the ruling
overturns and replaces such advice. However, the
taxpayer is entitled to rely on that advice until this
ruling takes effect. (Refer to GEN.05)
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Liability of financial institutions for
short-term dealing receipts from
customers who hold exempt
bank accounts
Revenue Ruling FID.037