Section 48 - The Commissioner's power to require repayment and impose penalty (FHOG-002) [2012] VICSROFHOG 1 (1 May 2012)
Revenue Ruling FHOG.002
A first home owner grant (FHOG) is payable on an
application if the applicant complies with the five
eligibility criteria set out in sections 8 to 12 of the
First Home Owner Grant Act 2000
(the Act) and
enters into, and completes, an eligible transaction
as defined in
of the Act. An explanation
of these requirements and obligations is contained
in the FHOG Application Form and Lodgement
The State Revenue Office, as part of its role in
administering the Act, conducts investigations to
ensure that applicants comply with the Act.
If as a result of an investigation it was found
that an applicant does not comply with the
Act, the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) may require repayment of the
FHOG and impose a penalty. An applicant is liable
to pay interest on any unpaid amount or penalty.
The purpose of this Ruling is to explain how the
Commissioner will approach the imposition of
administrative penalties, and the calculation of
interest, under section 48 of the Act.
Administrative penalties and interest play an
integral role in the administration of the Act by:
(a) deterring people from attempting to access the
FHOG when they are not eligible
(b) encouraging people to repay the FHOG when
they do not meet the requirements of the Act
(c) compensating the Government for the financing
costs incurred due to the late repayment of a
(d) deterring ineligible applicants from retaining, or
delaying the repayment of, the FHOG.
The Commissioner may also prosecute applicants
who have committed offences under the Act
for example, by making a false or misleading
statement in, or in connection with a FHOG
application. The purpose of the offence provisions
is to deter and punish FHOG offenders with fines
and imprisonment. The offence provisions are not
discussed in this Ruling.
Under section 48 of the Act, the Commissioner
may, by written notice, impose a penalty not
exceeding the amount an applicant is required to
(a) as a result of an applicant’s dishonesty, an
amount is paid by way of a FHOG (section
48(2)), and
(b) an applicant (or former applicant) fails to make
a repayment required by section 48(1) of the Act
or by the conditions of the FHOG (section 48(3)).
In deciding whether to impose a penalty, and if so,
the quantum of it, the Commissioner considers the
circumstances of each case.
Section 48(2) penalty: as a result of an
applicant’s dishonesty, an amount is paid by way
In deciding whether or not to impose a penalty
under section 48(2) of the Act, the Commissioner
must initially be satisfied that:
(a) the applicant has been dishonest at the time
of making his or her application. In doing so,
the Commissioner may consider the applicant’s
behaviour subsequently to draw inferences
making the application; and
(b) a FHOG was paid as a result of that dishonesty.
Revenue Rulings
Section 48 – The Commissioner’s power to
require repayment and impose penalty
First Home Owner Grant Act 2000
Ruling history
Issued date
The Commissioner applies the common law test
of ‘dishonesty’ set out by the High Court in
v the Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493.
In applying
test, a FHOG will have been paid as a
result of the applicant’s dishonesty if, for example:
(a) as a question of fact, the applicant:
(i) made a false or misleading statement in
connection with an eligibility criterion for
the FHOG – for example, providing incorrect
personal details such as name or date of
birth or citizenship/permanent residence; not
declaring a spouse or domestic partner; not
declaring the previous receipt of a FHOG;
or not declaring a prior relevant interest in
residential property, and
(ii) knew or believed that the statement was false
or misleading, and
(iii) intended to obtain the FHOG by the making
of the statement, and
(b) that conduct amounts to dishonest conduct
according to the standards of ordinary, decent
people. There is no need for the Commissioner
to consider whether the applicant (subjectively)
knew or believed the conduct to be dishonest
according to the standards of ordinary, decent
If the Commissioner is satisfied that the FHOG has
been paid as a result of the applicant’s dishonesty,
the factors that the Commissioner will take into
account in order to decide whether to impose a
penalty and if so, the quantum of that penalty are:
(a) the degree of dishonesty;
The Commissioner will regard dishonest
statements about information directly
concerning the eligibility criteria as evidencing
a higher degree of dishonesty as opposed to
matters which may be of lesser significance
such as the applicant’s personal particulars
(b) the deterrent effect of the penalty
(c) the candour of the applicant in his or her
response to compliance enquiries
(d) whether the FHOG has been repaid, and
(e) penalty decisions in previous cases involving
similar circumstances. For example, previous
section 48(2) penalty decisions made by the
Commissioner in the first instance, those made
on an objection, and on review by the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal and tribunals
in other jurisdictions.
Section 48(3) penalty: an applicant (or former
applicant) fails to make a repayment required
under section 48(1) of the Act or the conditions
of the FHOG
of the Act specifically deals with
authorising payment of the FHOG in anticipation
of compliance with the residence requirement.
The payment is made on condition that, if the
residence requirement is not complied with, the
applicant must within 14 days after the end of the
period allowed for compliance:
(a) give written notice of that fact to the
Commissioner, and
(b) repay the amount of the FHOG.
of the Act also allows the Commissioner
to authorise the payment of the FHOG on certain
conditions. Such a condition may require the
applicant to give notice of the non-compliance
with the condition within a period stated in the
condition; and repay the FHOG within a period
stated in the condition.
Under section 48(1) of the Act, the Commissioner
may, by written notice, require an applicant (or
former applicant) for a FHOG to repay an amount
paid on the application if the amount was paid in
error, or the Commissioner reverses the decision
under which the amount was paid for any other
To decide whether or not to impose a penalty
under section 48(3) of the Act, the Commissioner
must initially be satisfied that an applicant (or
former applicant) has failed to make a repayment
required under section 48(1) of the Act, or the
conditions of the FHOG.
Being so satisfied, the factors that the
Commissioner will take into account in deciding
whether to impose a penalty under section 48(3) of
the Act and if so, the quantum of that penalty are:
(a) the surrounding circumstances including
the intention of the applicant in relation to
fulfilment of the eligibility criteria or other
conditions of the FHOG
Commissioner of State Revenue
(b) the reasons for the failure to comply with the
eligibility criteria or other conditions of the FHOG
(c) the truthfulness of the original statements made
by the applicant in his or her application for the
(d) whether the applicant has complied with the
eligibility criteria or other conditions of the
FHOG to some extent
(e) the deterrent effect of the penalty
(f) the candour of the applicant in his or her
response to compliance enquiries
(g) whether the FHOG has been repaid, and
(f) penalty decisions in previous cases involving
similar circumstances. For example, previous
section 48(3) penalty decisions made by the
Commissioner in the first instance, those made
on an objection, and on review by the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal and tribunals
in other jurisdictions.
Objections to penalty imposed under section 48
An applicant (or former applicant) who is dissatisfied
with a decision to require the applicant (or former
applicant) to pay a penalty imposed under section
48 of the Act may lodge a written objection with
the Commissioner within 60 days after the date of
the notice of decision. The grounds for the objection
must be stated fully and in detail, and must be in
writing. On an objection, the objector has the onus
of proving the objector’s case.
An amount or penalty under section 48 of the
Act is payable by the date specified in the written
notice from the Commissioner.
Under section 48(5) of the Act, an applicant (or
former applicant) is liable to pay interest on any
unpaid amount that is required to be repaid under
section 48(1) or on any penalty imposed under
sections 48(2) or (3). That interest is calculated
on a daily basis from the end of the last day for
payment until the day it is paid at the interest rate
from time to time applying under Division 1 of Part
Taxation Administration Act 1997
Section 48(6)
of the Act allows the Commissioner
to remit interest by any amount he considers
appropriate.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling