Broker receipts (FID-040) [1997] VICSROFID 1 (1 February 1997)
Revenue Rulings
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
Broker receipts
Revenue Ruling FID.040
Replaced by: FID.054
By virtue of section 18(2A) of the
Institutions Duty Act 1982
(the Act) a Victorian
broker who receives or retains broker receipts
during a month is liable to pay FID in respect of
those receipts.
The term ‘broker receipts’ is defined under
section 3 of the Act which includes commissions
received or retained by a broker. Confusion arises
as to what amount is subject to duty as ‘broker
receipts’, when a broker, who acts as an
underwriter, receives the gross amount of
underwriting commission, but retains only an
amount net of sub underwriting commissions
paid to the sub-underwriters.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the
treatment of the sub-underwriting commissions
paid by a broker.
Under section 3 of the Act, ‘broker receipts’
a) receipts and amounts retained or realised
(after deduction of any trading losses) in the
nature of profits from trading in securities;
b) dividends received from trading in securities
and dividends received on securities held by
the broker;
c) brokerage received or retained (whether from
trading in equities, options, futures, fixed
interest or any other means);
d) commissions received or retained;
e) interest and fees received or retained;
f) receipts from the sale of capital assets, other
than goods, not traded in the ordinary course
of the business of the broker.
It is quite common that, when a broker agrees to
underwrite an issue of shares for a fee, he will
spread his risk through a number of other brokers.
In return, the lead underwriter will have to pay from
his underwriting commission sub-underwriting
commissions to the other sub-underwriters. Strictly
according to the legislation, the total amount of
underwriting commission received by the lead
underwriter is the amount of ‘broker receipts’ that is
subject to duty, as the underwriter receives the whole
amount of the underwriting commission on his own
account. Further, the receipt of sub-underwriting
commissions would be dutiable in the hands of the
sub-underwriters who are Victorian brokers.
However, the Office recognises this strict application
of the law is not consistent with the legislation
operating in New South Wales which allows the
deduction of sub-underwriting commissions from
underwriting commissions. In order to provide
uniform treatment for underwriting commissions and
competitive equality for the Victorian brokers in the
underwriting business, the Commissioner has ruled
that a broker can deduct sub-underwriting
commissions paid from the underwriting commission
received. Duty is to be paid on the net amount of
underwriting commission only.
The above ruling is only applicable to underwriting
commissions. It does not apply to other
commissions, brokerage or fees payable to sub
agents or other persons for services rendered to the
underwriter.
ON THE MOVE
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
C E A S E D 31 December 1998
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue