Receipts from deceased estates by registered financial institutions (FID-038) [1996] VICSROFID 2 (1 October 1996)
Revenue Rulings
Section 18(3)(k) of the
Financial Institutions Duty Act
(the Act) provides exemption from financial
institutions duty for ‘a receipt of money by a
trustee company from the estate of a deceased
person committed to the management of the
Trustee Company’.
The effect of this section is that duty is not imposed
merely as a result of money having to be transferred
between accounts to enable the trustee company to
manage the financial affairs of the estates.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the application
of Section 18(3)(k) of the Act.
This Ruling replaces Revenue Ruling FID.001.
It is the opinion of the Commissioner that section
18(3)(k) of the Act applies to a receipt of money
that is committed to the management of the trustee
company, when funds are transferred from the
deceased person’s accounts, held with financial
institutions, to accounts which are operated by the
trustee company. As all assets of the deceased are
committed to the management of the trustee
company at the date of death, the exemption in
question applies solely to the transfer of money held
by the deceased at the date of death.
Once the assets are committed to the management
of the trustee company, duty is payable in relation to
all subsequent dealings in respect of those assets
that result in the receipt of money by the trustee.
This includes receipts resulting from the sale of
property or other assets (stocks, bonds, etc) after the
date of death, and the receipt of money not
previously credited to the accounts of the deceased.
When these assets are sold, the money is coming to
the estate from the ordinary market. The exemption
under Section 18(3)k) is restricted to receipts of
money from the deceased estate.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Receipts from deceased estates by
registered financial institutions
Revenue Ruling FID.038
Replaces FID.001