First Home Owners Grant and Moveable Buildings (FHOG-001) [2001] VICSROFHOG 1 (1 March 2001)
Revenue Rulings
SRO - ISO 9001 Quality Certified
First Home Owner Grant and Moveable Buildings
Revenue Ruling FHOG.001
First Home Owner Grant Act
Victoria (the Act) a grant of up to $7,000 is payable
to a first home owner who satisfies the eligibility
criteria and who completes an eligible transaction.
Section 13(6) of the Act provides that if a person
purchases a moveable building and intends to use it
as a place of residence on land owned by that
person, the Act applies as if the person were an
owner builder building a house on the land.
A moveable building does not include a mobile
transaction is the date of the contract to purchase
the moveable building and the completion date is
the date that the moveable building is ready for
occupation. Section 13(7)(c) of the Act in turn
provides that the consideration for the transaction is
the actual cost to the owner of carrying out the
work (excluding any allowance for the owner
builder’s own labour). Under the Act, the amount
payable as a grant is the lesser of the consideration
for the eligible transaction or $7,000.
It appears to be common practice for a person to
acquire a moveable building for little or no
consideration but then incur significant costs
in removing the building and relocating it onto
their land.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the
circumstances in which the acquisition of a
moveable building for no consideration would
qualify as an eligible transaction under section 13
of the Act.
Where a person acquires a moveable building for
no consideration and intends to use it as a place
of residence on land owned by that person,
the removal and relocation costs will be treated as
forming part of the purchase price for the purposes
of section 13(7)(c) of the Act. The transaction will
accordingly qualify as an eligible transaction under
section 13(6) of the Act.
The commencement date in such a case will be the
date that the moveable building is relocated on the
land and the transaction will be taken to be
completed when the moveable building is ready for
occupation as a place of residence on the land.
The amount payable as a grant will be the lesser of
the costs of removing, relocating and making the
moveable building ready for occupation or $7,000.
In order to receive payment, an applicant must
apply to the State Revenue Office and provide the
following supporting documentation:
1. A copy of the certificate of occupancy.
2. Proof of acquisition of the moveable building
(e.g. letter of confirmation from owner) and a list
of itemised costs incurred in removing and
relocating the moveable building together with
In exceptional circumstances, a statutory declaration
stating from whom the moveable building was
acquired and the itemised costs incurred in
removing and relocating the moveable building.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue