Employment Agency Contracts - Declaration by exempt clients (PTA-026V2) [2011] VICSROPTA 2 (1 July 2011)
Revenue Ruling PTA.026 (Version 2)
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
harmonises the payroll tax legislation in a number of
Australian jurisdictions.
The employment agency provisions in Division 8 of
of the Act apply to an employment agency
contract, which is defined as a contract under which
a person (the employment agent) procures the
services of another person (the service provider) for
a client of the employment agent. The provisions are
designed to apply to labour hire arrangements where
the employment agent contracts with the client for
the provision of labour where there is no agreement
between the service provider and the client.
Under the employment agency provisions, the
employment agent is taken to be the employer
(section 38 of the Act) and the person who
performs work for or in relation to which services
are supplied to the client under an employment
agency contract (on-hired worker) is taken to be
the employee (section 39 of the Act). Amounts paid
or payable under the employment agency contract
are taken to be wages (section 40(1) of the Act).
Consequently, the employment agent is liable to pay
payroll tax on the amounts taken to be wages.
However, certain types of payments are exempt
from payroll tax under section 40(2) of the Act. The
exemption applies where:
(a) the wages would have been exempt from payroll
except for Division 4 or 5 of
that part, section 50 or clause 16 of schedule
2 (the Relevant Provisions) had the service
provider been paid directly by the client as an
employee, and
(b) the client has made a declaration to that effect
to the employment agent, in respect of the
service provider (the Relevant Declaration).
Organisations that are exempt from payroll tax
under the Relevant Provisions include:
• Non-profit bodies having as their sole or
dominant purpose a charitable, benevolent,
philanthropic or patriotic purpose
• Public benevolent institutions
• Religious institutions
• Certain private non-profit schools providing
education at or below the secondary level
• State school councils within the meaning of the
Education and Training Reform Act 2006
• Health care service providers, and
• Councils (except for wages paid in relation to
certain activities. See section 60 of the Act).
This Revenue Ruling explains the operation of the
exemption under section 40(2) of the Act and its
requirements.
Relevant Declaration
To claim the exemption under section 40(2) of
the Act, the employment agent has to obtain a
Relevant Declaration from its client. The Relevant
Declaration must be in writing and must state
that the wages paid or payable to or in relation to
the service provider for the provision of services in
connection with the employment agency contract
would be exempt under the Relevant Provisions had
the service provider been paid by the client as an
SRO Payroll Tax PTA Form 3 (
Employment Agency
Contracts - Declaration by Client
) which is available
on www.sro.vic.gov.au may be used to make the
Relevant Declaration. This form is not a prescribed
form and employment agents are free to develop
their own version of the declaration.
Revenue Rulings
Employment Agency Contracts -
Declaration by exempt clients
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
TempStaff Agency on-hired a worker to the
Southern Benevolent Foundation, a public
benevolent institution. The worker performed work
for the Southern Benevolent Foundation in respect
of its benevolent services.
Had the worker been paid directly by the Southern
Benevolent Foundation as an employee, the wages
would be exempt under the Relevant Provisions.
Therefore, TempStaff Agency is entitled to the
exemption under
section 40(2)
of the Act provided
it obtains a Relevant Declaration from the Southern
Benevolent Foundation for the worker.
Recruitment Solutions Agency on-hired a worker
to the Northern Region Shire Council. The worker
performed work for the Northern Region Shire Council
in connection with the supply of electricity (which is a
non-exempt activity under
of the Act).
Had the worker been paid directly by the Northern
Region Shire Council as an employee, the wages
would not be exempt under the Relevant Provisions.
Therefore, Recruitment Solutions Agency is not
entitled to the exemption under
section 40(2)
Act in respect of the wages it pays the worker.
Incomplete or Incorrect Declaration
Employment agents are liable for any payroll tax
liability if a Relevant Declaration is found to be
incomplete or does not meet the requirements
outlined above. For this reason, employment
agents should ensure that their exempt clients have
completed the Relevant Declaration in full.
If a client has provided a Relevant Declaration
which is later found to be incorrect (because the
wages paid to or in relation to the service provider
would not have been exempt under the Relevant
Provisions had the service provider been paid by
the client as an employee), the employment agent
will nevertheless be liable to pay payroll tax on the
amounts paid to the on-hired workers provided to
that client.
If an employment agent wishes to confirm that a
Relevant Declaration from a client is correct, the agent
may contact the SRO. The secrecy provisions within
Taxation Administration Act 1997
(TAA) prevent the
SRO from divulging information about the client to the
agent unless the agent first obtains written consent
from the client that will enable the SRO to provide
information about its payroll tax status.
Frequency of Declaration
The Act requires a separate Relevant Declaration
for each employment agency contract entered into
between the employment agent and their client(s).
However, the Commissioner recognises that this
requirement may be impractical and onerous.
For this reason, the Commissioner will be satisfied
if the employment agent obtains one Relevant
Declaration from its exempt client for each financial
year if the type of work performed by all persons
on-hired by that employment agent to that client is
Where the contract for the provision of the workers
goes beyond a financial year, only one declaration is
Employment agents should ensure that a Relevant
Declaration is obtained before the end of the
relevant financial year.
ABC Personnel Agency on-hired six workers to the
Western Public Hospital for two financial years. All
six workers performed accounts payable work for
Western Public Hospital for the whole period.
ABC Personnel Agency is entitled to the exemption
under section 40(2) of the Act as the wages would
have been exempt under the Relevant Provisions
had the on-hired workers been paid directly by the
Western Public Hospital as employees. To claim
this exemption, ABC Personnel Agency must obtain
a Relevant Declaration from the Western Public
Hospital before the end of the first financial year for
the six workers. As the contract to provide the six
workers relates to a period of two financial years,
ABC Personnel Agency will not be required to obtain
a subsequent Relevant Declaration in the second
year in respect of the six workers.
In the 2011-12 financial year, TempPeople Agency
on-hires three nurses to the Eastern Public Hospital.
TempPeople Agency is entitled to the exemption
under section 40(2) of the Act as the wages would
be exempt under the Relevant Provisions had the
three nurses been paid directly by the Eastern Public
Hospital as employees. TempPeople Agency must
The previous version of this Ruling stated that the employment agent would be exonerated from any payroll tax liability in this
situation if the
employment agent had acted in good faith at all times. However, in the process of arriving at a single harmonised position, all jurisdictions
agreed that it is not appropriate to exonerate the employment agent in such circumstances. Accordingly, jurisdictions which had issued
previous version of this Ruling have re-issued this Ruling as PTA026 (version 2).
obtain a Relevant Declaration from the Eastern
Public Hospital for the three nurses by the end of
the financial year.
Later that year, TempPeople Agency on-hires two
accounts payable workers to the Eastern Public
Hospital. TempPeople Agency is entitled to the
exemption under section 40(2) of the Act as
the wages would be exempt under the Relevant
Provisions had the two on-hired workers been
paid directly by the Eastern Public Hospital as
employees. The Relevant Declaration already
obtained by TempPeople Agency from the Eastern
Public Hospital for that financial year relates to the
provision of the nurses. As the work provided by the
two accounts payable workers is not similar to the
nursing services, it must obtain a further Relevant
Declaration from the Eastern Public Hospital in
respect of the two accounts payable workers.
Application for refund made by an employment
If an employment agent becomes aware that its
client is exempt under the Relevant Provisions
of the Act after having paid payroll tax on the
wages under an employment agency contract, the
employment agent may apply for a refund under
section 19 of the TAA.
A refund application must be accompanied by a
Relevant Declaration and written confirmation from
the client stating that the Relevant Declaration is
made for a retrospective period correlating to the
refund period. All refund applications are subject to
the windfall gain provisions contained in section 22
of the TAA.
Record keeping by employment agent
All Relevant Declarations must be kept by the
employment agent for five years. Employment
agents must ensure that all Relevant Declarations
can be readily produced upon request by the
Commissioner.
Anti-avoidance provisions
If an employment agency contract has the effect
of reducing or avoiding payroll tax, section 42 of
the Act allows the Commissioner to impose payroll
tax on any payment made under the contract on
any party to the contract including the client of the
employment agent or the service provider.
Commissioner of State Revenue
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling