Heads of duty relevant to franchise agreements (SD-107) [2000] VICSROSD 6 (1 December 2000)
Revenue Rulings
Heads of duty relevant to franchise agreements
Revenue Ruling SD.107
Replaces SD.059
SD.059 has been revised to reflect the abolition of
deed duty from 1 May 1997.
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) does not charge
duty in respect of a franchise agreement under any
specific head of duty. Unlike other jurisdictions, no
duty is charged in respect of transfers of intellectual
property such as patents, copyright, licences and
trademarks.
However, various elements of the franchise
agreement may be dutiable under one of the
sections of the Act.
The term ‘franchise agreement’ is quite broad. It is
ordinarily understood to mean, in a commercial
sense, the granting (by a franchisor) of a right to
another person (the franchisee) to undertake a
business in a particular location or area using
certain techniques and/or trademarks developed by
the franchisor. In many cases the franchisor
undertakes a special role in ‘setting-up’ the
franchisee in business. This may be achieved by
assisting in the purchase of property or by leasing
property and assets to the franchisee. It may also
include providing assistance with the recruitment
and training of staff.
Whilst such agreements may be made under one
contract, the parties to such contracts should be
aware of the potential application of the Act to
elements of such contracts.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain which heads
of duty may apply to a franchise agreement. It also
clarifies the status of a franchise agreement that
was executed as a deed prior to the abolition of
deed duty on 1 May 1997.
This ruling is effective from 1 May 1997.
Most franchise agreements comprise a licence,
rather than a conveyance of property. If no transfer
of real property occurs as part of the overall
franchise agreement, no duty will be payable under
the transfer of land provisions (Heading VI of the
Third Schedule to the Act).
However, duty may be payable in respect to the
lease of real property. Where the franchise
agreement contains an agreement to lease or a
lease of real property, the payments under the lease
may be dutiable under Heading VIII of the Third
Schedule of the Act. This provision charges duty on
the granting or transfer of a lease, an agreement to
lease or on a lease document itself. The type of
document will determine the amount of duty
payable. The method and amount of payment will
also depend on whether the lease is for a definite or
indefinite term (see Revenue Ruling SD.042).
Where the franchise agreement includes a lease or
hiring arrangement in respect of goods, duty may
be payable under the rental duty provisions of the
Act (Sections 131AA - 131AG) if the franchisor is
considered to carry on a rental business.
This ruling is not exhaustive in its treatment of this
subject matter. There may be instances where the
arrangements surrounding a franchise agreement
attract duty under one of the other provisions or
heads of duty under the Act. In particular, parties to
such an agreement should be aware of Heading
IV(A) (Transfer of marketable securities), Heading
IX (Instrument of settlement) and Heading XXII
(Mortgage, Bond, Debenture or Covenant).
A franchise agreement that was executed as a deed
before 1 May 1997 will attract deed duty unless
chargeable with duty under another section of
Any person unsure of the liability to duty, which may
arise in respect of a franchise agreement, should
lodge documents with the State Revenue Office for
an opinion.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 2000