Principal Place of Residence Exemption - Substantial Business Activity (LTA-001V2) [2013] VICSROLTA 1 (1 April 2013)
Principal Place of Residence Exemption –
Substantial Business Activity
Land Tax Act 2005
Revenue Ruling LTA.001 (version 2)
The principal place of residence (PPR) exemption
provided by
section 54(1)(a)
Land Tax Act
(the Act) applies to land owned by a natural
person that is used and occupied as the PPR of that
person. Sections 54(1)(ab) and (b) of the Act extend
the PPR exemption to land owned by:
• a person that is used and occupied as the PPR
of a natural person who has a right to reside on
that land; and
• trustees of certain trusts that is used and
occupied as the PPR of a vested beneficiary in
relation to the land.
However, where the PPR land is also used by any
person to carry on a substantial business activity,
section 62(1) of the Act provides that the PPR
exemption applies only to the extent that the PPR
land is used and occupied for residential purposes
by the owner, a vested beneficiary in relation to
the land or a natural person who has a right to
reside on the land, as the case requires. If section
62(1) of the Act applies, the Commissioner of State
Revenue (the Commissioner) must apportion the
value of the PPR land between use and occupation
for residential and business purposes in accordance
with section 62(3) of the Act.
In determining whether the PPR land is also used by
a person to carry on a substantial business activity,
section 62(2) of the Act provides that the following
factors must be taken into account:
a) whether paid employees or contractors (other
than employees or contractors who are relatives
of, and who ordinarily reside with, the person
who uses and occupies the land as his or her
PPR) work on the land; and
b) whether any part of the land is used or allocated
solely for business purposes; and
c) if part of the land is used or allocated (whether
solely or partly) for business purposes, the
proportion of the area of the land, or of the floor
space of buildings on the land, that is so used or
allocated; and
d) the amount of income (if any), and the
proportion of the person’s total income, that is
derived from business activities carried on on the
e) any other matters the Commissioner considers
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain
the factors in section 62(2) of the Act which
the Commissioner must take into account when
determining whether the PPR land is also used by a
person to carry on substantial business activity.
In this Ruling, a reference to a resident of a PPR
land refers to the owner, a vested beneficiary in
relation to the land or a natural person who has
a right to reside on the land (as the case requires)
who uses and occupies the land as his/her PPR.
In determining whether land is used by a person
to carry on a substantial business activity, account
must be taken of –
a) Whether paid employees or contractors
(other than employees or contractors who are
relatives of, and who ordinarily reside with, the
resident of the PPR land) work on the PPR land
Where remunerated employees or contractors
are engaged in the business activities carried
on on the PPR land, the Commissioner will
consider the number of employees or contractors
engaged and the regularity with which they
work. The greater the number of employees or
contractors and the greater the regularity with
Revenue Rulings
LTA.001 (version 2)
Ruling history
LTA.001 (version 2)
Issued date
Dates of effect
LTA.001 (version 2)
which they work, the more likely it is that the
Commissioner will consider that the PPR land
is being used to carry on a substantial business
Employees or contractors who are related to
the resident of the PPR land and who ordinarily
reside with that resident are not taken into
account. A relative includes a spouse or
domestic partner, a child or grandchild, a
parent or grandparent, a brother or sister, and a
nephew or niece.
For example, if the resident of the PPR land
conducts a consulting business on the PPR land
and employs a full time secretary/bookkeeper,
this would indicate that the PPR land is used
to carry on a substantial business activity.
However, if the secretary/bookkeeper is the child
of the resident of the PPR land and ordinarily
resides with that resident, that employee is not
taken into account in determining whether a
substantial business activity is carried on on the
Furthermore, the Commissioner will generally
take into account only those employees or
contractors whose work on the PPR land is
directly related to the principal business activities
carried on on the PPR land.
For example, if the PPR land is used to carry on
a bookkeeping business, the engagement of a
gardener at the PPR land will not be taken into
account in determining whether a substantial
business activity is carried on on the PPR land.
However, if the PPR land is used to carry on
a Bed & Breakfast business, the engagement
of a gardener will be taken into account as a
gardener is considered to be directly related to
the carrying on of a Bed & Breakfast business.
b) Whether any part of the PPR land is used or
allocated solely for business purposes
Where part of the PPR land (including the
floor space of any building(s) on the PPR land)
is allocated solely for business purposes, the
Commissioner will generally consider that the
PPR land is being used to carry on a substantial
business activity.
For example, if part of the building, such as the
ground level floor of a two storey residence, is
used solely for a milk bar or cafe business, this
will generally indicate that a substantial business
activity is being carried on on the PPR land.
A home office refers to the use of a space on
the PPR land (such as a study or spare room)
to carry out business related work, such as
accounts or storage of business records.
Where the resident of the PPR land undertakes
most of his/her work at his/her employer’s
business and uses a home office to complete
work related to their employment from time to
time, the Commissioner is unlikely to consider
the use of a home office in such circumstances
to be a use of the PPR land to carry on a
substantial business activity.
Similarly, where the resident of the PPR land is
self-employed but undertakes most of their work
at other premises (such as at a client’s property),
the Commissioner is unlikely to consider the use
of a home office in such circumstances to be
a use of the PPR land to carry on a substantial
business activity.
c) If part of the PPR land is used or allocated
(whether solely or partly) for business purposes,
the proportion of the area of the land, or of the
floor space of buildings on the PPR land, that is
so used or allocated
Where more than 30 per cent of the PPR land
or 30 per cent of the area of a building on
the PPR land is used (whether solely or partly)
for business purposes, the Commissioner will
generally consider that the PPR land is used to
carry on a substantial business activity.
d) The amount of income (if any), and the
proportion of the person’s total income, that is
derived from business activities carried on on
the PPR land
Where more than $30,000 (gross) income
is derived from the business activity carried
on on the PPR land for the most recently
completed financial year (preceding the year of
assessment), the Commissioner will generally
consider that the PPR land is used to carry on a
substantial business activity.
LTA.001 (version 2)
e) Any other matters the Commissioner considers
In addition to those factors set out at paragraphs
a) to d) above, the Commissioner must also take
into account any other matters he considers
relevant in determining whether a substantial
business activity is carried on on the PPR land.
Other matters which the Commissioner may
consider include:
• Whether any other person has been given a
right to use or occupy any part of the PPR
land or building for business purposes. For
example, if the resident of the PPR land
grants a lease or licence to another person
to store records or other business related
materials, this may indicate that a substantial
business activity is being carried on on the
• The extent and nature of the business activity
carried on on the PPR land when compared
with business activity conducted elsewhere.
• The extent and nature of income tax
deductions claimed in respect of the business
activity carried on on the PPR land.
• The level of involvement of the resident of the
PPR land (or his/her family) in the business
activities.
• Whether promotional or advertising materials
in respect of the business activities refer to
the PPR land.
• Whether a council permit is required or
has been issued in respect of the business
activities carried on on the PPR land.
The relevance and weight to be given to each of the
factors in section 62(2) of the Act will depend on
the circumstances of each case.
Apportionment
If the PPR land is used by any person to carry on a
substantial business activity, section 62(1) of the Act
provides that the PPR exemption applies only to the
extent that the PPR land is used and occupied for
residential purposes by the resident of the PPR land.
Section 62(3) of the Act provides that the
Commissioner must apportion the value of the PPR
land as between use and occupation for residential
purposes and use for business purposes, having
regard to the proportion of the PPR land used
for each purpose and the extent to which each
proportion is so used. Section 62(4) of the Act
further provides that the Commissioner may consult
the Valuer-General in relation to an apportionment.
Leigh is a self-employed web designer who works
from his PPR. One room is exclusively set aside
for his web designing activities, representing
approximately 12 per cent of the floor space of
the building on the PPR land. Leigh has obtained
a council permit to conduct the business activities
from his PPR. During the most recent financial year,
Leigh’s gross income was $38,000.
The fact that Leigh’s web designing business
generated over $30,000 indicates that Leigh
is using the PPR land to carry on a substantial
business activity. This is particularly so given that
part of his PPR is used exclusively for the business,
and the fact that the council has granted a permit
in respect of the business activities. As section 62(1)
of the Act applies in this case, Leigh is entitled to
the PPR exemption only to the extent that the PPR
land is used and occupied by Leigh for residential
Phil works full-time in a music store, and
supplements his income by giving music lessons
from his PPR on a casual basis. One room
(approximately 15% of the floor space of the
building) is set aside for his music lessons. Phil
derives approximately $8,000 per annum from his
business activities.
Although a room at Phil’s PPR is set aside solely for
his business, the area allocated to his business and
the income derived is not significant. Furthermore,
Phil is involved in the business on a casual basis
only. Taken together, these factors indicate that
Phil is not using his PPR to carry on a substantial
business activity. As section 62(1) of the Act does
not apply, Phil is entitled to a full PPR exemption in
respect of the PPR land.
Sam and Debbie own a Bed & Breakfast property
in the Yarra Valley. The building on the PPR land
consists of 6 bedrooms; Sam and Debbie occupy
LTA.001 (version 2)
Commissioner of State Revenue
two bedrooms for personal use and the remaining
four bedrooms are made available to guests. The
Bed & Breakfast business generated an income of
$120,000 last financial year and Debbie decided to
hire a part-time gardener to assist with the upkeep
of the lawns.
The business income in this case is well above
$30,000 and the proportion of the PPR residence
allocated for business purposes is significant (more
than 30%). Also, Debbie has employed a gardener.
The combination of these factors indicates that the
PPR land is being used to carry on a substantial
business activity. Therefore, the PPR exemption
applies only to the extent that the PPR land is used
and occupied for residential purposes by Sam and
Sharon is employed by XYZ Pty Ltd as an
accountant. Occasionally, Sharon works after hours
from her home office which is located in a spare
garage on the PPR land. Each year, Sharon claims
a tax deduction in respect of her home office
expenses. Sharon’s son also uses the home office to
check his emails and complete his homework.
Although Sharon claims tax deductions in respect
of her home office, the extent of the use is not
significant. Furthermore, the home office is used
partly for private purposes by Sharon’s son. Taken
together, these factors indicate that Sharon is not
using her PPR to carry on a substantial business
activity. As section 62(1) of the Act does not apply,
Sharon is entitled to a full PPR exemption in respect
of the PPR land.
Annette has lived in her PPR for many years. To
supplement her income, Annette decides to lease
part of the PPR land (approximately 25 per cent)
to her nephew, who uses it to operate a veterinary
clinic. Annette’s nephew employs a full-time
receptionist to help him at the clinic and distributes
advertising material containing the address of the
The fact that part of the PPR land is leased to
another person for business purposes, combined
with the employment of a full-time receptionist and
the provision of the advertising material, indicates
that Annette’s PPR is being used to carry on a
substantial business activity. Therefore, the PPR
exemption applies only to the extent that the PPR
land is used and occupied for residential purposes
by Annette.
Partial exemption if separate residence is leased
for residential purposes
It should be noted that where the PPR land is not
used to carry on a substantial business activity,
consideration may still need to be given to section
62A of the Act. Section 62A of the Act provides
that where the PPR land contains a separate
residence that is leased for residential purposes,
land tax is assessable on that part of the PPR land
leased for residential purposes.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling