Duty relief on the interposition of a unit trust between stapled security holders and the stapled entities (DA-047.V1) [2008] VICSRODA 5 (1 August 2008)
Revenue Ruling DA.047
Tax Laws Amendment (2007 Measures No. 5)
(Cth) inserted Subdivision 124-Q into Part
3-3 of Chapter 3 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) (ITAA97). Subdivision 124-Q provides
capital gains tax replacement asset roll-over relief
on the reorganisation of stapled entities in certain
circumstances. Specifically, roll-over relief is available
for holders of ownership interests (such as shares, trust
interests and options) in stapled entities (exchanging
members) where, under a scheme for reorganising the
stapled entities’ affairs, they dispose of those interests
in exchange for interests in an interposed unit trust.
The relief applies to roll-overs that take place on or
after 1 July 2006.
Division 1B was inserted into Part 2 of Chapter 11 of
Duties Act 2000
(Duties Act) by the
State Taxation
Acts Amendment Act 2008
(Vic). The Victorian
Parliament enacted Division 1B to provide duty relief in
specified circumstances when an exchanging member,
or the trustee of the interposed trust, makes a relevant
acquisition due to the reorganisation of stapled entities
in accordance with Subdivision 124-Q. Division 1B
applies to roll-overs that occur on or after 1 July 2008.
The land rich provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of the
charge duty on the relevant acquisition
of an interest in a land rich landholder. A land rich
landholder is a private company, a private unit trust
scheme or a wholesale unit trust scheme that has
land holdings in Victoria with an unencumbered value
of $1 million or more, and its land holdings in all
places (whether within or outside Australia) comprise
60% or more of the unencumbered value of all the
landholder’s property (other than excluded property).
A person makes a relevant acquisition if they acquire
a significant interest or a further interest in a land
rich landholder. In relation to a landholder that is
a private unit trust scheme, a significant interest is an
interest that entitles a person to a distribution of 20%
or more of the property on the winding up (vesting)
of the landholder. In the case of a landholder that is
a private company or wholesale unit trust scheme,
a significant interest is an interest that entitles a person
to a distribution of 50% or more of the property on the
winding up (or vesting) of the landholder.
Section 77(1)
provides that a person
acquires an interest in a land rich landholder if the
person obtains an interest beneficially in the landholder
regardless of how it is obtained or increased. Section
77(2AA) specifies that the trustee of a trust may obtain
an interest for the purposes of the land rich provisions.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to clarify the
circumstances in which Division 1B of the
will apply to exempt acquisitions which may otherwise
attract duty under the land rich provisions.
Application for exemption under Division 1B
Section 124-1045 of the ITAA97 sets out the
requirements for an exchange of stapled securities to
be treated as a roll-over for the purposes of Subdivision
124-Q. There are two ways in which an exchange of
securities can occur:
(a) the new trust case – a new trust is interposed
between the security holders of the stapled entities
(that is, the exchanging members) and the stapled
entities. In the new trust case, the exchanging
members acquire ownership interests in the new
interposed trust, and cease to own their ownership
interests in the stapled entities. The new trust will
acquire all the exchanging members’ ownership
interests in the stapled entities.
(b) the existing trust case – one of the trusts comprising
the stapled entities is interposed between the
exchanging members and the other stapled entities.
In the existing trust case, the exchanging members
retain their ownership interests in the interposed
trust, but cease to own their ownership interests
in the remaining stapled entities. The interposed
trust acquires all of the ownership interests in the
remaining stapled entities from the exchanging
In both cases, if the interposed trust or any of the
previously stapled entities are land rich, either the
exchanging members, or the trustee of the interposed
trust, may have a liability to duty under the land rich
Revenue Rulings
Duty relief on the interposition of a unit
trust between stapled security holders
and the stapled entities
Ruling history
Issued date
August 2008
Replaced by
DA.047 (version 2)
Dates of effect
August 2008
provisions. The specific duty consequences will depend
on the way in which the exchange of securities occurs
(including the de-stapling process and the timing of
the transactions between the exchanging members
and the trustee of the interposed trust). In the case
of the interests acquired by exchanging members
in an interposed trust, their individual acquisitions
may not amount to a significant interest. However
their interests in the interposed trust will be taken to
have been acquired in an associated transaction. For
more information on associated transactions, refer to
Revenue Ruling DA.039. Accordingly the exchanging
members will make a relevant acquisition of 100% in
the interposed trust.
The purpose of Division 1B is to provide an exemption
from duty for both the exchanging members and the
trustee of the interposed trust if a relevant acquisition
is made by either of them on the reorganisation of the
stapled group in accordance with Subdivision 124-Q
(provided certain conditions are met).
Section 250DI(1)
will be interpreted in accordance
with the underlying intention of Division 1B. On this
basis, an exchanging member, or the trustee of the
interposed trust, who makes a relevant acquisition in
the course of, or as a result of, a roll-over may apply
to the Commissioner of State Revenue (Commissioner)
pursuant to section 250DI(1) of the Act for an
exemption from duty under Division 1B. To reduce
compliance costs, the Commissioner will accept an
application by the trustee of the interposed trust made
on behalf of the exchanging members for the purposes
of section 250DI(1). Furthermore, for the avoidance
of doubt, the trustee of the interposed trust may apply
to the Commissioner for an exemption under Division
1B even if the exchanging members do not make a
relevant acquisition (and accordingly it is not necessary
for them to apply for an exemption).
An application for the exemption can be made by way
of written submission to the Commissioner, which will
be treated as a private ruling and must include full
details of parties to the transaction and copies of all
relevant draft documents.
Grant of the exemption
section 250DI(2)
Commissioner must grant an exemption if he is
satisfied that the requirements in paragraphs (a) to
(d) have been met. The purpose of Division 1B is to
provide an exemption from duty on the restructure of
stapled entities in accordance with Subdivision 124-Q.
The condition contained in paragraph (a) reinforces
this purpose. It requires that the relevant acquisition
must be made in the course of, or as a result of, a
roll-over that occurs on or after 1 July 2008 in the
circumstances set out in section 124-1045 of ITAA97.
The condition in paragraph (b) relates to the status
of the stapled entities. The effect of paragraph (b) is
that the exemption provided by Division 1B is available
only for the reorganisation of listed stapled entities in
accordance with Subdivision 124-Q. This is in contrast
to Subdivision 124-Q which provides roll-over relief for
stapled entities, whether listed or unlisted.
Specifically paragraph (b) provides that the
Commissioner must be satisfied the shares or units in
the stapled entities to which the roll-over relates:
• were listed at the time the relevant acquisition was
• are intended to be listed within the period of 3
years commencing on the date on which the
relevant acquisition was made.
As part of the restructure process the existing stapled
entities will be delisted, and the interposed trust will
be listed in its place. In some cases, depending on the
practice adopted by the Australian Stock Exchange
when delisting the stapled entities, it is possible that
the stapled entities may not be listed when the trustee
of the interposed trust acquires the interests in the
stapled entities from the exchanging members. If this
occurs, the Commissioner will treat the stapled entities
as listed for the purpose of
section 250DI(2)(b).
Revocation of the exemption
Once the Commissioner has granted an exemption
from duty under Division 1B, the exemption may be
revoked if any of the following circumstances set out in
section 250DK(1) occur:
(a) the interposed trust does not retain all its ownership
interests in the stapled entities for a period of at
least 3 years commencing on the day on which the
relevant acquisition was made; or
(b) the relevant acquisition was not made in the course
of, or as a result of, a roll-over; or
(c) the exemption was granted based on false or
misleading information in a material particular
provided to the Commissioner by an exchanging
member or the trustee of the interposed trust; or
(d) the relevant acquisition arose from arrangements
or a scheme devised for the principal purpose of
taking advantage of the benefit of
section 250DI.
Section 250DK(2) however provides that the exemption
will not be revoked under section 250DK(1)(a) if the
Commissioner is satisfied that the interposed trust does
not retain its ownership interests in the stapled entities
by virtue of:
(a) a public float of any of the stapled entities that
occurred within 12 months after the day on which
the relevant acquisition was made; or
(b) the shares or units of any of the stapled entities
being unstapled to enable the winding up of that
(c) the winding up of any of the stapled entities.
The purpose of section 250DK(2) is to provide a
concession from the three-year post association test
contained in section 250DK(1)(a) in the circumstances
specified. Paragraph (b) is intended to provide such
a concession if, under the scheme for reorganising
the affairs of the stapled entities, those entities
remained stapled after the exchange of securities,
and are subsequently unstapled prior to the stapled
entities being wound up. Paragraph (c) provides
a corresponding concession if the trustee of the
interposed trust ceases to hold its ownership interests
in the stapled entities due to any of those entities being
If the Commissioner revokes the exemption granted to
the trustee of the interposed trust, the trustee may be
liable for payment of the duty originally payable on its
relevant acquisition (including any applicable penalty
or interest). Similarly, if the Commissioner revokes
the exemption granted to the exchanging members,
they may be liable for payment of the duty originally
payable on their relevant acquisition (including
any applicable penalty or interest). In the case of
exchanging members, section 250F(2) of the Duties
Act provides that they are jointly and severally liable
for payment of the duty, penalty or interest. As stated
above, the exchanging members will be taken to make
a relevant acquisition of 100% in the interposed trust,
on the basis that their interests in the interposed trust
are acquired in an associated transaction. Accordingly
it is considered appropriate that all exchanging
members are jointly and severally liable for payment of
the duty (including any applicable penalty or interest)
on revocation of the exemption.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
August 2008
Commissioner of State Revenue