Refunds (LT-006) [1993] VICSROLT 6 (30 September 1993)
Revenue Rulings
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
C E A S E D 15 October 1993
Revenue Ruling LT.006
Replaced by: LT.007
The cases of
Royal Insurance Australia Ltd v
Comptroller of Stamps (1992)
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (1992
) determined that the mistake of
fact and mistake of law distinction was not an
appropriate basis for deciding the period over
which a refund should be paid.
As a consequence, legislation was passed
limiting the period of refund in respect of
applications received on or after 15 August
The purpose of this Ruling is to outline the period
and circumstances in which refunds of land tax
will be paid.
This Ruling is superseded and is now replaced by
Any application for refund received on or after
15 August 1992 will have the refund limited to a
maximum period of three years prior to the date
of application.
A refund will not be paid to a land owner where
the cost of the land tax has been recovered from
another person unless such monies are
reimbursed within 90 days of the refund being
made, to the person, so charged. However, the
Commissioner has determined that a land owner
will not be considered to have recovered from or
to have charged another person merely because
the cost of land tax is built into the price charged
by the land owner. To constitute a charge on
another person the land owner would need to
directly and explicitly charge another person for
land tax (for example, through the terms of a
lease agreement).
In addition, before a refund is paid in relation to
overpaid land tax, the overpaid tax will be applied to
meet all other liabilities that the land owner has to
the Crown in respect of Acts administered by the
Commissioner of State Revenue.
For refund applications received prior to 15 August
1992, a full refund will be paid regardless of the
reason for the overdeclaration, provided that the
matter had not been finalised prior to that date and
the land owner would not receive a windfall gain due
to charging another person for the cost of land tax.
Such applications will be limited to the period for
which application has been made. The view taken by
the State Revenue Office in respect of windfall gains
will be argued before the High Court in the appeal in
the Royal Insurance case. If an application for
refund received prior to 15 August 1992 had been
finalised, any further application will be subject to
the new legislative provisions.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE