Goods held or used in connection with land (DA-054) [2011] VICSRODA 1 (1 March 2011)
Revenue Ruling DA.054
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) imposes duty on the
transfer of dutiable property unless an exemption or
concession applies.
The term ‘dutiable property’ is defined in
section 10(1)
of the Act to include, amongst other things, an estate
in fee simple in land.
The definition of dutiable property in the Act also
includes goods in Victoria, if the goods are the subject
of an arrangement that includes a dutiable transaction
over an estate or interest in land elsewhere referred to
section 10(1)
, including goods used in connection
with a business carried on or in connection with the
Section 10(1)(d)
of the Act excludes the following
categories of goods from the definition of dutiable
i) goods that are stock-in-trade,
ii) materials held for use in manufacture,
iii) goods under manufacture,
iv) goods held or used in connection with
primary production,
v) livestock.
The purpose of this Ruling is to provide clarification
on the types of goods that are subject to duty under
the Act and to explain the scope of the excluded
categories of goods in
section 10(1)(d)(i)
– (iv). The
Ruling also provides guidance on –
the difference between goods and fixtures,
the treatment of plant and plant produce, and
the treatment of motor vehicles
for the purposes of
section 10(1)(d)
of the Act.
Although this Ruling considers the treatment of
fixtures insofar as it relates to the definition of dutiable
property in
section 10(1)
of the Act, it does not deal
specifically with tenant’s fixtures for duty purposes.
While the term ‘goods’ is not defined in the Act,
goods can be defined to include all chattels personal
other than choses in action and money. The term is
commonly understood to refer to tangible personal
property and includes plant and equipment, furniture
and fittings and other assets that may be used in
connection with a business conducted on the land.
Goods subject to duty
Goods are treated as dutiable property under the Act
where they are the subject of an arrangement that
includes a dutiable transaction over an interest in land
elsewhere referred to in
section 10(1)
of the Act. In
such circumstances, goods are subject to duty unless
excluded by
section 10(1)(d)
of the Act.
Furthermore, as goods must be tangible, intangible
items such as licenses and unbundled water
entitlements are not dutiable as goods.
Stock-in-trade, materials held for use in
manufacture and goods under manufacture
Goods that are ‘stock-in-trade’ are excluded from the
definition of dutiable property. As the term stock-in-
trade is not defined in the Act, it is given its ordinary
commercial meaning under common law.
Goods will generally be regarded as stock-in-trade if
they are a commodity of the business, that is, they
are held for sale or hire by the business. Examples of
stock-in trade include:
• liquor sold by licensed premises such as a hotel,
• books sold in a bookstore, and
• motor vehicles owned for sale by a
Licensed Motor Car Trader.
Materials held for use in manufacture and goods
under manufacture are also excluded from the
definition of dutiable property. Materials held for use
in manufacture include, for example, raw materials,
such as the timber used to make furniture and
fabrics used to make items of clothing. Goods under
manufacture include partly manufactured goods such
as the chemicals used to make cleaning products.
Revenue Rulings
Goods held or used in connection with land
*There is no effective start date as this Revenue Ruling is merely
clarifying the State Revenue Office's ongoing practice.
Ruling history
Dates of effect
of the Act (being an estate in fee simple).
Whether an item used for the purpose of primary
production is classified as a good or fixture depends
on its nature, use and degree of annexation to the
land and intention regarding the annexation.
Examples of fixtures include sheds, fences and
trellises used to support the growth of plants or vines.
Machinery which may be moved but that is situated
in a permanent location, such as milking machinery
(including milk vats), is also regarded as a fixture.
Similarly, an item kept in position by its own weight
that is intended to remain in that position permanently
and which enhances the use of the property for
primary production is considered to be a fixture.
Plant and plant produce
Whether a plant and/or its produce is treated as
a good ‘held or used in connection with primary
production’ depends on its categorisation as either
fructus naturales
fructus industriales
are considered to be fixtures of the land
(which are dutiable), whilst
fructus industriales
considered to be primary production goods and are
therefore excluded from the definition of dutiable
Fructus industriales
refers to a crop or harvest of
the earth produced annually by labour and industry,
through sowing and reaping, planting and gathering
of the relevant crop or harvest. Although grown in the
ground, this class of produce is not treated as part
of the land as its characteristics are similar to those
of primary production goods: see
Seas Sapfor Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamps (SA)
(1997) 97 ATC 4535
). Items classed as
fructus industriales
corn, hay, oats, wheat and potatoes.
In contrast,
fructus naturales
refers to plant or plant
produce that grows naturally from the soil, that is,
without human cultivation. The common law regards
such items as being part of the soil: see
Fructus naturales
items include the trees found in pine
and timber plantations, fruit trees and grape vines.
Items classed as
fructus naturales
are considered to be
fixtures regardless of whether they have been planted
for the purpose of harvesting or felling. This is because
the labour involved in the planting of these items
represents a small part of the overall process and its
development is deemed to have occurred naturally
from the soil: see
Marshall v Green
[1875] UKLawRpCP 74
(1895) 1 CPD 35.
Fructus naturales
items are only considered to be
goods upon their actual severance from the land.
Once this occurs, such items are expressly excluded
from the definition of dutiable property by virtue of
section 10(1)(d)(i)
(i.e. stock-in-trade). For example,
grapes on a grape vine are classed as a fixture for the
Goods held or used in connection with primary
Section 10(1)(d)(iv)
of the Act excludes from the
definition of dutiable property goods that are held or
used in connection with primary production.
‘Primary production’ is defined in the Act to mean the
use of land primarily for -
a) cultivation for the purpose of selling the
produce of cultivation (whether in a natural,
processed or converted state), or
b) the maintenance of animals or poultry for the
purpose of selling them or their natural
increase or bodily produce, or
c) the keeping of bees for the purpose of selling
their honey, or
d) commercial fishing, including the preparation
for commercial fishing or storage or
preservation of fish or fishing gear, or
e) the cultivation or propagation for sale of
plants, seedlings, mushrooms or orchids.
Goods will be treated as being held or used in
connection with primary production where they are
held directly in connection with the primary production
that is being undertaken on the land. These include
harvesters, tractors, picking trolleys and trailers.
Conversely, ordinary household goods such as floor
coverings, light fittings, bedding, curtains and furniture
are not held directly in connection with primary
production and the Commissioner of State Revenue
(the Commissioner) will not consider such items to be
primary production goods regardless of whether the
• situated in a house located on primary
production land which is occupied by the
farmer and/or the farmer’s family, or
• supplied by the farmer to individuals engaged
to assist in primary production on the land.
Goods and fixtures
It is important to distinguish goods from fixtures
because whilst goods may, depending on their
categorisation, be excluded from the definition of
dutiable property, fixtures are always considered to be
dutiable property.
This distinction is made on the basis that goods
only have a temporary annexation to the land and
therefore do not form part of the land whereas fixtures
are annexed to the land in such a way that they are
considered to form part of the land. Fixtures are
therefore not treated as a separate item of dutiable
property under
of the Act, rather they fall
within the meaning of dutiable property in
section 10(1)(a)
period that they are attached to the vine. It is only
once the grapes have been removed from the vine
that they are classed as goods that are stock-in-trade.
However, where at the time of contract, the
items are to be immediately withdrawn from
the land, or the process of vegetation is completed,
the Commissioner will consider the land to be a
‘warehouse’ for the
fructus naturales
items and will
therefore regard such items as goods that are
stock-in-trade.
A contract of sale in respect of a vineyard is executed
with the contract stipulating that the grapes on the
vines are to be immediately picked by the purchaser
after the contract date. In such circumstances, the
grapes are deemed to be goods, namely stock-in-
trade and thus will be excluded from the definition of
dutiable property. Accordingly, duty will be calculated
on the value of the land and any fixtures (for example,
sheds, vines and trellises etc) that are transferred to
the purchaser.
There is also an intermediate class of produce which
provides no crop in the year of planting (i.e. hops). In
circumstances where no crop is produced until several
years after planting, any crop derived after that first
year of plantation is regarded as
fructus naturales
Motor vehicles
The definition of dutiable property under section
10(1)(d) of the Act encompasses motor vehicles that
are used in connection with a business carried on or
in connection with land. However, Chapter 9 of the
Act also separately imposes duty on an application for
the registration or transfer of registration of a motor
To avoid the imposition of double duty, motor vehicles
which attract duty under Chapter 9 of the Act are
not considered to be goods within the definition of
dutiable property under
section 10(1)(d)
of the Act.
Where a registered vehicle, that does not attract
duty under Chapter 9 of the Act, is the subject of an
arrangement that includes a dutiable transaction over
an estate or interest in land, that vehicle is regarded as
dutiable property pursuant to
section 10(1)(d)
is otherwise excluded by that section).
Commissioner of State Revenue