Expatriate Employees (PT-115) [2005] VICSROPT 3 (1 March 2005)
1. The purpose of the ruling is to clarify an employer's
liability under S.6 of
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
in respect of wages paid to expatriate employ-
ees. It replaces Revenue Ruling PT.082.
2. Whether wages of an employer are subject to the
payment of Pay-roll Tax in Victoria will depend upon
where the work is performed by an employee and
where the payment is received by an employee.
3. Employers who have expatriate employees should be
aware that wages which include a wide variety of
payments made to or in relation to these employees,
may be subject to Pay-roll Tax where payments are
received in Victoria in relation to employees working
overseas or payments are received overseas by
employees working in Victoria.
Expatriate employees working overseas
4. Wages received in Victoria by an expatriate employee
who is working in another country, or countries, are
1. Where the assignment in another country, or
countries, is no more than six (6) continuous
2. For the first six months of a continuous assignment
in another country, or countries, of greater than six
(6) months.
5. Where services are performed by an employee on a
continuous assignment in another country, or
countries, of greater than six (6) months any wages
received in Victoria for services that were performed in
the seventh and subsequent months of that
assignment are not subject to Pay-roll Tax.
6. The six month period does not have to be within the
one financial year but must be a continuous period.
Where an employee, working in another country,
returns to Australia, it will not be considered to be a
break in continuity in the following circumstances:
The employee returns for a holiday; or
The employee returns to perform work exclusively
related to the overseas assignment for a period of
less than one month;
and in either case, the employee immediately returns
to that overseas country to perform further work on
the assignment.
7. If only part of the wages earned by an expatriate
employee working in another country, or countries, are
received in Victoria, then those part wages must be
declared for Pay-roll Tax.
8. Note: From 1 January 1998 S.6 of the PRT Act
ensures that any wages that relate to services per-
formed offshore and beyond the limits of the coastal
waters of any Australian State or Territory, but not in
another country, are taxable if they are received in
Victoria irrespective of the duration of the assignment.
As such the six (6) months exemption that applies to
wages received in Victoria for work
performed in another country, is not applicable.
Expatriate employees working within Victoria
9. It is common practice for overseas parent companies
to send employees to work for their Victorian
subsidiaries or branches on a permanent or temporary
basis. Wages paid to such persons are subject to
Pay-roll Tax in Victoria in any calendar month where
the employee works mainly in Victoria. This applies
regardless of where such wages are received by the
expatriate.
10. Where the expatriate employee works in two or more
States or Territories other than Victoria in a calendar
month, and the wages are received in Victoria, they
are taxable in Victoria.
11. Although the basis for determining whether payments
made, or benefits provided, to expatriates are subject
to Pay-roll Tax is essentially the same as applies to
other wage payments, the following clarification is
Wages paid in a foreign currency
12. When calculating the value of the payment, the State
Revenue Office will accept an exchange rate
conversion, based upon the Reserve Bank of
Australia's daily rate published, for the day of
payment. If this creates difficulties, the employer may
use, as an alternative, the yearly average rate for the
financial year, as published by the Australian Taxation
Office. The previous year's figure may be applied for
the purpose of making monthly returns, provided that
the current year's rate is used to make an appropriate
adjustment in the Annual Adjustment return.
Bonuses paid overseas to expatriates relating to
employer/group performance
13. Subject to the following paragraph, the value of
bonuses paid overseas as a result of an employer's, or
employer group's performance, are subject to Pay-roll
Revenue Rulings
Revenue Ruling PT.115
76 775 195 331
Revenue Ruling PT.115
Replaces PT.082
Expatriate employees
Revenue Ruling PT.115
Tax and should be declared in Victoria to the extent
that they relate to a period in which the expatriate
worked in Victoria, regardless of when the bonus is
paid. If the bonus is paid for a period in which the
expatriate worked wholly in Victoria, the whole of
the bonus paid is subject to Pay-roll Tax .
14. The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
a bonus paid overseas for a financial year in which
the expatriate worked at least partly in Victoria, will
be subject to Pay-roll Tax in Victoria only if the
expatriate worked in Australia for more than one
half of that financial year. The amount of bonus to
be declared is to be calculated on a pro rata basis
using the number of calendar months in which the
expatriate worked mainly in Victoria.
15 For example, where an annual bonus of $12,000 is
paid overseas to an expatriate employee who
worked in Australia for a total of seven months, of
which three months were worked mainly in Victoria,
three-twelfths of $12,000 ($3,000) is subject to
Victorian Pay-roll Tax.
16 The bonus would not be taxable in Victoria if the
expatriate employee worked in Australia for less
than six (6) months.
Fringe benefits
17. Benefits provided to expatriate employees which fall
within the provisions of the Commonwealth Fringe
Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986 (the FBT Act) are
subject to Pay-roll Tax based on the grossed up
taxable value determined under the FBT Act.
Employer contribution to Superannuation benefits
18. The definition of wages includes employer
contributions to superannuation funds. The
superannuation benefits of expatriate employees are
taxable if paid or payable in relation to a person
whose wages, or other remuneration, are subject to
Pay-roll Tax.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue