Chattels (SD-096) [1999] VICSROSD 3 (1 July 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Revenue Ruling SD.096
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) imposes stamp duty
on a transfer or conveyance of real property.
Section 63(3) of the Act provides that chattels sold
with the property, except stock-in-trade used in
connection with a business, are also subject to duty.
Section 63(4) excludes primary production chattels
The purpose of this ruling is to set out whether
certain chattels are brought to duty by the provisions
of section 63 of the Act and the treatment of
chattels in the areas identified as requiring
clarification. The issues covered by this ruling are:
1. under what circumstances chattels are
2. the meaning of stock-in-trade;
3. motor vehicles;
4. the meaning of primary production chattels;
5. the treatment of plants and plant produce.
1. When chattels are dutiable;
Section 63(3)(a) refers to the fact that chattels do
not include stock-in-trade held or used in connection
with a business carried on, or in connection with, the
real property. The Commissioner of State Revenue is
of the view that there needs to be a physical
connection to the land for section 63(3)(a) to apply.
A physical connection does not, however, need
permanency or regularity but does need to be
tangible. Removal of chattels to another site at the
date of contract of sale would not exclude those
chattels from duty.
A transfer of land resulting from a sale of a business
involving both fee simple and leasehold land would
attract duty on the value of those chattels used in
connection with the fee simple land and also those
used in connection with both properties. Chattels
used only in connection with the leasehold land
would not attract duty. Similarly, if a business of
shipping or hire boats were sold, the value of the
land used for administration would not include the
value of the vessels.
2. Stock-in-trade
The Commissioner considers that stock-in-trade,
means items held for sale, including goods under
manufacture and material held for use in
manufacture. Examples include:
• liquor sold with licensed premises but not
including the glasses in which the liquor would
be served; and
• flowers in a florist shop.
3. Motor vehicles
There are specific provisions in the Act which impose
duty on the registration, or transfer of registration, of
motor vehicles. Any registered vehicles that are part
of a transaction for the disposition of real property
may potentially be considered as chattels and
therefore attract a second imposition of duty.
To avoid double duty, the following categories of
vehicles are not considered to be chattels under
sub-sections 63(3) and 63(4):
• vehicles owned by a Licensed Motor Car Trader
• vehicles which are primary production chattels,
• vehicles which attract duty on transfer under
Heading XXI of the Act.
Please continue over page
Ceased - March 2011
Registered vehicles, which do not attract stamp duty
on transfer under Heading XXI, such as caravans
and light trailers, may be regarded as chattels
included in the transfer of real property and
attract duty.
4. Primary production chattels
Section 63(4) of the Act excludes from duty “stock,
implements or other chattels held or used in
connection with the use of the real property for
primary production”. The definition of real property
used for primary production is set out in section
63(1) of the Act, and further clarified in Revenue
Ruling SD.007. The question of licences passing with
primary production land is addressed in Revenue
Ruling SD 052. This ruling is to clarify the treatment
for stamp duty purposes of certain chattels held or
used in connection with primary production land.
Machinery which, although movable, is situated in a
permanent location, such as milking machinery
(including milk vats) are considered to be fixtures
and therefore subject to duty. If an item is kept in
position by its own weight and is intended to remain
in that position permanently and enhances the use
of the property for primary production, it would also
be considered a fixture. Items that may be
temporarily attached to the ground, such as a trellis
used to support young plants, which is to be moved
after the plants are established would be considered
a chattel. Whether or not an item is a chattel will
depend on its nature and use. Where doubt exists,
taxpayers may seek the Commissioner’s advice
under the guidelines for private rulings.
Primary production chattels are those used directly in
connection with primary production, such as a
harvester. The exclusion from duty of primary
production chattels does not apply to ordinary
household chattels, such as floor coverings, light
fittings, curtains and furniture, even if they are
situated in a house located on primary production
land and used by the farmer and family. Also, the
exclusion does not apply to chattels such as bedding
or furniture supplied by the farmer for the use of
persons engaged to assist in primary production.
5. Plants and plant produce
Seas Sapfor Ltd v Commissioner of Stamps (SA)
(1996) 34 ATR 120
, the court concluded that the
law may be summarised as follows:
“First that which is growing naturally such as grass,
natural timber and fruit on trees can be regarded as
part of the land (fructus naturales) and in a contract
of sale and purchase of land will pass with the land.
Crops which are sown for the purpose of reaping or
planted for the purpose of gathering and which are
produced in the year of their labour may be
classified as fructus industriales, and are things
independent of the land and may be the
entitlements of a tenant or may be sold as growing
crops independent of the land. Trees including fruit
trees or vines which are planted for the purpose of
harvesting or felling are not fructus industriales and
if the land upon which they are growing is sold they
pass with the land:
Saunders v Pilcher and Tyne
(1986) Ltd v Commissioner of Stamps (SA) (1995)
95 ATR 4.571.
There is an exception to the last
mentioned statement being the exception mentioned
Marshall v Green
[1875] UKLawRpCP 74
(1875) 1 CPD 35
trees can be classified as chattels if they are sold for
the purpose of immediate felling”.
The Commissioner has determined, therefore, that
fructus naturales (which includes fruit on vines or
trees) will be treated as fixtures and liable to duty
unless they are trees sold for immediate felling and
fructus industriales will be regarded as primary
production chattels.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue