Credit Providers (FID-057) [1999] VICSROFID 3 (1 July 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Credit Providers
Revenue Ruling FID.057
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
contains specific provisions that apply to credit
providers and pastoral finance companies in addition
to general provisions for other types of financial
institutions. The interaction between the specific
provisions for credit providers and pastoral finance
companies has been the source of some confusion.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain when an
organisation is considered by the State Revenue
Office (SRO) to be a “credit provider” within the
meaning of section 3 of the Act. The ruling also
explains when the SRO applies the specific
provisions for pastoral finance companies.
Section 3 of the Act states that a “credit provider”
“a person who provides credit under credit contracts
in the course of a business carried on by him in
A “credit contract” is defined in section 3 to be a:
“…credit sale, a loan, or a continuing credit
Who is a credit provider?
The above definitions show that it is necessary to
examine the type of financial activities undertaken by
an organisation in order to decide whether it is a
credit provider. The definition of “credit contract” in
the Act is expansive and potentially covers a wide
variety of financial arrangements. The breadth of the
definitions of “credit provider” and “credit contract”
would make aspects of the FID regime
administratively unworkable if the SRO were to apply
the provisions literally. Accordingly, this ruling
describes the application of the credit provider
provisions to various methods of providing credit.
Retail Credit
Retailers frequently provide credit arrangements to
customers through the use of store cards or other
schemes. Under these arrangements, a customer
can purchase goods and pay for them over a period
of time, with or without an interest charge.
The credit may be provided directly by the store, by a
related company or by an unrelated entity. Retail
credit is also referred to as consumer credit.
Trade Credit
As distinct from retail credit, trade credit concerns
credit provided by businesses to trade purchasers as
part of their on-going business relationships.
A supplier may allow a period of grace before
requiring payment in full or before applying interest
to the amount outstanding. Trade credit granted by
a supplier to a buyer of goods or services is a
short-term source of funds and may form the major
source of working capital for small business.
Pastoral Finance Companies
A “pastoral finance company” is defined in section 3
of the Act as:
“a person carrying on a business of financing
pastoral pursuits or a business of stock and station
agents to whom an order in force under section 11
Banking Act 1959
of the Commonwealth as
amended and in force for the time being applies.”
A pastoral finance company may make loans as part
of its ordinary business operations and, therefore,
also appears to fall within the definition of “credit
provider” in the Act. However, the Act makes a
distinction between credit providers, pastoral finance
companies and other entities. The Act provides
specifically that pastoral finance companies which
are registered financial institutions may hold exempt
bank accounts under section 25(12)(b). The list of
receipts which can be paid to such an account is
found in section 25(5).
Please continue over page
It is the SRO’s view that retail credit is included in
the definition of credit contract under the Act.
Therefore an organisation which provides retail
credit in the course of its business activities is a credit
The SRO does not consider that the definition of
credit contract under the Act includes trade credit.
Accordingly, an organisation which provides only this
form of credit is not a credit provider.
The SRO considers that it is the intention of the Act
that there should be discrete, specific arrangements
for pastoral finance companies and credit providers.
Where a company is a pastoral finance company
within the meaning of the Act, the provisions for
pastoral finance companies apply to that company
and it is not the intention of the legislation, nor
appropriate, to treat that company as a credit
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue