Land Tax Grouping Provisions (LT-002) [1993] VICSROLT 2 (1 June 1993)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Land tax grouping provisions
Revenue Ruling LT.002
Section 44 of the
Land Tax Act 1958
provides for
the grouping of related corporations in
certain circumstances.
The grouping provisions are primarily intended to
ensure that the land held by corporations which are
commonly owned or controlled, is aggregated.
The effect of these provisions is that the land
holdings of each corporations in the group would
be aggregated, and assessed as one land holding.
Hence, the total tax payable by corporations in a
group would be equal to the tax that would be
payable if a single corporation owned all of the land
owned by the related corporations in the group.
Where two or more corporations are related, they
may be grouped and treated as if they were a single
corporation, if the Commissioner so determines.
Corporations grouped under this section will be
assessed jointly, and one corporation within the
group will receive an assessment on behalf of the
group. That corporation, and the other corporations
within the group, will be entitled to equitable rights
of indemnity between themselves.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the
circumstances in which two or more corporations
are related to each other, and what factors will be
considered in the exercise of the Commissioner’s
discretion to group related corporations.
Related Corporations
Corporations are related, and may be grouped in
four situations. These are as follows.
(a) Control of one corporation by another corporation
If one corporation is deemed to be able to exert
control over another corporation, then these two
corporations are related.
This control will be deemed to exist in
three circumstances.
Control of the composition of the board of
directors. This requires the power to appoint
or remove a majority of the directors: or
Control of more than 50 per cent of the
voting power at a general meeting; or
Holding more than 50 per cent of the issued
share capital.
(b) Control of two or more corporations by one
person, or two or more persons acting together
If one person, or two or more persons acting
together, are deemed to be able to exert control over
two or more corporations, them those corporations
are related. This control will be deemed to exist in
any of the three circumstances mentioned in the
previous point.
(c) Holding of more than 50 per cent of the issued
ordinary share capital of a corporation by
another corporation and its shareholders
Two corporations are related in this situation if one
corporation (the first corporation) is deemed to
be controlled by another corporation (the second
corporation), together with the second corporation’s
shareholders. This control will be deemed to
exist where:
More than 50 per cent of the ordinary shares
of the first corporation are held by the
second corporation together with the second
corporation’s shareholders, and
The sum of:
the share holding of the second corporation
in the first corporation expressed as a
percentage; and
the holding of the first corporation’s
shareholders in the second corporation
expressed as a percentage is greater than
50 per cent.
ON THE MOVE
(d) Corporations related to a common corporation
If two or more corporations are related (by virtue of
the circumstances detailed above in 1(a) to 1(c)) to
the same corporation, then those corporations are
also related to each other. Corporations may be
related to each other even if one or more of those
corporations does not own land in Victoria.
In applying the above provisions, any shares held, or
rights exercisable, by a trustee or nominee for
another person will be deemed to be held or
exercisable by the trustee/nominee or their beneficial
owner. Similarly, any shares held, or rights exercisable,
by a person only by virtue of an issue of debentures
in another corporation, or by way of security for a
loan, will be disregarded for the purposes of
determining control of a corporation.
(2) Commissioner’s discretion
Where two or more corporations are related, the
Commissioner may determine that such corporations
constitute a group and are to be assess as if a
single entity.
The Commissioner has adopted the view that where
two or more corporations are related those
corporations will be grouped and assessed as if they
were one entity, except where it is unjust to do so.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue