Settlements and Unit Trusts Allowances and Reimbursements (SD-092) [1998] VICSROSD 2 (1 September 1998)
Revenue Rulings
This ruling seeks to clarify the stamp duty liability
arising from the establishment of unit trust deeds,
especially where the instrument establishing the
unit trust comprises a hybrid of both discretionary
beneficiaries and unit holders.
Under Heading IX of the Third Schedule to the
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) an instrument of
settlement is dutiable at the fixed rate of $200.
Generally the term ‘settlement’ may be defined as
a disposition or vesting of property by one person
to another.
The terms of a discretionary trust established by
an instrument of settlement may include a
discretion to select the beneficiaries from a
designated class of potential beneficiaries or to
decide how the trust property will be distributed
among the beneficiaries. This is consistent with
the statutory definition of discretionary trust under
section 71 of the Act.
A unit trust is a trust that is constituted by the
vesting of property in a trustee. The trust property
is held for the benefit of persons known as unit
holders, whose participation in the Trust is
evidenced by the issue of a unit certificate. Under
the Act, a unit is defined as a marketable security.
In circumstances where sub-division 7 of the Act
does not apply, the initial issue of units will not be
subject to duty; however, the subsequent transfer
of any such units will be considered for duty under
the relevant provisions in the Act.
A document will not be regarded as a settlement
were the initial unit holders provide funds for
its establishment.
Where a discretionary trust is established whereby
property is settled or agreed to be settled, the
provisions under Heading IX of the Third Schedule to
the Act apply and a fixed duty of $200 is payable on
the trust deed.
Where a unit trust fund is established solely from
contributions made by unit holders, the instrument
establishing the unit trust will not generally be dutiable
as there has not been a vesting of property to the
unit trust.
Where a unit trust fund is originally established from a
source other than the initial unit holders and is then
vested in the trustee, the SRO will regard the
instrument establishing the unit trust as constituting a
settlement and accordingly, fixed duty of $200 will
be payable.
Instruments establishing hybrid trusts for the benefit of
discretionary beneficiaries and unit holders and
whereby property is settled or agreed to be settled will
be regarded by the SRO as a settlement under
Heading IX of the Third Schedule of the Act. Further, a
conversion of a unit trust into a hybrid trust will be
regarded by the SRO as a settlement.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
September 1998
Settlements and Unit Trusts
allowances and Reimbursements
Revenue Ruling SD.092
beneficiaries or to
ciaries or to
perty will be distributed
e distributed
aries. This is consistent with
ries. This is consistent with
efinition of discretionary trust under
finition of discretionary trust under
of the Act.
it trust is a trust that is constituted by the
is a trust that is constituted by t
vesting of property in a trustee. The trust property
vesting of property in a trustee. The trust pr
is held for the benefit of persons known as u
is held for the benefit of persons known as u
holders, whose participation in the Trust
whose participation in the Trus
evidenced by the issue of a unit cer
sue of a unit ce
the Act, a unit is defined as a m
t is defined as a
In circumstances where su
ces where s
does not apply, the in
does not apply, th
subject to duty; h
subject to duty;
of any such u
of any such u
ettled, the
the Third Schedule to
he Third Schedule to
uty of $200 is payable on
of $200 is payable on
st fund is established solely from
t fund is established sole
s made by unit holders, the instrument
made by unit holders, the instr
hing the unit trust will not generally be dutiable
the unit trust will not generally be dutiable
there has not been a vesting of property to the
here has not been a vesting of property to the
unit trust.
unit trust.
Where a unit trust fund is originally estab
Where a unit trust fund is originally estab
source other than the initial unit hold
other than the initial unit hol
vested in the trustee, the SRO w
vested in the trustee, the SRO w
instrument establishing the
instrument establishing the
settlement and accordin
ement and acco
be payable.
Instruments
Instruments
Ceased - 30 June 2001