Assessments - Period of Retrospectivity (GEN-013) [2005] VICSROGEN 1 (1 September 2005)
Assessments --- Period of Retrospectivity
Revenue Ruling GEN.013
Replaces GEN.012
This ruling makes a minor amendment to and
replaces GEN.012. It provides further clarification
on the commencement date of an investigation of
the tax liability of a taxpayer by the State Revenue
Office (SRO) and the application of this ruling to
Land Tax assessments.
This ruling informs taxpayers and their
representatives of the policy concerning the period
of retrospectivity, which applies to all assessments
issued under legislation administered by the SRO.
The SRO has power to assess any tax outstanding
for past periods under the relevant legislation
regardless of how long those periods may be.
This power reflects a principle that, despite a
failure to recognise the existence of their tax
liabilities or to pay tax when it falls due, taxpayers
remain responsible for the payment of unpaid tax
liabilities.
The SRO takes the view that it is appropriate to
impose some limitations on the period of
retrospectivity when assessing a taxpayer’s tax
liability to ensure that:
No unreasonable financial burden is placed on
taxpayers where the liability arose from
genuine error, oversight or ignorance; and
General equivalence between the periods for
assessments and refunds is maintained.
However, the SRO does not consider that any
limitation should apply when a taxpayer’s unpaid
taxes arise from an intentional disregard of a
taxation law (refer to
TAA.006 --- Interest and
Penalty Tax
for examples of intentional disregard
of a taxation law).
This ruling applies to all assessments raised under
legislation administered by the SRO. In this ruling,
a period of retrospectivity means the period ending
on the date of an event, which identifies a
taxpayer’s liability to pay tax, and for which the
SRO will seek to recover any outstanding tax.
Assessments may also be raised to recover any tax
owing for periods following the period of
retrospectivity.
Reference date for period of retrospectivity
As a general rule, the SRO will limit the period of
retrospectivity for an assessment to a 3 year period.
The commencement date of the period of
retrospectivity is determined by reference to the date
of a voluntary disclosure, the date on which an
investigation commenced or the date on which a
taxpayer is advised of a tax liability, whichever
occurs first.
A voluntary disclosure is made when the SRO
receives the written voluntary disclosure from a
taxpayer. An investigation commences when a
taxpayer is informed by the SRO in writing of an
investigation into a possible tax default by the
taxpayer. However, where the SRO has to conduct
an investigation on a person other than the
taxpayer in order to determine a possible tax
default, the investigation commences when the
SRO notifies the person other than the taxpayer, in
writing, of an investigation into a possible tax
A taxpayer is considered to have been advised of a
tax liability on receipt of advice from the SRO by
various means including a private ruling, a notice of
decision or any other written advice indicating that
a tax liability exists.
There are variations to the retrospective period for
Pay-roll Tax and Land Tax.
For Pay-roll Tax, the period of retrospectivity must
include three (3) complete financial years. For
example, if a voluntary disclosure is made in March
2003, the period of retrospectivity will include the
three financial years ending on 30 June 2002 plus
the following eight months ending February 2003.
An exception for Pay-roll Tax arises when an
employer pays tax which is payable in Victoria, to
another jurisdiction by mistake. Where that other
which exceeds the period of retrospectivity, the SRO
will issue an assessment to match the period for
which tax was refunded.
Liability for Land Tax is assessed on a calendar year
basis and accordingly, the period of retrospectivity
is three (3) calendar years prior to the current
calendar year. A calendar year runs from 1 January
to 31 December.
If a taxpayer has an outstanding Land Tax liability
and the SRO has not previously assessed the
taxpayer in respect of that tax liability, the SRO will
assess the taxpayer’s Land Tax liability only for the
current calendar year. However, this will not apply
to matters involving special Land Tax assessments
or if the SRO is of the view that the taxpayer has
misled the SRO, whether by withholding
information or providing inaccurate information
relevant to the Land Tax liability. For example, a
taxpayer not informing the SRO of a change in
entitlement to an exemption previously granted. In
this instance, the period of retrospectivity set out in
the above paragraph will apply.
The SRO recognises that a taxpayer may need
some time to confirm that a liability exists or to
quantify the tax owing, particularly where the
taxpayer wishes to seek advice from external
advisers. However, the SRO may extend the period
of retrospectivity beyond the three year period
where a taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure but
there is an unreasonable delay between the
disclosure and the earlier recognition of a tax
Where the SRO is responsible for an unreasonable
delay in completing its investigation and advising
the taxpayer of any liability identified or issuing a
private ruling to a taxpayer on a voluntary
disclosure, the commencement date of the period
of retrospectivity will be adjusted to reflect that
Where the SRO and taxpayer both agree that the
SRO should obtain external advice to establish
whether the taxpayer has a tax liability, an agreed
date for the commencement of the period of
retrospectivity will be negotiated.
Documents presented for stamping
For documents that give effect to or evidence a
dutiable transaction, for example, a transfer of
land, this ruling is relevant only in instances where
the SRO, independently of the taxpayer, identifies
such documents in respect of which the correct
amount of duty has not been paid in full. A person
can always present a document for stamping and
the payment of any applicable duty, regardless of
whether the document was executed within the last
three years or not.
Intentional disregard of legislation administered
The SRO does not consider that the period of
retrospectivity will be limited to 3 years when a
taxpayer’s unpaid tax arises from an intentional
disregard of legislation administered by the SRO.
Instead, a taxpayer will be assessed for the
maximum period permitted by the relevant
legislation to ensure that no taxpayer benefits or
profits from such conduct.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
September 2005
Commissioner of State Revenue