Interest and Penalty Tax (TAA-007V2) [2014] VICSROTAA 1 (28 February 2014)
Revenue Ruling TAA.007 (version 2)
Taxation Administration Act 1997
was introduced on 1 July 1997 to provide a
single, overarching framework for the consistent
administration of Victoria’s taxation laws. Taxation
laws, as currently defined in the TAA, include the
Duties Act 2000
Land Tax Act 2005
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Congestion Levy Act
Part 9B of the Planning and Environment Act
Part 6 of the Livestock Disease Control
The TAA also provides for the reciprocal
enforcement of taxation laws in other jurisdictions
under Part 9, Division 2A of the TAA.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain
how the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) will impose administrative penalties
and calculate interest under Part 5 of the TAA.
Interest and penalty provisions play an integral role
in tax administration because they:
• deter non-compliance by making it unprofitable
• establish a uniform and consistent response
to non-compliance
• underscore the advantage of compliance and
the consequences of non-compliance, and
• compensate the Victorian Government for being
denied the use of funds to which it is entitled.
As outlined in the SRO’s Customer Charter,
the Commissioner will ordinarily start from the
presumption that taxpayers have dealt with their
tax affairs honestly. The penalty imposed in respect
of a default is intended to reflect the degree of the
taxpayer’s culpability. This is important because the
taxation laws frequently place an onus on taxpayers
to self assess or to notify the Commissioner of
certain circumstances.
The TAA provides a fixed penalty scale and also
allows the Commissioner to adjust the penalty
rate up or down the scale to reflect the level
of culpability. The Commissioner may:
a) determine that no penalty tax applies if
he is satisfied that there were mitigating
circumstances, i.e. that reasonable care was
taken or a Tax Default or Notification Default (as
explained later in this Revenue Ruling) occurred
for reasons beyond the taxpayer’s control,
b) reduce the rate of penalty tax where there has
been a voluntary disclosure, or
c) increase the rate of penalty tax where there
i) intentional disregard of a taxation law, or
ii) hindrance to an investigation.
In deciding whether to impose or remit penalty
tax and interest in a particular tax matter, the
Commissioner will be guided by the principles
outlined in this Revenue Ruling, and will apply
them as appropriate, taking into account all the
circumstances of the case.
This Revenue Ruling has been revised to incorporate
the Commissioner’s approach to legislative
amendments made since the release of the previous
version of this Revenue Ruling in July 2007.
Please note that this is a general Revenue Ruling.
The specific application of interest and penalty
provisions to payroll tax is outlined in
Ruling PTA.036 (version 2) - ‘Payroll Tax – Interest
and Penalty Tax’
Revenue Rulings
TAA.007 (version 2)
Interest and Penalty Tax
Ruling history
TAA.007 (version 2)
Explanation of key terms in this Revenue
Tax means a tax, levy, duty and any other amount
paid or payable under a taxation law. Tax also
includes interest and penalty tax imposed in
accordance with the TAA.
A taxpayer is a person who has, or may have,
a liability to pay tax. The taxpayer may or may
not have received a notice of assessment of the
tax liability. A reference to taxpayer in this Revenue
Ruling includes a person who is authorised to act
as the taxpayer’s representative.
Tax Default means a failure by a taxpayer to pay
the whole or part of the tax that the taxpayer is
liable to pay in accordance with a taxation law.
A Tax Default occurs when the taxpayer has made
a late payment of the correct tax (a ‘Late Payment
Tax Default’), or paid less than the correct amount
of tax (a ‘Tax Shortfall Tax Default’).
Unpaid tax refers to a tax liability under a taxation
law, which has not been discharged. If, at the
time the Tax Default occurred, there has been an
overpayment of tax that is within the time permitted
for a refund, the overpayment can be offset against
unpaid tax so that interest or penalty tax is assessed
on the net amount of unpaid tax. The offsetting
of an overpayment against an underpayment must
not extend beyond the statutory time limit under
the relevant refund provisions.
A Notification Default is a failure by a taxpayer:
• to notify the Commissioner of an error or
omission in his or her land tax assessment
as required under section 104A of the LTA within
60 days of the land tax assessment being issued
(an ‘Error or Omission Notification Default’), or
• who is a trustee to notify the Commissioner of
certain circumstances as required under section
46K of the LTA within one month of the event
occurring (a ‘Trust Notification Default’).
Penalty tax is the tax imposed under section 29
of the TAA if a Tax Default or Notification Default
Interest is imposed under section 24 of the TAA if
a Tax Default occurs. Interest has two components:
the ‘market rate’ and the ‘premium rate’ of interest.
Penalty Tax
When is penalty tax imposed?
Penalty tax can be imposed on Tax Defaults and
Notification Defaults. Penalty tax is not imposed
if it amounts to less than $20.
Tax Default
The Commissioner has classified Tax Defaults into
two categories: Tax Shortfall Tax Defaults and Late
Payment Tax Defaults.
A Tax Shortfall Tax Default occurs when no tax,
or less than the full tax assessed, has been paid.
A Tax Shortfall Tax Default may include:
• a failure to register and pay tax as required
under a taxation law
• the understatement of a tax liability and
the associated underpayment of tax
• the incorrect application of an exemption
resulting in an underpayment of tax
• a failure to notify the Commissioner of the
cessation of an exemption resulting in an
underpayment of tax, or
• a failure to notify the Commissioner of a breach
of the conditions attached to a private ruling.
A Late Payment Tax Default occurs when:
• a registered taxpayer pays the correct tax for
a return period after the due date for payment,
but before the Commissioner has issued an
assessment for tax for that period
• a taxpayer lodges a document/statement after
the time permitted by legislation and pays the
correct tax at the time of lodgement
• a taxpayer fails to pay an assessment (for tax
or penalty tax) by the due date shown on the
notice of assessment, or
• a taxpayer fails to pay an instalment by the
due date under an instalment arrangement.
A Late Payment Tax Default will generally not
attract penalty tax but will attract interest at the
sum of the market and premium rates.
However, the Commissioner may impose penalty
tax for Late Payment Tax Defaults if the same
registered taxpayer pays tax late more than twice
within a financial year. The rate of penalty tax
imposed will depend on whether the Commissioner
considers that the taxpayer has demonstrated
TAA.007 (version 2)
a failure to take reasonable care or intentional
disregard of a taxation law. Penalty tax may also
be assessed on late annual reconciliation payments.
Please refer to
Revenue Ruling PTA.036 (version 2)
- ‘Payroll Tax – Interest and Penalty Tax’
for further
information about penalty tax and payroll tax.
Notification Default
Notification Defaults only arise in relation to land
tax. The Commissioner has classified Notification
Defaults into two categories:
• Error or Omission Notification Defaults, and
• Trust Notification Defaults.
An Error or Omission Notification Default
occurs where a taxpayer who receives a land tax
assessment fails to notify the Commissioner within
60 days from the date of issue of the notice of
assessment that they own land in Victoria which
is not specified in the assessment, or have received
an exemption for which they are not eligible.
Annabel received her 2010 land tax assessment.
The assessment omitted one of Annabel’s
investment properties and Annabel failed to notify
the Commissioner of that omission within 60
days of her 2010 assessment being issued. The
Commissioner subsequently became aware of
this omission and issued Annabel a 2010 land tax
reassessment imposing an additional $1000 in land
tax. The reassessment included penalty tax of $250
imposed at the rate of 25 per cent on the additional
amount of land tax assessed because a Notification
Default had occurred.
If land is owned jointly, notification may be made
by any one of the joint owners named in the
assessment within 60 days from the date of issue of
the joint assessment.
A Trust Notification Default occurs where a trustee
fails to notify the Commissioner, in writing, within
one month of any of the following events:
• the trustee acquires or disposes of land
in Victoria
• the trust to which the land is subject becomes
a different category of trust
• the trustee has notified the Commissioner of
beneficial interests in land subject to a fixed trust
(under section 46B of the LTA) and there are
changes to the beneficial interests in land,
or the trustee has notified the Commissioner
of the unit holdings of a unit trust scheme
(under section 46C of the LTA) and there are
changes to the unit holdings in the scheme, or
• the administration of a deceased estate that
includes land is complete.
Penalty tax is imposed on the additional land tax
that would have been assessed had the Notification
Default not occurred. If no additional land tax
is assessed, no penalty tax will be imposed.
Penalty Tax Rates
The starting point for the imposition of penalty tax
is 25 per cent of the Unpaid tax. The Commissioner
may then remit, increase or reduce the rate of penalty
tax from 25 per cent depending on the particular
circumstances.
There are a number of steps that the Commissioner
will take to determine whether to remit, increase
or reduce the rate of penalty tax from 25 per cent:
1. Penalty tax will be remitted if the Commissioner
is satisfied that the taxpayer took reasonable
care to comply with the taxation law, or that
the Tax Default or Notification Default occurred
solely because of circumstances beyond the
taxpayer’s control. This means no penalty tax
will be assessed.
2. The rate of penalty tax will be increased to
75 per cent if the Commissioner is satisfied
that the taxpayer’s intentional disregard of
a taxation law contributed to the Tax Default
or Notification Default.
3. The rate of penalty tax will be increased by
20 per cent (either from 25 per cent to 30
per cent or from 75 per cent to 90 per cent)
if, during an investigation into a known or
suspected Tax Default or Notification Default,
the taxpayer concealed information or hindered
the Commissioner from becoming aware of
the nature and extent of the Tax Default or
Notification Default.
4. In situations where the taxpayer has made
a voluntary disclosure to the Commissioner,
the rate of penalty tax will be reduced by:
o 80 per cent (either from 25 per cent to
5 per cent or from 75 per cent to 15 per
cent) if the taxpayer made a voluntary
disclosure to the Commissioner before
TAA.007 (version 2)
an investigation into a known or suspected
Tax Default or Notification Default.
o 20 per cent (either from 25 per cent to
20 per cent or from 75 per cent to
60 per cent) if the taxpayer made a voluntary
disclosure to the Commissioner during an
investigation into a known or suspected
Tax Default or Notification Default.
Reasonable care
All taxpayers are expected to take reasonable care
to ensure they meet their tax obligations. However,
the standard of reasonable care may vary depending
on a taxpayer’s circumstances. The Commissioner
recognises that a Tax Default or Notification Default
may occur despite a taxpayer’s best intentions and
effort to comply with taxation laws.
In relation to tax matters covered by this Revenue
Ruling, reasonable care requires taxpayers to keep
complete and accurate records, make diligent efforts
to understand and comply with the relevant laws,
seek advice on uncertain or complex matters, be
honest in their dealings with the State Revenue Office
(the SRO) and promptly notify the SRO of all relevant
circumstances.
As a starting point, the Commissioner will consider
the taxpayer’s circumstances to establish what
level of care can reasonably be expected from the
taxpayer, including:
a) the taxpayer’s knowledge of tax legislation and
the information available on the taxation issue,
particularly where the Tax Default or Notification
Default relates to new legislative provisions which
have been in place for less than 12 months
b) the taxpayer’s access to expert advice
c) the complexity of the law relating to the Tax
Default or Notification Default
d) the taxpayer’s commercial experience and
whether standard accounting or commercial
practices in the taxpayer’s field or business
contributed to the taxpayer’s misapplication
of a taxation law
e) any individual circumstances that may have
contributed to the taxpayer’s misunderstanding
or inability to meet their tax obligations in
a timely manner, and
f) whether the Tax Default was due to an isolated,
honest, or unintended mistake having regard
to the taxpayer’s compliance history.
The following actions, alone or in combination, may
indicate that a taxpayer had taken reasonable care:
a) the taxpayer had taken reasonable steps
to be aware of his or her taxation obligations
by seeking professional advice or requesting
a private ruling from the SRO, and had applied
the advice or private ruling in good faith
b) the taxpayer had applied any relevant Revenue
Rulings in good faith, and
c) the taxpayer had maintained appropriate and
proper records.
A taxpayer would not be considered to have taken
reasonable care despite following the advice of
their representative if the taxpayer was aware of the
falsity of documents being prepared for assessment
by the SRO or had suspected or knew of fraudulent
activities conducted to mislead or deceive the SRO.
Investment Co was considering purchasing a property.
Investment Co was aware that a new provision of the
Duties Act 2000
may apply to charge an additional
amount of duty if it purchased the property. As
there was no case law or Revenue Rulings to provide
guidance on the application of the new provision,
before proceeding, Investment Co sought written
legal advice from a law firm, Smith & Associates.
Smith & Associates provided written advice that
the provision would not apply to the transaction.
Based on this advice, Investment Co purchased
the property and paid duty on the basis that the
provision did not apply.
The SRO determined that the new provision applied
to the transaction and subsequently assessed
Investment Co, resulting in additional duty of
$5,000 being assessed along with penalty tax.
Being dissatisfied with this outcome, Investment Co
lodged an objection to the imposition of the penalty
tax and provided the Commissioner with evidence
that it received advice from Smith & Associates.
In this case, the Commissioner would fully remit the
penalty tax because Investment Co took reasonable
care to comply with its tax obligations by seeking
and obtaining legal advice in relation to a provision
which was untested and had only been recently
introduced.
TAA.007 (version 2)
Bob has owned an investment property (Property
1) for five years and has always paid his land tax
assessments. In 2010, Bob purchased an additional
investment property (Property 2). In February 2011,
Bob received his 2011 land tax assessment. The
assessment included Property 1 but not Property 2.
In September 2011, the Commissioner became
aware that Property 2 had been omitted from Bob’s
2011 assessment and issued a 2011 reassessment,
which assessed both Property 1 and Property 2
and included penalty tax at the rate of 25 per cent
calculated on the additional amount of land tax
Bob lodged an objection to the penalty tax
component of the 2011 reassessment
at he took reasonable care because:
• when he purchased Property 2 in 2010 his
conveyancer lodged a Notice of Acquisition
(NOA) with the SRO and
• he has always simply paid his assessments when
they arrived and he does not know how land tax
is calculated or of his notification obligations, and
• he has always paid his assessments on time.
In these circumstances, Bob did not take reasonable
care as he did not make any effort to check that
his 2011 assessment was correct. The fact that Bob
lodged a NOA in 2010 does not displace the onus
on Bob to take reasonable care by checking his
2011 assessment and notifying the Commissioner
of the omission.
David owned two properties: his family home
(Property 1) which he used and occupied as his
principal place of residence (PPR) and an investment
property (Property 2). Since their purchase, David
had received annual land tax assessments specifying
Property 1 as PPR-exempt and assessing land tax
on Property 2.
Due to a change in his employment situation,
in January 2011 David moved interstate to work
and began to rent Property 1 to tenants. As a
result, David was not entitled to the PPR exemption
on Property 1 for the 2012 land tax year. In March
2012, David received his 2012 land tax assessment,
which also outlined his obligation to notify the SRO
of any error or omission in that assessment, within
60 days. The assessment correctly assessed land tax
on Property 2 but incorrectly specified Property 1
as PPR exempt. David paid the 2012 assessment
but did not contact the SRO or take any other steps
to check whether he was still entitled to the PPR
In July 2012, the Commissioner became aware
that David was no longer entitled to the PPR
exemption on Property 1 and issued a reassessment
for 2012, which assessed land tax on both Property
1 and Property 2 and included penalty tax for
the notification default at the rate of 25 per cent
calculated on the additional amount of land tax
David lodged an objection to the penalty tax
component of the 2012 reassessment on the grounds
that he took reasonable care because his failure to
notify the Commissioner of the error in his assessment
was due to him not knowing that he was no longer
entitled to the PPR exemption on Property 1.
In these circumstances, the assessment notice had
informed David of the requirement to notify the
SRO of any errors or omissions. It was reasonable
to expect him to be aware of this obligation and to
take steps to check whether Property 1 should still
be exempt from land tax given he was no longer
living there. As he did not make any enquiries, he
was found not to have taken reasonable care.
Circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control
Circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control may
include (depending always upon the individual case):
a) postal or delivery delays due to strikes or natural
disasters (but not where the taxpayer could have
arranged other means of delivery because
of knowledge of the likelihood of such a delay)
b) fires, floods or other natural disasters
c) unavailability of key personnel due to sudden
resignation, ill-health or death
d) computer system breakdowns, including third
party systems, and
e) changes to applicable taxation laws resulting
from court decisions.
The Commissioner will not be satisfied that there
were circumstances outside the taxpayer’s control
unless the taxpayer took all reasonable steps to avoid
or mitigate the Tax Default or Notification Default.
TAA.007 (version 2)
Intentional disregard of a taxation law
Intentional disregard of a taxation law means a
deliberate act or omission which causes a Tax Default
or Notification Default. This may be determined on
the basis of direct evidence of a taxpayer’s intention
(e.g. admission by a taxpayer) or can be inferred from
the surrounding circumstances and conduct of the
taxpayer. Conduct that may demonstrate intentional
disregard of a taxation law includes:
• tax avoidance or evasion
• knowingly making false or misleading statements
or records, or omitting or concealing relevant
facts or records
• failing to act in accordance with a private ruling
or well-established principle of tax law
• repeated Tax Defaults or Notification Defaults
on the same or closely related matters, and
• knowingly failing to notify the Commissioner
in accordance with statutory requirements.
Taxpayer’s culpability when a representative
or third party has contributed to the default
If a taxpayer authorises a person to act as his or
her representative in the conduct of his or her tax
affairs, the Commissioner will consider any action of
the taxpayer’s representative to be an action of the
taxpayer. Accordingly, the taxpayer will be responsible
for a Tax Default or a Notification Default which
arises from the action or failure of the taxpayer’s
representative unless it could be shown that the
taxpayer had taken reasonable care. The standard
of reasonable care will be evaluated according to the
circumstances and the expertise of the taxpayer’s
representative, however, the liability for penalty tax
remains with the taxpayer.
There may be circumstances where a Tax Default or
Notification Default occurs as a result of the failure of
a third party, who is not the taxpayer’s representative,
to provide timely or accurate information which is
necessary to determine the taxpayer’s liability for
tax. The behaviour of a third party will not influence
the Commissioner’s consideration of a taxpayer’s
culpability for a Tax Default or Notification Default.
The Commissioner will take into account factors
such as whether the taxpayer could reasonably
have been expected to know about the accuracy
of the information provided by a third party. The
Commissioner will also consider whether the taxpayer
did all that was possible and reasonable to assist the
third party to provide the required information.
Penalty Tax where the SRO conducts an
investigation or where a taxpayer makes
a voluntary disclosure
The Commissioner may conduct an investigation
of the TAA to examine a taxpayer’s
compliance with one or more taxation laws. The
investigation begins when the SRO informs the
taxpayer in writing that an investigation has
commenced. The investigation is completed when
the SRO has provided a taxpayer with formal
acknowledgement that the SRO has completed
the investigation.
A voluntary disclosure must be in writing and disclose
sufficient information to enable the nature and extent
of the Tax Default or Notification Default to be
determined.
The penalty tax rate will be reduced by:
• 80 per cent if, before the Commissioner
commences an investigation into a known or
suspected Tax Default or Notification Default,
the taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure to
the Commissioner, or
• 20 per cent if, after the Commissioner
commences an investigation into a known or
suspected Tax Default or Notification Default
by the taxpayer and, before it is completed,
the taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure
to the Commissioner.
The penalty tax reduction for a voluntary disclosure
before an investigation into a known or suspected
Tax Default or Notification Default is a concession
for taxpayers who co-operate fully in providing the
Commissioner with information and thereby avoid
the need for a full investigation. Depending on the
circumstances, the reduction in the rate of penalty
tax for a taxpayer who makes a voluntary disclosure
before the Commissioner commences an investigation
into a known or suspected Tax Default or Notification
Default applies as follows:
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 25 per cent (which could not be remitted
on the basis of reasonable care or circumstances
outside the control of the taxpayer) would
be reduced to 5 per cent, or
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 75 per cent (due to the taxpayer’s intentional
TAA.007 (version 2)
disregard of a taxation law contributing to the
Tax Default or Notification Default) would
be reduced to 15 per cent.
Clark owned land which was used for primary
production and was exempt from land tax. Prior
to 31 December, the primary production activities
ceased and, as a result, the land was no longer
exempt from land tax. The following year, Clark
received a land tax assessment which specified
that the land was still exempt from land tax because
the primary production exemption still applied.
Clark did not notify the SRO of the error in the
assessment within 60 days. Accordingly,
a Notification Default occurred.
Following the expiration of the 60 day period,
Clark advised the SRO in writing that the land
was not being used for primary production. Clark
then received a reassessment which assessed land
tax on the land and included penalty tax imposed
at the rate of 5 per cent of the additional land tax
assessed in recognition of the fact that Clark made
a voluntary disclosure prior to the commencement
of an investigation into a known or suspected
Notification Default.
A voluntary disclosure during an investigation into
a known or suspected Tax Default or Notification
Default occurs when a taxpayer actively assists the
investigation by obtaining, compiling and providing
the information necessary to determine the nature
and extent of a Tax Default or Notification Default.
A taxpayer’s response to the commencement of an
investigation will not be considered to be a voluntary
disclosure if the taxpayer does no more than respond
to requests for information and allow investigators
access to books and records. The reduction in
penalty tax for a voluntary disclosure during an
investigation provides an incentive for taxpayers,
because it reduces the time and work required by an
investigator to complete an investigation once it has
commenced. Depending on the circumstances, the
reduction in the rate of penalty tax for a taxpayer who
makes a voluntary disclosure after the Commissioner
commences an investigation but before it is
completed applies as follows:
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 25 per cent (which could not be remitted
on the basis of reasonable care or circumstances
outside the control of the taxpayer) would
be reduced to 20 per cent, or
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 75 per cent (due to the taxpayer’s intentional
disregard of a taxation law contributing to the
Tax Default or Notification Default) would
be reduced to 60 per cent.
The Commissioner advised Company B by letter that
he had commenced an investigation into a known
or suspected Tax Default in respect of Company
B’s compliance with the
Payroll Tax Act 2007
the current year and the preceding 3 years. After
receiving the letter, Company B made a voluntary
disclosure to the Commissioner in respect of the
current year but not the preceding 3 years. It was
found that Company B owed payroll tax for all
4 years under investigation, and that the Tax Default
was due to Company B failing to take reasonable
care and was not due to circumstances outside
Company B’s control. Penalty tax was imposed at the
rate of 20 per cent in respect of the unpaid payroll
tax for the current year and at 25 per cent in respect
of the unpaid payroll tax for the preceding 3 years.
Limitation on the reduction of penalty tax for
voluntary disclosures
The reduction in the rate of penalty tax for a
voluntary disclosure either before or during an
investigation into a known or suspected Tax Default
or Notification Default does not apply to payroll tax
matters where there is a Tax Default and:
a) the Tax Default involved the failure to lodge
a return and pay tax by the due date under
a taxation law, or
b) the taxpayer lodged a return by the due date
that disclosed a liability to pay tax but a Tax
Default arose because the taxpayer did not
pay that amount of tax by the due date.
The purpose of this limitation is to deny an automatic
reduction in the rate of penalty tax to a taxpayer
who, as a person registered to lodge payroll tax
returns and pay tax on a periodic basis, fails to meet
these obligations. It is the Commissioner’s practice
to raise an assessment of estimated tax payable
when a registered taxpayer has failed to lodge a
payroll tax return and pay tax for a period. However,
if the taxpayer subsequently provides a payroll tax
return or information showing that the estimated
TAA.007 (version 2)
liability for the period is incorrect, this information
will not be regarded as a voluntary disclosure before
an investigation. A reassessment will be made and
penalty tax will be recalculated by applying the rate
of penalty tax, used in the initial assessment, to the
correct amount of tax.
When will the Commissioner increase the rate
of penalty tax?
The penalty tax rate will be increased by 20 per
cent if, after the Commissioner commences an
investigation into a known or suspected Tax Default
or Notification Default, the taxpayer conceals
information or hinders the Commissioner during
the investigation.
Concealment or hindrance of an investigation means
an act or omission by a taxpayer, occurring during the
course of an investigation, which prevents or hinders
the Commissioner from finding the existence, nature
or extent of a Tax Default or Notification Default.
Depending on the circumstances, the increase in
the rate of penalty tax for a taxpayer who conceals
information or hinders the Commissioner during an
investigation into a known or suspected Tax Default
or Notification Default applies as follows:
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 25 per cent (which could not be remitted
on the basis of reasonable care or circumstances
outside the control of the taxpayer) would be
increased to 30 per cent, or
• Penalty tax imposed at the standard rate
of 75 per cent (due to the taxpayer’s intentional
disregard of a taxation law contributing to
the Tax Default or Notification Default) would
be increased to 90 per cent.
Commissioner’s discretion to remit penalty tax
by any amount
of the TAA authorises the Commissioner
to remit penalty tax in part or in full in appropriate
circumstances. It is this provision which enables the
Commissioner to impose penalty tax at rates other
than the standard rates outlined in this Ruling.
When considering whether to remit penalty tax under
this provision, the Commissioner will examine all the
relevant circumstances and take into account any
mitigating factors.
In relation to Notification Defaults, relevant
circumstances may include:
a) Whether the taxpayer has notified the
Commissioner of the correct ownership details
of the subject land at the time of acquisition
b) Whether the taxpayer has notified the
Commissioner of any change to the use of
the subject land which may affect whether
it is taxable under the LTA
c) Whether the SRO contributed to the error
or omission in the assessment
d) The complexity of the matter
e) The level of sophistication and commerciality
of the taxpayer, and
f) The compliance history of the taxpayer.
The penalty tax rates can be summarised as follows:
When is interest imposed?
If a Tax Default occurs, interest is imposed
on unpaid tax and unpaid penalty tax.
Interest is also imposed on a judgment debt that
includes an amount of unpaid tax. A judgment debt
is a judgment given, or entered, by a court for an
amount of unpaid tax.
Interest is not imposed on any unpaid interest or if
the amount of interest calculated on a Tax Default
is less than $20.
TAA.007 (version 2)
No Voluntary
Disclosure or
Concealment
or Hindrance
Investigation
Investigation
Investigation
Concealment
or Hindrance
Investigation
take reason-
able care, no
circumstances
control of the
taxpayer and
no intentional
disregard of a
taxation law
care or cir-
control of the
Intentional
disregard of a
taxation law
Because a Notification Default only results in
liability to pay penalty tax and is not a Tax Default,
interest is not imposed. However, a Tax Default
will occur if a taxpayer fails to pay the penalty tax
imposed by the due date. Accordingly, interest will
accrue on any unpaid penalty tax imposed as
a result of a Notification Default.
Under the TAA, interest is comprised of two
components:
• a market rate component, and
• a premium rate component fixed at 8 per cent
Market Interest
The purpose of imposing interest at the market rate
is to reimburse the Victorian Government for the
financing costs incurred due to the late payment of
the tax. The market rate is established by reference
to the Bank Accepted Bills rate unless there is a
current order specifying a different rate, made
by the Minister and published in the Government
Gazette. On 1 July each year, a new Bank Accepted
Bills rate is set automatically for the financial year.
The market rate is the average of the daily yields
for 90 day Bank Accepted Bills published by the
Reserve Bank of Australia for the preceding month
Premium Interest
The purpose of the premium rate is to:
a) penalise taxpayers for the late payment of tax
b) deter similar non-compliance by other taxpayers,
c) make it unattractive for taxpayers to pay other
debts in preference to taxation debts.
Therefore the premium rate is usually charged for
Late Payment Tax Defaults (other than for repeated
Late Payment Tax Defaults which attract penalty
tax) and instalment payments not paid by the due
date made under approved arrangements to pay
arrears of tax.
When will the Commissioner remit interest?
Full remission
of the TAA allows the Commissioner
to remit all or part of any interest imposed
in whatever circumstances the Commissioner
considers appropriate.
Remission of market rate of interest
In determining whether to remit the market rate
of interest, the Commissioner will consider whether
there is any reason that the Victorian Government
should bear the financing costs of revenue forgone
as a result of a Tax Default. Such a situation may
be where the SRO has contributed to the Tax
Default. For example, remission of the market rate
may be appropriate if the SRO has been unable
to provide a taxpayer with a decision in a timely
manner or has provided advice which has been
shown subsequently to be incorrect.
The Commissioner may also remit the market rate
of interest in exceptional circumstances.
Remission of the premium rate of interest
Remission of the premium rate of interest may
occur in circumstances where:
• the market rate component of interest is partially
or fully remitted, or
• penalty tax has been imposed for a Tax Default
and there is no need for an additional penalty
in the form of premium interest.
Accordingly, the premium rate of interest
is generally remitted in full where penalty tax
is imposed.
Generally, the Commissioner will partially remit the
premium rate of interest where a taxpayer has taken
reasonable care to comply with a taxation law,
as the imposition of the full premium rate of interest
is not required either as a penalty or as a deterrent.
However, to impose only the market rate of interest
on the unpaid tax would place this taxpayer at an
advantage when compared with a taxpayer who
paid tax on time by borrowing at normal business
rates, often around 3 per cent higher than the
market rate. It is therefore equitable to remit the
premium interest rate by 5 per cent (from 8 per cent
to 3 per cent) for unpaid tax by those taxpayers
whose culpability does not warrant penalty tax
or premium interest of 8 per cent.
Table of Interest and Penalty Charges
The application of interest and penalty tax to
various categories of Tax Defaults and Notification
Defaults is summarised in the table on page 10.
TAA.007 (version 2)
February 2014
Commissioner of State Revenue
Table of Interest and Penalty Charges
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling.
All rulings must be read subject to Revenue
Ruling GEN.001.
TAA.007 (version 2)
Tax Default
culpability
Penalty Tax
Market rate
Late Payment
Treated as a
tax shortfall
Tax Shortfall
Circumstances
Taxpayer took
care to comply
with a taxation
Failure to take
care but no
intentional
disregard of a
taxation law
Intentional
disregard of a
taxation law