Contractors - Services ancillary to the supply of goods (PTA-033) [2008] VICSROPTA 11 (1 August 2008)
Revenue Ruling PTA033
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
and harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria
Parties to a ‘relevant contract’ are taken to be
employers and employees (sections 33 and 34 of the
Act) and payments made under a contract are deemed
to be wages (section 35 of the Act). Deemed wages
are subject to payroll tax under section 36 of the Act.
While most contracts for the provision of services come
within the meaning of ‘relevant contract’ under section
32 of the Act, certain types of contracts are specifically
excluded from the definition of ‘relevant contract’. One
of the exclusions is a contract where the provision of
labour is ancillary to the provision of materials and/or
(section 32(2)(a)
of the Act).
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain how
section 32(2)(a)
of the Act would apply to exclude
a contract from the definition of ‘relevant contract’.
Where the amount relating to the provision of
materials and/or equipment under a contract is more
than 50% of the total contract amount, the provision of
labour under the same contract is considered ancillary.
There must be evidence to substantiate that the
provision of materials and/or equipment is the principal
object of the contract.
The amount attributable to materials and/or equipment
must be reasonable, having regard to the type of
services provided. In determining what is a reasonable
amount, due regard must be given to the current
market prices for such materials and equipment. This
exemption does not apply if the materials and/or
equipment are purchased from the principal or any
member of a group (within the meaning of
the Act) to which the principal belongs.
The principal may apply to the Commissioner of
State Revenue for a private ruling in accordance with
Revenue Ruling GEN.009 if:
• the 50% criterion is not satisfied, and/or
• the materials and/or equipment were bought from
the principal (or a member of a group to which the
principal belongs) at arms’ length
and the principal believes that the exemption should
Alternatively, where the 50% criterion is not satisfied,
the principal may be entitled to a deduction depending
on the profession of the contractor (Revenue Ruling
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Revenue Rulings
Contractors - Services Ancillary to the
Supply of Goods
Payroll Tax Act 2007
August 2008
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ruling history
Issued date
August 2008
Dates of effect