Payroll Tax - Interest and Penalty Tax (PTA-036) [2009] VICSROPTA 2 (1 July 2009)
Revenue Ruling PTA.036
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act) is a taxation law for
the purposes of the
Taxation Administration Act 1997
(TAA). Any failure to pay the correct amount of payroll
tax when it falls due is a tax default which is subject
to interest and penalty tax under the TAA. Revenue
Ruling TAA.007 outlines the State Revenue Office’s
(SRO) general policy on the application of interest and
penalty tax.
The Act harmonises the payroll tax legislation
in Victoria and NSW. As part of the payroll tax
harmonisation initiative, interest and penalty tax
policies in relation to payroll tax defaults have also
been harmonised.
This Revenue Ruling explains in detail the application
of interest and penalty tax to a range of payroll tax
defaults and should be read in conjunction with
Revenue Ruling TAA.007.
A. Tax default
A payroll tax default occurs when a taxpayer fails to pay
tax in accordance with the Act. The TAA provides for
interest and penalty tax to be applied to a tax default.
The interest rate consists of a market rate component
and a premium rate component. The market rate
component is to reimburse the Government for the
financing costs incurred due to the late payment of
tax. The premium rate component of 8% per annum
is imposed to deter late payments and ensure that a
defaulting taxpayer is not advantaged when compared
with a taxpayer who paid on time.
Penalty tax is imposed, in addition to interest, on the
amount of tax unpaid when a tax default occurs.
For the purposes of applying interest and penalty tax,
the Commissioner of State Revenue (Commissioner)
categorises tax defaults as follows:
• a late payment, or
• a tax shortfall.
1. Late payment
A tax default is regarded as a late payment when the
correct tax is paid in full after the due date but before
any action has been taken by the Commissioner.
As a general rule, a late payment tax default will not
be charged penalty tax but will attract interest at the
sum of the market rate plus the premium interest rate.
Interest will apply from the due date for payment until
the actual date of payment.
However, an exception to the rule is when a registered
employer pays the monthly tax after the due date but
before the Commissioner issues an assessment on more
than two occasions within a financial year (i.e. a repeat
late payer). This late payment tax default will attract
market rate of interest and penalty tax of 5%.
Examples of late payment tax defaults include:
(i) a registered employer pays the correct amount of
tax for a month after the due date but before the
Commissioner issues an assessment for the tax
owing for the month,
(ii) an assessment issued by the Commissioner is
not paid by the due date shown on the notice of
assessment, or
(iii) a taxpayer fails to pay an instalment by the
due date under an arrangement to pay tax by
instalments.
2. Tax Shortfall
Any tax default other than a late payment is
regarded as a tax shortfall. As a general rule, a tax
shortfall will attract:
(i) penalty tax at a rate reflecting the taxpayer’s
culpability (see attached table), and
(ii) interest at the market rate only.
A tax shortfall will not attract penalty tax in the
following circumstances:
(i) If the Commissioner considers that an employer
took reasonable care to comply with the Act.
However, to impose only the market rate of interest
on the tax unpaid would place this taxpayer at
an advantage when compared with a taxpayer
Revenue Rulings
Payroll Tax - Interest and Penalty Tax
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
who paid tax on time. Therefore, interest will be
charged at the sum of the market rate plus a
premium rate of 3% per annum.
(ii) If the taxpayer made a voluntary disclosure
before an investigation commenced. Interest will
be charged at the sum of the market rate plus a
premium rate of 3% per annum.
(iii) If the Commissioner considers that the tax shortfall
occurred due to circumstances outside the
employer’s control.
The following circumstances are examples of tax
shortfalls:
Example 1: Registered employer – payment of
monthly liability after an assessment
A registered employer fails to pay the correct monthly
tax by the due date and the Commissioner has taken
action by issuing an assessment for the tax owing for
the month. As a general rule, the rate of penalty tax in
this circumstance will be 25%. The assessment will be
based on estimated taxable wages where no monthly
return was lodged and will be based on the wages
or liability stated on the return where the employer
lodged a return but failed to pay the tax.
Example 2: Registered employer - underpayment of tax
Even though a registered employer has paid an amount
of tax for a month or a financial year, the employer has
paid less than the correct tax. The underpayment may
be identified by a review conducted by, or on behalf of,
the employer or by an investigation conducted by the
SRO. The amount of penalty tax applied will reflect the
taxpayer’s culpability.
Example 3: Failure to register and pay payroll tax
An employer, whose taxable wages have exceeded the
threshold, fails to register within the time permitted
and pay the tax owing. The amount of penalty tax
applied will reflect the taxpayer’s culpability.
B. Remission
The Commissioner may remit interest in part or
in full in such circumstances as the Commissioner
considers appropriate. Interest may be fully remitted
for a late payment tax default if the Commissioner is
satisfied that the late payment occurred as a result
of circumstances beyond the control of the taxpayer.
Examples of circumstances when interest may be
remitted in full include, but are not limited to:
• official postal and DX delays
• natural disasters such as a fire or flood.
Partial remission of the premium rate of interest may
occur where there is evidence that a taxpayer took
reasonable care or where a voluntary disclosure was
made before the commencement of an investigation.
A taxpayer is entitled to a reduction in the penalty tax
if the taxpayer voluntarily makes a written disclosure
which enables the Commissioner to determine the
nature and extent of the tax default:
• 80% if a written disclosure is made before the
commencement of an investigation into a known
or suspected tax default, or
• 20% if a written disclosure is made during an
investigation into a known or suspected tax default.
The penalty tax will be increased by 20% if the
taxpayer hinders or conceals information during an
investigation into a known or suspected tax default.
C. Annual Reconciliation (AR) Process
At the end of each financial year, every registered
employer is required to lodge an AR return for the
purpose of reconciling the employer’s tax liability for
the financial year with the tax previously paid for that
When an employer finds that further tax is payable
for the financial year, the AR return should be lodged
by the due date together with the payment of the tax
outstanding. For an employer who has overpaid payroll
tax for the financial year, the lodgement of the AR
return constitutes a request for the SRO to refund the
overpayment.
Due date for lodging the AR return
The due date for lodging the AR return is the 21st day
of July, or the next business day if the 21st falls on the
weekend or a public holiday, immediately following the
financial year to which the AR return relates (the AR
There is no tax default if the employer lodges the AR
return and pays any outstanding tax by the due date.
A tax default occurs when the correct amount of tax
owing for the financial year has not been paid, or where
the AR return has not been lodged, by the due date.
If the employer makes a payment of tax without
lodging an AR return, the Commissioner is unable to
determine whether the total tax paid is the correct
tax payable for the year. Therefore, even though a
payment of tax was made, given that no AR return
is lodged, the Commissioner will proceed to issue an
assessment of any estimated tax owing as though a
tax default has occurred.
Treatment of tax defaults related to the AR process
(i) AR lodged or tax paid after the due date but
before assessment is issued
If an employer lodges its AR return or pays the
tax owing after the due date but before the
Commissioner issues an assessment for the tax
owing for the AR period, any tax paid after the due
date or remaining unpaid will attract interest at the
market rate plus premium interest at the rate of 8%
(ii) AR lodged or tax paid after assessment is issued
If an employer fails to lodge its AR return or pay
the tax owing and the Commissioner issues an
assessment for the tax owing for the AR period,
any tax paid after the due date or remaining
unpaid will attract penalty tax of 25% and interest
charged at the market rate.
If the AR return is subsequently lodged, the penalty
tax and interest will be adjusted accordingly based
on the wages stated on the return. If the AR
return subsequently lodged shows that no tax was
outstanding at the due date, the interest and penalty
tax will be fully remitted.
D. Payment of tax in error to another jurisdiction
A tax shortfall may arise because tax has been paid
in error to the ATO or another jurisdiction. If the SRO
is satisfied that the tax was paid to another party in
error, no penalty tax will be imposed. Further, if the full
amount of tax payable in Victoria was received by the
wrong party on or before the due date, interest will be
remitted in full. If the tax liability payable in Victoria
is greater than the amount of tax paid to the wrong
party, full remission of interest will still apply, provided
the difference is paid to the SRO by a date specified
by the Commissioner.
This Revenue Ruling applies to a tax default that
occurs on or after 1 July 2009.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling.
PAYROLL TAX PENALTIES & INTEREST TABLE
(per annum)
LATE PAYMENT
1. Monthly return lodged/tax
paid after due date (7th day
of the following month) but
before issue of assessment
Market + 8%
2. Assessment not paid by
due date as shown on the
notice of assessment
Market + 8%
3. The Commissioner is
satisfied late payment was
beyond the control of the
4. Monthly return lodged/
tax paid late on more than 2
occasions during a financial
year before the issue of
TAX SHORTFALL
1. Monthly return not lodged
and assessment issued for tax
owing for the month
2. Voluntary disclosure before
investigation commenced
Market + 3%
3. Disclosure made after
investigation commenced
4. Assessment issued after
investigation completed (and
the taxpayer did not take
reasonable care)
5. Assessment issued after
investigation completed
(and evidence of intentional
disregard of the law)
6. The Commissioner is
satisfied that the taxpayer
took reasonable care
Market + 3%
7. The Commissioner is satisfied
tax shortfall was beyond the
control of the taxpayer
ANNUAL RETURNS
1. Annual return lodged
before issue of assessment.
Tax paid late or remains
outstanding
Market + 8%
2. Annual return not lodged
and assessment issued for
Commissioner of State Revenue