Preparation of land and the primary production exemption (LT-014) [2001] VICSROLT 1 (1 December 2001)
STATE REVENUE OFFICE OF VICTORIA
Preparation of land and the primary production
Revenue Ruling LT.014
Sub-sections 9(1)(ga), (h) and (ha) of the
Land Tax Act 1958
(the Act) provide exemption
from land tax where the land is used for primary production.
Following the decision of the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal in
Boyd Property
Company Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
(2000) it has become necessary to
clarify the circumstances where the preparation of land will be considered to be part of the
process of primary production undertaken on that land.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide guidance as to those circumstances.
Subject to satisfying all other matters required under sub-sections 9(1)(ga), (h) or (ha) of
the Act, land will be considered to be used for the purpose of primary production if the
Commissioner is satisfied that any of the following preparatory activities is undertaken as
part of a continuous, consistent and unbroken effort that is directed towards that purpose:
• clearing of land
• establishment of fences
• construction of fire breaks
• planting of wind breaks
• eradication of noxious weeds or vermin
• fertilising
• ploughing
• topsoil enhancement
• regeneration of land following salt encroachment
• establishment of dams or irrigation to ensure adequate water supply
An exemption will not be granted where the preparatory activities represent the
construction of a place of residence on the property, the cultivation of plants or trees for
experimental or pilot purposes or the conducting of feasibility studies.
Other factors may be taken into account in support of an application for exemption,
dependent on the specific requirements of the type of primary production or the condition
of the land.
Period of preparation time
Subject to the above conditions being met, preparatory activities will be taken to form part
of the process of primary production undertaken on the land if the time that is dedicated to
them does not exceed a period of twelve months either from the date of transfer of the land
or from the date of commencement of preparatory activities, where no change of ownership
of land has occurred.
Where the preparatory activities exceed a period of twelve months, the Commissioner may
grant the exemption after considering the circumstances of the individual case.
Procedure for the application of an exemption under this ruling
It is the responsibility of the applicant to inform the State Revenue Office (SRO) that
preparatory activities relevant to primary production are being undertaken on the land. In
the case of a change of ownership of land, if an assessment for land tax is issued for land
that is being prepared for primary production, the assessed owner should object to the
assessment and detail the preparatory activities that have been undertaken on the land. The
objection must be lodged within 60 days of the service of the notice of the land tax
assessment.
Special land tax
If the preparatory activities do not form part of a process of primary production undertaken
on the land, the land tax exemption does not apply.
Section 10 of the Act provides for the application of special land tax in cases where land,
which is exempt under specific sub-sections of section 9(1) of the Act, ceases to be exempt.
In some instances, where there is a change in land ownership, the vendor may still have a
liability to special land tax in respect of that land (refer to Revenue Ruling LT.008 which
outlines the circumstances where special land tax applies).
The SRO may request any information that it considers relevant for the purpose of
determining whether land is used for primary production. Each application will be
considered individually based on the information provided.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law. Each decision made by the State
Revenue Office is made on the merits of each individual case having regard to any relevant
ruling. All rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 2001
Document Outline
Period of preparation time
Procedure for the application of an exemption under this ruling
Special land tax