Liability on roll-overs of bill of exchange (FID-048) [1996] VICSROFID 4 (8 October 1996)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
This ruling explains the liability of a financial
institution for the payment of financial institutions
duty (FID) for various transactions associated with
providing financial accommodation to customers
under bill facility agreements. Under the
Institutions Duty Act
1982 (the Act) and the
Institutions Duty Regulations
1992, some receipts by
a financial institution from its engagement on a bill
of exchange are exempt from duty.
A financial institution may provide financial
accommodation to a customer by means of a bill
facility agreement. Under such an arrangement, the
customer is entitled to draw bills, or request the
financial institution to draw bills on its behalf. In
either case, the financial institution will undertake to
accept the bill once drawn. A bill may then be sold in
the money market in order to obtain the desired
funding. Under a bill facility agreement, the financial
institution’s role may vary. It may act as the customer’s
agent to sell the bill into the market. Alternatively, the
financial institution may buy the bill before resale to
another party or to hold it until maturity.
As acceptor of the bill, the financial institution is
liable to pay the holder the face value of the bill
upon presentment at maturity. The financial
institution will seek reimbursement, or indemnification,
of this amount from the customer. At the same time,
a new bill may be issued to continue the financing
arrangement and the issue of a ‘replacement ‘ bill is
referred to as a roll-over.
Generally, receipts from trading in bills of exchange
qualify as short term dealings and are liable for
concessionary duty rather than primary duty.
However, receipts of indemnification payments
associated with trading in bills of exchange do not
qualify as short term dealings. From 8 October 1996,
regulation 8(1)(q) provides an exemption for receipts
of indemnification payments in respect of bills of
exchange which have a face value of $50,000 or
more and a term of not more than 185 days.
The processing of the transactions for a roll-over of a
bill of exchange under a bill facility agreement may
be done directly through the customer’s account or
through an internal account of the registered
financial institution. The transactions arising from
each method and their appropriate FID treatment
are discussed in this ruling.
In this ruling, every reference to a bill of exchange
means a bill with a face value of $50,000 or more
and a term of not more than 185 days.
A. The transactions are conducted directly through
the customer’s account.
On maturity of a bill of exchange, which a financial
institution has accepted on a customer’s behalf, the
financial institution pays the holder the face value
of the bill. The financial institution then debits the
customer’s account and credits its own account to
obtain re-imbursement for the amount paid.
Regulation 8(1)(q) exempts this receipt from
primary duty.
If the financial institution is both the acceptor and
the holder of the bill, the amount received by
debiting the customer’s account is an amount
received on maturity of a bill of exchange and is a
short term dealing receipt within the meaning of
section 7(1)(g).
A new bill of exchange is then issued, sold on the
short term money market and the proceeds credited
to the customer’s account. The proceeds will qualify
as an amount in respect of the issue of a bill of
exchange under section 7(1)(c) for the customer
and, if the customer operates a short term dealing
account, may be deposited to that account. Unless
the customer’s account is an exempt account, this
deemed receipt by the financial institution arising
from the credit to the customer’s account will be
dutiable at the primary rate.
Liability on roll-overs of bills of
Revenue Ruling FID.048
Replaces Revenue Ruling FID.015
ON THE MOVE
If the amount debited to the customer’s account to
pay for the maturing bill exceeds the amount
credited from the proceeds of the new bill, the
financial institution may require the customer to
deposit sufficient funds into the account to make up
the difference. The receipt by the financial institution
arising from this deposit is not an indemnification
payment and will be dutiable at the primary rate,
unless the customer’s account is an exempt account.
B. The transactions are conducted through an
internal suspense account of a financial
institution which is also a registered short-term
money market operator.
When a person presents a financial institution with a
maturing bill of exchange which it has accepted on
behalf of a customer, the financial institution pays
the holder the face value of the bill and debits its
own suspense account. If the financial institution is
the holder of the maturing bill, it will debit its
suspense account as an initial step in receiving
payment from its customer.
At the same time the financial institution arranges
for a new bill of exchange to be issued by its
customer. This bill may be sold on the short term
money market by the financial institution acting as
agent for its customer, and the proceeds credited to
the financial institution’s suspense account. In this
case, the receipt is an exempt receipt by the
financial institution under section 18(3)(h) of the
Act. Alternatively, the financial institution may buy
the new bill from its customer and credit its suspense
account with the discounted amount owing to the
customer. This credit entry does not represent a
receipt under ordinary concepts or a deemed receipt
and therefore is not dutiable.
The financial institution will then seek
indemnification, or re-imbursement, from its
customer for the difference between the amount
paid for the maturing bill and the amount received
from the sale of the new bill. This indemnification
payment is not a short term dealing, but is an
exempt receipt under regulation 8(1)(q).
The commencement date for this ruling is
8 October 1996.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
January 1998