Employment Agency Contracts - On-hire to Government (PT-117) [2005] VICSROPT 5 (1 April 2005)
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
') was amended
State Taxation Acts (Tax Reform) Act 2004
introduce changes to the employment agency contract
provisions effective from 1 January 2005.
2. Under the new provisions, the employment agent is
liable for Pay-roll Tax on payments made under an
employment agency contract to or in relation to service
providers (on-hired workers), as well as on the value of
any fringe benefits provided and superannuation
contributions made on behalf of these on-hired workers.
3. An exemption for the employment agent is provided
under section 5(3) of the
, in respect of the
wages paid to the on-hired worker, under an employment
agency contract, where:
the wages would be exempt from Pay-roll Tax
had the on-hired
worker been paid by the client as an employee;
the client has provided a declaration to that effect
to the employment agent, in respect of the on-
hired worker.
4. The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the correct Pay-roll
Tax treatment of payments made by an employment
agent to a worker on-hired to a government department.
5. Commonwealth Government
The Commonwealth Government ('the Commonwealth')
does not pay Pay-roll Tax by virtue of section 114 of the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Constitution
Section 114
Constitution
any State Government from imposing tax on the
Commonwealth.
does not apply to the
Commonwealth, and therefore, an employment agent
must pay Pay-roll Tax on 'wages' paid to any workers on-
hired to Commonwealth government departments under
an employment agency contract from 1 January 2005
(eg. The Department of Defence, The Department of
Family and Community Services).
7. Victorian State Government
All Victorian State Government departments are subject
to Pay-roll Tax in Victoria and therefore employment
agents must pay Pay-roll Tax on 'wages' paid to workers
on-hired to Victorian State Government departments
Revenue Rulings
Ruling No. PT.117
Employment Agency Contracts
On-hire to Government
Revenue Ruling PT.117
under employment agency contract from 1 January 2005
(eg. The Department of Human Services, The
Department of Primary Industries, The Department of
Infrastructure).
8. Local Government
Wages paid by Local Government (municipal councils)
are exempt from Pay-roll Tax under
section 10(1)(e)
, other than those wages paid or payable:
for or in connexion with; or
for or in connexion with the construction of any
buildings or the construction or any works or the
installation of plant, machinery or equipment for
use or in connexion with -
the supply of electricity or gas, water supply, sewerage,
the conduct of abattoirs, of public markets, of parking
stations, of cemeteries, of crematoriums or of hostels or
of any other activity that is a prescribed activity
9. Consequently, employment agents that on-hire workers
to Local Government are not required to pay Pay-roll Tax
on payments to those on-hired workers, provided that the
worker is not engaged in a prescribed activity shown at
paragraph 8 above.
10. Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law. Each decision
made by the State Revenue Office is made on the merits of each
individual case having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must
be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01
Commissioner of State Revenue