Duty concession for off the plan sales - land and building packages and refurbishments (DA-048) [2008] VICSRODA 8 (1 September 2008)
Revenue Ruling DA.048
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) imposes duty on transfers
of dutiable property unless an exemption or concession
applies. Concessions are available when there is a
transfer of land as a result of an off the plan sale which
involves either a land and building package under
section 21(3)
or a refurbishment under
section 21(4).
The land and building concession applies where
a person enters into a contract for the purchase of
a land and building package and construction has not
commenced, or only a percentage of construction has
been completed, at the date of contract.
The refurbishment concession applies where
a contract is entered into for the refurbishment
of an existing building where the refurbishment has
not commenced or is not complete at the date of
the contract, and the transferor is the first registered
proprietor of the subdivided lot.
Section 21(5)
Act defines a refurbishment as building work for which
a building permit has been issued being work for the
conversion of an existing building for which such a
permit or approval is required.
The dutiable value under
section 21(3)
Act is determined by deducting the purchasers’ cost
of any construction or refurbishment (inclusive of GST)
occurring after the date of the contract of sale from
the contract price (inclusive of GST).
State Taxation Acts Amendment Act 2008
(the amending Act) has introduced changes to the
calculation process for the off the plan concession,
including a new fixed percentage method.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to:
• clarify when the concessions apply
• publish percentage amounts for different classes
of buildings or refurbishments, and
• explain the changes to the calculation of the
concession and other issues as a consequence
of the amending Act.
This Revenue Ruling applies to contracts for off the
plan sales entered into on or after 1 October 2008.
In order for the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) to determine the application of the
off the plan concession, the transferor must complete
SRO Duties Form 4A (Off the plan sales statutory
declaration) in accordance with section 21(4A) of
the Act. Part 6 of the Form relates to the calculation
of the concession in accordance with the new fixed
percentage method. Part 7 of the Form relates to the
calculation of the concession in accordance with the
previous method, referred to below as the alternative
Whole of project or single lot approach when
determining the percentage of construction costs
In order to determine the percentage of construction
costs completed as at the date of the contract of sale,
it is necessary to have regard to the manner in which
the project is managed. This can be either a whole
of project approach or a single lot approach.
Whole of project approach
If the completion of the construction works for the
property/lot is dependant on the completion of
construction works for all other lots, including the
common areas in that development, and the approval
of the certificate of occupancy is dependant on the
completion of all the other lots and common areas
for that subdivision, then the transferor must use the
whole of project approach.
This approach requires evidence of (but not limited
to) progress payments claimed by the builder and
supported by quantity surveyor reports. The whole
of project approach accords with industry practice and
ensures the calculations take into account the relevant
proportion of costs attributable to common areas (e.g.
security, lifts and stairwells).
An example of the whole of project approach is where
the quantity surveyor report states that 60 per cent of
construction is completed at the date of the contract
of sale. Although no construction has commenced in
Revenue Rulings
Duty concession for off the plan sales – land
and building packages and refurbishments
Ruling history
Issued date
September 2008
DA.011 & DA.016
Dates of effect
regards to units on the top floors, the transferor must
state that based on the whole of project approach,
60 per cent of construction is completed in regards
to all units sold at that time.
Single lot approach
If the completion of the construction works for the
property/lot is not dependant on the completion of
construction works for all properties in that development
and separate approvals including certificate of
occupancy can be obtained for the individual lot/unit,
the transferor may use the single lot approach.
This approach requires the transferor to keep detailed
records of the progress of the construction works for
that specific lot/unit at the time of the contract of sale.
When to use the whole of project or single lot
The whole of project approach should be used for
multi-lot low rise or high rise developments.
For a single lot freestanding construction, although the
whole of project approach can be used, the following
percentages for the various stages of construction may
be used as a guide when determining the percentage
of works carried out at the contract date:
• 15 per cent for base (slab/foundations etc)
• 30 per cent for frame
• 65 per cent for lock up
• 90 per cent for fixing
• 100 per cent for completion.
When the whole of project approach is used it must
be used for all the units in the development.
Calculation of the off the plan concession
There are two methods for calculating the off the
plan concession:
1. The fixed percentage method, or
2. The alternative method.
1. Fixed percentage method
The fixed percentage method involves the use of
a deemed maximum percentage amount (fixed
percentage) which represents the amount paid
or payable by the purchaser for the construction
component of the contract. This method is designed
to make it easier for the transferor to calculate the
concession.
Rounding down to 10 per cent increments
Where the fixed percentage method is used, the
percentage of building works completed can be
rounded down to the next 10 per cent increment,
thereby resulting in a greater concession.
For example, where 37 per cent of the building works
are completed prior to the contract of sale date, it
can be rounded down to 30 per cent. Rounding down
increases the off the plan concession by increasing the
allowable deduction from the GST inclusive contract
price. In this case, 70 per cent of the building costs
occurring after the date of the contract are deducted
instead of 63 per cent. Refer to Example 3 below.
Fixed percentages & class of buildings
When using the fixed percentage method the
transferor is required to:
• define the class of building
• determine what percentage of the building works
have been completed at the contract of sale date,
• complete Part 6 of SRO Duties Form 4A.
The different classes of buildings are:
• Single lot freestanding or single dwellings sharing
side walls (e.g. a terraced house or duplex). This
also includes dwellings which have abutting garage
• Multi-lot low rise – up to and including 3 storeys,
not including basements. These are usually units or
apartments with access to common property, and
• High rise multi-lot, 4 or more storeys, not including
basements. These are usually units or apartments
with access to common property.
The deemed fixed percentage for each class of
building is as follows:
Examples of fixed percentage method of calculation
Where no construction or refurbishment has
commenced at the date of the contract of sale,
the minimum dutiable value of the property can
be ascertained by deducting the deemed fixed
percentage for cost of construction, or refurbishment,
from the contract price. The dutiable value would
be the contract price minus the deemed percentage
amount for the class of building.
Class of Building Building works component % cost
of construction of contract price
freestanding
Multi-lot low
rise – up to
and including
Date of contract: 1 October 2008
Class of building: single lot freestanding
Consideration: $500,000
No construction commenced
As the fixed percentage of contract price for building
works for a single lot freestanding building is set
at 45 per cent, the concession would be calculated
as follows:
Step one - deemed building works component is
45 per cent, therefore 45 per cent of $500,000
Step two - therefore the dutiable value would be
$500,000 minus $225,000 = $275,000
Where construction or refurbishment has commenced
but is incomplete at the date of the contract of sale,
the dutiable value of the property can be ascertained
as follows:
• Deduct the percentage of the construction works
completed prior to the contract from the deemed
fixed percentage for cost of construction, or
refurbishment.
• Then deduct the remaining percentage of
construction works from the contract price.
• The dutiable value is the contract price less
the deemed percentage amount relating to the
construction not completed at the contract date.
In this example the transferor is required to calculate
the percentage of works carried out at the date of sale.
Date of contract: 11 October 2008
Class of building: single lot freestanding
Consideration: $500,000
Percentage of construction completed at date of
contract is 30 per cent, the frame is completed
As the fixed percentage of contract price for building
works for a single lot freestanding building is set
at 45 per cent, the concession would be calculated
as follows:
Step one - deemed building works component is
45 per cent, therefore 45 per cent of $500,000
Step two – 30 per cent of building works completed
at date of contact therefore 70 per cent uncompleted
Step three – 70 per cent of $225,000 = $157,500
Step four – therefore the dutiable value would be
$500,000 minus $157,500 = $342,500
Rounding down to 10 per cent increments
Where 37 per cent of the building works are
completed prior to the contract of sale date, it can
be rounded down to 30 per cent. In this case, the
calculation is based on 70 per cent of the building
costs occurring after the date of the contract being
deducted, instead of 63 per cent.
Date of contract: 21 October 2008
Class of building: single lot freestanding
Consideration: $500,000
Percentage of construction completed at date of
contract is 37 per cent
As the fixed percentage of contract price for building
works for a single lot freestanding building is set
at 45 per cent, the concession would be calculated
as follows:
Step one – deemed building works component is
45 per cent, therefore 45 per cent of $500,000
Step two - completed building works is rounded
down from 37 per cent to 30 per cent therefore the
deemed uncompleted building works is 70 per cent
Step three – 70 per cent of $225,000 =$157,500
Step four – therefore the dutiable value would be
$500,000 minus $157,500 = $342,500
Alternative method
Some transferors may elect to use the alternative
method which requires a declaration of land values
and the actual cost of construction to the purchaser.
It should be noted that rounding down is not available
with this method.
The alternative method requires the transferor to
complete Part 7 of SRO Duties Form 4A and address
the following issues:
• base land value
• off the plan land value
• unit entitlement ratio
• non-deductible costs not related to the physical
construction and deductible costs relating to
construction together with a percentage of costs
calculation.
These issues are discussed in greater detail on the SRO
website under Duty concession for off the plan sales.
Record keeping
In addition to the record keeping obligations imposed
on the transferee pursuant to Part 8 of the
Administration Act 1997
, the amending Act introduces
record keeping obligations for transferors. These
obligations apply to all applications for the off the
plan concession where the contract of sale is entered
into on or after 1 October 2008, irrespective of the
method of calculation.
The transferor is required to keep all records that are
necessary to enable the duty payable on the transfer
to be assessed. These records may include:
• land valuations
• quantity surveyor reports
• drawdown schedules against financial
accommodation
• third party completion of works claims
• certificate of occupancy showing mandatory
inspection stages
• any other relevant records.
The transferor must retain the records for not less than
5 years after the date they were made or obtained or
the date on which the dutiable transaction occurred,
whichever is the later unless the Commissioner
authorises a shorter retention period.
The Commissioner, by written notice, may require a
person to produce to him a document that is required
to be kept within the period specified in the notice or
any extended period allowed by the Commissioner.
Joint and several liability for additional duty
Where a transferor makes a declaration under section
21(4A) of the Act and that declaration is incorrect,
the transferor is jointly and severally liable with the
transferee for any additional duty payable on the
transfer, including any penalty tax or interest.
Evidentiary requirements
The following documents must be lodged for
assessment of duty:
• The original completed signed and dated transfer
• The original or complete copies of the contract/s
of sale and if separate, a copy of the contract with
the transferee for the construction or refurbishment
of the subject property
• SRO Duties Form 1 (Goods statement for
residential land) or SRO Duties Form 2 (Goods
statutory declaration), whichever is applicable
• SRO Duties Form 4A completed by the transferor,
• A copy of the building permit or building approval
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
September 2008
Commissioner of State Revenue