Application of the anti-avoidanceprovisions (DT-005) [1996] VICSRODT 1 (30 April 1996)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Section 5(1)(c)
Debits Tax Act 1990
charges tax, in certain circumstances, on each
eligible debit of not less than $1 made to an account
kept outside Victoria. Tax will be imposed if the
account holder (or one of the account holders) is a
resident of Victoria and the account was used in
connection with the avoidance of liability for
payments of the tax that would have been charged
if the debit had been made to an account kept in
Victoria. (For details concerning what constitutes a
Victorian resident see
Section 3(2)
of the Act.)
Section 5(2)
of the Act also provides that there is no
avoidance if the debit is made to an account which
would attract a liability to a similar tax.
Section 5(2)
of the Act was amended by the
Tax (Amendment) Act
to provide that
avoidance may still be concluded unless the tax
payable in the other jurisdiction is also payable at
the same rate as Victorian debits tax.
Concerns have been raised with the State Revenue
Office that as a result of this amendment, the
anti-avoidance provisions may have adverse
implications for legitimate transactions which were
not intended to avoid tax.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the application
of the amended anti-avoidance provisions.
Section 5(1)(c) of the Act is clearly not intended to
apply to the legitimate use of interstate accounts.
In essence it is intended to impose tax on
transactions which the Commissioner of State
Revenue has reasonably concluded, having regard
to the surrounding circumstances, are effected
by means which avoid the payment of debits tax
in Victoria.
It is not possible to identify specific situations in
which avoidance would clearly be concluded, the
following factors will be considered by the
Commissioner in applying Section 5(1)(c) of the Act:
1. The jurisdiction in which the account is held and
the rate of tax applicable (if any);
2. The extent of any established private and
commercial interests in that jurisdiction of the
resident of Victoria who would benefit from any
difference between the rate or amount of tax
payable in that jurisdiction and Victoria;
3. The existence of other accounts held by the
resident of Victoria in other jurisdictions and the
extent of established private and commercial
interests in those jurisdictions;
4. The source of the funds deposited to the
account and the nature of payments regularly
made from the account;
5. Any reasons which may be given to the
Commissioner for the account being held outside
Victoria and for any specific payment, or
payments, being made from that account rather
than an account held in Victoria.
Where the Commissioner determines that the
account was used for avoidance purposes, a default
assessment will be made and an assessment issued
to the account holder under section 33(3) (b) of
In cases where it is not clear whether or not Section
5(1)(c) of the Act applies and therefore whether an
account holder is liable to pay debits tax under
Section 8(2), a private ruling should be sought from
the State Revenue Office.
Application of the anti-avoidance
Revenue Ruling DT.005
Replaced by: DT.007
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
ON THE MOVE
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
C E A S E D 30 June 1997
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue