Rooming House Exemption - Commissioner's Guidelines (LTA-003) [2007] VICSROLTA 3 (1 October 2007)
Revenue Rulings
Rooming House Exemption – Commissioner's Guidelines
Land Tax Act 2005
Revenue Ruling LTA 003
According to
section 75(1)(a)
Land Tax Act
(the Act), land is exempt from land tax if the
land is used and occupied as a rooming house
(within the meaning of the
Residential Tenancies Act
) and is registered under part XII of the
. To claim this exemption, a landowner
must apply to the Commissioner of State Revenue
(the Commissioner) as required by section 75(4) of
In determining whether a landowner is eligible
for this exemption, section 75 (1)(b) of the Act
requires that the Commissioner is also satisfied that
the rooming house is used and occupied primarily
as low cost accommodation by people with low
incomes in accordance with his guidelines. The
purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to set out the
Commissioner's guidelines for determining whether
a landowner is eligible for the rooming house
exemption under section 75 of the Act.
The Commissioner’s guidelines for determining
whether a landowner is entitled to the exemption
under section 75 of the Act for land used and
occupied as a rooming house are as follows:
The types and location of premises in which low
cost accommodation may be provided
The exemption applies to all Victorian rooming
houses that comply with the definition in the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
and are registered
with local councils under the
Health Act 1958
Circumstances in which and the arrangements
under which, the accommodation is provided
At least 80 per cent of total accommodation must
be available for long-term residents (i.e. persons
who reside at the rooming house for at least
three consecutive months or any period totalling
three months in a year) and must be occupied or
available for occupation only by long-term residents
in the taxation year.
Maximum tariff limits for the accommodation
The maximum tariff level applicable for rooming
houses is 105 per cent of the Commonwealth aged
pension rate for full board and lodging and 70 per
cent of the aged pension rate for lodging only. This
rate will be applicable to both singles and couples
depending on circumstances.
Each year, the level will be based on the relevant
previous September quarter pension level (e.g.the
tariff level for 2007 is based on the pension level for
the September quarter 2006).
The number and types of persons for whom the
accommodation are provided
The exemption applies only to rooming houses
occupied by four or more residents and where none
of those residents is a family member of either the
owner or the manager of the facility.
Special land tax
Land that is exempt from land tax on the basis that
it is used and occupied as a rooming house will
be subject to special land tax when it ceases to be
exempt (section 30(1)(d) of the Act).
This Revenue Ruling covers land subject to land tax
for the 2006 land tax period and onwards.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
October 2007
Commissioner of State Revenue
Revenue Ruling LTA.003 was ceased on 31 December 2012 due to the issue of Revenue Ruling LTA.003 (Version 2)
which applies from the 2013 land tax year onwards