Application to Schemes Involving Trusts (LT-009) [1995] VICSROLT 2 (31 October 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Section 71 of the Land Tax Act.
Application to Schemes
Involving Trusts
Revenue Ruling LT.009
As recommend by the Fordham Land Tax Review,
Land Tax (Revision) Act 1991
amended the then
existing anti-avoidance provision, section 71 of
Land Tax Act 1958
(the Act). The new provision
is modelled on
Assessment Act
and sections 11S and 11T of the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1958
, which themselves are based
on the Part IVA provision.
Amendments were made to strengthen the
anti-avoidance provision after the special trust
provisions were repealed in April 1993.
The anti-avoidance provision was widened to clearly
apply to schemes involving trusts.
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the types of
trusts that are not intended to be treated as
‘schemes’ for the purposes of section 71 of the Act.
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled that
for the purposes of section 71 of the Act, a trust will
not be treated as part of a scheme involving multiple
trusts, if it is a trust established for any of the
following purposes:
• trusts established to administer superannuation
funds which are eligible funds within the
meaning of section 267 of the
Assessment Act 1936
• trusts solely established for the benefit of
disabled persons, or where the disabled person is
the sole beneficiary, during his or her lifetime, in
respect of both income and capital;
• trusts established to hold land for members of
clubs as defined in section 13(2) of the
Land Tax Act
trusts established as a consequence of an order
of a court or tribunal, the Guardianship and
Administration Board or some similar body; and
• trusts established for the purpose of providing
funds, which are utilised solely for the purposes
of furthering the following activities for the
benefit of the community provided the income or
capital of the trust can never be distributed to
the donor or to the donor’s family.
The activities are:
assistance for disabled persons, and
The Commissioner of State Revenue has also ruled
that section 71 will not be applied to situations
where there are only two trusts; the first trust being a
business trust which holds land used solely in the
course of the family business, and a second trust
which hold all other land on behalf of the parties to
both trusts. Accordingly, the parties to both trusts
may not hold any land in their own right, either
alone or jointly. (This exclusion will still be applicable
even though some of the parties to the trusts hold
their principal residences in their own names.)
For the purpose of this paragraph, the relevant
parties to a trust are the trustee, the appointer, the
guardian and the beneficiaries.
For trusts established for purposes other than those
listed above, section 71 will only apply if it can be
established that the three prerequisites as listed
under the section are present. The prerequisite
conditions are:
1. the existence of
to which section 71(2)
2. the obtaining of
a reduction in
or exemption
in connection with that scheme; and
ON THE MOVE
3. the requisite conclusion that
the main purpose
the person or one of the persons, who entered
into or carried out the scheme, is to enable a
person to obtain a reduction in, or exemption
form, tax in connection with that scheme.
Please not that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue