Principal Place of Residence Exemption - Substantial Business Activity (LTA-001) [2007] VICSROLTA 1 (1 October 2007)
Revenue Rulings
Principal Place of Residence Exemption – Substantial Business Activity
Land Tax Act 2005
Revenue Ruling LTA 001
The principal place of residence (PPR) exemption
provided by
section 54(1)(a)
Land Tax Act
(the Act) applies to land owned by a natural
person who uses and occupies the land as his/her
principal place of residence. Section 54(1)(b) of the
Act extends the PPR exemption to land owned by
a trustee of certain types of trusts if its beneficiary,
who is a natural person, uses and occupies the land
as his/her principal place of residence.
However, where a substantial business activity
occurs on the land, section 62 of the Act limits the
PPR exemption to the extent of the land that is
used for residential purposes. The purpose of this
Revenue Ruling is to explain the factors set out in
section 62(2) of the Act which the Commissioner
of State Revenue Office (the Commissioner) must
consider in determining whether substantial business
activity is conducted on PPR land.
The existence of any one of the factors set out
in section 62(2) of the Act is sufficient for the
Commissioner to determine that a substantial
business activity is being conducted on the land that
is also being used as one’s PPR (PPR land). The
relevance and weight to be given to each factor will
depend on the circumstances of each case.
The factors that the Commissioner must consider in
determining whether a substantial business activity
is being carried out on PPR land include (but not
limited to):
a) If paid employees or contractors (other than those
who are relatives of, and usually reside with, the
owner) are engaged in the business activities
carried out on the land
Where remunerated employees or contractors (who
are not related to the owner) are engaged in the
business activity, the Commissioner would generally
consider that there is substantial business activity on
the PPR land.
b) Amount of income that is derived from the
business activity carried out on the land
The Commissioner would generally consider that
substantial business activity occurs on the PPR
land if the gross income derived from the business
activity undertaken on the land for the most recently
completed financial year (preceding the year of
assessment) is $30,000 or more.
c) Proportion of the land that is used (or allocated)
for business purpose
The Commissioner would generally consider that
substantial business activity occurs on the land
if more than 30 per cent of the land, or 30 per
cent of the area of a building on the land, is used
to conduct the business activity. The operation
of a home office which is only being used for
the purpose of keeping accounts and records of
business activities which are conducted elsewhere, is
unlikely to constitute a substantial business activity
for the purposes of section 62 of the Act.
In addition to the above, the Commissioner could
also consider any other factors that could indicate
that a substantial business activity is being carried
out on PPR land.
This Revenue Ruling covers land subject to land tax
for the 2006 land tax period and onwards.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
October 2007
Commissioner of State Revenue
Revenue Ruling LTA.001 was ceased on 5 December 2012 due to the issue of Revenue Ruling LTA.001 (Version 2)
which applies from 5 December 2012