Employment Agency Contracts - Exempt not-for-profit approved group training organisations (PT-121) [2006] VICSROPT 1 (1 January 2006)
Revenue Rulings
January 2006
Commissioner of State Revenue
1. With effect from 1 January 2005, wages paid to a
"new entrant" employed by an approved group
training organisation in accordance with the
requirements of an approved training scheme under
section 51 of the
Vocational Education and Training
1990 are exempt from Pay-roll Tax under section
10(1)(k) of the
Pay-roll Tax Act
(the Act) if the
"new entrant" is on-hired by the group training
organisation under an employment agency contract.
2. A "new entrant" is defined in section 10(5) of the Act
an apprentice or trainee who meets the requirements
of the Victorian Learning and Employment Skills
Commission for eligibility for funding as a new entrant
under the applicable performance agreement under
section 10 of the Vocational Education and Training
3. The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide the
list of names of the not-for-profit group training
organisations that have been declared by the
Treasurer in the Government Gazette as approved
group training organisations for the purposes of
section 10(1)(k) of the Act.
4. This Revenue Ruling replaces PT.106 as the Treasurer,
from time to time, adds and removes organisation(s)
from the list by way of announcements in the
Government Gazette. The list is now set up as a table
on www.sro.vic.gov.au which will be updated as and
when the changes are announced.
5. The Treasurer, by way of notices in the Government
Gazette, has declared a number of group training
organisations as approved group training
organisations. The complete list of approved group
training organisation is available on the website of the
State Revenue Office:
http://www.sro.vic.gov.au/sro/srowebsite.nsf/revenue/C
EA638BB11A1FAF0CA2570CF007F6DD6/$File/publi
cation-PTX-038.pdf
Therefore, wages that these approved group training
organisations pay to "new entrants" under
employment agency contracts are exempt from Pay-
roll Tax for services provided during the exempt period
as indicated on the table.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Employment agency contracts
Exempt not-for-profit approved group training organisations
Revenue Ruling PT.121
Replaces PT.106