Branch closures, amalgamations or restructures - Evidence for exemption (FID-052) [1998] VICSROFID 4 (7 July 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
The purpose of this ruling is to provide financial
institutions with advice on what evidence is
sufficient to conclude that money is received as a
result of the closure, amalgamation or restructure
of a branch of a financial institution.
Frequently, financial institutions are restructuring
their branch networks and, as a consequence,
branches may be closed or amalgamated with
another branch in the same locality. Customers,
who hold accounts at a branch to be closed, may
respond in a number of ways. They may:
• accept the relocation of their accounts to the
branch nominated by their financial
institution;
• request that their accounts be relocated to
another branch of their choice;
• transfer their funds to existing accounts kept
by another branch; or
• close their accounts and transfer their funds
to accounts kept by another financial
institution.
To ensure that customers will not be charged with
the cost of any duty for transfers of money in these
circumstances, two exempt receipts are provided
by regulations 8(1)(r) and (s) of the Financial
Institutions Duty Regulations 1992.
This ruling is concerned with regulation 8(1)(r),
which applies to receipts of money to be credited
to accounts at another branch or another financial
institution, providing that all the funds are sourced
from accounts held at the branch which
was closed.
Regulation 8(1)(r) exempts from primary rate duty:
‘A receipt of money by a registered financial
institution for the credit of an account kept by it in
the name of a person or persons jointly, if-
(i) the money is received solely as a result of the
closure, amalgamation or restructure of another
branch of that financial institution or a branch of
another financial institution in Victoria or in a State or
Territory in which a corresponding law is in force; and
(ii) the money was last held in an account in the
name of that person or those persons jointly’.
Generally a financial institution which plans to close a
branch writes to all customers who hold accounts at
that branch advising them of the new branch which
will keep their accounts. Where customers are not
satisfied with the arrangements proposed by the
financial institution and transfer their funds or
accounts elsewhere, it may be difficult for financial
institutions receiving those funds to establish that the
amounts are received as a result of a branch closure,
amalgamation or restructure. This difficulty may be
increased when customers, for a variety of reasons,
request alternative arrangements after their accounts
have been relocated.
Transfers of funds between branches of the same
financial institution
Where a financial institution closes a branch and
transfers all accounts kept at that branch to another
of its branches, any receipts arising from the transfers
will be exempt receipts under regulation 8(1)(r). The
exemption applies whether the branch to which the
accounts are transferred is nominated by the account
holder or the financial institution.
There may be circumstances where accounts have
been transferred from a closed branch before a
customer directs the financial institution to transfer
those funds to accounts kept by another branch of the
customer’s choice. The State Revenue Office will
consider the receipts arising from the second transfer
of the accounts or funds to be made solely as a result
of the closure of the branch providing that:
Branch closures, amalgamations
or restructures - Evidence
for exemption
Revenue Ruling FID.052
ON THE MOVE
• the customer requests the accounts to be relocated
within three months of the action taken by the
financial institution to remove the accounts from
the closed branch; and
• the customer requests all accounts, relocated at
the financial institution’s discretion, to be kept at
another branch of that financial institution.
If these conditions are satisfied, the receipts from both
the first and second transfers are exempt receipts.
Transfers of funds between financial institutions
Some customers, on learning of the closure, or
intended closure, of the branch of the financial
institution which keeps their accounts, may decide to
close those accounts and transfer their funds to new or
existing accounts with another financial institution.
Again, this may occur before or after the accounts have
been relocated from the closed branch. The State
Revenue Office considers that a financial institution can
be satisfied that the amounts received for the crediting
of accounts can be treated as exempt under regulation
8(1)(r), where it has obtained:
• a copy of a letter sent to the account holder
advising of the closure of the branch and the
branch to which accounts would be relocated; or
• a notice of the branch closure published in the
• any written material published by the financial
institution concerned which confirms the branch’s
closure; or
• telephone advice (which is then documented) from
the relevant financial institution confirming which
branch was closed and the branch to which
accounts were transferred or reassigned.
The financial institution should also request each
customer seeking this exemption to produce a
passbook or statement (or other documentation) which
demonstrates that the customer held an account at the
closed branch.
In addition, for the exemption to apply, customers
must move accounts or funds to another financial
institution within three months of the action to
remove the accounts from the closed branch.
Verification of the amount of the exempt re-
The exemption provided by regulation 8(1)(r) is
limited to amounts last held in accounts at a
closed branch of a financial institution and will
not apply to a receipt of money which includes
money from other sources. If a customer wishes
to claim the exemption for amounts totalling
more than $10,000, the financial institution must
request the customer to provide documentary
evidence that the amount of money transferred
comprises only money previously held in accounts
at the closed branch. In all other cases, it will be
sufficient for the financial institution to ascertain
that the customer kept an account at a branch
which closed within the past three months.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1998