Stamp Duty liability relating to a 'right to reside' under a will (SD-104) [2000] VICSROSD 3 (1 October 2000)
Revenue Rulings
Stamp duty liability relating to
a ‘right to reside’ under a will
Revenue Ruling SD.104
Replaces Revenue Ruling SD.027
This ruling has been revised to reflect the abolition
of deed duty from 1 May 1997.
The transfer or conveyance of real property is
subject to ad valorem duty under Heading VI of the
Third Schedule to the
Stamps Act 1958
unless an exemption applies.
Section 65 of the Act provides that duty is payable
under Heading VI in respect of any instrument
assigning or agreeing to assign a right or interest in
real property which exists under an estate, will or
codicil of a deceased person.
Section 65 also provides that if duty has been paid
on such an instrument, no duty will be payable on
any subsequent transfer of the underlying real
property made in accordance with that instrument.
From time to time, questions arise concerning the
transfer or disposal of a ‘right to reside’ in respect
of real property. In some cases, such a right will not
be a transferable interest or will be extinguished
when the beneficiary ceases to occupy the property.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain how
different types of rights to reside are treated under
section 65 of the Act.
This ruling applies from 1 May 1997.
The provisions of section 65 of the Act do not apply
to a ‘right to reside’ that cannot be transferred or
assigned from the beneficiary to another person.
Upon relinquishment of the property such a right
is extinguished.
This type of interest is generally distinguished from
an instrument effecting a ‘life tenancy’ which is
transferable. Such instruments fall within the ambit
of section 65 of the Act and are subject to ad
valorem duty.
It should be noted that an instrument which is
executed as a deed before 1 May 1997 will be
chargeable with deed duty unless chargeable with
duty under another section of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings
must be read subject to Ruling No. GEN.01
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 2000