Exemption from involuntary transfer between accounts of the same person (FID-051) [1998] VICSROFID 3 (1 July 1998)
Revenue Rulings
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling FID.008 and
is effective from I July 1998. FID.008 described a
number of exempt receipts including a transfer of
money to a ‘new’ account as the result of a
closure, amalgamation or restructure of a branch.
A receipt arising from these circumstances is now
covered by a specific, and more comprehensive,
exemption found in regulations 8(1)(r) and (s) of
the Financial Institutions Duty Regulations 1992.
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
imposes duty on deemed receipts as well as
physical receipts by registered financial
institutions. In some circumstances, the crediting
of an account may give rise to a deemed receipt
under subsections 9(1A) and 9(2). There may be
circumstances where the crediting of a customer’s
account represents a transaction, which is beyond
the control of the customer and outside the
intended scope of the deeming provisions, where it
is inappropriate to impose duty. This ruling
identifies specific circumstances where the
crediting of an account will not be held to be a
deemed receipt and therefore will not be subject
The Commissioner of State Revenue has ruled
that financial institutions duty is not payable in
relation to the crediting of an account where:
• the transfer of money into a ‘new’ account
with the same financial institution is the result
of the conversion of one computer system to
another which requires either the renumbering
of existing accounts or the creation of ‘new’
• the transfer of money into a ‘new’ account with
the same financial institution is the result of a
change of a product account type due to a
product being withdrawn under a product
rationalisation conducted by the financial
institution; or
• the transfer of money into a ‘new’ account with
the same financial institution is the result of the
loss of a passbook, credit card or automatic teller
machine card.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1998
ON THE MOVE
Exemption for involuntary transfers
between accounts of the same person
Revenue Ruling FID.051
Replaces FID.008