Certificates of Exemption - Religious Institutions (DT-004) [1995] VICSRODT 3 (31 October 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Debits Tax Act 1990
charges tax on debits to accounts on which cheques
may be drawn. However, Section 26 of the Act
provides for a certificate of exemption to be granted
where all debits to these accounts are likely to be
either ‘exempt’ debits or ‘excluded debits.
An exempt debit is a debit of a certain type specified
by the legislation which does not attract tax (eg. it is
made solely for the purpose of reversing a credit
previously made to the account).
An excluded debit is a debit made to an account
kept in the name of certain classes of persons or
organisations not liable to debits tax. It is a further
requirement that an excluded debit must be a debit
made in relation to transactions carried out by, or on
behalf of, such class of persons or organisations
wholly and exclusively in furtherance of its objects.
section 3(1)
of the Act, a debit made to an
account with a financial institution, kept in the name
religious institution
is an ‘excluded’ debit. If the
Commissioner is satisfied that all debits to such an
account are, or are likely to be excluded debits or
exempt debits, the account will be designated an
exempt account (a certificate of exemption will be
granted for the account). If a debit is made, or is to
be made, which is neither an exempt debit nor an
excluded debit, the certificate of exemption will be
withheld or revoked as the case may be.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide guidance
as to the types of institutions that constitute
‘religious institutions’.
This ruling replaces items 3 - 9 of the Australian Tax
Office debits tax ruling MT2002 and is operative
from 1 January 1995.
To be granted religious institution status, the objects
and activities of an organisation must reflect its
charter as a body instituted for the promotion of
some religious object, and the beliefs and practices
of the members of that body must constitute a
religion. The following are some of the indicators
of the existence of a religion for the purposes of
• belief in a supernatural being, thing or principle;
• the existence of a comprehensive belief system.
ie moral code;
• the existence of ceremonies, services
and rituals;
• the acceptance by the organisation of new
members, who must accept the organisation’s
ideas to the exclusion of other ideas; and
• the degree of importance of faith to the believer.
All applications for exemption by organisations other
than those normally accepted as ‘religious institutions’
(ie. those denominations recognised under Section
Marriage Act 1961
) should include:
• a copy of the constituent documents;
• a copy of the most recent annual report and
financial statements; and
• a detailed description of the activities of
the organisation.
The following issues have also required clarification:
Commercial Undertakings
If a religious institution conducts some transactions
of a commercial nature, such transactions will not
necessarily preclude that organisation from being
recognised as a religious institution for the purpose
of the Act. The exemption will be allowed where the
profits from those transactions are wholly and
exclusively directed in furtherance of the objects of
the organisation.
Certificates of Exemption -
Religious Institiutions
Revenue Ruling DT.004
Ceased - 30 June 2005
ON THE MOVE
Religious Groups
Many churches have various groups operating under
their control or within their constitutional framework.
Examples of these are men's and women's guilds,
societies and various youth groups. These groups are
centred on religious principles and the advancement
of the particular religion which they represent.
Such groups are considered to be religious
institutions (where these groups are not separately
constituted it is accepted that they are in effect
part of the church, which itself qualifies as a
religious institution).
An exemption from debits tax will not however be
extended to sporting clubs or groups associated with
or sponsored by the churches. Generally, such
activities have separate bank accounts and there
should be little difficulty in separating those accounts
entitled to exemption from those not so entitled.
Personal cheque accounts of ministers of religion
and members or religious organisations do not
qualify for exemption.
If there is doubt as to whether a particular
organisation constitutes a religious institution for the
purposes of the Act, the matter should be referred to
the State Revenue Office for a private ruling.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ceased - 30 June 2005