Landholder Provisions - General Issues Relating to Trust Registration Applications (DA-061) [2012] VICSRODA 9 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – General Issues
Relating to Trust Registration Applications
Revenue Ruling DA.061
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on
relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme (whether
private or public) that has land holdings in Victoria with
an unencumbered value of $1 million or more.
Section 89Q
of the Act allows the trustee of a unit
trust scheme to apply for registration of the scheme
as a wholesale unit trust scheme, an imminent
wholesale unit trust scheme, a declared wholesale
unit trust scheme or a declared public unit trust
scheme. Application forms are available on the State
Revenue Office (SRO) website. For information on
the registration of a unit trust scheme as a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme or a declared public unit
trust scheme, please see Revenue Rulings DA.062 and
DA.063, respectively.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide
guidance on certain issues relating to trust registration
applications under
of Chapter 3 of the Act,
including the Commissioner of State Revenue's (the
Commissioner) ability to backdate the registration of
a unit trust scheme and to look through the registered
unit holders of the scheme.
An application for registration must be made in the
relevant approved form available on the SRO website.
Duties Form 59 is to be used by a unit trust scheme
seeking registration as a wholesale unit trust scheme,
an imminent wholesale unit trust scheme or a declared
wholesale unit trust scheme. Duties Form 60 is to be
used by a unit trust scheme seeking registration as
a declared public unit trust scheme. The Commissioner
will not process an application for registration unless
all the relevant parts of the application form are
completed in full and the specified documentation
and information listed in the form is provided.
In considering an application for registration, the
Commissioner may request further information to
determine the application and is permitted under
section 89Q(3)
of the Act to take into account any
matter he considers relevant. Where the Commissioner
considers further information is required to determine
an application for registration, the application will not
be processed until the further information is provided.
It should be noted that a registered imminent
wholesale unit trust scheme that meets the criteria for
registration as a wholesale unit trust scheme during or
at the end of the 12 month registration period will not
automatically be registered by the Commissioner as
a wholesale unit trust scheme. A separate application
must be made for registration as a wholesale unit trust
scheme under
section 89S
of the Act.
Registration backdating
Section 89V(1)
of the Act provides that registration may
be granted to commence on a day before the date on
which the application for registration is approved.
When seeking registration of a unit trust scheme under
the Act, a trustee must satisfy the Commissioner that
the scheme meets various registration criteria. One
common criterion is that registration is not being
sought for the purpose of, or as part of a scheme
or arrangement with a collateral purpose of, avoiding
or reducing duty otherwise chargeable under
of Chapter 3.
If a relevant acquisition has occurred in a scheme
that has not registered under the Act, and the
trustee subsequently seeks registration to a period
on or before the date of the relevant acquisition,
the Commissioner will take the view that registration
of the scheme is being sought for the purpose (or
collateral purpose) of avoiding or reducing the duty
chargeable under
of Chapter 3 of the Act. In
such circumstances, the Commissioner will not make
the registration of the unit trust scheme retrospective
to a date before the liability to duty arose.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
The Commissioner will also not grant or backdate
registration of a unit trust scheme as a declared
public unit trust scheme or declared wholesale unit
trust scheme solely so that a unit trust scheme
in which it owns units can qualify for registration
as a wholesale unit trust scheme.
sections 89J
of the Act, a unit
trust scheme that ceases to be a widely held trust
or a wholesale unit trust scheme as a result of the
redemption of units in the scheme is granted, within
certain prescribed criteria, a 30 day period to revert
scheme. Consequently, where
section 89J
of the Act applies and the relevant 30 day period has
not expired, the Commissioner will not entertain an
application for registration of a scheme as a declared
public unit trust scheme or a declared wholesale
unit trust scheme. However, the Commissioner will
entertain an application for registration lodged after
the expiry of the 30 day period where the scheme has
failed to revert back to a widely held trust or wholesale
unit trust scheme within the relevant period of time.
If no relevant acquisition was made in the scheme
during the 30 day period, the Commissioner may
make the registration of the scheme retrospective
to the commencement of the 30 day period. If a
relevant acquisition did occur in the scheme during
the 30 day period, the Commissioner will not make
the registration of the scheme retrospective to a date
before the liability to duty arose.
Example 1 is an example of where the Commissioner
would be inclined to backdate the registration of a unit
trust scheme. Example 2 is an example of where the
Commissioner would not be inclined to backdate the
registration of a unit trust scheme.
A unit trust scheme is registered as an imminent
wholesale unit trust scheme. At the end of the
12 month period for registration as an imminent
wholesale unit trust scheme, the scheme satisfies
the criteria to be registered as a wholesale unit
trust scheme. However, the trustee of the scheme
overlooks the requirement that a separate
application must be made for registration as
a wholesale unit trust scheme. Sometime later,
the trustee becomes aware of this requirement
because of an investment it wishes to make in
another scheme that is registered as a wholesale
unit trust scheme. Prior to making this investment,
the trustee of the scheme applies to be registered
as a wholesale unit trust scheme and requests
that registration be backdated to the date its
registration as an imminent wholesale unit trust
scheme ceased. No relevant acquisitions have
been made in or by the scheme during this period
of time. In these circumstances, the Commissioner
would be inclined to backdate the registration
of the scheme as registration is not being sought
to avoid duty on any relevant acquisitions made
in or by the scheme.
A unit trust scheme that was established for
the purposes of investment by professional and
institutional investors holds 3 parcels of land
in Victoria worth $100 million each. Qualified
investors hold 65% of the units in the scheme.
The remaining 35% of the units are held by a
single non-qualified investor who acquired the
units a year ago from a previous investor in the
scheme that was also a non-qualified investor.
As this acquisition constituted a dutiable relevant
acquisition in the scheme, the non-qualified
investor successfully convinces the trustee of the
scheme to seek registration of the scheme as a
declared wholesale unit trust, effective from a
date prior to the relevant acquisition. In these
circumstances, even if the Commissioner was
inclined to register the scheme as a declared
wholesale unit trust, registration may not be
granted retrospectively, particularly to a date prior
to the relevant acquisition.
Registered unit holders and look through
In determining whether a unit trust scheme satisfies
the relevant criteria for registration under
of Chapter 3 of the Act, the Commissioner will not
look beyond the registered unit holders of the scheme.
The only exception is where a unit holder is a bare
trustee, nominee or custodian separately holding units
in the scheme for different beneficial owners (including
qualified investors under
section 89P
of the Act) who
could call for the units at any time. In all other cases,
the Commissioner will not look through registered unit
holders to determine a scheme’s status under the Act.
Example 3 is an example of where the Commissioner
would look through the registered unit holders
of a scheme. Example 4 is an example of where the
Commissioner would not look through the registered
unit holders of a scheme.
A unit trust scheme with 1000 unit holders has
a single registered unit holder that holds 36%
of the units in the scheme. This unit holder
is a professional nominee company which happens
to have been separately appointed to hold 19%
of the units in the scheme on behalf of Mr X and
17% of the units on behalf of Mr Y. Mr X and Mr
Y are not associated persons and are able to call
for their units at any time. In these circumstances,
the Commissioner will look through the
professional nominee company when determining
and characterising the scheme’s status and/or
registration under the Act.
A unit trust scheme has 100 unit holders, one
of whom holds a 70% interest in the scheme (the
registered unit holder) as trustee of a managed
investment scheme with over 300 members.
As the 70% interest is held by the trustee of
another unit trust scheme (on behalf of all the
unit holders of the scheme), the Commissioner
will not look through the registered unit holder
when determining and characterising the scheme’s
status and/or registration under the Act.
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of
of Chapter 3 of the Act in
relation to their particular circumstances, the taxpayer
may contact the Landholder Acquisitions Branch at
the SRO or request a private ruling in accordance
with the guidelines in Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In
all cases, the onus is on the taxpayer to provide the
Commissioner with the necessary information to
enable an informed decision to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue