Fees paid to golf professionals by golf clubs (PTA-013V2) [2013] VICSROPTA 1 (24 May 2013)
Fees paid to golf professionals by golf clubs
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Revenue Ruling PTA.013 (version 2)
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
harmonises the payroll tax legislation in a number of
Australian jurisdictions.
Even though a golf club may set a minimum number
of working hours, a golf professional is unlikely to be
a common law employee as the golf professional may
be carrying on a business of providing professional golf
services (whether in his/her own capacity, partnership or
an incorporated entity). In addition, a golf professional
is not usually entitled to the various types of paid leave
that an employee is normally entitled to.
The income of a golf professional may include prize
money, proceeds from the sale of goods in the pro
shop, fees for golf lessons provided, and retainer and
commission payments from a golf club. The purpose of
this Revenue Ruling is to clarify a golf club’s payroll tax
liability on payments made to a golf professional.
Although a golf professional is unlikely to be a common
law employee of a golf club, the golf professional
may be deemed as an employee of the golf club and
any payments made to the golf professional may be
deemed as wages under Division 7 of
(the Contractor Provisions). Deemed wages are subject
to payroll tax under section 35 of the Act.
However, payments made by a golf club to a golf
professional may be exempt from payroll tax if:
• the golf professional provides services to the
golf club for no more than 90 days in a financial
(section 32(2)(b)(iii)
of the Act). For more
information on what constitutes a day’s work,
refer to Revenue Ruling PTA.014.
• the golf professional engages another person
to assist in providing the services to the golf
(section 32(2)(c)
of the Act). That person
must be engaged in a substantially full-time
capacity and provide services required of the golf
professional under the contract between the golf
professional and the club. Further, that person
cannot merely be providing administrative
services to the golf professional’s business.
• the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) is satisfied that the golf
professional provides the same kind of services
provided to the club, to the general public in that
financial year
(section 32(2)(b)(iv)
of the Act).
The Commissioner would generally accept that
the golf professional provides services to the
general public if the golf professional earns more
than 50 per cent of his/her income as a golf
professional from sources other than the golf
club that engages him/her.
Grouping of the business of the golf professional
and the golf club
Even if the payments to a golf professional were exempt
under the Contractor Provisions, the business of the
golf club may still be grouped with the business of the
golf professional under
of the Act (the Grouping
Provisions). If so, in calculating the payroll tax liability
under the Grouping Provisions, all wages paid by the
golf professional’s business and those paid by the golf
club are aggregated.
For the Grouping Provisions to apply, the business of
the golf club and the golf professional would have
to be substantially dependent or connected. Given
the way that most golf professionals operate, if less
than 50 per cent of the golf professional’s income for
providing professional golf services is derived from the
golf club, the Commissioner would generally exercise
his discretion not to group the golf professional with the
Golf clubs should apply to the Commissioner for a
private ruling if they are uncertain as to whether their
payments to golf professionals are subject to payroll tax.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
Revenue Rulings
PTA.013 (version 2)
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ruling history
PTA.013 (version 2)
Issued date
Dates of effect