Application of section 64A(3) to trustees and transfers of land (SD-095) [1999] VICSROSD 2 (1 July 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Application of section 64A(3) to
trustees and transfers of land
Ruling SD.095
Replaces SD.094
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling SD.094 which is
withdrawn following the substitution of section
64A(3) by the
State Taxation Acts (Amendment) Act
. The substitution of section 64A(3) was as a
consequence of the Court of Appeal decision in
McKinnon Wallace Holdings v Commissioner of State
Revenue, 98 ATC 5181.
The purpose of this ruling is to explain the effect of
the substituted section 64A(3).
The transfer or conveyance of real property is subject
to ad valorem duty under Heading VI of the Third
Schedule to the
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act), unless
an exemption applies. Generally property
acquisitions are evidenced by a conveyance under
general law or transfer of land pursuant to the
Transfer of Land Act 1958
Transfer of Land Act 1958
precludes the
registration of trust interests. A change of beneficial
ownership may therefore be effected without a
registerable instrument.
Section 64A of the Act charges duty in
circumstances where the beneficial ownership of real
property is changed without an instrument of
transfer. Section 64A(3) deals specifically with the
circumstances where real property which is vested in
a person becomes subject to a trust for another by
reason of a declaration of trust by that person.
This ruling applies from 8 June 1999.
Section 64A(3) applies in the following
circumstances:
• A person is trustee for two trusts; Trust X and
Trust Y. The real property is vested in the person,
as trustee of Trust X, who later declares that the
property is held on trust for Trust Y.
• Real property is vested in a person in his or her
own right. That person by declaration of trust
declares the property to be held on trust for
another person.
Section 64A(3) requires that a statement be lodged
with the Commissioner of State Revenue and duty,
at ad valorem rates on the market value of the real
property, paid no later than 14 days after the
property becomes an asset of the trust.
Any declaration of trust is also subject to duty of
$200 as a settlement under Heading IX of the Third
Schedule to the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue