The definition of premium in relation to the dutiability of insurance intermediaries fees (SD-100) [1999] VICSROSD 7 (1 November 1999)
Revenue Rulings
The definition of premium in relation
to the dutiability of insurance intermediaries’ fees
Revenue Ruling SD.100
Replaces Ruling SD.001
This ruling replaces ruling SD.001 to reflect a
change to section 98(1)(a) of the
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act), which no longer recognises insurance
discounts as forming part of insurance premiums.
This ruling also clarifies whether insurance
intermediary fees are part of the premium and
therefore subject to stamp duty. Insurance
intermediaries are persons who, for reward, arrange
contracts of insurance for insurers or parties seeking
insurance, in Australia or elsewhere.
Sub-division 11 of the Act imposes obligations on
insurance companies which carry on an insurance or
assurance business, to register (under section 96 of
the Act) and pay stamp duty (under section 97 of the
Act) on all gross premiums received. A premium is
defined under section 98(1) of the Act as a gross
premium that includes any commissions or any fire
service levies paid or payable in connection with
insurance by an insurer or any other person, or any
amount which is credited or charged in any manner
in the books of account of the company, person or
firm issuing the policy.
It is common practice for insurance companies to
collect insurance premiums payable from contracts
of insurance, and forward any payments by way of
commissions or fees to an insurance intermediary,
where the intermediary had arranged the insurance
on their behalf. In these circumstances, the
Commissioner of State Revenue (the Commissioner)
has ruled that the full amount of the insurance
premium (inclusive of insurance intermediary fee,
commission or both) is subject to duty.
Insurance intermediaries are increasingly acting on
behalf of parties seeking insurance, and charging
service fees directly to insured persons for arranging
the contract of insurance. The service fee is a
separate charge raised by the intermediary in the
course of representing the insured person and it is
billed or itemised separately to, and paid by, the
insured person. No part of this service fee is
forwarded to the insurance company or firm issuing
the policy, nor does this fee form any part of a
contractual arrangement between the insurer and
insurance intermediary. The Commissioner has
ruled that in these circumstances it is only the
insurance premium, inclusive of commissions, and
not the separate service fee or charge, which is
subject to duty.
Where an insured person pays a fee directly to an
insurance intermediary, the fee will not be dutiable
as a commission within the context of section
98(1) of the Act, where all of the following tests
are satisfied:
• the insurance intermediary invoices the insured
person separately or itemises the fee separately
for the service provided;
• the intermediary receives the fee or charge in the
course of the business of representing the insured
person when arranging the insurance contract;
• the service fee or charge paid by the insured
person to the intermediary can be clearly
identified as such and does not form part of the
insurance premium or commission;
• the service fee or charge is paid directly to the
intermediary and no part is paid in any form to
the registered insurance company which is
deemed to have issued the policy;
Please continue over page
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1
SRO - ISO 9001 Quality Certified
• the amount paid to the insurance intermediary is
in fact a charge for service to the insured person
and does not form part of the commission
payable by the insurance company, and no
netting off of the premium by the insurance
company occurs.
In these circumstances, the insurance intermediary’s
service fee should not be included in the registered
insurance company’s return when calculating the
amount of stamp duty payable on premiums.
Insurance intermediaries or registered insurance
companies who believe that certain service fees,
charges or commissions do not fall within the
definition of premium, but whose facts do not exactly
fit the criteria of this ruling should contact the State
Revenue Office for a private ruling.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
November 1999
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1