Stamp Duty on Option Contracts (SD-091) [1998] VICSROSD 1 (1 May 1998)
Revenue Rulings
SRO compliance activity has revealed that some
Victorian dealers, after receiving initial instructions
from their clients, process transactions through their
dealer accounts and pay duty at the concessionary
When a Victorian dealer, acting in the capacity as
agent for a client, purchases or sells options issued by
companies over their unissued shares, stamp duty is
payable at the primary rate of 15 cents for every $100
pursuant to section 60C(1)(b)(ii). However, when a
Victorian dealer, who is a principal party to a contract
for options over unissued shares, transfers the options,
stamp duty is payable at the concessionary rate of
0.25 cents for every $100 pursuant to section
The mere fact that a transaction relating to the sale or
purchase of options over unissued shares has gone
through a Victorian dealer’s account will not, in itself,
mean that the transaction will attract stamp duty at
the concessionary rate. It is the capacity (agent or
principal) in which the Victorian dealer acted which will
determine the rate at which stamp duty is payable by a
Victorian dealer.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the correct
rate of stamp duty payable by Victorian dealers on
the sale or purchase of options over unissued
Section 60A(2) of the
Stamps Act 1958
provides that stamp duty is only payable on the
sale or purchase of a marketable security or rights
in respect of shares for consideration in money or
equivalent value. In the context of this ruling the
term ‘right in respect of shares’ means options
issued by companies over their unissued shares.
Pursuant to the provisions in section 60C of the
Act, Victorian dealers are required to lodge weekly
returns which provide the relevant details of all
transactions undertaken by them. They are also
required to pay stamp duty in respect of the sales
and purchases of marketable securities included in
the return.
Stamp duty is not payable in Victoria on the
creation of option contracts over marketable
securities. Stamp duty is payable only upon the
sale or purchase of options issued by companies
over their unissued shares. The subsequent
exercise of such an option is not dutiable under
the Act, as it represents an issue of shares rather
than a sale or purchase of unissued shares.
Section 60C(1) provides that when a Victorian
dealer acts as an agent to a transaction, stamp
duty is payable on the total consideration received
for the sale or purchase of rights in respect of
shares at a rate of 15 cents for every $100.
A different regime is applicable when a dealer is a
principal party to the sale or purchase of rights in
respect of shares. Under section 60C(2)(b), a
concessionary rate of 0.25 cents for every $100 is
applicable to sales and purchases made on the
dealer’s own account.
Stamp Duty on Option Contracts
Revenue Ruling SD.091
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1
C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1 C E A S E
D 3 0 J u n e 2 0 0 1
SRO - ISO 9001 Quality Certified