Subpoenas and their costs in accessing SRO information (GEN-006) [1995] VICSROGEN 2 (1 June 1995)
Revenue Rulings
Subpoenas and their costs in
accessing SRO information
Revenue Ruling GEN.006
The State Revenue Office administers a number of
Acts which contain secrecy provisions which make it
an offence to make an unauthorised disclosure of
information obtained in connection with the
administration of those Acts.
Under these provisions, no person may disclose or
publish any information obtained in the course of the
administration or execution of the legislation, unless
the disclosure or publication is made:
with the consent of the person from whom
the document was obtained; or
in connection with the administration or
execution of the Act or Regulation; or
to authorised persons under the Act or
Regulation; or
for the purpose of any legal proceeding
arising out of the Act or Regulation.
Extensive case law, including
R v. Clarkson
provides judicial support for the application
of the secrecy provisions to deny access with very few
exceptions. Therefore, only in limited circumstances
will a subpoena override the secrecy provisions.
Occasionally, subpoenas have been served requiring
the Commissioner and State Revenue Office personnel
to provide office records under the auspices of one
of the above exceptions. A subpoena is an order in
writing requiring a person to produce a document or
to give evidence before a court.
The purpose of this ruling is to outline the
circumstances in which the State Revenue Office is
entitled to recover costs associated with answering
a subpoena.
In cases where the exclusions to the secrecy
provisions permit the State Revenue Office to comply
with the terms of a subpoena, it is entitled to seek
costs as outlined in the rules of various courts.
Consequently, where the State Revenue Office is
compelled to comply with a subpoena, whether or
not evidence of any kind is produced in a court or
tribunal, it will actively seek to recover costs against
the party requesting the subpoena.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue