Casual staff (PT-118) [2005] VICSROPT 6 (1 September 2005)
Casual staff
Revenue Ruling PT.118
Replaces PT.016
The purpose of this ruling is to provide guidance in
determining whether wages paid to casual workers
are subject to Pay-roll Tax.
There is no definition for a casual worker
contained in the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
However, it is generally accepted that a casual
worker is a worker who is employed directly by the
employer on an informal, uncertain or irregular
basis. Broadly, the work assignments of a casual
worker can be interpreted as a sequence of
independent engagements, with no expectation of
any further work from the employer.
The Act imposes a liability upon an employer for
any wages paid or payable by the employer to their
``employees'' or ``deemed employees''.
Workers who are ``deemed employees'' include:
Contractors (including consultants, out-
workers and sub-contractors) engaged
under a relevant contract as defined under
section 3C of the Act; and
Those workers engaged under an
`employment agency contract' as defined
in the Act --- (commonly referred to as
temporary workers, agency staff, or on-
hired workers).
Note: From 1 February 1999 to 31
December 2004 the client of the
employment agent was deemed to be the
employer of the on-hired worker. Whereas,
from 1 January 2005 the employment
agent is deemed to be the employer of the
on-hired worker.
Generally, employees and contractors are engaged
directly by the employer, whereas workers engaged
under an `employment agency contract,' are
engaged indirectly through another party --- i.e. an
employment agency.
This Revenue Ruling does not apply to workers
engaged under an employment agency contract.
It may apply to employment agents in respect of
casual staff directly engaged by them that are not
on-hired under an employment agency contract.
For workers engaged directly by an employer, it is
important to distinguish whether these workers are
employees or contractors. Wages paid to employees
are always subject to Pay-roll Tax regardless of
whether the worker is engaged on a full-time, part
time or casual basis. However payments made to
contractors may be exempt from Pay-roll Tax under
certain circumstances.
The answer to the question of whether a worker is
an employee or a contractor is not always clear.
According to common law principles, a number of
indicia need to be considered in determining the
relationship between the worker and the employer.
In the case of casual workers, the question of
whether the worker is an employee or a contractor
is even less clear. This is because casual workers
may be engaged under terms and conditions that
are different to those pertaining to permanent
employees. For example, casual workers do not
generally accrue leave entitlements such as sick
leave or annual leave and are usually paid a
loading in excess of the normal rate to compensate.
Similarly, contractors do not usually receive leave
payments from the principals that engage them.
In relation to contractors, Section 3C of the Act
states that no liability arises for Pay-roll Tax until the
contractor has worked more than 90 days in total
during the financial year. However, payments to
casual employees must be declared in full for the
purposes of Pay-roll Tax. The 90-day exemption
does not apply to wages paid to casual employees.
This ruling provides guidance with respect to
whether a casual worker should be treated as an
employee or a contractor.
The Commissioner has determined that casual
workers who are unincorporated and who do not
operate a business should generally be treated as
common law employees.
Irrespective of the skill level of the worker,
employees (including casual employees) tend to be
subject to a high degree of control and direction
from their employer. The employer has the right to
control the manner in which the work is to be
control the manner in which the work is to be
performed. The employer usually defines the hours
of work and the casual employee may or may not
be engaged on a continual basis. The employer
generally provides the casual employee with the
material and equipment required for the task and
the casual employee is generally not able to
delegate his or her work to another person nor is
the casual employee exposed to any commercial
risk. In addition, casual employees are unable to
make a profit or a loss from the performance of
their duties.
It should be noted that only those workers
providing services as `natural persons' can be
considered employees. If the worker provides
services through his or her own company or a trust
structure, the worker should be treated as a
contractor.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State
Revenue Office is made on the merits of each
individual case having regard to any relevant
ruling. All rulings must be read subject to
Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
September 2005
Commissioner of State Revenue