Exempt allowances: Motor vehicle and accommodation (PTA-005V2) [2010] VICSROPTA 1 (1 May 2010)
Revenue Ruling PTA.005 (Version 2)
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
harmonises the payroll tax legislation in the Australian
harmonised is exempt allowances.
This revenue ruling explains the position regarding
exempt allowances.
of the Act defines wages to include
allowances paid or payable to an employee. Generally,
all allowances paid or payable to an employee are
taxable for payroll tax purposes. However, there
are specific provisions which apply to motor vehicle
allowances and overnight accommodation allowances.
Sections 29 and 30 of the Act provide that motor
vehicle allowances and overnight accommodation
allowances are not taxable to the extent that each of
these allowances do not exceed the exempt component.
Motor Vehicle allowance
A motor vehicle allowance is paid or payable to an
employee to compensate them for any business use
of his or her own private vehicle.
The exempt component is calculated using the
formula: E = K x R
E is the exempt component
K is the number of business kilometres travelled
during the financial year
R is the exempt rate.
The exempt rate is the rate prescribed under the
income tax legislation for calculating a deduction
for car expenses for a large car using the cents per
kilometre method in the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which the allowance
is paid or payable.
A motor vehicle allowance can be paid on the basis
of an amount per business kilometre travelled by the
employee or as a regular flat or fixed amount.
Motor vehicle allowance paid on a per kilometre basis
Section 22 of the
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act
(the FBT Act) generally exempts an expense
payment benefit if it is a reimbursement of car
expenses of a car owned or leased by an employee
that is calculated by reference to the distance travelled
by the car (i.e. paid on a cents per kilometre basis).
There are some circumstances where the fringe
benefit exemption does not apply, for example,
where the expense payment benefit relates to a
holiday taken by the employee or where the travel
relates to relocation.
Some uncertainty may exist as to whether or not
such exempt expense payment benefits are subject to
payroll tax where the benefit also falls within another
part of the definition of wages under the Act. The
Commissioner is of the view that exempt expense
payment benefits are generally not wages for payroll
tax purposes even where the exempt benefit may also
fit within another part of the definition of wages under
the Act. Therefore, a car expense payment paid on a
cents per kilometre basis is not subject to payroll tax.
Motor vehicle allowance paid as a flat or fixed
amount (i.e. not paid on a per kilometre basis)
An allowance which is paid as a flat or fixed amount
is not an exempt car expense benefit. In the absence
of records confirming the business kilometres travelled,
the total payments are subject to payroll tax. For
example, a regular travelling allowance of $200 per
month, paid to a sales person who keeps no records
of the business use of his or her private motor vehicle,
is taxable in full.
However, where an employer can produce records
to demonstrate the business kilometres travelled
in the period covered by the allowance, the exempt
component may be calculated. The amount of a
motor vehicle allowance paid up to the exempt
component is exempt. Where the allowance exceeds
the exempt component, only the amount in excess
of the exempt component is taxable.
For motor vehicle allowances paid to real estate
salespersons, please refer to Revenue Ruling PTA.025.
Revenue Rulings
Exempt allowances:
Motor vehicle and accommodation
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
Allowance paid as fixed amount plus a rate per
Where a motor vehicle allowance is paid as a
combination of a fixed amount plus a rate per
kilometre, the total amount of the allowance that
exceeds the combined total of the two exempt
components will be taxable. The exempt components
are the exempt fringe benefit component and the
exempt component using the ATO rate per kilometre.
Overnight Accommodation Allowance
An overnight accommodation allowance is paid to
cover temporary accommodation costs for a night’s
absence from the employee’s usual place of residence
as a consequence of employment.
Temporary accommodation in this context means:
• accommodation for a continuous period of no
more than 21 days, or
• accommodation for a continuous period of more
than 21 days where the employee continues to
maintain a domestic dwelling for the purpose
of accommodating the employee and/or his or
her family.
All allowances paid or payable for accommodation
that is not of a temporary nature are fully taxable.
An overnight accommodation allowance is
distinguished from an accommodation expense
payment (or a reimbursement) in that the
accommodation allowance is a pre-determined
amount paid to an employee and the employee is not
required to substantiate the costs incurred in securing
the accommodation.
An overnight accommodation allowance is also
distinguished from a living away from home allowance.
An overnight accommodation allowance is generally
paid where there is no change of employment
location whereas a living away from home allowance
is paid where the employee has moved and taken up
temporary residence away from his or her usual place
of residence. These allowances are subject to different
Commonwealth taxation treatments. An overnight
accommodation allowance is treated as assessable
income in the hands of the employee whereas a living
away from home allowance is a fringe benefit.
An overnight accommodation allowance, provided
to an employee for temporary accommodation costs,
will be taxable only to the extent that it exceeds the
exempt rate.
The exempt rate for overnight accommodation
allowances is the total reasonable amount for daily
travel allowance expense using the lowest capital
city for the lowest salary band for the financial year
determined by the Federal Commissioner of Taxation.
These determinations are made by the Federal
Commissioner of Taxation in June of each year and
set out the amounts that the Federal Commissioner
of Taxation considers are reasonable for the following
income tax year in relation to claims made for travel
allowance expenses.
The ATO determination of reasonable amounts for
travel allowance expenses includes components for
meals and incidental expenses. These components
are also exempt when paid as part of the overnight
accommodation allowance to the extent that they
do not exceed the respective ATO limits whether or
not the employer separately identifies these payments
made to an employee.
In some instances, the accommodation is paid by
the employer directly to the hotel, motel or serviced
apartment and the employee is only paid an allowance
for meals and incidentals in respect of the period of
absence from the employee’s usual place of residence.
The allowances for meals and incidentals are exempt
from payroll tax up to the respective ATO limits for
these payments.
For overnight accommodation allowances paid to truck
drivers, please refer to Revenue Ruling PTA.024.
Living Away From Home Allowance
A living away from home allowance is a fringe benefit
and therefore, the value for payroll tax purposes is
the value determined in accordance with the FBT
Act. If the allowance does not qualify as a living away
from home allowance benefit under the FBT Act, it
will be treated in the same manner as an overnight
accommodation allowance.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling.
Commissioner of State Revenue
Total business kilometres travelled during the
2007-08 year: 10,000
Allowance paid during the year:
Fixed amount
Rate per kilometre @ 30 cents
Total allowance paid
Less exempt fringe benefit
Less exempt component (using the 2006-07
ATO rate of 70 cents per km)
Taxable portion of allowance