Land Rich Provisions - Obligations on Making a Relevant Acquisition and Calculation of Duty (DA-044) [2012] VICSRODA 1 (1 April 2012)
Land Rich Provisions – Obligations on Making
a Relevant Acquisition and Calculation of Duty
Revenue Ruling DA.044 (version 2)
The land rich provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of the
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) impose duty on a relevant
acquisition of an interest in a land rich landholder.
A land rich landholder is a private company, a private
unit trust scheme or a wholesale unit trust scheme that
has land holdings in Victoria with an unencumbered
value of $1 million or more, and its land holdings in all
places (whether within or outside Australia) comprise
60% or more of the unencumbered value of all the
landholder’s property (other than excluded property).
of the Act sets out the ways in which
a person may make a relevant acquisition in a land
rich landholder. When a person makes a relevant
acquisition, duty must be paid, and an Acquisition
Statement (SRO Duties Form 49) completed and
lodged with the Commissioner of State Revenue
(Commissioner), within 30 days after the date
of the relevant acquisition.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to identify the
concessions and assistance available to taxpayers
in meeting their obligations under
3 of the Act. The ruling sets out various lodgement
concessions and examples on the calculation of
of Chapter 3 of the Act. It also
identifies certain duty concessions that may apply if a
landholder's land holdings include leasehold estates
and/or primary production land.
Requirement to lodge Acquisition Statement
and pay duty
of the Act provides that if a relevant
acquisition is made, either or both the person who
made the relevant acquisition, and the landholder in
which the acquisition was made, must prepare and
lodge an Acquisition Statement with the Commissioner
within 30 days after the date of the relevant acquisition.
Duty must also be paid within 30 days of the date of
the relevant acquisition otherwise a tax default will
occur for the purposes of the
Taxation Administration
(TAA). In cases involving a relevant
acquisition of an interest by a trustee, both the trustee
and the person(s) on whose behalf the interest was
acquired (the beneficiary or beneficiaries) may each be
considered to be the person who acquired the interest
and liable for the payment of duty.
To reduce compliance costs and to prevent double
duty issues arising, the Commissioner will not require a
landholder to separately lodge an Acquisition Statement
and pay duty if the person who made the relevant
acquisition lodges a statement and pays the duty within
the required timeframe. Where more than one person
may be considered to have acquired the interest (such
as an acquisition by a trustee on behalf of a trust), the
obligation will be satisfied if either the trustee or the
beneficiary lodges the Acquisition Statement and pays
the duty within the required time.
If the landholder becomes aware that the person
who made the relevant acquisition does not intend to
lodge an Acquisition Statement, the Commissioner
will require the landholder to either complete and
lodge a statement itself, or cause the person who
made the relevant acquisition to complete and lodge a
statement. If neither lodges a statement in accordance
with section 80 of the Act, penalties may be imposed.
Assistance to determine liability to duty
The duty on a relevant acquisition must be paid
within 30 days of the date of the relevant acquisition
otherwise a tax default occurs for the purposes of the
If a taxpayer (that is, the person who made the
relevant acquisition or the landholder in which
the acquisition was made) requires assistance in
determining its liability under the land rich provisions,
the taxpayer may request the Commissioner to issue a
private ruling and/or an assessment. The Commissioner
will determine the taxpayer’s liability and make an
assessment of duty based on the information provided
by the taxpayer, and/or obtained by the Commissioner.
Where a taxpayer requests the Commissioner to issue
a private ruling and/or an assessment, the taxpayer
Revenue Rulings
DA.044 (version 2)
Ruling history
DA.044 (version 2)
Issued date
Dates of effect
should estimate the duty payable on the relevant
acquisition and pay that amount before the end of
the 30 day period. Depending on the circumstances
of the matter, any underpayment of duty may attract
penalty tax and interest. In determining the penalty
tax and interest payable (if any), the Commissioner
will also take into account any delays in the provisions
of information by the taxpayer that prevented the
Commissioner from promptly determining the
taxpayer’s full liability to duty. A taxpayer will not be
penalised for any delays in the determination of its
liability to duty by the Commissioner that are not due
to the taxpayer.
If a taxpayer fails to lodge an Acquisition Statement
and pay the required duty within the statutory 30
day period, the Commissioner may impose penalty
tax and interest in accordance with sections 24 and
29 of the TAA and the current ruling setting out the
Commissioner’s policy on penalty tax and interest.
Duty calculation
A relevant acquisition is charged with duty at the same
rates that apply to land transfers under Chapter 2
of the Act. However, a different method of calculation
applies depending on whether the relevant acquisition
in the land rich landholder is the result of the
acquisition of a single interest, aggregated interests
or a further interest. A concession also applies
when the value of the landholder's Victorian land
holdings is between $1 million and $1.5 million. In
such circumstances, the duty chargeable in respect
of a relevant acquisition (whether the result of the
acquisition of a single interest, aggregated interests
or a further interest) is calculated in accordance with
the phasing-in of duty formula set out in section 84 of
the Act. In certain cases, the Commissioner may also
provide a concession on the calculation of duty on a
relevant acquisition in a land rich landholder which
owns, or is deemed to own, certain leasehold land or
primary production land.
When a relevant acquisition results from an acquisition
that is of itself a significant interest, or the acquisition
of interests on the same day that aggregate to
a significant interest, section 83(1) of the Act provides
that duty is charged on the amount calculated by
multiplying the unencumbered value of all land
holdings of the landholder in Victoria at the date of
acquisition by the percentage interest acquired as
a result of the relevant acquisition.
Example 1: Single interest
The duty payable on a relevant acquisition made
when a person acquires a 70% interest in a land
rich landholder which has $10 million in Victorian
land holdings is calculated as follows:
Value of Landholder’s Vic land holdings
$10,000,000
Interest Acquired
Dutiable Value ($10m x 70%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable ($7m x 5.5%)
When a relevant acquisition arises from the aggregation
of interests acquired within a three year period by a
person either alone or together with an associated
person or in associated transactions, section 83(1B)
of the Act provides that duty is charged at the rates
set out in Chapter 2 on the aggregate of the amounts
separately calculated in respect of each of the interests
that comprise the relevant acquisition.
Example 2: Aggregated interests
The duty payable on a relevant acquisition
comprising the aggregation of a 15% interest
acquired in a private unit trust scheme in 2006
(when the scheme’s Victorian land holdings were
valued at $2 million) with a 15% interest acquired
in 2007 (when the scheme’s land holdings were
valued at $4 million) is calculated as follows:
Value of landholder's Vic land holdings in 2006 $2,000,000
Interest Acquired in 2006
Dutiable Value of 2006 Interest ($2m x 15%)
Value of landholder's Vic landholdings in 2007 $4,000,000
Interest Acquired in 2007
Dutiable Value of 2007 Interest ($4m x 15%)
Dutiable Value of Relevant Acquisition
($300,000+$600,000)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable ($900,000 x 5.5%)
When duty has been charged on a relevant acquisition,
and a further interest is acquired in the landholder,
duty on the further interest is calculated under section
83(2) of the Act by determining the duty that would
be chargeable on the prior interests acquired plus the
further interest and subtracting from that amount the
duty chargeable in respect of the prior interests. The
reference to duty chargeable is not a reference to duty
actually paid on the prior interests at the time of their
acquisition, but rather a reference to duty chargeable
at the time of the acquisition of the further interest.
Example 3: Further interest
A person made a relevant acquisition of a 25%
interest in a land rich private unit trust scheme
in 2005. At that time the Victorian land holdings
of the scheme were valued at $10 million and
the duty paid in respect of the acquisition was
DA.044 (version 2)
$137,500 ($10 million x 25% x 5.5%). In 2006
that person acquired a further 10% interest in the
scheme. The value of the scheme's Victorian land
holdings in 2006 had increased to $12 million.
The duty payable on the acquisition of the further
interest is calculated as follows:
Value of landholder's Vic land holdings in 2006 $12,000,000
Sum of Further and Prior Interests held in 2006 35%
Dutiable Value of Further and Prior Interests
($12m x 35%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Duty Payable on Further and Prior Interests
($4.2m x 5.5%)
Dutiable Value of Prior Interest ($12m x 25%)
Relevant Rate of Duty
Dutiable Payable on Prior Interest ($3m x 5.5%)
Duty Payable on Acquisition of Further Interest
($231,000 - $165,000)
Leasehold interests
Except for the types of leasehold estates specifically
defined as dutiable property in section 10(1) of the
Act, the Commissioner recognises that leasehold
estates are not dutiable property for the purposes
of Chapter 2 of the Act. For land rich purposes,
however, the definition of a land holding in section
72(1) does not specifically exclude a leasehold estate.
In circumstances where a landholder is the lessee
of land, the value of the leasehold estate must be
included in the value of the landholder’s land holdings
when determining whether it is land rich. However the
Commissioner has determined that duty will not be
calculated with reference to the value of any leasehold
estate unless it is a type that is dutiable under Chapter
2 of the Act. Consequently if a person makes a
relevant acquisition in a land rich landholder whose
Victorian land holdings comprise:
(a) only leasehold estates that are not dutiable
property, no duty will be payable as the acquisition
of the interest is exempt under section 85(1) of
(b) leasehold estates (none of which are dutiable
property) and freehold land, duty will be payable
with reference to the value of the freehold land
(c) leasehold estates (some or all of which are dutiable
property) and/or freehold land, duty will be payable
with reference to the value of all the landholder’s
land holdings that would be dutiable on a transfer
under Chapter 2 of the Act (both leasehold and
freehold estates).
Primary production land
If a person acquires an interest in a landholder from
a lineal ancestor or descendant, section 71(5) of the
Act provides that the land holdings of the landholder
are taken not to include land that is primarily used
for primary production when determining whether the
landholder’s land holdings comprise 60% or more
of the unencumbered value of all its property. Even
so, a landholder that owns both primary production
land and other land not used for primary production
purposes may still be land rich for the purposes of
Section 85(1)(a) of the Act provides that an acquisition
by a person of an interest in a landholder is exempt
if the means by which the person acquired the
interest would have resulted in no ad valorem duty
being payable under Chapter 2 had the subject of
the acquisition been a transfer of the land of the
landholder to the person. The transfer of land used
primarily for primary production between relatives in
prescribed circumstances is exempt from duty under
section 56, contained in Chapter 2 of the Act.
The Commissioner recognises that an anomaly
arises in terms of the application of the above two
concessions and the calculation of duty when
a person acquires an interest from a lineal ancestor
or descendant in a landholder that owns both primary
production land and other land not used for primary
production purposes. In such circumstances, the
concessions may not provide any relief from duty if the
landholder is determined to be land rich on the basis
of the non-primary production land. In recognition
of this anomaly, duty will not be payable on the value
of the land used primarily for primary production.
Duty will only be payable with reference to the value
of the non-primary production land.
Further assistance
If a taxpayer requires advice on the interpretation
and application of Part 2 of Chapter 3 of the Act in
relation to their particular circumstances, the taxpayer
may contact the Land Rich Unit at the State Revenue
Office or apply for a private ruling in accordance with
Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all cases, the onus is
on the taxpayer to provide the Commissioner with the
necessary information to enable an informed decision
to be made.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
DA.044 (version 2)
Commissioner of State Revenue