Determining whether a worker is an employee (PTA-038) [2011] VICSROPTA 3 (1 July 2011)
Revenue Ruling PTA.038
Payroll tax is payable on wages paid or payable to
an employee. The term ‘employee’ is not defined
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act) and therefore
takes its ordinary or common law meaning. The
courts have established a number of principles that
assist in determining whether a worker is a common
law employee.
In most cases, it will be clear whether an employee
/ employer relationship or a principal / independent
contractor relationship exists. However, there
may be cases where the true character of the
relationship is unclear or ambiguous.
The purpose of this ruling is to provide information
principals and their professional representatives
determine whether their workers are common law
This ruling is not intended to provide definitive
advice as to whether a particular relationship is an
employer / employee relationship or a principal /
independent contractor relationship as the facts of
each case vary. Where the nature of the relationship
is unclear, tax professionals and practitioners may
seek further information from the Commissioner of
State Revenue (Commissioner) about the payroll tax
implications of specific arrangements.
It should be noted that if a worker is not a common
law employee, it does not necessarily mean that
payments made to them are not subject to payroll
tax. The definition of wages in the Act also includes
amounts paid or payable to contractors under the
contractor provisions. Therefore, the contractor
provisions should also be considered. Specifically,
where the contractor provisions apply, the principal
is deemed to be the employer, the worker is deemed
to be the employee and the payments made to the
worker are deemed to be wages unless one of the
exemptions applies.
Details about the contractor provisions in each
Territory’s website.
The examples used in this ruling have been included
to illustrate a particular factor relevant to the
determination of whether a worker is an employee
or an independent contractor and are based on a
limited set of facts. In practice, the totality of the
relationship must be considered before determining
whether a worker is an employee or an independent
contractor. It is also recognised that, in practice, a
much broader set of facts than those detailed in the
examples will generally be present.
Legal principles
The courts start from a position of determining
whether a common law employment relationship
exists, as opposed to a principal / independent
contractor relationship. In a common law
employment relationship there is a ‘contract of
service’. A ‘contract of service’ is based on a
‘mutuality of obligation’; that is, the employer makes
an offer of work with accompanying remuneration
and the employee accepts the terms of the offer by
performing the work.
This contract can be either implied or expressed
orally or in written form.
Factors that have been considered by the courts
in determining whether a worker is an employee
1. control and direction;
2. contract and practical relationship;
3. contracts to achieve a ‘given result’;
Revenue Rulings
Determining whether a worker is an employee
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
4. independent business;
5. power to delegate;
7. provision of tools and equipment; and
8. other factors.
In considering these factors, it should be noted
that numerous court decisions have held that the
totality of the relationship between the parties must
be taken into account before deciding whether
a worker is an employee or an independent
contractor; that is, a determination cannot be
made on the basis of a limited, or selective, number
of factors (see for example:
Stevens v Brodribb
Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
[1986] 160 CLR 16
[2003] AIRC 504
Commissioner of State
Revenue (WA) v Mortgage Force Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 24
Commissioner of State Taxation
(SA) v Roy Morgan Research Centre Pty Ltd
Sweeney v Boylan Nominees Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA19) and
B & L Linings Pty Ltd & anor v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (No 2) [2006]
NSWADTAP 32)
Control and direction
An important factor in determining the nature of
the relationship between a business operator and
a worker is the degree of control that the business
operator can exercise over the worker.
The right of a business operator to control or to
direct how, where, when and who is to perform the
work in question is a strong indicator that a worker
is an employee (see for example:
D & D Tolhurst
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic)
Hollis v Vabu Pty Ltd (T/A Crisis Couriers)
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21
JA & BM Bowden & Sons Pty
Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
Narich Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Pay-
roll Tax (NSW)
84 ATC 4035 and
Commissioner of
Pay-roll Tax (Vic) v Mary Kay Cosmetics Pty Ltd
The importance of control lies not only in its
existence, but also in the right of the business
operator to exercise it. In some businesses, the
business operator does not actually exercise much
control or direction over a worker. In this context,
the issue to be considered is whether the business
operator has the right or authority to exercise
control or direction over the worker, not whether
such control is actually exercised.
In considering whether the business operator has
the right or authority to exercise control over how
the worker performs the work, it is important to
recognise that in certain circumstances there may
be very limited scope or need to exercise control.
Additionally, as discussed in
, the element
of ‘control’ must be assessed in light of the nature
of the actual work that is being performed by the
For instance, where a worker is a highly skilled
tradesperson, there may be little need for the
business operator to supervise or direct the manner
in which the worker goes about providing services,
even though he or she could do so. Where the
business operator does not have the qualifications
or experience of the worker, the business operator
will have little scope or need to exercise control
over how the worker routinely goes about his or her
However, where the business operator does not
exercise direct control, there may be scope to
exercise control in relation to incidental or collateral
matters and this will be sufficient to satisfy the
element of control. Such control of incidental or
collateral matters may indicate that the business
operator exercises their right to control not by
instructing the worker on how to perform work, but
by directing the worker as to which jobs to perform
at a given time or by checking on the standard of
the work carried out.
A project management firm engages a worker as
a site supervisor. The site supervisor is responsible
for overseeing all things that happen on-site. In
this example, the site supervisor could be either
a professional or a highly skilled or experienced
tradesperson. The general manager of the firm may
not have the technical skills and experience to be
able to tell the site supervisor how to actually go
However, the project management firm may be able
to control or direct the site supervisor in relation to
the general nature of the work to be undertaken,
as well as incidental or collateral matters such as
the hours of their attendance at the work site, the
records they must maintain and the format of any
progress reports.
The owner of a fishing boat engages a worker to
captain the boat. The owner remains on shore, the
captain has the day to day control over the boat
and the crew while at sea and there is very little
scope for the boat owner to control how the captain
carries out their work while the boat is at sea.
However, there is scope for the boat owner to give
the captain directions on general matters such as
what areas are to be fished and what fish are being
sought, as well as incidental or collateral matters
such as safety procedures on the boat and how the
catch is to be processed and stored while at sea.
The absence of control may indicate that an
employer / employee relationship does not exist;
however, this is not necessarily conclusive. In several
court cases including
Brodribb, Tolhurst, Vabu Pty
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
, it was noted that control is not the
sole determinant of the nature of the relationship.
The totality of the relationship must be considered.
Finally, control exerted by a principal over, for
example, a distributor, for the sole purpose of
protecting business interests such as intellectual
property, is not considered to constitute control in
the way that the word ‘control’ is used in this ruling
in determining whether a worker is an employee.
Contract versus practical relationship
The terms of a contract provide evidence of the
nature of the relationship between the parties (see
for example:
Commissioner of State Taxation (SA) v
Roy Morgan Research Centre Pty Ltd
[2004] SASC
Bridges Financial Services Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
(2005) ATC 4735
Forstaff v The Chief Commissioner of State
[2004] NSWSC 573).
However, it is necessary to consider all of the facts
and circumstances of the relationship between
the parties to the contract, including their conduct
towards each other both at the time they entered
into the contract and after the contract has been
Contractual arrangements may contain a clause
that purports to characterise the relationship as
that of principal / independent contractor and not
employer / employee. Such a term can be given little
weight if it contradicts the effect of the agreement
) or the practical relationship between
the parties (
). That is, parties labelling
their relationship as ‘independent contractor and
principal’ or ‘to produce a result’, whether by a
clause in a written contract or otherwise, will have
no effect where that relationship, in practice, is
really one of employment.
After the execution of the contract, the conduct of
the parties will also be considered to determine the
full extent of the contractual relationship.
The fact that the conduct of the parties may not
accord with the terms of the contract does not
mean that the Commissioner considers that the
contract is a sham; rather, the Commissioner will
take into account the terms of any contract in
addition to the conduct of the parties.
Contracts to achieve a ‘given result’
A contract to produce a ‘given result’ is one in
which the focus is on the ultimate result (usually
required under a contract), rather than what
must be provided during the performance of the
contracted task. If the facts support a finding that
the purpose of a contract is to achieve a ‘given
result’, this is an indicator that there is a principal /
independent contractor relationship.
This is particularly the case where the contract is for
a fixed price, or where payment is made subject to
meeting various milestones specified in the contract
or at its completion.
Where a worker provides a ‘labour only’ service
pursuant to a contract and is paid at an hourly or
daily rate, or set rate of pay (including piecework
rates and commission), this indicates that the
contract is not for a given result.
If the contract is not to achieve a given result, but is
rather for the labour of the worker, the arrangement
will tend to have the characteristics of an employer
/ employee relationship (
Roy Morgan Research Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2010] FCAFC 52
(26 May 2010)
A construction company enters into a contract
with various construction workers to perform
tasks required for the construction of a building.
The company pays the workers an hourly rate.
The construction workers are not entering into a
contract to produce a given result but rather are
entering into a contract to provide services for an
hourly fee.
A construction company enters into a contract with
a landscaper to carry out the landscaping required
for the building for a fixed fee of $10 000. The
landscaper has entered into a contract to produce a
given result for a fixed fee.
The owner of a mango farm engages a number of
workers to prune trees. The workers are paid on the
basis of the number of trees pruned. The workers
are not entering into a contract to produce a given
result but rather are entering into a contract to
provide services at piecework rates.
Independent business (also referred to as the
‘Integration Test’)
If a worker is engaged by a business operator in
the ordinary course of operating the worker’s own
independent business, this indicates that the worker
is not engaged as an employee.
The issue to be considered is whether the worker
is conducting their own business as distinct from
participating in the business of the business
operator. In deciding whether or not the worker
is in fact conducting their own business the
Commissioner will consider a range of factors
• How the worker sources or obtains clients or
customers. If the worker was engaged by a
business operator as a result of advertising
their services to the public as a normal part of
carrying on a business, or as a result of winning
a tender, this will usually indicate that the worker
is operating a business;
• Whether the worker bears the risk. It is more
likely that a worker is operating his or her own
business, rather than operating as an employee,
where the worker bears the risk and makes a
profit or loss as a result of the work undertaken.
Similarly, where a worker has an opportunity to
create his or her own goodwill, it is more likely
that the worker is operating a business;
• Whether the worker incurs expenditure in
earning the income or provides his or her own
materials and equipment. The greater the
expenditure incurred in earning income and the
greater the materials and equipment supplied by
the worker, the more likely it is that the worker is
operating a business rather than operating as an
• Whether basic transactional business systems
are in place such as invoicing, insurance
(professional indemnity and public liability),
appropriate financial record keeping practices
and membership of professional or trade
associations;
• Whether regulatory business compliance
requirements are in place such as registration of
business name, ABN and GST;
• Whether the services provided involve the
provision of labour of sufficient skill to suggest
that a profession or trade is being pursued
through a business;
• The number of clients or customers the worker
has had over the life of the business and in
relation to the specific years in question;
• Whether the worker is required to perform the
services personally;
• Whether the worker is prevented from sub-
contracting, engaging others or delegating
the work to others. If the worker has engaged
or arranged for others to undertake work in
conjunction with themselves this is likely to
indicate that the worker is operating a business
rather than providing services as an employee;
• Whether the worker was previously employed by
the business operator; and
• How long the worker has been in business.
Notwithstanding the above, it is still possible
for workers who normally operate independent
businesses to work as casual employees from
time to time. In particular, it is not unusual in the
building and construction industry for tradespeople
operating genuine independent businesses for
most of the time, to be occasionally engaged as
casual employees for larger jobs carried out by an
For example, an independent electrician engaged
by an electrical maintenance company to work as
part of a team, being paid at an hourly rate and
working under supervision may be treated as a
casual employee resulting in payments received
being subject to payroll tax. However, before
making a final decision, all factors relating to the
relationship would need to be considered.
Power to delegate
The power to delegate is a factor that firmly
indicates that the worker is an independent
contractor rather than an employee (
Australian Air
Express Pty Ltd v Langford
[2005] NSWCA 96
[2005] 147 IR 240).
The power to delegate in this context refers to
the capacity of the worker to engage others to
undertake the services for which the worker was
engaged. In these circumstances, the worker is the
party responsible for paying the other persons.
A common law employee delegating tasks to other
employees is fundamentally different to the power
to delegate exercised by a contractor. When an
employee asks a colleague to undertake certain
tasks, the employee is not responsible for paying
that colleague.
In a principal / independent contractor relationship,
the power to delegate will generally be implicit, as
the focus is generally on achieving a result rather
than obtaining the services of any particular person.
Where a business operator claims that the
workers engaged have the power to delegate their
work, they will need to produce evidence that
the delegation power is actually exercisable in
practical terms. The right to delegate must always
be initiated and carried out by the independent
contractor and not be controlled by the business
If the worker performs all of the work and in
practice does not engage others to assist with the
performance of the work, or where the business
operator provides a replacement worker when
the worker is unable to provide their services, it is
unlikely that the worker has the power to delegate.
Delegation clauses in contracts must be considered
in the context of the arrangement between the
parties to ensure that they accurately reflect what
occurs in practice. Where there is a delegation
clause in which a replacement worker must be
approved by the business operator and this approval
is not provided in practice, this may mean that the
‘right’ to delegate is illusory.
A worker is engaged on a contract by a steel
fabrication firm and is paid an hourly rate. It is
claimed that under the terms of the contract the
worker has the power to delegate. On the occasions
when the worker has been unable to attend work
(for example, due to illness), the steel fabrication
firm has allocated the worker’s tasks to someone
else, paid that other person (rather than the worker)
and has not permitted the worker to provide a
replacement.
In this example, the worker does not have any real
or practical power to delegate.
A worker who bears the commercial risk and
responsibility for any poor workmanship or injury
sustained in the performance of the work indicates
that the worker is an independent contractor. An
independent contractor typically carries their own
insurance and indemnity policies.
Provision of tools and equipment
Providing assets, tools and equipment and incurring
expenses and other overheads indicates that the
worker is an independent contractor.
However, providing the necessary tools and
equipment is not necessarily inconsistent with an
employment relationship because an employee is
likely to be reimbursed or receive an allowance for
providing their own tools and equipment.
Other factors
The Courts have considered a number of other
factors in determining whether an employer /
employee relationship exists. Factors suggesting an
employee / employer relationship exists include:
• the right to suspend or dismiss the worker;
• the obligation to work;
• working set and regular hours;
• the payment of a regular or fixed remuneration;
• the deduction of income tax;
• providing superannuation benefits, annual leave,
sick leave and long service leave; and
• requiring the worker to wear a company uniform.
Lease or bailment arrangements
The courts have considered that an employer /
employee relationship will generally not exist where
there is a lease or bailment arrangement. These
arrangements involve payments for the right to use
or exploit property rather than for the provision of
An example of a bailment arrangement is the
relationship that exists between the owner of a taxi
and the taxi driver. Under this type of arrangement
the taxi driver makes a payment to the owner
in return for the right to use the taxi (
Commissioner of Taxation v De Luxe Red and Yellow
Cabs Co-operative (Trading) Society Ltd & Ors
[1998] FCA 361
(1998) 82 FCR 507).
Payments to inter-posed entities
A common law employment relationship cannot
exist between a principal and an inter-posed entity
such as a company. However, payments made in
these circumstances may still be subject to payroll
tax under the contractor or avoidance arrangement
provisions.
With respect to partnerships, raising invoices in a
partnership name or making payments to joint bank
accounts do not on their own prove the existence
of a legally constituted business partnership.
If the other partner is not providing services in
relation to the payment and no formal partnership
agreement has been prepared, it is unlikely it would
be accepted that there is an agreement with an
interposed entity.
Comparison of employee and independent
contractor indicators
Page 7 provides a table outlining employee and
independent contractor indicators in terms of the
various factors utilised by the courts in determining
whether a worker is an employee or an independent
contractor.
Comparison of employee and independent contractor indicators
Employee Indicator
Independent Contractor Indicator
The worker is subject to the direction of
the business operator, or the direction of
an employee of the business operator, as
to where, when and how the work is to be
The worker is free to decide the manner
in which they will complete the task and
achieve the agreed result.
The worker is paid on a time basis or at
'piece rates'.
The business operator pays the worker
on the basis of a quote to achieve a set
result (generally without regard for the time
Payment is made to an interposed entity.
of labour /
The worker wholly or predominantly
provides labour.
The business operator supplies all or most
of the materials and equipment necessary
for the worker to perform their services.
Where the worker provides their own tools
or materials they are usually reimbursed or
paid an allowance.
The worker supplies all or most of the
materials, equipment and tools needed to
complete the contracted work (not just tools
of the trade or a motor vehicle used to drive
to and from a work site).
Entitlements
The worker receives superannuation, sick
leave, recreation leave or long service leave
or is paid extra in lieu of such entitlements.
The worker makes provision for their own
superannuation and is not entitled to sick
leave, recreation leave or long service leave.
Income tax is deducted from the payments
made to the worker.
Income tax is not generally withheld from
the payments made to the worker.
However, a worker can request a business
operator to withhold tax from payments
made to them (see
Schedule 1 to the
Taxation Administration
(Cwlth)). In these cases, the
voluntary withholding of tax is not
necessarily indicative of an employer /
employee relationship
Hours of work
The worker works set hours (either by
agreement with the business operator or
under an award).
The worker works the hours necessary to
complete the task to the standard, and
within the timeframes, specified by the
business operator.
The worker has been working for the
business operator for a continuous extended
period of time.
The worker does not provide services to
the business operator on a regular or
continuous basis.
Representation
to the public
The worker is recognised as part of the
business operator’s business.
The worker is not seen as part of the
business operator’s business; that is, the
worker is recognised as operating their own
Comparison of employee and independent contractor indicators
(Continued)
Employee Indicator
Independent Contractor Indicator
Responsibility
for quality
The business operator, not the worker, is
legally responsible for the quality of the
work performed by the worker.
The worker is legally liable for the quality of
the work performed.
The worker is required to perform the work
personally (they are not able to delegate or
subcontract the work).
The worker employs others to assist them
in doing the work, or is able to delegate or
subcontract the work to other persons of
their choice.
Insurance and
Maintained by the business operator.
The worker maintains relevant and
necessary licences and insurance policies.
The worker does not have an ABN.
The worker has an ABN.
All risk is borne by the business operator.
The worker bears the commercial risk of
deriving a profit or suffering a loss for the
work performed and incurs significant
expenses in deriving income.
Payments are reduced to cover the cost of
rectifying defects.
Dismissal /
resignation
The business operator can suspend or
dismiss the worker, or the worker can cease
to work for the business operator, regardless
of whether the worker has completed any
particular task or not.
The worker is free to choose whether to
accept or refuse work from the business
Conclusions
Each case must be considered on its own facts
using the principles identified by the courts and
tribunals as a guide. The decision on whether a
worker is an employee cannot be made on the basis
of only a few features of the relationship. In each
case it is necessary to consider the totality of the
relationship between the business operator and the
worker and this involves considering a wide range of
Some of these factors may suggest that the worker
is an employee, whilst other factors may suggest
that the worker is an independent contractor
Commissioner of State Revenue v Mortgage Force
Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 24).
Additionally, as noted in the
page 1 of this ruling, if it is determined that an
employer / employee relationship does not exist,
consideration must still be given to whether the
contractor provisions apply.
If the position is not clear, professional advice
should be sought as there are complex legal issues
to be considered. Alternatively, the relevant State
or Territory Revenue Office may be contacted for
further information.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case, having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue