Aggregation of dutiable transactions and the exception from aggregation for domestic builders where residential premises are to be constructed (DA-026V2) [2014] VICSRODA 1 (1 January 2014)
Revenue Ruling DA.026 (version 2)
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charges duty on the
dutiable value of dutiable property the subject of
a dutiable transaction.
of the Act provides for the aggregation
of dutiable transactions in certain circumstances.
State Taxation Acts Amendment Act 2012
Amending Act) amended the aggregation provisions
by removing the discretion of the Commissioner of
State Revenue (the Commissioner) to not aggregate
and replacing it with a specific exemption for
transactions involving vacant land purchased by
domestic builders provided certain criteria are met.
The changes introduced by the Amending Act apply
to dutiable transactions taking place on or after
28 June 2012.
Section 24A of the Act provides that, if the
exception from aggregation for domestic builders in
section 24(2) of the Act applies and the residential
premises are not constructed within 5 years or the
land is transferred without the residential premises
being constructed, the Commissioner may reassess
duty on those transactions that have not been
aggregated as if they have been aggregated (giving
an allowance for any duty already paid in respect
of the transfers).
The purpose of this Ruling is to clarify how the
Commissioner will apply the aggregation provisions
in section 24 of the Act. In particular:
• the circumstances in which two or more
dutiable transactions will be considered to form
‘substantially one arrangement’ (Section A of
this Ruling)
• the exception from aggregation for domestic
builders in some circumstances (Section B
of this Ruling), and
• re-assessment of duty where the domestic
builder exception is applied and residential
premises are not constructed (Section C of
this Ruling).
Section A – Aggregation of Dutiable Transactions
Section 24(1) of the Act provides that dutiable
transactions relating to separate items or separate
parts of dutiable property are to be aggregated
and treated as a single dutiable transaction if:
• the contracts of sale are entered into within
12 months pursuant to section 24(1)(a)(i) of
the Act or in any other cases, the dutiable
transactions occur within 12 months pursuant
to section 24(1)(a)(ii) of the Act (Criterion 1), and
• the dutiable transactions together form,
evidence, give effect to or arise from what is,
substantially, one arrangement relating to all
of the items or parts of the dutiable property
(Criterion 2).
Criterion 1 - The 12 month period
For dutiable transactions that are transfers upon
sale, dutiable transactions may be aggregated
where the contracts of sale are entered into within
12 months of each other.
Where one or more of the dutiable transactions are
not transfers upon sale, dutiable transactions which
occur within 12 months of each other may also be
aggregated.
Criterion 2 - Substantially one arrangement
Aggregation can only apply where dutiable
transactions together form, evidence, give effect to
or arise from what is, substantially one arrangement
relating to all of the items of dutiable property.
Revenue Rulings
DA.026 (version 2)
Aggregation of dutiable transactions
and the exception from aggregation
for domestic builders where residential
premises are to be constructed
Duties Act 2000
Ruling history
DA.026 (version 2)
January 2014
Dates of effect
DA.026 (version 2)
Section 24(1) of the Act does not capture disparate
transactions, which are separate and independent.
Butterworths Legal Dictionary
‘arrangement’ as ‘generally, an agreement, plan or
compact, the legal effect of which depends on the
context in which it is used’. An ‘arrangement’ has
been interpreted as constituting a wider course of
action than a single agreement, and includes ‘all
kinds of concerted action by which persons may
arrange their affairs for a particular purpose or so
as to produce a particular effect’:
Bell v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1952] HCA 34
(1953) 87 CLR 548
The reference to ‘one arrangement’ in section 24(1)
of the Act is at least as broad as the expressions
‘one transaction’ or ‘one series of transactions’, used
in the previous aggregation provision in the
Act 1958: Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
v Pacific General Securities Ltd and Finmore
Holdings Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADTAP 51
(2004) 58 ATR 17
Pacific General
). Accordingly, the Court and Tribunal
decisions in relation to the previous provision are
still relevant in determining whether transactions
form one arrangement.
In determining whether a series of transactions form
‘substantially one arrangement’, the Commissioner
will consider the substance of the transactions.
This involves consideration of any connection or
interdependence between the transactions which
gives them some essential unity or ‘oneness’, and
whether the relationship between the transactions
is an integral and not a fortuitous one depending
merely on such circumstances as contiguity in time
Jeffrey v Commissioner of Stamps
23 SASR 398 and
Old Reynella Village Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamps
[1989] SASC 1724
(1989) 51 SASR 378.
An ‘arrangement’ may exist regardless of whether
separate items of property are dealt with in separate
contracts or transfer instruments. Further, an
‘arrangement’ may exist regardless of the number
of transferors or the number of transferees.
In determining whether an ‘arrangement’ exists,
the Commissioner will consider the conduct of
the transferee or transferees. Where there is more
than one transferee, it is not necessary that the
transferees be ‘related persons’ or ‘associated
persons’ as defined in section 3(1) of the Act.
The Commissioner will look at the overall
circumstances of the relationship between the
transferees and their conduct.
The Commissioner will analyse each matter
on its own merits on a case by case basis. The
examples provided in this Ruling do not limit the
circumstances in which an aggregated assessment
will be made. Such an assessment may also be
made if other factors are present that lead to the
conclusion that the transactions have a sufficient
relationship, connection or interdependence to
make them, in substance, one arrangement.
Factors Commissioner will consider in determining
whether there is ‘substantially one arrangement’
In deciding whether the circumstances of a
particular case amount to ‘substantially one
arrangement’, the Commissioner is required
to have regard to all relevant factors including,
but not limited to, the circumstances immediately
surrounding the transfers in question:
General Securities
The Commissioner will consider, among others,
the following factors:
• for transactions concerning land – the nature
of the items of land, including whether items
of land have a dependant or interrelated use
and/or are single parcels, the history of their
ownership and use, and whether they have been
acquired in order to be used together. These
factors are analysed to determine whether the
properties have been acquired for separate
and independent use. For example, in cases
involving transfers of fractional interests, the
use of the land acquired for a common purpose
is an indicator that the transactions involve
‘substantially one arrangement’.
• for transactions concerning land and goods –
the use of the goods, and the connection of
that use with the relevant land.
• for all transactions – the nature of the
negotiation process for the different items
of dutiable property, the timing and sequence
of the transactions relating to the different items
of property, and the terms of any contracts.
The Commissioner will examine:
- whether the contracts were negotiated
- whether the contracts were conditional
upon each other
- whether the transferee(s) received a
discount by virtue of acquiring multiple
items of property, and
DA.026 (version 2)
- whether there was another way in which
the transferor(s) could have effected the
transactions.
• where there are different transferees – the
relationship between the transferees, including
whether they were acting in concert or with a
common purpose.
Examples of situations where Commissioner will
Examples of situations where the Commissioner
would generally consider there to be ‘substantially
one arrangement’ include:
• there are separate transfers arising out of a
single contract, or out of separate contracts
which arise out of a single option
• there are separate contracts of sale, at least
one of which is interdependent or conditional
• a single price has been negotiated for all the
items of property and then allocated to separate
• there are transfers of fractional interests in the
same property
• the transaction concerns a single parcel of land,
for example, all the apartments in a block or
a hotel and their associated car parks which
are not available for separate sale, or a single
unit and its accessory unit(s) which is not
available for separate sale
• land is sold subject to subdivision – duty will be
assessed on the aggregated dutiable value rather
than the separate values of the subdivided lots
• land is sold subject to approved plans for
building or development across different lots
• separate items of land used for the same
business are sold by separate contracts to
one purchaser (or associated purchasers), and
• land and a business conducted on the land
are sold by one vendor (or associated vendors)
to one purchaser (or associated purchasers) –
duty will be assessed on the value of the land
and the business goods, whose values will be
aggregated.
Factors which indicate that there may not
be ‘substantially one arrangement’
Factors which may indicate that there is not
‘substantially one arrangement’ include:
• where the items of property are acquired from
independent vendors, or
• where the items of property are genuinely
available for separate sale. However, although
advertising material may establish that items
of property are genuinely available for separate
sale, if the mode of sale is different from that
advertised they may form ‘substantially one
transaction’. For example, where two properties
are advertised for auction in separate lots,
but the purchaser negotiates a sale of both
properties with the vendor before the auction,
this may indicate ‘substantially one transaction’.
Examples of situations where Commissioner will
not aggregate
Interdependent or conditional contracts would
normally be viewed as part of ‘substantially one
arrangement’. However, there may be circumstances
where contracts are conditional but are not part
of a single transaction or arrangement from the
perspective of the purchasers. An example might
be where unrelated purchasers buy separate items
of property. In this case, the vendor would only sell
these items of property if the vendor is able to find
separate purchasers for each item. Section 22B of
the Act makes specific provision for such a situation
in relation to business goods. That section provides
that business goods are not to be aggregated with
the dutiable value of unencumbered land in certain
circumstances, such as where the contracts of sale
are conditional on each other, but do not form
substantially one transaction and the purchasers
of the land and business are not associated or the
same person.
Examples of situations where the Commissioner
would generally consider there not to be
‘substantially one arrangement’ include:
• the items of property are purchased at auction
in separate lots
• there is an exchange of properties between
associated parties
• there is a distribution between associated parties
as a result of a property settlement
• there is a distribution between associated parties
as a result of a litigation settlement
• there is a distribution to separate beneficiaries
of a trust, and
DA.026 (version 2)
January 2014
Commissioner of State Revenue
• there is an in specie distribution under a Will
or distribution from a trust where the transferees’
entitlement under the deed is exceeded, and
more than one property is transferred
in accordance with that deed.
Disclosure requirements relating to transactions
forming part of substantially one transaction
Section 24(6) of the Act requires a transferee to
disclose to the Commissioner in writing, at or
before the time of lodging an instrument or
declaration for stamping, details known to the
transferee of all the items of dutiable property
that are part of substantially one transaction. The
penalty for failure to disclose these details is 100
penalty units. Please refer to the SRO Duties Form
2 (Goods statutory declaration) to disclose the
relevant details.
Section B – Exception from Aggregation for
Domestic Builders
Section 24(2) of the Act provides a specific
exception from aggregation for vacant land
purchased by licensed home builders in certain
circumstances. Section 24(2) of the Act provides
that dutiable transactions are not aggregated
if the Commissioner is satisfied that:
(a) the dutiable property that is the subject of
the dutiable transactions is vacant land
(b) the transferee is registered as a domestic builder
Building Act 1993
and is a builder
within the meaning of the
Domestic Building
Contracts Act 1995,
(c) the transferee intends to construct residential
premises on the vacant land for the purpose
of selling that land to the public.
Section 24(7) of the Act clarifies that the
Commissioner may treat land as vacant if satisfied
that the land is substantially vacant apart from
there being the remnant of any building, object
or structure that the Commissioner is satisfied has
been preserved because of its heritage significance.
Section C – Reassessment of Duty Where
Residential Premises are not Constructed
Section 24A(1) of the Act provides that, if the
exception to aggregation in section 24(2) of the
Act is applied and the builder:
(a) transfers the land before residential premises are
ready for occupation as a place of residence
(b) constructs premises other than residential
premises (commercial premises for example) and
those premises are ready for occupation or use for
the purpose for which they were constructed, or
(c) fails to construct residential premises which are
ready for occupation on the vacant land within
5 years after the date on which the land was
transferred,
the Commissioner may reassess duty on those
transactions that were not aggregated as if they
were aggregated (giving an allowance for any
duty already paid in respect of the transfers).
Section 24A(3) of the Act sets out the methodology
for the reassessment of duty in respect of each
dutiable transaction comprising vacant land to
which subsection (1) applies. This methodology
allows the duty to be determined where one or
multiple transactions need to be reassessed.
The dutiable value of the aggregated dutiable
transactions is determined based on the dutiable
value at the time the transactions originally
occurred. Duty is then calculated on the aggregated
dutiable value, and apportioned across each
dutiable transaction (based on the proportion
of the dutiable value represented by each dutiable
transaction). An allowance is then given for duty
already paid on the relevant dutiable transaction
due to the operation of section 24(2) of the Act.
Section 24A(6) of the Act requires the transferee
to lodge written notice with the Commissioner
within 30 days after becoming aware that any
of the circumstances set out in sub-section (1) have
occurred in respect of any of those transactions.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling