Rights of access to records prepared for ATO purposes (GEN-008) [1998] VICSROGEN 2 (1 January 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Rights of access to records
prepared for ATO purposes
Revenue Ruling GEN.008
Replaces Ruling GEN.004
This ruling replaces Revenue Ruling Gen.04, which
has been withdrawn, and has effect both
retrospectively and prospectively. The ruling clarifies
the issue of State Revenue Office (SRO) ccess to
Commonwealth taxation records and also identifies
the practice taxpayers must allow if the records
sought contain a tax file number.
The various Acts administered by the SRO give
broad powers to authorised officers that enable full
and free access to books, documents and other
papers for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the provisions of State taxation legislation.
These powers of access include the right of access
to records which are prepared for the purposes of
complying with the Acts administered by the
Commonwealth Commissioner of Taxation, for
example, fringe benefits tax returns and income
tax returns.
Some taxpayers and their representatives are
uncertain whether access powers under the State
taxation legislation extend to information prepared
for legislation administered by the Commonwealth
Commissioner of Taxation, particularly in relation to
records containing tax file numbers.
In the performance of their duties, State Revenue
Office authorised officers may examine documents
prepared for Australian Taxation Office purposes
which are held by someone other than the
Commonwealth Commissioner of Taxation.
The privacy and misuse of such information is
protected by State and Commonwealth legislation.
However, taxpayers and their representatives should
ensure that tax file numbers on copies of documents
provided to the officers are deleted or covered to
avoid communication of these numbers to the State
Revenue Office.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
January 1998