Land and building refurbishment ('off-the-plan') stamp duty calculations (SD-099) [1999] VICSROSD 6 (1 November 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Land and building and refurbishment (‘off-the-plan’)
stamp duty calculations
Revenue Ruling SD.099
Replaces SD.087
Stamps Act 1958
(the Act) provides
concessions, under section 63(3)(c), for purchasers
of house and land packages and new units or
apartments on horizontal or vertical developments
and, under section 63B, for purchasers of units or
apartments in a refurbished building.
Revenue Ruling SD.064 provides details of the
concession available under section 63(3)(c) and
Revenue Ruling SD.069 provides details of the
concession available under section 63B.
This ruling will help you to calculate the
concessional stamp duty payable by purchasers of
units or apartments off-the-plan or where
construction of the building or refurbishment is
incomplete at the date of the contract.
Stamp duty on a transfer of land is calculated on the
higher of the consideration or the market value of
the real property as at the date of sale. The duty
is payable on the transfer of land which,
in normal circumstances, is executed at or shortly
before settlement.
The purpose of the legislation relating to off-the-plan
transfers is to ensure that stamp duty is not charged
on the value of any physical construction occurring
after the date of sale. To achieve this, the legislation
allows the cost of construction which occurs after the
date of the contract to be deducted from the
contract price.
The execution of contracts at different stages of
building developments has caused some difficulties
when attempting to identify the value of allowable
deductions for stamp duty in the case of individual
units or apartments. This ruling provides a guide to
calculating a figure for stamp duty purposes, which
is based both on simplicity of administration for the
parties and certainty of procedure, and which may
be applied in a broad range of circumstances.
This ruling addresses the following:
1. the elements of a contract and terminology;
2. the date of sale;
3. the basis of valuation for lots on subdivisions;
4. lots in new and refurbished buildings on vertical
developments;
5. the value of lots on horizontal developments; and
6. the minimum value in house and land packages.
1) The elements of a contract and terminology
For the purposes of determining the basis of duty,
the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) will consider that the following are
the elements of a contract (or contracts) for the
purpose of purchasing a land and building package
or a refurbished lot.
Land value, including:
base land value; and
off-the-plan land value.
Construction costs, consisting of:
infrastructure;
physical building works; and
Non-deductible costs.
For the purposes of this ruling the following terms
A) Land value
i) Base land value – The value attributable to the
unsubdivided land immediately before any
infrastructure is in place. This is the value for
which the real property might reasonably have
been sold on the open market and does not refer
to the purchase price paid by the vendor, unless it
can be reasonably argued that the value has not
altered since that purchase.
Please continue over page
of land is calculated on the
calculated on
ration or the market value of
ation or the market value of
as at the date of sale. The duty
as at the date of sale. The duty
n the transfer of land which,
the transfer of land which,
al circumstances, is executed at or shortly
circumstances, is executed at or
re settlement.
The purpose of the legislation relating to off-th
The purpose of the legislation relating to off
transfers is to ensure that stamp duty is no
transfers is to ensure that stamp duty is
on the value of any physical construc
y physical construc
after the date of sale. To achieve
e of sale. To achiev
allows the cost of constructio
t of construct
date of the contract to b
contract price.
contract price.
The executio
The executio
erminology;
n for lots on subdivisions;
for lots on
d refurbished buildings on vertical
refurbished buildin
value of lots on horizontal developments; and
ue of lots on horizontal developments; and
. the minimum value in house and land package
mum value in house and land packag
1) The elements of a contract and termino
1) The elements of a contract and termino
For the purposes of determining the b
of determining the b
the Commissioner of State Reven
e Commissioner of State Reven
Commissioner) will consider t
Commissioner) will consider
the elements of a contra
purpose of purchasi
urpose of purch
or a refurbished
or a refurbished
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
ii) Off-the-plan land value - The enhanced value
that could be attributed to the land with the
infrastructure in place but prior to any physical
building works on the land.
B) Construction costs
Construction costs for the purposes of sections
63(3)(c) and 63B are those which are costs to the
purchaser and which are implied as being contained
in the contract.
The Commissioner is of the view that profit is
attributable to both the land and the building works.
i) Infrastructure — the relevant non-building works
which add to the total cost of construction
• a planning permit;
• water and sewerage connections;
• a building permit;
• approval of regulatory bodies such as
VicRoads, an electricity or gas company;
• the required road/access or utilities works;
• acceptance by the neighbourhood, thereby
eliminating contentious issues; and
• site decontamination costs.
ii) Building works - the physical construction of the
building, including demolition and clearing costs
in relation to the existing or previous building.
iii) Profit - the profit element accruing under the
C) Non-deductible costs
Non deductible costs include those incurred by the
vendor, and ultimately included in the contract price,
that are not directly related to the physical
construction of the building. Promotional and other
costs incurred as part of the sale of the property and
any chattels, such as furniture, sold in conjunction
with the property fall within this category. These
costs are not considered to be attributable to
construction, and therefore not able to be deducted
for the purpose of establishing the value on which
stamp duty is calculated.
2) The date of sale
In the case of an off-the-plan contract, the date of
sale is the date on which the parties entered into a
contract of sale for an identifiable parcel of land on
an approved plan.
The date of any expression of interest cannot be
used as the date of sale.
3) The basis of valuation for lots on subdivisions
The base value of an individual lot on a plan of
subdivision, to be the subject of a multi-unit
development, may be determined by the relationship
of the lot to the market value of the land to be
developed. The relationship of the individual lot in
the development is usually expressed as a fraction
and is often referred to as the Unit Entitlement Ratio
(UER). The market value of land under development
may be reflected by a recent arm’s length purchase
of that land, where it can be reasonably argued that
the value has not altered since that purchase.
The off-the-plan value of a site for a refurbishment
or a new development, after all permits and
statutory approvals (infrastructure costs) are in
place, but before any physical building works begin,
may vary considerably. Where no other reasonable
valuation method is available, the Commissioner has
determined that a minimum factor of 25 per cent is
appropriate for the purpose of establishing the
increase in the market value of a lot on a multi-lot
development when buying off-the-plan. This figure
is based on advice from the Office of the
Valuer-General.
Where parties are aware that the value has
increased by more than 25 per cent, the higher
value should be used.
Where the parties contend that the off-the-plan
value is lower than the base value plus 25 per cent,
they must submit the transfer for the opinion of the
Commissioner with sufficient evidence to
substantiate the proposed value.
4) Units or apartments in new and refurbished
buildings on vertical developments
The calculation method for the stamp duty
concession, as described below for individual units or
apartments on vertical developments, is also used for
both new and refurbished buildings, and for off-the-
plan contracts or where construction is incomplete at
the contract date.
A) Establishing the value before construction
i) Ascertain the market value of the total project
before any development or building works, and
multiply it by the UER to arrive at the base lot.
ii) Add 25 per cent to the base land value to
establish for stamp duty purposes the value of the
land immediately before building works begin.
Please continue over page
cal construction of the
uction of the
emolition and clearing costs
molition and clearing costs
existing or previous building.
existing or previous building.
profit element accruing under the
profit element accruing under the
C) Non-deductible costs
C) Non-deductible costs
Non deductible costs include those incurred b
Non deductible costs include those incurred
vendor, and ultimately included in the co
vendor, and ultimately included in the co
that are not directly related to the ph
that are not directly related to the p
construction of the building. Pro
construction of the building. Pro
costs incurred as part of the
costs incurred as par
any chattels, such as fu
any chattels, such as
with the property f
ith the property f
ts are not c
ably argued that
bly argued that
that purchase.
a site for a refurbishment
a site for a ref
nt, after all permits and
t, after all permits a
als (infrastructure costs) are in
als (infrastructure costs) are
efore any physical building works begin,
fore any physical building works begin,
ry considerably. Where no other reasonable
derably. Where no other reasonable
uation method is available, the Commissioner ha
uation method is available, the Commissioner h
determined that a minimum factor of 25 per ce
determined that a minimum factor of 25 p
appropriate for the purpose of establishing
appropriate for the purpose of establishing
increase in the market value of a lot o
increase in the market value of a lot o
development when buying off-the
development when buying off-the
is based on advice from the O
is based on advice from the
Valuer-General.
Where parties are
ere parties are
increased by m
increased by
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
This example illustrates a calculation where no
physical construction has occurred at the date of
contract. The calculation is for a ten lot plan on land
purchased for $500,000. It is assumed that all units
are similar in size and value, the Unit Entitlement
Ratio (UER) is 1:10. The figures below relate to each
lot (unit).
Contract price
Construction costs
$100,000 (estimated)
$ 90,000 (estimated)
Step 1. Market value of land to be subdivided
($500,000) multiplied by UER (1/10) =
$50,000 (base land value of each lot).
Step 2. Base land value ($50,000) + 25 per cent
($12,500) = $62,500 (base land value of
the lot plus infrastructure costs – off-the-plan
land value)
[NB: If the actual increase is higher than 25 per
cent, the higher figure should be used]
Step 3. Deduct the off-the-plan land value from the
contract price to establish the total costs
including construction and profit.
$240,000 - $62,500 = $177,500 (value of
all non land costs).
Step 4. Establish the amount of costs not attributable
to the physical construction (such items as
promotional, sale and commission costs and
chattels – refer to Revenue Rulings SD.064
and SD.069). In this example $3,500 has
been used. Deduct this amount from the
non land costs to establish the deductible
construction costs. $177,500 - $3,500
= $174,000.
This is the maximum concession able to be
claimed for an off-the-plan purchase.
Step 5. Deduct from the contract price the amount
of the deductible construction costs.
$240,000 - $174,000 = $66,000.
For stamp duty purposes $66,000 is the dutiable
land value of the property, including non deductible
costs, immediately before construction begins.
B) Establishing the value where construction begins
after the contract date
If there have been any improvements made to the
real property after the date of the contract, duty is
calculated on the contract price less the cost of any
construction which occurred after the date of
contract. The cost of construction is that cost which
the purchaser incurs as part of the contract.
Although the final costs of construction, and
therefore the value of any profit in relation to the
unit, may not be known at the date of sale, the
difference between the off-the-plan value of the land
before any building works and the contract price is
the cost of construction to the purchaser, being the
building works including the profit accruing on the
sale. The legislation refers to the cost of construction
in relation to the particular lot. For administrative
convenience in determining the percentage of
completion of construction, the Commissioner will
accept the proportional project completion as the
basis for any calculations.
i) Determine the amount of the concession
attributable exclusively to that lot in respect of the
refurbishment or construction at the date of
contract by deducting from the contract price the
off-the-plan land value and any non deductible
costs, as described above.
ii) Determine the percentage of construction to be
completed in relation to the project at the date of
the contract. If the project is to be completed in
stages then the percentage of the particular
stage relating to the lot should be used.
iii) Multiply the percentage of construction to be
completed by the amount calculated at i) to
obtain the cost of construction and the profit
attributable to the building works.
iv) Deduct the figure calculated at iii) from the
contract price to arrive at the figure on which
stamp duty is calculated.
Adopting the figures in the previous example, this
calculation illustrates the additional steps needed to
establish the value where a lot is sold after
construction commenced. It is assumed that the unit
is 35 per cent complete.
Please continue over page
= $177,500 (value of
e amount of costs not attributable
e amount of costs not attributable
physical construction (such items as
physical construction (such items a
omotional, sale and commission costs and
omotional, sale and commission co
chattels – refer to Revenue Rulings SD.064
attels – refer to Revenue Rulings
and SD.069). In this example $3,500 has
SD.069). In this example $3,50
been used. Deduct this amount from
been used. Deduct this amount from
non land costs to establish the d
non land costs to establish the d
construction costs. $177,500
n costs. $177,50
= $174,000.
This is the maxim
s the maxim
claimed for a
Step 5. Deduct
Step 5. Deduct
alue of the la
alue of the
he contract price is
e contract price is
he purchaser, being the
e purchaser, being the
g the profit accruing on the
the profit accruing on the
n refers to the cost of construction
refers to the cost of construction
he particular lot. For administrative
e particular lot. For adm
ce in determining the percentage of
ce in determining the percentag
letion of construction, the Commissioner will
n of construction, the Commissioner will
accept the proportional project completion as the
ccept the proportional project completion as the
basis for any calculations.
basis for any calculation
i) Determine the amount of the conce
amount of the conc
attributable exclusively to that l
ttributable exclusively to that
refurbishment or construct
refurbishment or construc
contract by deducting
off-the-plan land
costs, as desc
costs, as des
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
Establish base land value: $500,000 x 1/
10 UER = $50,000.
Establish off-the-plan value: $50,000 +
25 per cent ($12,500) = $62,500.
Establish total costs: $240,000 - $62,500
= $177,500.
Establish deductible construction costs:
$177,500 - $3,500 = $174,000.
Step 4.1. Percentage to be completed after the
contract date = 65 per cent
Step 4.2. Deductible construction costs: ($174,000)
x 65 per cent = $113,100
Contract price: ($240,000) - $113,100 =
The figure of $126,900 is the value on
which stamp duty is calculated.
5) The value of lots on horizontal developments
These developments differ from vertical
developments in that the activities occurring before
building works have begun may include a higher
level of road and utilities works. The same method to
that used for vertical developments is used to
ascertain the value on which stamp duty is
calculated.
6) The minimum value in house and land packages
These packages differ from multi-storey
developments in that each parcel may be subject to
a separate building permit and may be available for
sale without a building agreement.
Where the particular parcel, whether or not the
subject of a recent plan of subdivision, is available
for separate sale, the off-the-plan value arrived at by
deducting the cost of construction from the contract
price should be not less than the market value
established by such methods.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
November 1999
ouse and land packages
ouse and land packages
r from multi-storey
that each parcel may be subject to
hat each parcel may be subject to
uilding permit and may be available for
ilding permit and may be availab
hout a building agreement.
building agreement.
Where the particular parcel, whether or not the
Where the particular parcel, whether or not the
subject of a recent plan of subdivision, is avail
subject of a recent plan of subdivision, is ava
for separate sale, the off-the-plan value a
for separate sale, the off-the-plan value a
deducting the cost of construction fro
deducting the cost of construction fr
price should be not less than the
price should be not less than th
established by such method
established by such m
Please note that ruling
Please note that rul
ach decision ma
ch decision ma
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001
CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001 CEASED 30 June 2001