Assignment of interest under a will or intestacy (including the surrender, abandonment or disclaimer of such an interest (SD-098) [1999] VICSROSD 5 (1 October 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Assignment of interest under a will or intestacy
(including the surrender, abandonment or disclaimer of such an interest)
Revenue Ruling SD.098
The purpose of this ruling is to clarify the operation
of sections 56A and 65(1) of the
Stamps Act 1958
documents which assign or transfer any interest of
beneficiaries in marketable securities or real property
acquired under a will or under an intestacy.
Sections 56A and 65(1) of the
Stamps Act 1958
bring to duty transfers or assignments of rights or
interests in either marketable securities or real
property acquired under a will or an intestacy,
regardless of whether the estate has been fully
administered at the time the right or interest is
transferred or assigned.
Unless there is contrary intention in the will, a
deceased estate merges that interest with the
remainder interests and transfers the value of the life
interest to the remaindermen. A disclaimer or
surrender of any other interest increases the interest
of other beneficiaries.
The only rights available to a beneficiary of an
unadministered estate are rights to due
administration and not property interests. A right to
due administration is not itself a right to real or
personal property but a
chose in action
(a term for
an intangible right to property, enforceable by legal
Wills Act 1997
provides that,
subject to a contrary intention appearing under the
will, if a disposition is made to a person who dies
within 30 days after the death of the testator, the will
takes effect as if the person had died before the
testator. Accordingly, if a beneficiary under the will
dies within 30 days of the testator, his or her bequest
under the will does not take effect and the bequest
reverts to the estate.
Commissioner considers that sections 56A and 65(1)
of the Act have application in relation to the
1. The chose in action of a beneficiary of an
unadministered estate is a right in respect of
real or personal property within the terms of
section 56A or section 65(1) of the
(“the Act”).
2. An instrument referred to in either section 56A
or section 65(1) of the Act will be chargeable
whether the instrument is in respect of a chose
in action before administration or a direct
interest following administration of the estate.
3. The liability to duty is not affected by the use of
any particular term of disposition, such as
abandons, disclaims or surrenders, nor any
direction as to the benefit of such right in
respect of, or direct interest in, property.
4. In view of
where a beneficial interest under a will consists
of either marketable securities or real property
and is assigned within 30 days of the testator’s
death, the SRO will regard the assignment or
transfer as dutiable upon the expiration of 30
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
October 1999
terest with the
est with th
nsfers the value of the life
e value of th
ermen. A disclaimer or
ermen. A disclaimer or
other interest increases the interest
ther interest increases the interest
ly rights available to a beneficiary of an
ghts available to a beneficiary o
administered estate are rights to due
red estate are righ
administration and not property interests. A rig
administration and not property interests. A
due administration is not itself a right to re
due administration is not itself a right to r
personal property but a
chose in action
ose in actio
an intangible right to property, en
right to property, e
subject to a contra
subject to a cont
will, if a dispo
will, if a dispo
a beneficiary of an
tate is a right in respect of
ate is a right i
al property within the terms of
al property within the
6A or section 65(1) of the
A or section 65(1) of the
(“the Act”).
An instrument referred to in either section 56A
ment referred to in either section 56A
or section 65(1) of the Act will be chargea
or section 65(1) of the Act will be chargea
whether the instrument is in respect o
ether the instrument is in respect
in action before administration or
e administration o
interest following administrat
interest following administra
3. The liability to duty is n
3. The liability to duty is
any particular term
abandons, disc
abandons, di
direction a
direction a
Ceased - 30 June 2001