Status of private rulings (GEN-005) [1995] VICSROGEN 1 (1 March 1995)
Revenue Rulings
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
Status of private rulings
Revenue Ruling GEN.005
Replaced by GEN.007
The Commissioner of State Revenue issues two types
of rulings - public and private. Public rulings are
issued as part of the Revenue Rulings service
introduced by the State Revenue Office in June 1993
as a method of publishing and disseminating
decisions on the interpretation and application of
legislation administered by the Office. (See Revenue
Ruling GEN.01.) These rulings detail the State
Revenue Office’s position or policy on a particular
issue and are of general application to tax/duty
payers. Private rulings are issued in response to
specific requests by tax/duty payers, or their
representatives, seeking advice on the interpretation
of the legislation with respect to a situation
encountered by the tax/duty payer.
This Ruling serves to clarify the status of private
rulings issued by the Commissioner of State Revenue
to a particular tax/duty payer.
This Ruling is to be read in conjunction with
Revenue Ruling SD.020, ‘Assessment of
unexecuted documents’.
The Commissioner will issue a private ruling at
the request of an individual tax/duty payer to assist
that person to comply fully with any of the Acts
administered by the State Revenue Office.
However, it is not appropriate for the Commissioner
to provide private rulings to tax/duty payers to
enable them to practice tax avoidance or to exploit
ambiguities in the legislation. Therefore, in some
instances, requests for private rulings may be refused.
Generally, a private ruling will not be issued to a
tax/duty payer who presents a hypothetical situation
for an opinion. Nor will a private ruling be issued to
evaluate alternatives and advise which option results
in the least liability for tax or duty.
The Commissioner may issue a private ruling on a
proposed course of action if the taxpayer is unable
to decide whether to proceed without receiving
advice of the State Revenue Office’s view of the tax
consequences. Before a ruling will be issued in these
circumstances, the tax/duty payer will be required to
identify all parties involved by name and address,
estimate the completion date for the proposed
course of action and provide all material facts.
In addition, the tax/duty payer will be required to
submit a statement to the effect that there is a
genuine intention to proceed with the proposed
course of action unless the ruling indicates that it
would be impractical to do so, or raises issues not
previously addressed. Once a ruling on a proposed
course of action has been given, there is always a
possibility that the Office may receive fresh legal
advice or implement a change of policy which would
cause the Commissioner to find that the ruling is
incorrect before the tax/duty payer can finalise the
proposal. If this occurred, the Commissioner would
review all circumstances of the case before deciding
whether the ruling would be withdrawn. Otherwise,
the Commissioner will be bound by the private ruling
issued provided that the completed course of action
accords with all the information given.
To obtain a private ruling a tax/duty payer, or their
representative, must lodge a written submission
with the Office detailing the issue in question, all
other parties involved and all relevant facts.
The submission should also state the applicant’s
views of the interpretation and application of the
provisions in question to their own circumstances,
the rationale for such views including arguments for
and against, as well as any relevant case law.
Please continue over page
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
C E A S E D 31 July 1997
The Commissioner will review the information
presented and may seek further information from
the tax/duty payer, or third parties, before issuing a
private ruling on the matter.
The private ruling will have application only to the
tax/duty payer to whom it is issued and to the
factual situation presented by that tax/duty payer.
It cannot be relied upon as a precedent by other
tax/duty payers.
The Commissioner will be bound by any private
ruling issued to a tax/duty payer provided that:
• the tax/duty payer and all relevant parties have
been fully identified;
• the tax/duty payer has made a full disclosure of
all material facts and information in the ruling
submission;
• the circumstances to which the ruling is applied
are identical to those represented to the
Commissioner in the ruling submission; and
• the tax/duty payer acts, or has acted, in
accordance with the ruling.
When the above requirements have been satisfied,
the only situations which would cause the
Commissioner to depart from an issued private
ruling are:
• where the advice is subsequently overruled by a
court or tribunal;
• where there is a legislative amendment; or
• where the Commissioner has determined that a
particular ruling issued is incorrect.
In such cases, the ruling will be withdrawn from the
date of the decision of the court or tribunal (or such
later date as the Commissioner decides is appropriate),
the date of the amendment or the date of the
Commissioner’s determination respectively. If the
withdrawal of the ruling results in a new liability for
the tax/duty payer, tax or duty will be payable only
from the date on which the ruling is withdrawn.
The Commissioner will not be bound by a private
ruling where it is found that a tax/duty payer, or their
representative, has failed to provide all material
information which ought to have been provided, or
has misrepresented information whilst seeking a
private ruling. The ruling will be considered never to
have had application and accordingly, the
withdrawal of such a ruling would have both a
prospective and retrospective effect. In cases where
there has been a failure to provide all material
information, the Commissioner will take into
consideration the role of the Office in obtaining
further information to determine the date of the
withdrawal of the ruling. However, the onus is on the
tax/duty payer, or their representative, to provide all
material information in the first instance and to
monitor all communications from this Office which
advise of legislative amendments, judicial decisions
and policy changes.
In some instances, it may be necessary to give a
qualified ruling stating the Commissioner’s current
position but advising the tax/duty payer of the
possibility of a change of opinion. This would occur
when the State Revenue Office is awaiting judicial
interpretation of the same issue which concerns the
tax/duty payer and when it is known that legislative
amendments are contemplated. In these situations,
the onus will rest with the tax/duty payer to monitor
the continuing validity of the private ruling.
If the facts or circumstances, as presented in the
submission, change after the private ruling has
been issued, the tax/duty payer, or their representative,
is required to contact the Office to clarify whether
the private ruling is still applicable in light of
the changes.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue