Profit distributions and loan accounts (PT-128) [2007] VICSROPT 1 (1 April 2007)
Profit distributions and loan accounts
Revenue Rulings
The definition of wages in section 3 of the
Pay-roll Tax
(the Act) includes any wages, remuneration,
salary, commission, employer superannuation
contributions, bonuses or allowances paid or payable
to or in relation to an employee. This definition
is extended by section 3(2) of the Act to include
fringe benefits as defined in the Fringe
Benefits Tax
Assessment Act 1986
(Cth) (the FBT Act).
A question may arise as to whether payments and
loans made to the proprietor of a business, who is also
an employee of that business, are subject to pay-roll
tax. The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to provide
clarification regarding the pay-roll tax treatment of
these payments.
For a payment to be subject to pay-roll tax, the
payment must be made to or in relation to an
employee (or deemed employee) in his/her capacity
as employee, and not in any other capacity (e.g.
shareholder). Therefore, distributions of profit (i.e.
amount of surplus after deducting all expenses) to
persons who are both owners and employees of the
business are not wages under the Act.
Accordingly, trust distributions (whether income or
capital) and company dividends are not subject to
pay-roll tax when paid to beneficiaries or shareholders
even if they are also employees. These payments must
be clearly shown in the books of account as profit
distributions, and not expenses of the business.
Whether a loan made to a beneficiary or shareholder
who is also an employee of the business is subject
to pay-roll tax depends on how the loan is regarded
under the income tax legislation and the FBT Act. If
the loan is deemed to be income to the beneficiary or
shareholder for income tax purposes, it is not subject
to pay-roll tax. On the other hand, if it is regarded as a
loan benefit under the FBT Act, the grossed-up taxable
value for FBT purposes is subject to pay-roll tax.
Please contact the Australian Taxation Office for more
information on income tax and fringe benefits tax.
If the loan repayment is offset against the beneficiary's
or shareholder's remuneration, the amount of the
remuneration offset will be subject to pay-roll tax. If
the loan repayment is offset against trust distributions
to the beneficiary or dividends to the shareholder, the
amount offset is not subject to pay-roll tax.
A partnership is not a legal entity which is separate
and distinct from the partners. Therefore, any
payments to the partners (whether the payments
are described as `wages' or `loans') are regarded as
payments or drawings in respect of partnership profits
and are not subject to pay-roll tax.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Revenue Ruling PT.128
Replaces PT.026
Commissioner of State Revenue