Objections to Assessment (LT-001) [1993] VICSROLT 1 (1 June 1993)
Revenue Rulings
Objections to assessments
Revenue Ruling LT.001
The Commissioner issues assessments which notify a
person as to their liability to pay tax. Section 24A of
Land Tax Act 1958
provides a right of objection
against assessments made by the Commissioner.
However, it should be noted there is no avenue of
objection against decisions or determinations of the
Commissioner under this Act.
The purpose of this ruling is to outline the
requirements for lodgement of a valid objection.
The requirements for lodgement of a valid notice of
objection are as follows.
• The notice must be posted to or lodged with
the Commissioner within 60 days of the service
of the assessment. (The date of service will
be taken to be two days after the date of
an assessment).
• The notice must be in writing and should state in
detail the grounds relied upon.
In relation to the above requirements, it should be
noted that the Commissioner has no discretion to
consider any objection received outside the 60 day
limit. However, an objection by post will be considered
to have been received within the 60 days, if it is
received at the State Revenue Office no later than
two days after the expiration of the 60 day period.
The Commissioner will make a decision on all valid
objections and will provide written advice to the
taxpayer advising of the decision. A person
dissatisfied with a decision on an objection, has
defined rights of appeal to the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal or the Supreme Court of Victoria.
Taxpayers will assist the Commissioner in reaching
an early resolution of objections, where they provide
precise and detailed information in respect of the
matters that give rise to the objection against the
assessment in question.
Objections against site valuations should be made to
the relevant municipal authority, not to the
Commissioner. It should also be noted that there is
no avenue of objection against equalisation factors,
which are set by the Valuer-General.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE