Landholder Provisions - Constructive Ownership of Land Holdings of Discretionary Trusts (DA-059) [2012] VICSRODA 7 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions – Constructive Ownership
of Land Holdings of Discretionary Trusts
Revenue Ruling DA.059
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty
on relevant acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings
in Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million
In determining whether a company or unit trust
scheme is a landholder (and the amount of duty
payable on a relevant acquisition), its land holdings
are not limited to land it directly owns. In certain
circumstances, they may include land held by linked
entities and discretionary trusts:
sections 75
of the Act.
of the Act, a company or unit trust
scheme (including a landholder and linked entity)
that is a beneficiary of a discretionary trust may be
deemed to own or to be otherwise entitled to 100%
of the land that is the subject of the trust even though
at law it may not have a present entitlement to any
part of such property.
For the purposes of
of the Act, a company
or unit trust scheme is a beneficiary of a discretionary
trust if the capital of the trust may be applied in its
favour, either upon the exercise of a power or discretion
conferred under the trust, or in circumstances where
a discretion conferred under the trust is not exercised.
To avoid unjust results arising,
provides the Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) with discretion to determine that a
company or unit trust scheme’s entitlement to the land
of a discretionary trust is less than 100%. In addition
to the discretion, and as a safeguard against double
of the Act contains a restriction
on its operation where two or more companies and/
or unit trust schemes are determined to be entitled
to the land of the discretionary trust. In such cases,
the provisions of
of the Act cannot apply
to deem any of those companies and/or unit trust
schemes (either individually or together) to own or be
entitled to more than 100% of the land of the trust.
In determining the land that can be traced through
a particular discretionary trust,
deems the land of one discretionary trust (the First
Trust) to be the land of another discretionary trust (the
Second Trust) if the Second Trust is a beneficiary of the
First Trust, or if the trustee of the Second Trust (in its
capacity as trustee) is a beneficiary of the First Trust.
The purpose of this Ruling is to explain the factors the
Commissioner will take into account in determining
whether a company or unit trust scheme’s (including
a landholder’s or linked entity’s) deemed ownership
or entitlement to the land of a discretionary trust is
less than 100%. This Ruling does not deal with the
constructive ownership of land held through linked
entities under
of the Act. For information
on the tracing of land through linked entities, please
see Revenue Ruling DA.058 which is available on the
State Revenue Office (SRO) website.
The factors that the Commissioner will consider
in determining whether a company or unit trust
scheme (including a landholder or linked entity)
should be deemed to own or be entitled to less
than 100% of the land of a discretionary trust
include (but are not limited to) –
• The company or unit trust scheme’s entitlement
to the capital (i.e. the property) of the trust upon
the vesting of the trust, determined on the
assumption that the circumstances entitling
the company or unit trust scheme to a distribution
of the capital of the trust are satisfied.
• The likelihood of the company or unit trust
scheme receiving any of the capital of the
discretionary trust, having regard to any intention
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
(manifest or implied) of the settlor and/or trustee
to vest the property of the trust in the company
or unit trust scheme.
• If the discretionary trust was not established for
the benefit of the company or unit trust scheme,
how the company or unit trust scheme is related
to the person(s) for whom the discretionary trust
was established.
• The use of the land of the discretionary trust,
and whether the trust or its land forms part of a
business structure or activity involving the company
or unit trust scheme including whether the trust’s
land or any part of it has been used as security
for the benefit of the company or unit trust scheme
or a business structure or activity involving it.
• Evidence of historical capital distributions made by
the trustee of the discretionary trust. Where there
have been no capital distributions, and the terms
of the trust do not distinguish between persons or
classes of persons to whom the income and capital
of the trust may be applied, the Commissioner may
consider evidence of past income distributions to
determine the extent of a company or unit trust
scheme’s and/or linked entity’s entitlement.
In determining whether a company or unit trust
scheme’s entitlement to the land of a discretionary
trust should be less than 100%, the Commissioner’s
primary consideration will be its entitlement to
the capital of the trust upon its vesting. This will
be the case even if the vesting of the trust is not
contemplated at the time of the Commissioner’s
determination. Once the Commissioner has
determined the company or unit trust scheme’s
entitlement to a distribution of the capital of the trust
upon the vesting of the trust, he may, having regard
to the other factors identified in the above paragraph
and any further factors he considers relevant, either
increase or decrease the company or unit trust
scheme’s entitlement for the purposes of
of the Act.
The following examples illustrate when the
Commissioner may determine that a company or
unit trust scheme’s entitlement to the land of a
discretionary trust is less than or equal to 100% –
Example 1: A discretionary trust that has been
established to hold a family home for asset
protection purposes
Under the terms of the trust deed, a company
falls within the class of beneficiaries entitled to
a distribution of the capital of the trust on the basis
that one of the family members is a director and
shareholder of the company. Under the trust, the
company’s right to receive a distribution of the
capital of the trust upon its vesting is as one of
five potential default beneficiaries should the fund
not be distributed to named discretionary objects.
Assuming that the circumstances entitling the
company to a distribution of the capital of the trust
are satisfied, it would be entitled to receive at least
20% of the capital of the trust upon its vesting. The
only asset comprising the capital of the trust is the
family home. The home is used and occupied as
the principal place of residence of the family and is
not in any way connected to the business structure
or activity involving the company. While the
company is a capital beneficiary entitled to at least
20% of the capital of the trust, the Commissioner
would be inclined to find that the company’s
entitlement to the land of the trust is nil as the
and will most likely never vest in the company.
In a case such as this, the land of the discretionary
trust would be disregarded in determining whether
the company is a landholder.
Example 2: A private company landholder
operates two closely aligned businesses,
i.e. a building and construction business
in its own right and a land banking and
investment business in its capacity as trustee
of a discretionary trust
The landholder (in its own right) and three related
individuals are the specified beneficiaries of the
discretionary trust. Under the terms of the trust,
the trustee has the discretion to distribute the
capital and income of the trust to any of the
specified beneficiaries. If the trust were to vest,
the landholder and the three other beneficiaries
would each be entitled to receive a distribution
of 25% of the capital of the trust. Despite these
entitlements, all distributions of income made
during the life of the trust have only been made in
favour of the landholder. Furthermore, the trust’s
land holdings have been used to secure third party
loans to the landholder for the business it carries
on in its own right. While the landholder is one of
a number of beneficiaries potentially entitled to
the capital of the trust, the Commissioner would
be inclined to deem the landholder to own or to
be otherwise entitled to 100% of the land of the
discretionary trust. This is because the land of
the trust forms an integral part of the business
operations of the landholder, and the fact that the
landholder is trustee of the trust and has made
income distributions exclusively to itself, indicates
that the land of the trust is intended to benefit the
landholder. Accordingly, all the land of the trust
will be taken into account in determining the duty
payable on a relevant acquisition in the landholder.
The above considerations are provided as a guide only
and are not an exhaustive list of the matters or factors
the Commissioner may consider. Each matter will be
considered on its own individual facts in determining
the application of the provisions.
A taxpayer, who is uncertain of the application of
of the Act in a particular case, may contact
the Landholder Acquisitions Branch at the SRO or apply
to the Commissioner for a private ruling in accordance
with Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all cases, the onus is
on the taxpayer to provide the Commissioner with the
necessary information in order to make an informed
decision as to a company or unit trust scheme’s deemed
entitlement under
of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling.
All rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Commissioner of State Revenue