Broker receipts (FID-054) [1999] VICSROFID 1 (1 January 1999)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Broker receipts
Revenue Ruling FID.054
Replaces FID.040
The purpose of this ruling is to answer two
questions about ‘broker receipts’.
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
was amended in 1995 to introduce a new
charging regime for Victorian brokers. Under the
new provisions, brokers are required to pay FID on
‘broker receipts’ calculated in accordance with
returns they lodge with the Australian Securities
Exchange. These provisions were introduced soon
after similar amendments were made to the
legislation in New South Wales and were intended
to achieve consistent outcomes for brokers in the
two States.
There are various components of ‘broker receipts’,
including commissions and dividends, which have
prompted the following questions:
1. Is Financial Institutions Duty (FID) payable on
the commission received by a broker before
deducting the payment of sub-underwriting
commissions?
2. Is FID payable on dividends received by a
broker for shares held as a nominee?
Under section 3 of the Act, ‘broker receipts’ means
a) receipts and amounts retained or realised
(after deduction of any trading losses) in the
nature of profits from trading in securities;
b) dividends received from trading in securities
and dividends received on securities held by
the broker;
c) brokerage received or retained (whether from
trading in equities, options, futures, fixed
interest or any other means);
d) commissions received or retained;
e) interest and fees received or retained;
f) receipts from the sale of capital assets, other
than goods, not traded in the ordinary course
of the business of the broker.
The State Revenue Office (SRO) considers that this
definition should be applied in accordance with the
underlying principle that amounts received
beneficially by a broker will attract duty, but amounts
received on behalf of, and remitted to, another person
Commissions
It is common for a broker, who agrees to underwrite
an issue of shares for a fee, to spread the risk through
a number of other brokers. In return, those other
brokers will be paid sub-underwriting commissions by
the lead underwriter from the total amount of
underwriting commission received. Under a strict
application of the legislation, the total amount of
underwriting commission received by the lead
underwriter is the amount of ‘broker receipts’ that is
subject to duty, because the underwriter receives the
whole amount of the underwriting commission on his
own account. Further, the receipt of sub-underwriting
commissions would be dutiable in the hands of those
sub-underwriters who are Victorian brokers.
However, the SRO recognises this strict application of
the law is not consistent with the principle stated
above. Nor is it consistent with the legislation
operating in New South Wales which allows the
deduction of sub-underwriting commissions from
underwriting commissions. Therefore the
Commissioner has ruled that a broker can deduct
sub-underwriting commissions paid from the
underwriting commission received and pay duty on
the net amount. This will ensure uniformity with the
treatment of commissions in New South Wales and
competitive equality for Victorian brokers in the
underwriting business.
This treatment applies only to underwriting
commissions. It does not apply to other commissions,
brokerage or fees payable to sub-agents or other
persons for services rendered to the underwriter.
ON THE MOVE
Under the definition in section 3 of the Act, ‘broker
receipts’ include all dividends received by a broker,
whether beneficially or as a nominee.
To impose FID on dividends received by a broker as a
nominee is neither consistent with the legislation
operating in New South Wales, where such dividends
are not dutiable, nor consistent with the principle to
impose duty only on a broker’s beneficial income.
Therefore, the Commissioner has ruled that dividends
not beneficially received by a broker, being dividends
received on behalf of another person and remitted to
that person, are not subject to duty as ‘broker receipts’.
Dividends received beneficially by a broker are dutiable.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 1998