Rooming House Exemption - Commissioner's Guidelines (LTA003V2) [2012] VICSROLTA 1 (1 December 2012)
Rooming House Exemption –
Commissioner’s Guidelines
Land Tax Act 2005
Revenue Ruling LTA.003 (version 2)
Land is exempt from land tax under
section 75(1)
Land Tax Act 2005
(the Act) if the Commissioner
of State Revenue (the Commissioner) determines that
the land is used and occupied:
a) as a rooming house (within the meaning of
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
registered under
Public Health and
Wellbeing Act 2008
b) primarily as low cost accommodation by people
with low incomes, in accordance with guidelines
issued by the Commissioner for the purposes of
this section.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to set out the
Commissioner’s guidelines specified in section 75(2)
of the Act for determining whether a landowner is
eligible for the exemption under section 75 of the Act.
Eligibility for the exemption is targeted at rooming
houses which provide low cost accommodation
primarily to people who are disadvantaged, homeless
or earn low incomes.
To claim the exemption, the owner of the land must
apply to the Commissioner as required by section
75(4) of the Act. Applications should be made by
post, addressed to the State Revenue Office, GPO Box
1641, Melbourne VIC 3001. Supporting documentary
evidence and information should be provided.
The Commissioner’s guidelines for determining
whether a landowner is entitled to the exemption
under section 75 of the Act are as follows:
The types of premises in which low cost, rooming
house accommodation may be provided
The exemption applies only to premises which:
• contain one or more rooms that are available
for occupancy on payment of rent
• are available for occupation by four or more
• are registered with the relevant local council
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
as a rooming house
• are not self-contained units or apartments
• are not licensed under the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
• are not serviced apartments, hotels, motels,
bed and breakfasts or hostels, and
• are not used primarily for student, backpacker
and/or tourist accommodation.
The number and types of persons for whom the
accommodation must be provided
The exemption applies only to rooming houses which
have been occupied by four or more rooming house
residents during the year immediately preceding the
A rooming house resident means a person who:
• has the right to occupy a room, together
with a right to use common facilities in the
rooming house, under Part 3 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
(ie. not a Residential
Tenancy Agreement), and
• is not a family member of either the owner or
manager of the rooming house.
The circumstances in which, and the arrangements
under which, the accommodation is provided
The exemption applies only if, during the year
immediately preceding the tax year, at least 80 per
cent of the accommodation at the rooming house was
occupied by long term residents.
A long term resident is a rooming house resident who,
during the year immediately preceding the tax year,
Revenue Rulings
LTA.003 (version 2)
Ruling history
LTA.003 (version 2)
December 2012
Dates of effect
2013 land tax year
resided at the rooming house for one or more periods
totalling at least three months.
Where this requirement is not met in a particular
case, the owner of the land may provide to the
Commissioner written reasons explaining why this
requirement was not met. In each such case, the
Commissioner will consider the application on its own
merits, and may waive this requirement.
Maximum tariffs for the accommodation
The exemption applies only if the tariff charged per
person for weekly accommodation at the rooming
house does not exceed the maximum permitted tariff.
The maximum permitted tariff for a tax year is based
on the gross weekly age pension rate for the previous
September quarter (e.g. the maximum permitted tariff
for 2013 is based on the gross weekly age pension rate
for the 2012 September quarter).
Where full board and lodging is provided, the
maximum permitted tariff per person in the year
preceding the tax year is:
• 105 per cent of the gross single weekly age
pension rate for single accommodation, and
• 105 per cent of the gross couple weekly age
pension rate (on a per person basis) for shared
accommodation.
Where less than full board and lodging is provided,
the maximum permitted tariff per person in the year
preceding the tax year is:
• 70 per cent of the gross single weekly age
pension rate for single accommodation, and
• 70 per cent of the gross couple weekly age
pension rate (on a per person basis) for shared
accommodation.
Single accommodation means accommodation
in a room occupied by only one person who has
the right to exclusively occupy that room. Shared
accommodation means accommodation in a room in
any other scenario, including:
• By two or more persons who together have the
right to exclusively occupy that room, and
• By one or more persons who do not have the
right to exclusively occupy that room.
Special Land Tax
Section 30(1)(d) of the Act provides that special land
tax may apply in the event that land ceases to be
exempt from land tax as a rooming house.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
LTA.003 (version 2)
December 2012
Commissioner of State Revenue