Landholder Provisions - Meaning of 'Associated Transaction' (DA-057) [2012] VICSRODA 5 (1 July 2012)
Landholder Provisions –
Meaning of 'Associated Transaction'
Revenue Ruling DA.057
The landholder provisions in Part 2 of Chapter 3 of
Duties Act 2000
(the Act) charge duty on relevant
acquisitions in landholders.
A landholder is any company or unit trust scheme
(whether private or public) that has land holdings in
Victoria with an unencumbered value of $1 million or
of the Act sets out the various ways
a person may make a relevant acquisition in a
landholder. One such way is through the aggregation
of interests acquired by the person with interests
acquired by any other person in an ‘associated
transaction’.
An ‘associated transaction’ is defined in
section 3(1)
of the Act to mean the acquisition of an interest
in a landholder by a person and the acquisition of
an interest in the landholder by another person in
circumstances in which –
(a) those persons are acting in concert; or
(b) the acquisitions form, evidence, give effect to or
arise from substantially one arrangement, one
transaction or one series of transactions.
The purpose of this Ruling is to provide guidance on
the application of the ‘associated transaction’ definition
section 3(1)
of the Act and to explain the factors the
Commissioner of State Revenue (the Commissioner)
will take into account in determining whether or not
persons have acted in concert or their acquisitions
form, evidence, give effect to or arise from substantially
one arrangement, one transaction or one series of
transactions for the purposes of the section.
The ‘associated transaction’ definition in section
3(1) of the Act focuses on a relationship between
acquisitions of two or more persons. For the
purposes of the definition, this relationship may be
established by one of two ways – either by persons
acting in concert or acquisitions forming, evidencing,
giving effect to or arising from substantially one
arrangement, one transaction or one series of
transactions. It is not necessary that both limbs of the
definition be satisfied for acquisitions to constitute an
‘associated transaction’. It is also not necessary that
the persons who made the acquisitions be associated
persons as defined under
section 3(1)
of the Act.
Where acquisitions of interests satisfy at least one
of the two limbs of the ‘associated transaction’
definition in
section 3(1)
of the Act, the acquisitions
are to be regarded as an ‘associated transaction’.
Unlike the aggregation of interests of associated
persons, the Commissioner does not have discretion
to disassociate the interests acquired by persons in
an ‘associated transaction’. For information on the
meaning of the term 'interest' and details on how
and when an interest may be acquired, please see
Revenue Ruling DA.056.
The following paragraphs set out the Commissioner’s
views on the interpretation of the phrases ‘acting in
concert’ and ‘substantially one arrangement, one
transaction or one series of transactions’ as appearing
in the ‘associated transaction’ definition in section
3(1) of the Act.
Acting in concert
The phrase ‘acting in concert’ is not defined in the
Act. At common law, the phrase has generally been
interpreted as involving knowing conduct, the result
of communication between parties and not simply
simultaneous actions occurring spontaneously: see
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat
Industry Employees’ Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Bowen CJ at 337;
Bank of Western Australia Ltd v
Ocean Trawlers Pty Ltd & Ors
(1995) 13 WAR 407
(1995) 16 ACSR 501
, per Owen J at 524.
Revenue Rulings
Ruling history
Issued date
Dates of effect
For persons to be considered to be ‘acting in concert’,
there must be at least an understanding between
the persons as to a common purpose or object: see
Adsteam Building Industries Pty Ltd v Queensland
Cement and Lime Company Ltd
(No 4) [1985]
1 Qd R 127;
J-Corp Pty Ltd v Australian Builders
Labourers Federated Union of Workers
ALR 502. The understanding can be informal as well
as unenforceable (see
Bank of Western Australia Ltd
(supra) at 524;
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
Lutovi Investments Pty Ltd
[1978] HCA 55
(1978) 140 CLR 434
Gibbs and Mason JJ at 444), and may be inferred
from the circumstances surrounding the acquisitions
under consideration, including what the persons
have done, as well as by direct evidence: see
Western Australia Ltd
(supra) at 525;
Urban Consolidation and Development Pty
Ltd and Ors v Commissioner of State Revenue
VCAT 593 at 49-53.
The Commissioner considers that two or more
persons will be acting in concert where there is direct
or indirect evidence of communication between them
and that communication shows a common purpose
or object of an understanding, agreement or plan
(whether written or oral) regarding the persons’
acquisitions of interests in a landholder. This will
be the case even if the persons acquire interests
separately and for their own benefit.
Where there is no communication between persons
and their acquisitions of interests in a landholder arise
from simultaneous actions occurring spontaneously,
the acquisitions would not be seen as resulting from
those persons acting in concert. However in certain
circumstances the acquisitions may still constitute
an ‘associated transaction’ if the acquisitions form,
evidence, give effect to or arise from substantially
one arrangement, one transaction or one series of
transactions.
Substantially one arrangement, one transaction,
or one series of transactions
The word ‘arrangement’ is not defined in the Act.
Butterworths Legal Dictionary
(1997) defines an
‘arrangement’ as “generally, an agreement, plan, or
compact, the legal effect of which depends on the
context in which it is used.”
At common law, the term ‘arrangement’ has been
interpreted in different ways in different statutory
contexts. In the context of income tax legislation, an
‘arrangement’ has been interpreted as constituting
a wider course of action than a single agreement,
and includes “all kinds of concerted action by which
persons may arrange their affairs for a particular
purpose or so as to produce a particular effect”: see
Bell v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
CLR 548 at 573.
In the stamp duty context, the term ’arrangement’
has been interpreted as having a broad meaning
and as including a series of transactions: see
Commissioner of State Revenue v Pacific General
Securities Ltd & Finmore Holdings Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADTAP 51
ewton v Federal Commissioner of
[1958] UKPCHCA 1
(1958) 98 CLR 1
Australand Investments
Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
453. The term is not limited to describing dealings
between two or more persons (i.e. bilateral or
multilateral arrangements), and may include
unilateral arrangements which have been planned
and implemented by one person alone: see
General Securities Ltd
Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue v Pacific General Securities Ltd &
Finmore Holdings Pty Ltd
(No. 2) (2005) 63 ATR
Urban Consolidation and Development
Lutovi Investments Pty Ltd
(supra), per Aickin J at
The Commissioner considers that the phrase
‘substantially one arrangement, one transaction or
one series of transactions’ includes cases where the
relationship between the acquisitions is an integral
and not a fortuitous one depending merely on such
circumstances as contiguity in time or place: see
Reynella Villages Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamps
[1989] SASC 1724
(1989) 51 SASR 378
, at 381-382 and
General v Cohen and Another
[1937] 1 KB 478
Greene LJ at 491.
In considering whether acquisitions of interests in a
landholder constitute ‘substantially one arrangement,
one transaction or one series of transactions’, the
Commissioner will look at the substance of the several
acquisitions and in particular whether there is some
essential unity, some oneness, some unifying factor
between the acquisitions: see
Jeffrey v Commissioner
(SA) (1980) 23 SASR 398, at 405;
Consolidation and Development
The requisite unity for acquisitions to comprise
‘substantially one arrangement, one transaction
or one series of transactions’ under
section 3(1)
the Act is to be inferred from the circumstances
surrounding and the relationship between the
acquisitions, including the conduct of the parties to
the transactions. In determining whether or not the
requisite unity exists, it is not necessary that any of
the parties be associated persons, although such
circumstances may be relevant to the determination.
Acquisitions of interests in a landholder that result
from separate yet interdependent contracts (in that
completion of each contract is conditional on the
completion of all the other contracts) is an obvious
example of when acquisitions will be considered
to constitute an ‘associated transaction’. Due to
the interdependent nature of the contracts, such
acquisitions demonstrate the essential unity required
to form, evidence, give effect to or arise from
substantially one arrangement, one transaction or one
series of transactions.
Equally, the unity of acquisitions may arise where
the acquisitions result from a single contract, plan
or agreement. In this regard, the Commissioner
recognises that interests acquired by independent
members of the public under a genuine public offer
may constitute an ‘associated transaction’. While
the term ‘associated transaction’ is broadly defined
section 3(1)
of the Act, the Commissioner has
taken the position that he will not regard acquisitions
of interests by independent members of the public
as an associated transaction if the acquisitions are
made in response to a genuine public offer under a
product disclosure statement or prospectus lodged
with the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission. However, the Commissioner’s position
will not apply if it is found that other circumstances
exist which indicate that the acquisitions form part
of substantially one arrangement, one transaction or
one series of transactions or the acquirers acted in
concert in making the acquisitions. An example of
such a circumstance is if, under a public offer, one
person’s acquisition in a landholder is made subject
to and conditional upon another person’s acquisition.
The Commissioner’s position will also not apply
where the Commissioner considers that a person is
taking advantage of this concession, particularly in
cases where the public offer does not convert the
landholder to either a listed company or public unit
trust scheme.
The Commissioner’s position to not regard
acquisitions made in response to a genuine public
offer as constituting an ‘associated transaction’ is only
relevant in the context of applying the ‘associated
transaction’ provisions. The Commissioner’s views
do not extend to the application of
sections 89B
89C of the Act which specifically contemplate the
aggregation of interests acquired by the public where
the acquisitions relate to the conversion of a private
unit trust scheme to a public unit trust scheme or a
private company to a listed company.
Factors the Commissioner will take into account
to determine whether persons are ‘acting in
concert’ in relation to acquisitions or acquisitions
which ‘form, evidence, give effect to or arise from
substantially one arrangement, one transaction or
one series of transactions’
In determining whether acquisitions constitute an
‘associated transaction’ for the purposes of section
78 of the Act, the Commissioner will consider, among
other things, the following –
• The existence of any agreement, understanding
or arrangement (written or oral) between the
vendor(s) and/or the purchasers (acquirers) of the
interests in the landholder.
• Whether there is any interdependency between
the acquisitions, including whether completion
of any of the acquisitions is conditional on the
completion of any other acquisition.
• Whether the acquisitions of the interests were
negotiated independently or together and/or arise
from common circumstances.
• Whether the persons from whom the interest(s)
were acquired are the same or associated persons.
• The relationship (if any) of the persons who
acquired interests in the landholder.
• The period of time over which the interests were
Examples 1, 2 and 3 are situations where the
Commissioner would not consider the acquisitions
by two or more persons to constitute an ‘associated
transaction’.
Company A is the responsible entity of a
landholder that is a private unit trust scheme
(the Landholder). Company B is the sole unit
holder of the Landholder. To fund future property
purchases by the Landholder, Company A and
Company B resolve to register the Landholder
as a managed investment scheme and offer
the public a 50% interest in the Landholder
pursuant to a product disclosure statement. As
a means of building investor confidence and
ensuring a successful public capital raising,
Company A negotiates with a highly regarded
institutional investor (Cornerstone Investor) to
take an investment of 19% in the Landholder. The
Cornerstone Investor agrees to take its interest
in the Landholder on the condition that the
public offer achieves a minimum level of public
subscriptions. Having achieved the minimum level
of public subscriptions, Company A issues units
to the Cornerstone Investor (19%) and the public
shortly after the close of the subscription period.
In this case, the Commissioner would not consider
the acquisitions by the public and the Cornerstone
Investor as constituting an ‘associated transaction’
as none of the acquisitions by the public were
made conditional upon any other acquisition
including the Cornerstone Investor’s acquisition.
Even though the Cornerstone Investor’s acquisition
was dependent upon the attainment of a certain
level of public subscription, the Commissioner
would not regard the Cornerstone Investor’s
acquisition as forming an ‘associated transaction’
with the public subscriptions as this would negate
the Commissioner’s concession on acquisitions by
the public under a genuine public offer. However,
in circumstances where there are two or more
cornerstone investors, and their acquisitions are
made subject to and conditional upon each other,
the Commissioner would regard the acquisitions
by the cornerstone investors as constituting an
‘associated transaction’.
Company A is the responsible entity for a
landholder that is a private unit trust scheme
(the Landholder). To reduce the level of debt and
raise capital for future property purchases by the
Landholder, Company A obtains the consent of
the sole unit holder to offer fifteen investors known
to it (none of whom are associated persons) the
opportunity to invest in the Landholder. The offer
is unrestricted in that investors can apply for any
number of units in the Landholder. In addition,
the offer is not conditional upon the achievement
of a minimum level of subscriptions in order
for the offer to proceed. Ten of the investors
independently decide to take an interest in the
Landholder. One of the investors acquires a
significant interest, which constitutes a relevant
acquisition in the Landholder on its own. None of
the other investors acquires a significant interest.
In this case, the Commissioner would not regard
any of the acquisitions by the investors (including
the investor with the significant interest) as
together constituting an ‘associated transaction’ as
the investors’ acquisitions were not conditional on
each other. Furthermore, the investors did not act
in concert in making the acquisitions.
Company A is the trustee of the XYZ Family
Trust (the Family Trust) and owns a 50% interest
in a landholder that is a private company (the
Landholder). On 1 July 2012, Company A
exercised a discretion under the deed governing
the Family Trust and distributed in specie 50%
of the shares (a 25% interest) it held in the
Landholder to one of the discretionary objects
of the Family Trust, being X. On 1 July 2013,
Company A again exercised its discretionary power
under the deed governing the Family Trust and
distributed in specie its remaining 25% interest in
the Landholder to another discretionary object of
the Family Trust, being Company B. Company B
and X are not associated persons under the Act.
The Commissioner would not regard the above in
specie distributions as constituting an ‘associated
transaction’ provided it could be shown that they
were made pursuant to two independent unilateral
decisions by the trustee of the Family Trust. If
the decisions to distribute the two interests were
connected (other than being made pursuant to
the same power and by the same trustee), the
Commissioner would consider the acquisitions by
Company B and X to constitute an ‘associated
transaction’.
Examples 4, 5, 6, and 7 are situations where the
Commissioner would consider the acquisitions by
two or more persons to constitute an associated
transaction.
Three individuals (the Acquirers), who are not
associated persons as defined in the Act, resolve
to acquire in equal shares all of the issued share
capital of a landholder that is a private company
(the Landholder). The Acquirers appoint an
agent to negotiate the purchase of the share
capital of the Landholder on their behalf and
arrange joint finance for the acquisitions. In this
instance, although none of the Acquirers obtains
a significant interest in his or her own right (i.e.
an interest of 50% or more), the Commissioner
would regard the acquisitions as constituting an
‘associated transaction’ because the Acquirers
acted in concert by negotiating and making the
acquisitions and obtaining joint finance.
X holds all of the units in a landholder that is
a private unit trust scheme (the Landholder).
X decides to realise his investment and offers
all of his units in the Landholder for sale to
the market. Y becomes aware of the sale and
offers to purchase 15% of the units. X advises
Y that he will only sell to Y a 15% interest in
the Landholder if Y can secure purchasers for
the balance of his interest in the Landholder. To
ensure that Y can secure the purchase of a 15%
interest in the Landholder, Y contacts a number
of business associates to acquire the balance of
X’s interest. A number of Y’s business associates
agree to acquire the balance of X’s interest in
the Landholder, with no individual purchaser
agreeing to acquire a significant interest in their
own right (i.e. an interest of 20% or more). To
ensure the complete sale of his interest in the
Landholder, X prefers one contract be utilised but
is convinced by the other parties to use separate
but interdependent contracts (contracts that are
subject to and conditional on the completion
of each other). Y and the business associates
engage an accountant to conduct due diligence
and a solicitor to prepare all the necessary
documentation including the contracts of sale.
Y and the business associates share the costs
of these professional services in proportion to
the interest each of them is to acquire in the
Landholder. In this case, the Commissioner
would consider the acquisitions as constituting
an ‘associated transaction’ because Y and the
business associates acted in concert in the making
of the acquisitions and the acquisitions arise from
or form part of substantially one arrangement,
one transaction or one series of transactions for
the acquisition by them of X’s interest in the
Landholder.
A landholder that is a private unit trust scheme (the
Landholder) has ten unit holders each holding a
10% interest in the Landholder. None of the unit
holders are associated persons as defined under
the Act. Three of the unit holders (the Exiting Unit
Holders) decide to sell out their interests in the
Landholder at the same time, i.e. a combined 30%
interest (the sale units). Under the deed governing
the terms of the Landholder, an exiting unit holder
must offer its units for sale to the remaining unit
holders before offering the units for sale to external
parties. Two of the remaining unit holders (the
Acquirers) agree that they will acquire the 30%
interest in equal proportions, with a view to using
their interests together to obtain control of the
Landholder. The Acquirers jointly negotiate with
the Exiting Unit Holders and require completion of
the sale of each Exiting Unit Holder’s sale units
to be conditional upon one another to ensure
that they obtain control over the Landholder. In
this case, the Commissioner would regard the
acquisitions of the Exiting Unit Holders’ interests
in the Landholder as constituting an ‘associated
transaction’ as the Acquirers acted in concert
to acquire the sale units, and the Acquirers
will use the interests for a common purpose.
The acquisitions would also be considered to
arise from or form part of substantially one
arrangement, one transaction or one series of
transactions and be considered as an associated
transaction as they were interdependent.
The trustee and sole unit holder of a landholder
that is a private unit trust scheme (the Landholder)
resolve to offer units in the Landholder to a select
group of professional investors under a confidential
information memorandum. The offer of units
under the information memorandum identifies the
targeted group of investors and restricts investment
in the Landholder to only those investors. It is
a condition of the offer, that each investor is
restricted to a maximum interest of 19.9% in the
Landholder and the offer of units will not proceed
unless all of the units on offer are subscribed for
by the group of professional investors. If one of the
professional investors declines the offer, the offer
will lapse and none of the investors’ subscriptions
for units in the Landholder will be accepted. As
the acquisitions arise under a conditional private
placement involving the acceptance of restrictions
and conditions relating to the acquisitions in
the Landholder, the Commissioner would regard
the acquisitions by the professional investors as
constituting an ‘associated transaction’ as the
acquisitions arise from or form part of substantially
one arrangement, one transaction or one series of
transactions.
The above examples and considerations are provided
as a guide only and are not an exhaustive list of the
matters or factors the Commissioner may consider.
Each matter will be considered on its own facts in
Commissioner of State Revenue
determining the application of the provisions.
A taxpayer who is uncertain of the application of
the ‘associated transaction’ definition in section
3(1) of the Act in a particular case may contact the
Landholder Acquisitions Branch at the State Revenue
Office or request a private ruling in accordance with
Revenue Ruling GEN.009. In all cases, the onus is
on the taxpayer to provide the Commissioner with the
necessary information in order to make an informed
decision as to whether a person has made a relevant
acquisition by way of an ‘associated transaction’
of the Act.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.