Interest and Penalty Tax (TAA-005) [2001] VICSROTAA 1 (1 November 2001)
Revenue Rulings
SRO - ISO 9001 Quality Certified
Interest and penalty tax
Revenue Ruling TAA.005
Replaces TAA.003
This ruling replaces TAA.003 to reflect various
legislative changes in the Acts administered by the
State Revenue Office (SRO) since 1 July 2001.
It explains how the SRO will apply the interest and
penalty provisions of the
Taxation Administration Act
The TAA was introduced on 1 July 1997 to provide
consistent administrative provisions for those Acts
defined as “taxation laws” by the TAA.
Taxation laws include the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
Financial Institutions Duty Act 1982
. From 1 July 2001, the
Duties Act 2000
became a taxation law whilst
Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982
ceased as a taxation law.
Interest and penalty provisions play an integral role
in tax administration as they serve the
following purposes:
• To deter non compliance by making it
unprofitable to taxpayers
• To promote equity among taxpayers by ensuring
that those who meet their obligations are not
disadvantaged in comparison with those who
• To compensate the government for being denied
the use of funds to which it is entitled.
The policy intent of the interest and penalty
provisions is that the level of penalty should match
the degree of culpability and that taxpayers should
be encouraged to voluntarily declare any tax
liabilities as soon as they are known. This is
important given that Victorian taxation legislation
frequently adopts the principle of self-assessment
which places the onus on taxpayers to exercise
reasonable care in the calculation and timely
payment of their tax liabilities. In accordance with
the Taxpayers’ Charter, the SRO will start from the
presumption that taxpayers have dealt with their tax
affairs openly and honestly and that consequently
any error is due to ignorance or mistake rather than
deliberate intent.
The Commissioner of State Revenue (the
Commissioner) must exercise the discretionary
powers contained in the interest and penalty
provisions to meet contemporary standards of
ethical, fair and sensible tax administration.
Delegated SRO staff will assess or remit interest and
penalties in accordance with this ruling.
However, they will be responsible for identifying
situations where strict application of the ruling
would produce outcomes which are unreasonable
and inconsistent with the stated policy objectives. In
such cases it may be necessary to vary the practices
stated in this ruling.
1. This ruling provides for the application of interest
and penalty tax on a tax default and commences
on 1 July 2001.
Tax default
2. A tax default occurs when there has been a
failure by a taxpayer to pay tax in accordance
with the requirements of a taxation law. For
example, a tax default occurs when there has
been a late payment of tax by a taxpayer or a
representative of a taxpayer, or where there is a
tax shortfall by a taxpayer.
Interest – s.24 of TAA
3. Where a tax default occurs, interest is calculated
on the amount of tax unpaid on a daily basis
from the end of the last day for payment until
(and inclusive of) the day upon which the tax
unpaid is paid.
4. Interest is payable on tax unpaid and unpaid
penalty tax but is not payable on any unpaid
interest. Interest is also payable where judgment
has been given by or entered in a Court for
a debt that is for or includes an amount of
tax unpaid.
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Interest rate – s.25 of TAA
5. The applicable interest rate consists of the
following components:
a market rate
component to reimburse the
Government for the financing cost incurred
through the late payment of tax. This rate is
adjusted annually and from 1 July 2001 is
based on the daily average of the 90 day
Bank Accepted Bill rate for the preceding
May of each financial year; and
a premium rate
component to deter late
payment of revenue and to compensate the
SRO for the costs of administering approved
arrangements for payment of tax by a
taxpayer. This rate is a fixed rate of 8 per
cent per annum.
Minimum amount of interest – s.26 of TAA
6. Where the interest amount calculated on tax
unpaid is less than $20, no interest will be
Remission of interest – s.28 of TAA
7. The Commissioner may remit all or some of the
market rate and/or premium rate components of
interest rate.
Market rate
8. In considering the remission of the market rate
component of interest, the Commissioner will
consider the opportunity costs of revenue forgone
as a result of a tax default and the exposure to
the risks and uncertainty of revenue loss.
Thus the market rate component of interest will
only be remitted in exceptional circumstances.
9. The market rate component can be fully remitted
where the taxpayer can demonstrate that tax has
been paid in error to another jurisdiction or the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and full
payment of tax was received by that jurisdiction
or the ATO on or before the due date of the tax
liability. Where the actual tax liability payable in
Victoria is greater than the amount paid and
received by that jurisdiction or the ATO,
remission is possible if the taxpayer pays the
differential tax amount in Victoria by a date
specified by the Commissioner.
Premium rate
10. Remission of all or some of the premium rate
component may occur in the following
circumstances:
(a)where the market rate component of interest
is partially or fully remitted;
(b)that a taxpayer or person acting on behalf of
the taxpayer took reasonable care to comply
with the taxation law;
(c)the tax default is due to unforeseen
circumstances beyond the control of the
taxpayer or the person acting on behalf of
the taxpayer and the taxpayer took all
reasonable steps to avoid or mitigate the tax
(d)a voluntary disclosure by the taxpayer or the
representative of the taxpayer;
(e)the SRO contributed substantially to the
taxpayer’s error.
Penalty tax – s.29 of TAA
11. Penalty tax is imposed in addition to interest
on a tax default resulting from a failure to
declare or disclose a tax liability, that is, a tax
shortfall. The following, whilst not exhaustive,
are examples of a tax shortfall:
(a)non-payment of tax;
(b)failure to stamp an instrument and pay duty
within three months after the liability to pay
duty arises;
(c)failure to lodge pay-roll tax returns and pay
tax on time on three or more occasions
within a financial year. Penalty tax will be
imposed in respect of the third and
subsequent late payment within that
financial year.
12. The Commissioner has discretion not to
impose penalty tax only in the following
circumstances where the Commissioner is
(a)that a taxpayer or person acting on behalf of
the taxpayer took reasonable care to comply
with the taxation law; or
(b)the tax default occurred solely because of
circumstances beyond the control of the
taxpayer or the person acting on behalf of
the taxpayer and the taxpayer took all
reasonable steps to avoid or mitigate the
tax default.
13. There is no penalty tax imposed on any unpaid
penalty tax or unpaid interest (s.29(3) of TAA).
Penalty Tax Rates – s.30 of TAA
14. The two standard rates of penalty tax to be
applied to tax unpaid are:
(a)25 per cent; or
(b)75 per cent if the taxpayer has shown
intentional disregard of a taxation law.
15. The two standard penalty tax rates will vary in
the following circumstances:
(a)rates are reduced by 80 per cent if a
voluntary disclosure is made before an
investigation;
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
(b)rates are reduced by 20 per cent if a
voluntary disclosure is made during an
investigation;
(c)rates are increased by 20 per cent if the
taxpayer hinders or conceals information in
an investigation.
16. The indicative rates of penalty tax can be
tabled as follows:
Minimum amount of penalty tax – s.33 of TAA
17. Penalty tax is not to be imposed if it is less
Remission of penalty tax – s.35 of TAA
18. The Commissioner has the discretion to remit
part or the entire amount of the penalty tax.
The following are circumstances where the
Commissioner may fully remit penalty tax:
(a)where tax has been paid in error to another
tax was received by that jurisdiction or the
ATO on or before the due date of the tax
liability. Where the actual tax liability payable
in Victoria is greater than the amount paid
and received by that jurisdiction or the ATO,
remission may be granted if the taxpayer
pays the differential tax amount in Victoria
by a date specified by the Commissioner; or
(b)the SRO has substantially contributed to an
error by providing incorrect or misleading
advice to a taxpayer who has relied on that
advice to determine a tax liability. The SRO
would recognise such a situation only where
the particular advice given was premised on
the information provided by the taxpayer and
there is no reason in the mind of a
reasonable prudent person to doubt the
accuracy of the advice. The SRO will only be
bound where the facts disclosed by the
taxpayer and upon which the advice was
provided were accurate and comprehensive.
19. The following provides clarification of various
terms stated in the ruling.
20. Tax, for the purpose of this ruling, has the
same meaning as defined in section 3 of the
Taxation Administration Act 1997
21. A taxpayer includes an individual taxpayer or a
member of a group of taxpayers.
22. Tax unpaid refers to a tax liability under a
taxation law which has not been discharged.
Where, at the time the tax default occurred,
there is an overpayment of tax by the taxpayer,
such overpayment can be offset against the
unpaid tax within the same tax line so that
interest or penalty tax is payable on the net
amount of unpaid tax.
The offsetting of an overpayment and an
underpayment of tax must not extend beyond
the three-year limit under the relevant refund
provisions of a taxation law and the
retrospective assessing policy (refer to
Penalty Category
Prime Rate %
Concealment
Hindrance %
Investigation %
Investigation %
Reasonable care or
circumstances beyond
the control of the
taxpayer or taxpayer’s
agent and taxpayer has
taken reasonable steps
to mitigate the tax
Standard penalty
Intentional disregard of
a taxation law
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Reasonable care
23. Penalty tax will not be imposed where
taxpayers can show that they have taken
reasonable care in the conduct of their tax
affairs. The reasonable care standard requires
taxpayers to keep complete and accurate
records, make diligent efforts to understand
and comply with the law, seek expert advice on
uncertain or complex matters and be honest in
their dealings with the SRO. In determining
whether or not a taxpayer has taken
reasonable care, the SRO will consider a range
of factors including the taxpayers’ knowledge
of tax legislation, commercial experience,
access to expert advice and familiarity with the
English language.
24. The following situations, whilst not exhaustive,
may indicate that a taxpayer or a
representative of a taxpayer has taken
reasonable care.
(a)the taxpayer has maintained appropriate and
proper recording systems;
(b)the taxpayer has taken reasonable steps to
be aware of his taxation obligations and has
familiarised himself with the relevant
legislation so as not to overlook the
legislative requirements;
(c)the taxpayer has applied any relevant public
rulings in good faith;
(d)the taxpayer has sought professional advice
or private rulings for uncertain or complex
matters where no public ruling applied or his
circumstances differed from those described
in a public ruling;
(e)the taxpayer has acted in good faith
in applying any independent tax
advice received;
(f)the taxpayer has observed any private ruling
received and has notified the SRO if there
have been any changes in the information
on which the ruling was formed;
(g)the taxpayer has acted promptly to seek
advice or provide information once made
aware, from any source, that he might have
a tax liability;
(h)the taxpayer has sought a formal decision
from the SRO before relying on any
legislative exemption or concession which
requires the Commissioner to exercise his
discretion or grant approval.
Circumstances beyond a taxpayer’s control
25. Circumstances beyond the control of the
taxpayer or the person acting on behalf of the
taxpayer, who has made every reasonable
effort to mitigate the effect of these
circumstances include the following:
(a)postal or delivery delays but not where the
taxpayer could arrange for an alternative
means of delivery because the taxpayer is
aware of the likelihood of a delay;
(b)fires, flood or other natural disasters;
(c)key personnel not available due to sudden
resignation, illness or death;
(d)computer breakdowns including third party
systems such as Electronic Funds
Transfer systems.
Intentional disregard of a taxation law
26. Intentional disregard of a taxation law means
circumstances where the tax default is caused
by a deliberate act or omission by the taxpayer
or the person acting on behalf of the taxpayer.
This is determined on the basis of direct
evidence of a taxpayer’s intention (eg
admission by taxpayer) or can be inferred from
the surrounding circumstances and conduct of
the taxpayer.
27. Examples of conduct which may demonstrate
intentional disregard of a taxation law include:
(a)use of contrived or artificial avoidance
schemes which prove to be legally flawed;
(b)tax evasion or fraud;
(c)knowingly making false or misleading
records or statements;
(d)knowingly concealing relevant facts on a
tax liability;
(e)ignoring a private or public ruling of which
the taxpayer is aware, particularly on a
matter where the law is clearly established;
(f)failing to assess in accordance with well
established principles of tax law;
(g)failing to meet a tax liability after being
advised of its existence by the SRO or
another person.
(h)repeating a tax default on a same matter or
a closely related matter.
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Concealment or hindrance of an investigation
28. Concealment or hindrance of an investigation
means circumstances where a taxpayer, having
been informed by the Commissioner that an
investigation is to be carried out and before the
investigation is completed, took steps to prevent
or hinder the Commissioner from becoming
aware of the tax default.
Voluntary disclosures
29. A voluntary disclosure must be in writing and
provide sufficient information to determine the
nature and extent of the tax default.
A voluntary disclosure must state the identity of
the taxpayer or a group of taxpayers, the
nature, period and amount of the tax default
and provide an explanation of how the tax
default occurred. The SRO would not accept
a voluntary disclosure from a member of a
pay-roll tax group if another member of that
group has been advised of an investigation.
30. The unsolicited payment of a liability to duty or
the unsolicited lodgement of documents liable
for duty after the expiration of the statutory
three-month time for payment will generally be
considered to be a voluntary disclosure.
However, if the circumstances leading to
payment of duty produce inequitable outcomes
with other taxpayers, the penalty tax rate for
voluntary disclosures will not be applied.
Commencement and completion of an investigation
31. An investigation begins either when the SRO
informs a taxpayer in writing that an
investigation relating to the taxpayer is to be
conducted or on the first use of coercive powers
available under the TAA or other relevant
legislation in respect of the taxpayer. A member
of a taxpayer group will be deemed to have
been informed of an investigation if any
member of that group has been duly informed.
An investigation is completed when the SRO
has provided a taxpayer with formal
acknowledgement that the SRO has completed
the investigation.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of
law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual case
having regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must
be read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
November 2001
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002
Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002 Ceased August 2002