Contributions to the Construction Industry Long Service Leave and Redundancy Funds (PTA-034) [2008] VICSROPTA 12 (1 August 2008)
Revenue Ruling PTA034
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act), which commenced
on 1 July 2007, rewrites the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
harmonises the payroll tax legislation in Victoria and NSW.
In the building and construction industry, employers
are required to contribute to a
1. portable long service leave scheme, which provides
long service leave benefits to employees employed
in the industry, and
2. redundancy fund, which provides redundancy
benefits to workers employed in the industry.
In Victoria, the portable long service leave scheme
is administered by CoINVEST Ltd as trustee for the
Construction Industry Long Service Leave Fund in
accordance with the
Construction Industry Long Service
Leave Act 1997
. Redundancy funds for employees in
the building and construction industry in Victoria are
administered by the Redundancy Payment Central
Fund Limited (trading as Incolink), which is the trustee
company of the funds.
The purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to clarify
whether payroll tax is payable on contributions made
to these funds.
Under section 14 of the Act, the definition of wages
includes fringe benefits as defined in the
Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986
(Cth) (the FBT
Act). A contribution to the Construction Industry Long
Service Leave Fund or the approved redundancy funds
administered by the Redundancy Payment Central
Fund Ltd is not subject to payroll tax as long as the
payment does not constitute a fringe benefit under the
FBT Act. To determine whether or not a contribution
is a fringe benefit taxable under the FBT Act, please
A payment of long service leave benefit or redundancy
benefit from any of these funds is not taxable because
the Commissioner of State Revenue does not regard
such payments as wages for payroll tax purposes.
Please note that rulings do not have the force
of law. Each decision made by the State Revenue
Office is made on the merits of each individual
case having regard to any relevant ruling. All
rulings must be read subject to Revenue Ruling
Revenue Rulings
Contributions to the Construction Industry
Long Service Leave and Redundancy Funds
Payroll Tax Act 2007
August 2008
Commissioner of State Revenue
Ruling history
Issued date
August 2008
PT.049 & PT.126
Dates of effect