Rights to access to records prepared for ATO purposes (GEN-004) [1994] VICSROGEN 3 (1 August 1994)
Revenue Rulings
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
C E A S E D 31 January 1998
Rights of access to records
prepared for ATO purposes
Revenue Ruling GEN.004
Replaced by Revenue Ruling GEN.008
Authorised officers of the State Revenue Office
(SRO) possess broad enforcing powers under the
various acts administered by the Office.
(See Revenue Rulings PT.038, FID.009, LT.003).
However some taxpayers and their representatives
are uncertain about what access powers authorised
officers of the SRO possess in respect of information
prepared for the purposes of complying with the acts
administered by the Australian Taxation Office, in
particular, records containing tax file numbers.
The purpose of this Ruling is to outline the
provisions under the relevant acts to which officers
of the SRO can avail themselves in order to access
records with tax file numbers held by taxpayers and
their representatives.
The various acts administered by the Office provide
broad powers of access for authorised officers to
have full and free access to books, documents and
other papers for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of the various acts. These powers of
access include the right to have access to records,
(for example fringe benefit tax returns), which are
prepared for the purposes of complying with the acts
administered by the Commissioner of Taxation.
Section 8XA
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Commonwealth) (the Administration Act), as
originally enacted, prohibited authorised officers of
the SRO from obtaining from taxpayers and their
representatives, information which they had
prepared for the purpose of complying with
Commonwealth taxation laws. This inadvertently
hindered the enforcement of state taxation laws as
authorised officers were not entitled to information
prepared for Commonwealth taxation purposes.
However, with effect from 24 April 1991, Section
8XA of the Administration Act, was amended by the
Taxation Laws Amendment Bill (No.6) 1990
result of that amendment, Section 8XA of the
Administration Act no longer operates to prohibit
authorised officers of the SRO access to records that
are in the possession of someone other than the
Commissioner. Accordingly, authorised officers of the
SRO can require production of information
pertaining to records or documents prepared for the
Australian Taxation Office, including documents with
tax file numbers, from taxpayers and/or their
representatives for the purposes of determining their
liabilities. This right of access does not adversely
affect the confidentiality of tax file numbers or other
personal information. The privacy and misuse of
such information is protected by state and federal
legislation.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling No. GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue