Exemptions for RTGS transactions (FID-055) [1998] VICSROFID 6 (1 December 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
Exemptions for
RTGS transactions
Revenue Ruling FID.055
This ruling explains the Financial Institutions Duty
(FID) treatment of transactions recorded in a
management information system maintained by a
financial institution for the purpose of managing
its credit exposure and liquidity needs when
settling high value payments of its customers in a
real time environment.
Real Time Gross Settlement system
The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has
introduced a Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
system for high value inter-bank payments. Before
RTGS, banks made and received payments during
the day on behalf of major clients, but settled
through their exchange settlement accounts
(ESAs) with the RBA on a net deferred basis the
following day. RTGS minimises the risk that a bank
will not be able to meet its settlement obligations
because high value payments are settled in real
time, that is, as they occur.
Information is fed into RTGS by three systems
catering for different types of high value
transactions and different groups of users. These
systems are:
Reserve Bank Information and Transfer System
(RITS), which is an electronic clearing and
settlement system, owned and operated by the
RBA, for trading in Commonwealth Government
securities;
Austraclear which is also an electronic system for
the clearance and settlement of securities trading
and cash transfers; and
SWIFT/Payment Delivery System (SWIFT/PDS)
which is operated by the Australian Payments
Clearing Association and is used by all banks for
single-sided payments.
Under RTGS, banks have greater need to manage
their liquidity and control their credit exposure to
customers, particularly those customers operating in
more than one of the feeder systems. Banks will do
this by the following methods.
Customer scorekeeping accounts for RTGS
transactions
Some banks will establish a scorekeeping account for
each customer who undertakes transactions in the
RTGS system. All RTGS transactions for the day for
that customer are recorded in the scorekeeping
account so that, at any time, a bank knows its credit
exposure to that customer and can manage its own
liquidity needs. At the end of the day, the
scorekeeping account is cleared by sweeping the
balance to an operating account of the customer.
A specific exemption has been provided for a
scorekeeping account established by a bank for a
customer who conducts transactions using the RTGS
system. A bank, or any financial institution which
operates an ESA with the RBA, may apply to the SRO
for certificates of approval designating scorekeeping
accounts to be exempt accounts. This exemption is
found in Regulation 8(1)(u).
Management information systems for RTGS
transactions
Other banks will record all RTGS transactions for all
customers for a single day in a general ledger
account or a management information system. From
the recording of these transactions, the bank is able
to ascertain a customer’s credit position at any time
during the day. At the end of the day, the net position
from RTGS transactions for each customer is posted
to an operating account of that customer.
This ruling deals with transactions occurring under
these latter methods of managing payments settled in
real time under RTGS.
This ruling concerns credit entries recorded in a
management information system kept by a financial
institution which settles high value payments through
its ESA with the RBA under RTGS. It is the view of the
SRO that such credit entries are not receipts by the
financial institution which keeps the system for the
purposes of the Act provided that:
• they are made for the purpose of monitoring the
financial institution’s credit exposure to customers
conducting transactions under RTGS and
managing its liquidity; and
• each credit entry records a customer’s transaction
initiated through RITS, Austraclear or SWIFT/PDS,
• at the end of each day, the net result of each
customer’s RTGS transactions are recorded in an
operating account of that customer kept by the
financial institution.
The end of day posting of the customer’s net RTGS
transactions to an operating account does comprise a
receipt for which duty may be payable under the Act.
Liability of account holders which are registered
financial institutions.
Where the customer is itself a registered financial
institution, it will be able to receive the end of day
posting of its net RTGS transactions to a special
account (exempt bank account). A net credit balance
posted to a special account is an exempt receipt by the
financial institution which keeps the account. However,
this entry represents income received by its customer,
amounts received on behalf of the customer’s own
account holders, or both. Accordingly, the customer, as
a registered financial institution, is required to pay FID
on the dutiable components of its own income and on
amounts subsequently credited to non-exempt accounts
kept for its own customers.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 1998
ON THE MOVE