Nexus Provisions (PTA-039) [2011] VICSROPTA 4 (1 May 2011)
Revenue Ruling PTA.039
The nexus provisions of the
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(the Act) determine in which Australian jurisdiction
(State or Territory) payroll tax is to be paid. The
nexus provisions were amended effective from 1
This Revenue Ruling explains the nexus rules and
clarifies the circumstances when wages must be
declared in Victoria for payroll tax purposes. It also
clarifies the liability for wages paid for services
performed outside all Australian jurisdictions. It
should be read in conjunction with the attached
flowchart (Appendix A) which explains how the
various scenarios will be treated and shows the
circumstances in which wages are taxable in Victoria.
Payroll tax is payable when an employer's total
Australian wages exceed the payroll tax-free
threshold (deduction amount). Australian wages
comprise Victorian wages and interstate wages.
Victorian wages are the wages subject to payroll
tax under the Act. Interstate wages are those wages
subject to payroll tax in the other jurisdictions under
their equivalent payroll tax legislation.
To determine whether the wages paid or payable in
respect of each monthly return period are subject
to Victorian payroll tax,
of the Act firstly
requires an employer to determine whether the
employee has wholly performed services in Victoria
in a calendar month.
Where an employee has not wholly performed
services in Victoria in the month, the nexus
provisions provide four tiered tests, which require
the following factors to be considered:
• the employee’s principal place of
residence, or
• the employer’s registered ABN address/
principal place of business, or
• the place where the wages are paid to the
employee, or
• the place where the services are mainly
Determining where wages are taxable -
sections 11
Sections 11
need to be applied
by employers in determining where wages are liable
for payroll tax.
A. Where services are performed wholly in one
section 11(1)(a)
If services in a month are performed wholly in one
Section 11(1)(a)
considers the place where services
are performed by the employee in the month that
the wages are paid or payable even if that place is
not where the employee usually performs services.
For example, Joe normally performs his duties in
Victoria. In June 2010, he is sent to NSW for a
temporary project and performs all his services in
NSW that month. Wages paid to Joe in June 2010
for those services are liable to payroll tax in NSW.
B. Where services are performed in more than
one Australian jurisdiction and/or partly outside
all Australian jurisdictions –
section 11(1)(b)
If services are performed in a month:
• in more than one Australian jurisdiction, or
• in one or more Australian jurisdictions and
outside all Australian jurisdictions,
the new nexus provisions provide four tiered tests for
determining payroll tax liability. These tiered tests
must be applied in sequence.
Test 1 - Employee’s principal place of residence -
section 11A
Payroll tax is payable in the Australian jurisdiction
in which the employee’s principal place of residence
(PPR) is located in that month.
Revenue Rulings
Nexus Provisions
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Ruling history
Dates of effect
If an employee has more than one PPR in that
month, the employee’s PPR on the last day of that
particular month is the one taken to be the PPR.
In the case of a corporation that is deemed to be
an employee under the Act (e.g. a corporation that
is deemed to be an employee under the contractor
provisions or under the employment agency
provisions), the corporation’s PPR is taken to be in
the jurisdiction where its ABN address is located
or, if it does not have an ABN address, or has two
or more ABN addresses in the jurisdiction, where
its principal place of business (PPB) in Australia
is located. If the corporate employee has more
than one PPB in a month (e.g. where the corporate
employee changes its PPB address part way through
a month) the PPB is the address on the last day of
that month.
Test 2 - Employer’s ABN address or principal place
of business -
section 11B
If an employee does not have a PPR in an
Australian jurisdiction during that month, payroll tax
is payable in the jurisdiction where the employer’s
ABN address is located..
If the employer does not have an ABN address,
or has two or more ABN addresses in different
where the employer’s PPB in Australia is located.
If the employer has more than one PPB in a month
(e.g. when an employer changes their PPB address
part way through a month) the PPB is the address
on the last day of that month.
Test 3 - Where wages are paid or payable -
sections 11(1)(b)(iii)
If the employee does not have a PPR in an
Australian jurisdiction and the employer does not
have an ABN address or a PPB in an Australian
where the wages are paid or payable.
If wages are paid or payable in a number of
of the wages in the jurisdiction where the largest
proportion of wages is paid.
For example, Mary is employed by ABC Pty Ltd
and Mary does not have a PPR in an Australian
address or a PPB in an Australian jurisdiction during
October 2010.
Mary performs services in more than one jurisdiction
and is remunerated for those services in NSW
($200), Victoria ($300) and SA ($1000). The
payments are aggregated and tax is payable on the
total amount of $1500 in SA because that is where
the largest proportion of wages is paid.
Test 4 - Services performed mainly in Victoria –
section 11(1)(b)(iv)
If the employee does not have a PPR in an
Australian jurisdiction and the employer does not
have an ABN address or a PPB in an Australian
services were mainly performed in Victoria during
the month. Services are mainly performed in
Victoria if the actual time worked in Victoria is more
than 50 per cent during the month.
C. Employment in another country
Employees working in another country - assignment
for less than six continuous months
Wages paid or payable in Victoria to an employee
performing services wholly in another country (or
countries) (that is, an expatriate employee) for a
period of up to six continuous months, are taxable
in Victoria.
If only part of the wages earned by an expatriate
employee is paid in Victoria and the remaining part
is paid in another country, the part of the wages
paid in Victoria must be declared for payroll tax.
If the wages earned by the expatriate employee
working in another country or countries is paid in
more than one Australian jurisdiction, payroll tax is
payable on the aggregate of the Australian wages
in the jurisdiction where the largest proportion of
wages is paid.
Employees working in another country –
assignment more than six months
Wages paid in Victoria are exempt from payroll
tax if the employee has performed services wholly
in another country (or countries) for a continuous
period of more than six months after wages were
first paid for the employee for the services. The
exemption includes wages paid for the first six
months of service.
The six month period does not have to be within the
one financial year but must be a continuous period.
Providing an employee immediately returns to
another country to continue the assignment, it will
not be considered to be a break in continuity of
service if they return to Australia in the following
circumstances:
• for a holiday; or
• to perform services exclusively related to
the overseas assignment for a period of less
than one month.
If an employee returns to Australia in any other
circumstances, the previous period of continuous
service in another country is ended. A fresh period
of continuous service starts again on the date that
the employee recommences performing services in
the other country.
Services performed offshore
Wages paid in Victoria for services performed
wholly outside any Australian jurisdiction are
taxable in Victoria irrespective of the duration of
the assignment. This would typically apply to oil rig
If wages are paid in more than one Australian
of the wages in the jurisdiction where the largest
proportion of wages is paid.
As the services are not performed in another
country, the exemption for services provided outside
all Australian jurisdictions for a continuous period of
more than six months does not apply.
Wages paid in a foreign currency
When calculating the value of wages paid in a
foreign currency, the State Revenue Office will
accept an exchange rate conversion, based upon
the Reserve Bank of Australia's daily rate published
for the day of payment or the yearly average rate
for the financial year, as published by the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).
The previous year's ATO figure may be applied for
the purpose of making monthly returns, provided
that the current year's rate is used to make an
appropriate adjustment in the Annual Adjustment
Further deeming provisions under
also details a number of other factors
that employers may need to take into account, in
conjunction with the four tiered tests outlined above,
in determining when and where their payroll tax
liability arises.
1. Wages paid in a particular month are
deemed to relate to services performed in that
section 11(3)
Wages paid by an employer to an employee in
a particular month are deemed to be paid in
relation to services performed by that employee
in that month, even if the wages relate to services
performed by an employee over several months (i.e.
an annual bonus).
For example, in June 2010 Peter was paid his usual
$3000 wages for services performed in that month
and also a $2000 bonus for services performed
during the financial year ending June 2010. Even
though the bonus payment relates to services
performed for the whole financial year, it is deemed
to be paid in relation to services performed by Peter
in June. Therefore, only the services performed
in June 2010 will be used in determining whether
services were provided wholly in a jurisdiction or in
more than one jurisdiction.
If Peter performed services wholly in Victoria in June
2010 payroll tax would be payable in Victoria on
the $5000 wages paid to Peter in that month, even
though the bonus may relate to services provided
by Peter in other jurisdictions during the financial
year. If Peter provided services in more than one
used to determine in which jurisdiction payroll tax
would be payable. In most cases this would be the
2. If wages are paid in a different month from
when they were payable –
section 11(7)
If wages are paid in a different month from the
month they are payable, liability arises in the earlier
of the two months. For example, wages are paid
to Bill in August 2010, but under his employment
contract they should have been paid in May 2010.
In May 2010, Bill performed services wholly in
Victoria. As May is the earlier month, payroll tax on
the wages for his May services is payable in Victoria
even if Bill performed services wholly in NSW in
August. Any additional wages paid in August must
be separately analysed.
On the other hand, if Bill was paid in August
2010, in advance of his contractual entitlement to
payment in September 2010, the wages would be
liable in NSW, where he provided services in August
(being the earlier month).
3. If there are two or more payments in one
month – section 11(6)
There may be instances where an employee receives
two payments of wages from the same employer in
one month where one amount is paid for services
performed in one jurisdiction and the other amount
is paid for services performed in another jurisdiction.
For example, Rose receives wages of $1000 on 14
November 2010 for services performed in Victoria.
She receives another $2000 on 28 November 2010
from the same employer for services performed
in NSW. The two amounts are to be aggregated
together and treated as if paid for all services
performed by the employee in that month (i.e.
in Victoria and NSW). Therefore, the four tiered
tests are used to determine in which jurisdiction
payroll tax is payable. In most cases, this will be the
4. Where no services are performed in the month
in which wages are paid- sections 11(4) & (5)
There may be situations where an employee does
not perform services in the month that wages are
paid. In such circumstances, the liability for payroll
tax is determined by ascertaining where services
were provided for that employer during the most
recent prior month.
For example, Jane is paid in the month of December
but has not provided services to the employer in
that month. The last month Jane provided services
to that employer was October and those services
were provided wholly in Victoria. As such, payroll tax
is payable in Victoria for the wages paid to Jane in
However, if Jane provided services in more than
one jurisdiction in October, the payroll tax liability
for the wages paid in December will be determined
by using the four tiered tests. In most cases this will
be the jurisdiction where her PPR was located in
There may also be instances where wages are paid
to an employee but no services have ever been
performed by the employee for the employer. For
the purposes of determining where the payroll
tax is payable, services are deemed to have been
performed at a place or places where it may
be reasonably expected that the services will be
For example, if Jane accepts an offer of employment
in August 2010 to commence work in Victoria in
November 2010 and receives a payment of wages
in August 2010, Jane would be taken to have
performed services in August 2010 in Victoria
(being the place it can be reasonably expected that
services will be performed) and payroll tax on those
wages would therefore be payable in Victoria.
Shares and options
Payroll tax liability for the grant of a share or option
is also governed by the nexus rules contained in
sections 11, 11A, 11B and 11C of the Act as well as
section 26 of the Act.
If all the work was performed in Victoria in the
month in which the relevant day falls (i.e. the
granting or vesting date), then the shares or options
are taxable in Victoria. If the work performed in
the month in which the relevant day falls was
• in more than one Australian jurisdiction, or
• in one or more Australian jurisdictions and
outside all Australian jurisdictions,
then the payroll tax liability for the shares or options
will be determined by using the four tiered tests.
For the purposes of test 3, section 26 of the Act
identifies the place where wages constituted by the
grant of the shares or options are taken to be paid
or payable. If the share is a share in a Victorian
company or in the case of an option, an option to
acquire shares in a Victorian company, the relevant
wages are taken to be paid in Victoria.
If the share or option is not in a Victorian company,
the relevant wages are taken to be paid outside
In this context, “Victorian company” means:
• a company incorporated or taken to be
incorporated under the Corporations Act that
is taken to be registered in Victoria for the
purposes of that Act; or
• any other body corporate that is incorporated
under an Act of Victoria.
Definitions
For the purpose of this Revenue Ruling:
• ABN address means the address for service of
notices under the
A New Tax System (Australian
Business Number) Act 1999
(Cth), as shown in the
Australian Business Register kept under that Act.
• Australian jurisdiction means a State or Territory
of Australia (the boundaries of each State or
Territory include coastal waters as defined in
Interpretation
of Legislation Act 1984
for Victoria,
Coastal and
Other Waters (Application of State Laws) Act 1982
for Tasmania etc.)
• Employee includes other persons to whom taxable
wages are paid such as directors and contractors
who are deemed employees.
• Month means a calendar month such as January,
February etc.
Please note that revenue rulings do not have the
force of law. Each decision made by the State
Revenue Office is made on the merits of each
individual case having regard to any relevant
ruling. All revenue rulings must be read subject to
Revenue Ruling GEN.001
Commissioner of State Revenue
Not taxable in any Australian jurisdiction
Are services performed wholly
in 1 jurisdiction?
Taxable in that jurisdiction
Are services performed wholly
in Australia in 2 or more
Are services performed
partly in 1 or more Australian
Australian jurisdictions?
Does the employee have a PPR
in an Australian jurisdiction?
Are services performed in
another country continuously
for more than 6 months?
Taxable in that jurisdiction
Not taxable in any Australian jurisdiction
Does the employer have
a registered ABN address
in 1 Australian
Taxable in that jurisdiction
Does the employer have a PPB
in 1 Australian jurisdiction?
Were wages paid or payable
in Australian jurisdiction?
Were the services
performed mainly in 1
Australian jurisdiction during
Establishing
Were wages paid or payable
in Australian jurisdiction?
± where wages are paid in 2 or more
Australian jurisdictions, payroll tax
is payable where the largest
proportion of wages is paid
Appendix A - Nexus Provisions Flowchart