Netting off of legitimate short-term dealings (FID-042) [1997] VICSROFID 3 (1 April 1997)
Revenue Rulings
Sections 26(4) and 26(5) of the
Financial Institutions
Duty Act 1982
(the Act) regulate amounts which can
be credited to and debited from a short-term dealing
account. These amounts include amounts received
or paid by a short-term money market operator
‘in the course of short-term dealings’.
For the purposes of the Act, an amount qualifies
as being an amount received in the course of
short-term dealings, only if it is one of the
transactions listed under section 7.
Generally speaking, the amount received must be
not less than $50,000. This particular requirement
does not apply in every instance, but it does apply to
the majority of transactions listed under section 7 of
the Act. (Sections 7(1) & (3) specify the types of
transaction that must be not less than $50,000.)
The purpose of this Ruling is to clarify the State
Revenue Office’s position in relation to the net result
of two legitimate short-term dealings. The question
has been raised as to whether a ‘net figure’, and
particularly a ‘net figure’ of less than $50,000,
relating to two legitimate short-term dealings can
be credited to or debited from a short-term
dealing account.
An example of the type of ‘net figure’ envisaged by
this Office would be where a bill of exchange
matures and the majority of the proceeds received
are used to buy a new bill. Instead of crediting the
proceeds received from the maturing bill to the
short-term dealing account and then debiting that
account to purchase a new bill, the difference, or net
figure, between the maturity sum and the new
purchase price is passed onto the purchaser by their
banker. On occasions, that net figure can be less
than $50,000.
This scenario is not the only example of netting off.
Typically, netting off occurs where buying and selling
of financial instruments occurs through the same
dealer or where settlement takes place through the
same medium, such as Austraclear. The most
important criterion is that the netting off occurs as a
result of two legitimate short-term dealings.
Where there are two or more dealings which are
legitimate short-term dealings in their own right, the
net result of those dealings can be credited to or
debited from a short-term dealing account. In these
circumstances, an amount of less than $50,000 may
be credited to or debited from such an account.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be
read subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.01.
Denzil Griffiths
Commissioner of State Revenue
ON THE MOVE
Netting off of legitimate
short-term dealings
Revenue Ruling FID.042