General Information on Private Rulings (GEN-009) [1998] VICSROGEN 1 (1 December 1998)
Revenue Rulings
Please continue over page
General information on private rulings
Revenue Ruling GEN.009
Replaces GEN.007
This ruling, which replaces Revenue Ruling
GEN.007, has been revised to further clarify the
status of private rulings issued by the
Commissioner of State Revenue to a particular
The Commissioner of State Revenue issues two
are issued as part of the Revenue Rulings Service
introduced by the State Revenue Office (SRO) in
June 1993 as a method of publishing and
disseminating decisions on the interpretation and
application of legislation administered by the
Office (see Revenue Ruling GEN.001). These
rulings detail the SRO’s position or policy on a
particular issue and are of general application to
taxpayers. Private rulings are issued in response to
specific requests by taxpayers, or their
representatives, seeking advice on the
interpretation of the legislation for a situation
encountered by a particular taxpayer. The SRO is
not required by law to issue private rulings but
does so to help taxpayers pay the correct amount
(a) Application requirements
A person, who is uncertain of his liability to pay tax
under the legislation administered by the SRO,
may apply to the Commissioner for a private
ruling. An applicant may apply individually or
jointly with others who are party to the
arrangement or transaction. The application may
be made through an agent or representative.
The application must be in the form of a written
submission lodged with the SRO, and must:
• explain why a private ruling is required;
• describe the legislation and the issue in
• state the applicant’s interpretation of the
provisions at issue and the rationale for such
views, including arguments for and against
and any relevant case law;
• identify all parties involved by name and address;
• provide all material facts and copies of any
relevant documents;
• permit the Commissioner access to such
information or third parties as the Commissioner
may require.
Where the ruling request concerns a proposed course
of action, the application must be accompanied by a
statement signed by the applicant (and any other joint
applicants) containing:
• an estimated completion date for the proposed
course of action; and
• a declaration by the applicant (and other relevant
parties as appropriate) to the effect that there is
a genuine intention to proceed with the proposed
course of action depending on the ruling given,
and that a full disclosure of all the relevant facts
has been made.
(b) Commissioner to decide whether a private
ruling will be issued
The SRO wishes to give taxpayers all possible help to
comply fully with the Acts administered by the Office
and, for that purpose, the Commissioner will issue a
private ruling at the request of an individual taxpayer.
However, it is not appropriate for the Commissioner to
give taxpayers private rulings which would enable
them to practice tax avoidance or to exploit
ambiguities in the legislation. For this reason,
requests for private rulings may sometimes be
Generally a private ruling will not be issued to a
taxpayer who presents a hypothetical situation or an
opinion. Nor will a private ruling be issued to
evaluate alternatives and advise which option results
in the least liability for tax or duty. In no
circumstances will the SRO engage in an iterative
process in which a taxpayer who receives an
unfavourable decision requests another ruling for a
similar, but modified, situation or document.
The Commissioner may issue a private ruling on a
proposed course of action if the taxpayer is unable to
decide whether to proceed without receiving advice of
the SRO’s view of the tax consequences. Before a ruling
will be issued in these circumstances, the taxpayer must
give the SRO an estimated completion date for the
proposed course of action and must demonstrate a
genuine intention to proceed with the proposed course
of action unless the ruling indicates that it would be
impractical to do so, or raises issues not previously
In some instances it may be necessary to give a
qualified ruling stating the Commissioner’s current
position but advising the taxpayer of the possibility of a
change of opinion. This would occur when the SRO is
awaiting judicial interpretation of the same issue which
concerns the taxpayer or when it is known that
legislative amendments are contemplated.
(c) Process
The Commissioner will examine the application
presented and advise the applicant whether a private
ruling will be issued.
If the Commissioner decides to issue a private ruling,
further information from the taxpayer, or third parties,
may be sought.
A private ruling will always be given in writing and will
not be provided until the Commissioner has obtained
all the information considered relevant and necessary.
No discussion or other written documentation
exchanged in the process of developing the ruling
forms part of a private ruling. In no circumstances
should a person construe oral advice given by the SRO
to be a private ruling.
(d) Application of private ruling
A private ruling applies only to the taxpayer to whom it
is issued and to the factual situation presented. Other
taxpayers cannot rely on it as a precedent.
Likewise, a tax practitioner may not rely on a private
ruling obtained for one taxpayer as a precedent for
another client.
The Commissioner will be bound by any private ruling
issued to a taxpayer if:
• the taxpayer and all relevant parties have been fully
identified;
• the taxpayer has made a full disclosure of all
material facts and information in the application
and any subsequent submissions sought by the
Commissioner;
• the circumstances to which the ruling is
applied are identical to those represented to
the Commissioner in the application and
subsequent submissions; and
• the taxpayer acts, or has acted, in
accordance with the ruling.
If the facts or circumstances, as presented by
the applicant, change after the private ruling
has been issued, the taxpayer, or their
representative, must contact the SRO to clarify
whether the private ruling still applies.
A qualified private ruling applies as long as the
conditions stated in the ruling continue to apply
and the onus rests with the taxpayer to monitor
the continuing validity of the ruling.
(e) Non-application of private ruling
The Commissioner will not be bound by a
private ruling where it is found that:
• a taxpayer, or their representative, has failed
to provide all material information which
ought to have been provided; or
• has misrepresented information when
seeking a private ruling.
The ruling will be considered never to have had
application and accordingly, the withdrawal of
such a ruling would have both a prospective and
retrospective effect.
In cases where there has been a failure to
provide all material information, the
Commissioner will take into consideration the
role of the SRO in obtaining further information
to determine the date of the withdrawal of the
ruling. However, the onus is on the taxpayer, or
their representative, to provide all material
information in the first instance and to monitor
all communications from the SRO which advise
of legislative amendments, judicial decisions
and policy changes.
(f) Withdrawal of private ruling
The Commissioner may depart from a decision
made in a private ruling if:
• the advice is subsequently overruled by a
court, tribunal or legislative amendment; or
• the Commissioner has determined that a
particular ruling issued is incorrect.
The Commissioner will review the circumstances of
the case before deciding whether the ruling should be
withdrawn. If the Commissioner decides the ruling
must be withdrawn, it will be withdrawn from the date
of the decision of the court or tribunal (or such later
date as the Commissioner decides is appropriate), the
date of the amendment or the date of the
Commissioner’s determination respectively. If the
withdrawal of the ruling results in a new liability for
the taxpayer, tax or duty will be payable only from the
date on which the ruling is withdrawn.
Please note that rulings do not have the force of law.
Each decision made by the State Revenue Office is
made on the merits of each individual case having
regard to any relevant ruling. All rulings must be read
subject to Revenue Ruling GEN.001.
Commissioner of State Revenue
December 1998