URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/266.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JAFARI and RASHIMI AMID [2024] FCWA 266 (18 November 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
JAFARI and RASHIMI AMID
[2024] FCWA 266
[IN] NOVEMBER 2024
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
10432 of 2022
MR RASHIMI AMID
PROPERTY & ANTI-SUIT
INJUNCTIONS - Where the parties obtained consent orders for alteration of
property interests - Where the
documents filed in these proceedings did not
refer to a "mahr" or "marriage portion" payable to the mother under Islamic law
to a temporary marriage contract - Where the mother has commenced
proceedings in Country A to enforce payment of the mahr - Where
the mother has
applied to vary or set aside the consent orders so as to effectively recover the
mahr under orders proposed to be
made in this court - Where the father seeks
summary dismissal and a permanent anti-suit injunction - Where there is no
evidence in relation to relevant Islamic law - Where the competing
applications cannot be determined on the papers in any
Legislation:
Court Act 1997
Family Court Rules 2021
Representation:
Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Self Represented Litigant
Beacon Family Law
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES' NAMES
AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Jafari and Rashimi Amid
has been approved by the Family Court
of Western Australia pursuant to s 243(8)(g) of the
Family Court Act 1997
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
Jafari] ("the mother") commenced proceedings in this Court [in] 2022, seeking
parenting orders in relation to [Roshan] born [in]
2021, the only child of her
relationship [Mr Rashimi Amid] ("the father"). In the course of those
proceedings, financial issues
were raised and the parties each sought orders for
alteration of property interests.
The initial financial proceedings
parties attended a conciliation conference [in] September 2023, and reached
agreement in relation to the financial case. Orders
were made by consent by a
Registrar ("the consent orders"). The orders declared the intention of the
parties that in accordance
Family Court Act 1997
") they would, as far as practicable, determine finally the
financial relationship between the parties. The father was ordered to
mother the sum of $50,000 within 28 days. Orders were also made providing that
the mother's interest in "any other property
held in the [father's] name or
possession vests in [the father] absolutely", with a mirror order vesting the
father's interest in
property in the mother's name or possession in her.
A further order was made requiring each party to "pay and indemnify" the
in relation to any liabilities in their name or which related to any
property they were to retain. The financial proceedings were
concluded by the dismissal of all relevant applications and responses.
father transferred to his lawyers the amount required to be paid to the mother
pursuant to the orders, and the lawyers hold those
monies on trust.
Subsequent developments
then arose, as the mother sought to enforce in the [Country A's] courts the
payment of a mahr pursuant to a marriage contract.
The father filed an amended
substantive response on 25 January 2024 seeking an injunction restraining
the mother from "continuing
or commencing proceedings in Country A in relation
to the dowry".
Further or in the
alternative he sought "pursuant to s 79A to the extent the dowry has been
paid to [the mother] pay the sum equivalent
of the dowry to
By that he referred to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which would be the relevant
legislation if the parties are married, as distinct from the
Family Court Act
(WA) which is the relevant legislation if they are not.
mother filed an amended substantive application on 27 March 2024, seeking
final orders that the consent orders be set aside and
that the financial
proceedings be "reopened pursuant to
Family Court
sought an order that the sum of $50,000 then held on trust by the father's
lawyers and due to her pursuant to the consent orders
be paid to her immediately
and "categorised as partial property settlement", and that the father pay her
"the greater of 50 ounces
of pure gold or the equivalent amount in
She reserved the right to
further particularise the orders she sought. She proposed, on the basis of the
orders just noted being
made, that she be restrained by injunction from
commencing proceedings with respect to the mahr in any other jurisdiction. By a
Minute of Proposed Orders filed on 7 November 2024 she purports to seek the same
orders on an interlocutory basis.
father filed a third amended substantive response on 11 November 2024. By
a minute filed on 19 August 2024 he had foreshadowed
an application for summary
dismissal of the mother's substantive application. He still proposes the
anti-suit injunction already
mentioned but seeks additional orders. Either in
furtherance of the injunction, or by way of variation of the consent orders, he
seeks that the mother execute a waiver of entitlement to the mahr, and/or a
written acknowledgement that she has received the relevant
sum in full and final
satisfaction of all claims pursuant to the mahr, or in the alternative to the
extent the mahr has already been
paid to the mother, she repay the equivalent
sum to him. That self-evidently confused raft of proposed relief is not
explained by
any accompanying affidavit. It is sought to be explained in
written submissions filed on the same day, to which I will return.
father also seeks an order that the mother pay his costs on an indemnity
a separate matter, on 8 November 2024 the mother filed an application in a
case seeking to extend the duration of an injunction
and watch list order
previously granted preventing the father from removing Roshan from the country.
The existing watch list order
will expire on 22 December 2024. The father has
not had the opportunity to respond to that application; at the hearing, his
confirmed that the proposed extension is not opposed in the short term.
I will make the relevant orders at the conclusion of the
hearing, and do not
propose to address them further in these reasons.
mother also seeks "full access to be provided to her for Roshan's daycare and
the daycare app"
and an injunction
restraining travel outside Western Australia. The father has not had proper
opportunity to respond on those matters,
so I do not propose to deal with them
A preliminary matter
is apparent from what is set out above, it appears that there may be a dispute
between the parties as to whether or not they are
married. The proceedings to
date (including the making of the consent orders) have been conducted on the
basis that the parties
are not married. The mother has contended at a previous
hearing before me and again today that they are, and in earlier documents
father made specific reference to sections of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), while subsequently making reference to the
Family Court Act 1997
the mother's evidence, which does not appear to be contested, the parties
entered into a marriage contract, and participated in
a marriage ceremony, [in]
September 2020. The certificate annexed to her affidavit filed on 27 March 2024
records that the "type
of marriage" was a "temporary marriage for duration of
two years", with a further notation that if the parties decided to "marry
other on a permanent basis prior to [the] expiry of the temporary marriage, [the
father] shall relinquish temporary marriage
arrangements".
is a further notation to the certificate in the following terms:
This marriage is an Islamic marriage (NIKAH), according to the faith of Islam
only. It is a commitment ceremony and not an official
marriage, according to
Marriage Act 1961
. It may or may not be combined with the official legal
concept of a temporary marriage of that form is not known in Australian law.
While marriages entered into overseas can be recognised
under Australian law if
they are valid marriages in the relevant country, the ceremony between these two
parties was conducted via
with the parties in
Perth, and the celebrant [interstate]. It appears likely, but is not entirely
clear, that no divorce or equivalent
is required to end a temporary
the absence of proper submissions on point, let alone appropriately qualified
evidence in relation to Islamic law, I make no determinative
finding today as to
whether or not the parties were married. While that determination informs the
making of any final orders by
reference to the appropriate legislation, it does
not affect in practical terms the determination presently required.
said, I proceed on the basis that, unless it is subsequently established to the
contrary, the parties are not married for the
purposes of Australian law. I
note both the matters already discussed, and in particular, that the relevant
ceremony took place
in Australia. I also note that in her initiating
application filed on 23 December 2022 the mother indicated that the parties
not married, and that in his Case Information Affidavit filed on
24 February 2023 the father described the parties as having been
facto relationship.
The matters requiring determination
that background, the matters requiring determination on an interlocutory basis
may be briefly summarised.
mother proposes a raft of interlocutory orders in minutes filed on 23 August
2024 and 7 November 2024. In essence, she proposes
that the $50,000 presently
held on trust by the father's lawyers be immediately paid to her as a "partial
property settlement", on
the basis that the consent orders be set aside. She
seeks further orders that the father pay her "the greater of 50 ounces of pure
gold or the equivalent amount in cash"; the Islamic Marriage Certificate
referred to earlier in these reasons describes the "marriage
as 50 ounces of pure gold.
On the basis of those orders being made, she proposes that she be restrained
from taking further proceedings
in Country A to enforce the mahr.
his amended response, the father seeks interlocutory orders that the mother's
proposed orders to reopen the proceedings pursuant
to s 205ZH(2) and the
payment to her of the 50 ounces of pure gold, be summarily dismissed. He also
seeks a permanent injunction
restraining the mother from continuing or
commencing proceedings in Country A in relation to the
that the $50,000 currently
held on trust by his solicitors be transferred to the mother within one
business day, and that the mother
In a statement of claim
filed on 28 February 2024, he seeks in the alternative a variation to the
consent orders to the effect that
the mother relinquish any claim to the mahr,
by the variety of mechanisms already summarised.
essence, the mother seeks that the consent orders be varied so as to make
payment of the mahr the subject of an enforceable order
of this Court. The
father seeks to preserve the consent orders, and to prevent the mother
recovering the mahr either in this Court
or in [Country
The nature of the mahr
is common ground that at the time the parties entered into the contract for
their temporary marriage, payment of the mahr became
a contractual right of the
mother. That right, being a chose in action, is properly characterised as
is not clear, in the absence of suitable qualified evidence directed to the
point, is whether the mother's entitlement to the
mahr continues and is
enforceable. I do not know whether the end of the temporary marriage of itself
terminated the mother's entitlement.
Similarly, I do not know whether the
question of by which party the end of the relationship was instigated affects
that entitlement.
no evidence before me to enable any reasoned assessment of the prospects of the
mother enforcing payment of the mahr in
what are apparently pending proceedings
in Country A. Nor is there any evidence before me to enable a reasoned
assessment of how
long those proceedings might take if pursued, what steps would
be required to bring them to completion, and whether the personal
attendance of
the father or for that matter the mother in Country A might be required.
questions require attention by the parties. That is particularly so as there
was no mention by either of them of the mahr
in documents filed in this Court
prior to the making of the consent orders. If, at the time the consent orders
were made, the mahr
was properly characterised as property of the mother and was
not contemplated in the orders nor mentioned in the evidence, questions
arise as to whether the consent orders can properly stand. If, however, the
mother no longer has any entitlement to the mahr
under the marriage contract
then there is no apparent basis for either party to seek to set aside the
consent orders, and no utility
in the proceedings in Country A remaining on
is no admissible evidence presently before this Court to enable those matters to
be considered further.
Disposition
those circumstances, for obvious reasons no order to set aside or vary the
consent orders can presently be made. In the absence
of agreement, it is highly
unlikely that orders of that nature would be made on an interlocutory basis in
any event. It cannot be
said that a conclusion that the mother's application
has no reasonable prospect of success can be reached on the evidence as it
stands, or for that matter in circumstances where the father seeks to
accompany summary dismissal with an anti-suit injunction.
That is particularly
so when, as counsel for the father pointed out in submissions, the mother has
stated that she had legal advice
that the mahr could not be recovered in
proceedings in Australia. The father's evidence to date complains that the
mother did not
"disclose" the mahr – but of course as a party to the
marriage contract he was aware of it. He complains that the mother did
raise it in the earlier proceedings – but neither did he. The father was
represented in those proceedings by the same
firm that represents him now.
mother says that in fact she gave the father notice of her intention to pursue
the mahr in the Country A's courts prior to the
consent orders being made in
this Court, having been advised that she could not pursue it in the context of
these proceedings. That
evidence on the part of the mother is yet to be tested,
and I do not treat it as being admitted by the father.
the fundamental findings required to support a permanent anti-suit injunction
simply cannot be made. If the mother remains
entitled to the mahr, it may well
be common ground that the consent orders should be set aside, with the only
dispute then being
as to what orders should be made in their place. On the
other hand, the mother may on reflection abandon her proposition that the
consent orders should be varied and seek simply to enforce payment of the mahr
in the Country A's courts. In any event, orders were
made by consent on
17 April 2024 requiring the mother to stay the proceedings in Country A
until further order; those orders remain
in force, and neither party has sought
to discharge them on an interlocutory basis.
orders sought by the mother in relation to the $50,000 held on trust by the
father's lawyers similarly cannot be made in the
terms proposed by her, as those
terms presuppose the setting aside of the initial consent orders.
said, the consent orders remain in force unless and until they are set aside.
The father proposes to make the payment. The
mother proposes that the payment
be made but seeks to attach conditions to that payment which cannot be imposed
in the present circumstances.
father's obligation to comply with the consent orders remains. The fact that
the mother has applied to vary those orders does
not alter that. Sensibly,
counsel for the father acknowledged that point.
propose to order that the payment required under the consent orders be made. I
do not propose to characterise that payment for
the reasons just outlined. I
acknowledge the positions of each of the parties in that regard. The making of
the payment does not
of itself affect the mother's substantive application;
should she succeed in having the consent orders set aside or varied, the payment
would clearly be taken into account in any subsequent exercise of discretion.
The same observation applies to the father's response.
Steps from this point
parties need to consider the matters canvassed in these reasons and reconsider
their respective approaches to the proceedings.
I foreshadowed at the previous hearing, in the absence of agreement on relevant
matters expert evidence as to the status of the
mahr under Country A's law, and
the fundamental point of whether the mother remains entitled to it, is required.
Similarly, if an
anti-suit injunction is to be pursued expert evidence as to
matters relevant to the pending court proceedings in Country A needs
is for the parties rather than the Court to address those matters.
I acknowledge that the mother has tried to a limited extent
those matters by proposing a particular expert be engaged by the Court, but with
no disrespect to her that reflects a
misunderstanding of the relevant process.
I propose to order the parties to confer in that regard, and I expect that they
consider whether in fact they wish to proceed in this Court, or
potentially leave the consent property settlement orders intact and
question of whether or not the mahr is to be paid determined by the Country A's
court in which proceedings have already
Noting that there is an
airport watchlist order currently in place but that order is due to expire on 23
December 2024;
And further noting that the payment referred to in paragraph 1 of these orders
is to be made in compliance with paragraph 1 of the
minute of consent orders
forming part of the orders made on 18 September 2023, without prejudice to the
rights of the parties to
seek to vary or set aside those orders
There will be the following orders:
no later than 4.00 pm on 20 November 2024, the Respondent, Mr RASHIMI AMID must
do all things necessary to cause the sum of $50,000
presently held on trust by
his solicitors to be paid to the Applicant, Ms JAFARI, into bank account
[redacted].
pending applications and responses of the parties to the extent they sought
interlocutory relief in the form of orders varying
or setting aside the orders
made by consent on 18 September 2023, anti-suit injunctions, or summary
dismissal, be and are hereby
By consent, and with effect from 23 December 2024:
Respondent, and his servants and/or agents be restrained and an injunction is
hereby granted restraining each of them from removing
or attempting to remove or
causing or permitting the removal of the child, Roshan (male) born [redacted]
("the child") from the Commonwealth
of Australia.
is requested that the Australian Federal Police give effect to this order by
placing the name of the said child on the Family Law
Watch List in force at all
points of arrival and departure in the Commonwealth of Australia and maintain
the child's name on the
Watch List.
injunction contained in paragraph 3 of this order remain in force for a period
of 2 years from 23 December 2024.
expiration of the period referred to in the preceding paragraph and subject to
any further order of a Court of competent jurisdiction,
the Australian Federal
Police will cause the removal of the said child names from the Watch List.
Marshal and Officers of the Australian Federal Police and the Police Forces of
the States and Territories are requested and authorised
to give effect to these
Applicant, is to provide to the Australian Federal Police a 24 hour contact
telephone number.
Respondent have liberty to set aside or vary these orders upon reasonable notice
to the Applicant.
Form 2 Application of the Applicant filed on 8 November 2024 otherwise
stand adjourned to the directions hearing to be listed
pursuant to these
Expert evidence
parties and their lawyers if represented must personally confer by face-to-face
meeting or telephone in relation to the appropriate
future course of the
proceedings, and in particular the question of expert evidence in relation to
Country A's law.
Procedural orders
4.00 pm on 3 January 2025, the parties must file a joint minute setting out
(a) any interim, interlocutory or procedural orders which can be made by
consent; and
(b) any other interim, interlocutory or procedural orders sought by either party
but not agreed.
proceedings are adjourned to a further directions hearing before the Honourable
Justice O'Brien at not before 10.30 am [in] January
These reasons are the reasons for decision delivered [in] November 2024, edited
in places but only as to correct grammatical errors
and some infelicity of
expression without variation to the substance thereof.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
[IN] NOVEMBER 2024
By the father’s amended
response filed on 19 June 2023, and the mother’s reply filed on 31 July
At 10, [1].
At 10, [2].
At 12, [2].
Mother's Form 2
Application filed 8 November 2024, at
At a time of travel
restrictions due to the COVID
Albeit only for a
period of approximately 19 months.
Which is synonymous with
Inaccurately described
as a 'dowry' in his amended
Father's amended
response filed 11 November 2024 at 12.
As may be the case: See
Mohamed v Mohamed and Anor
[2012] NSWSC
I acknowledge that the
mother attempted to file a letter purporting to contain relevant evidence in
that regard. Appropriately,
the letter was not accepted for filing. If either
party seeks to adduce expert evidence, they will need to attend to the
Family Court Rules 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (165 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter