URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/103.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PRESCOTT and O'LEARY [2025] FCWA 103 (7 May 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
PRESCOTT and O'LEARY
[2025] FCWA 103
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
2693 of 2020
MR PRESCOTT
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Where
the father has been found to be a person under a disability – Where the
Attorney General
is requested to nominate a Case Guardian – Where the
Public Trustee cannot act as Case Guardian in parenting proceedings and
Public Advocate is the appropriate nominee - Where the Public Advocate has
declined to accept appointment as Case Guardian after
undertaking its own
investigation and reaching a conclusion contrary to that of the Court –
Where the Public Advocate declines
the Court's request that it attend or be
represented at a hearing listed for the purpose of considering whether
information and documents
in the possession of the Court might better inform its
investigation – Where the Court has no power to order the Public Advocate
to act as Case Guardian – Discussion of relevant
Legislation:
Court Act 1997
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Public Trustee Act 1941
Family Court Rules 2021
Representation:
Self-Represented Litigant
Ms A Sinagara
Independent Children's Lawyer
Ms N Chakich
Solicitors:
Self-Represented Litigant
Western Legal
Independent Children's Lawyer
Meillon & Bright
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Prescott and O'Leary
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Court Act 1997
This copy of the Court's Reason for Judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Court Act 1997
(WA) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
case is an example of the difficulties faced by litigants, and by the Court,
when a party to proceedings lacks the capacity
to conduct them and where there
is no suitable volunteer to assume the responsibilities of a Case Guardian. As
will be seen, the
delineation of the responsibilities of relevant government
agencies is problematic and the Court cannot in any sense compel them
Where, as here, they decline to do so, the relevant proceedings are placed in
limbo to the detriment of the party under
a disability, the other party, and (in
a parenting case) the children the subject of the litigation.
Background and commencement of the current proceedings
Prescott] ("the father") and [Ms O'Leary] ("the mother") lived together in a de
facto relationship before separating in April
2018. They have a son [Child A]
born [in 2012] and a daughter [Child B] born [in 2014]. The children presently
live with the mother.
July 2020, final orders were made by consent for the mother to have sole
parental responsibility for the children, and for them
to live with her and
spend time with the father as agreed. The father has subsequently given
evidence that he attended the relevant
hearing "unrepresented and in an
activated emotional state" which "seriously impacted [his] capacity to make an
informed decision."
present proceedings were then commenced by the father in a Form 1 Initiating
Application filed only three months later [in] October
sought to set aside the parenting orders to which he had recently consented.
While the application, prepared by solicitors
then acting for the father, is not
well drafted, it appears that what was intended was that he would propose
an equal shared care
arrangement.
application was opposed by the mother. Initially, a clinical psychologist was
appointed as the Single Expert Witness. After
expressing concerns as to
the complexity of the father's presentation, the psychologist withdrew his
consent to that appointment
and urged the appointment of a psychiatrist. Orders
were then made by consent [in] March 2022 appointing [Dr C] as
Single Expert
Witness, to include a psychiatric assessment of
both parties.
April 2022, the mother filed an Amended Form 1A Response, seeking orders for
alteration of property interests. The father filed
a Form 1B Reply [in] June
2022 which did not address that issue, but simply stated "I would like custody
of my children due to [Ms
O'Leary's] apparent unmanaged malignant
narcissism".
Nevertheless,
following a Conciliation Conference [in] August 2022, at which the father was
represented by lawyers, final orders
for alteration of property interests were
made by consent.
Difficulties
arose in the implementation of those orders. [In] September 2023, the
mother filed a Form 2 Application seeking to
[Later in] September 2023,
without the benefit of legal representation, the father filed a Form 2A Response
opposing that application
and proposing orders that he receive 100 percent of
"property matters", due to "modernslavery attempts and extreme C PTSD
(sic)", and seeking "access to Children immediately as per all
reccommendations (sic)". That response was accompanied by a lengthy
the content of which need not be summarised for present
primary orders made by consent [in] July 2020 have not been set aside or
discharged but have been supplemented by orders made
[in] August 2021
restraining the father from attending at the children's school and giving him
liberty to provide presents and/or
cards for the children via the Independent
Children's Lawyer ("ICL").
The Court's efforts to secure the appointment of a Case
The initial findings and request to the Attorney
a hearing [in] October 2023, the Magistrate who had maintained conduct of the
matter for some time recorded his finding that the
father lacked the capacity to
understand and conduct the litigation. The content and tenor of the
documents prepared and lodged
by the father clearly supported that finding,
which was informed by the report of [Dr C], which by then was in
evidence. As no volunteer
to take on the relevant responsibilities
was identified, the Court requested that the Attorney General nominate a
Case Guardian for
appointment by the
November 2023, the Attorney General wrote to the Court indicating that the
Public Trustee could not consent to act as Case Guardian
for the father in
circumstances where the parenting proceedings remained on foot. The view was
expressed that "the Public Advocate
is the appropriate statutory body to act on
behalf of a person with a disability in parenting proceedings... where there is
else suitable." The Attorney General noted that the Public Advocate
"requires a valid appointment as a limited guardian in respect
of a represented
person under the
Guardianship and Administration
before they will so act". He expressed the view that
the most appropriate course was for the matter to be referred to the
Advocate for it to consider making an application to the
State Administrative Tribunal for a limited guardianship and administration
order. It may be inferred that the initial proposition was that upon the making
of that order, the Public Advocate would act as
Case Guardian in both the
parenting and financial
proceedings.
The Public Trustee is appointed to act in the financial
proceedings and the Public Advocate declines to act in the parenting
proceedings
response, at the direction of the presiding Magistrate, the Principal
Registrar wrote to the Attorney General noting the separate
financial and
parenting proceedings and requesting that consideration be given to the
appointment of the Public Trustee as Case Guardian
for the father in the
financial proceedings only. While on the face of the initial response from the
Attorney General that request
may not have been necessary, as it transpired it
was prudent.
then ensued correspondence between the Court and [Mr E], a Senior Investigator
Advocate at the Office of the Public Advocate.
[Mr E] raised various
questions, which were promptly answered. He was provided with a detailed
explanation of the circumstances which
led to the Magistrate making the finding
referred to above and was given a copy of the report of [Dr C] and relevant
correspondence.
December 2023, the Attorney General nominated the Public Trustee for
appointment as Case Guardian for the father in the financial
proceedings. The
relevant consent was given, and the appointment was made. The proceedings
relating to the enforcement of the financial
orders were then promptly
concluded, not least because settlement on sale of the relevant property
pursuant to the primary orders
had by then been completed and the need for
active enforcement of those orders fell away.
substantive parenting proceedings commenced by the father, however, remained on
foot. The finding by the Magistrate that the
father did not have the capacity
to conduct those proceedings remained in place.
December 2023, [Mr E] wrote to the Court to advise that a Community Referred
Investigation had been conducted and that the Public
Advocate was "satisfied at
this point in time that [the father] does not require the appointment of a
guardian or administrator"
and "the Public Advocate [had] therefore decided not
to lodge any application with the State Administrative Tribunal." The letter
concluded by advising that the Public Advocate had closed
its investigation. Further detail as to just what the investigation
was not provided. No explanation was provided as to why the
Public Advocate had reached a conclusion contrary to the findings of
Magistrate and inconsistent with the prior appointment of the
Public Trustee.
virtue of that determination the parenting proceedings in this Court were placed
in limbo. They could not proceed in the face
of the clearly correct finding of
the Magistrate that the father lacked the requisite capacity to conduct them,
and the statutory
body established to assist persons lacking capacity declined
Subsequent developments
July 2024, the parenting proceedings were adjourned generally pending "the
obtaining of the capacity assessment" of the father,
for which the ICL had
sought and obtained limited funding from Legal Aid Western Australia. The
father did not appear at the relevant
hearing and was at the time an inpatient
in a psychiatric ward at
[a hospital].
initially admitted on an involuntary basis after displaying disorganised
behaviour. At one point, he was recorded as having
gone missing from the
hospital and attended a police station to "report his own death". He was
subsequently placed in a locked ward.
He was discharged from hospital [in] July
2024, after a stay of 39 days.
mother later brought an interim Form 2 Application seeking orders permitting her
to take a holiday overseas with the children.
Orders were made [in] December
2024 permitting that travel, effectively on an ex-parte basis given the father's
lack of capacity.
father subsequently sent various emails to the Court, in which he called for
relevant judicial officers and the ICL to be killed.
[In] December 2024,
the Chief Judge prohibited him from attending at the Court premises and directed
that his participation in any
future hearings be by telephone. The proceedings
were removed from the docket of the relevant Magistrate and assigned to
Further efforts to secure assistance for the father and the
listing of today's hearing
February 2025, and with the consent of the mother, the ICL sought permission to
provide a copy of the report of [Dr C] to the
father's treating
practitioners at the [Mental Health Service] ("the [Mental Health
Service]"). That permission was appropriately
sought, but the consent of
[Dr C] had not been requested.
made chambers orders [in] March 2025 listing the proceedings to a hearing today.
It was made clear on the face of the orders that
the matters for consideration
at the hearing would be the requested provision of reports to the [Mental Health
Service], and whether
the Public Advocate should be granted permission to
inspect and copy documents produced under subpoena. The anticipated purpose
such permission was to assist the Public Advocate and better inform its
consideration of the need for an appointment of a guardian
and/or administrator
for the father. Those documents include comprehensive notes produced by the
[Mental Health Service], which
have been received into evidence.
ICL was given liberty to provide a copy of those orders to the [Mental Health
Service] and to request that the relevant practitioner
advise the Court as to
whether they sought a copy of the report of [Dr C] to assist in the
assessment of appropriate treatment options
and services for the father. The
ICL was directed to serve a copy of the orders on the Office of the Public
Advocate, which in turn
was requested to participate in the hearing by having
the relevant officer appear with or without representation.
March 2025, the father sent an email to my chambers which made it clear that he
had received and read those orders, while asserting
that he is "perfectly normal
and sane" and has "no disease", but rather "Complex PTSD which is environmental
domestic slavery via
neurological or torture and torment 6B41." He expressed
the view that no hearing was required. While the proceedings on foot were
commenced by him to set aside the parenting orders to which he had consented, he
said further that the orders were working well and
asked to see the children
"this Sunday".
April 2025, the Court was advised that the father was to be managed in an
outpatient setting by a team under [Dr D], a consultant
psychiatrist. A
copy of the report of [Dr C] was requested. [Dr C] provided her consent to
the release of a copy of her report
to the father's treating mental health
practitioners, and that release
was approved.
Today's hearing
mother was represented by counsel at today's hearing.
ICL advised the Court yesterday that she had spoken with the children by
telephone [in] May 2025, having met with them in person
in mid-2024.
Relevantly, she said that the earlier meeting had resulted in the exchange of
gifts and other items between the father
and the children, and that during the
telephone conversation the children reported having recently spent some limited
time with the
father in the presence of his support worker and the mother. They
visited shops together and the children chose Christmas gifts.
Both children
spoke with affection about the father and said that they miss him.
Both demonstrated sadness about the current circumstances
and said that
they would like to spend time with him.
enquired as to what steps had been taken towards the preparation of a "capacity
assessment" pursuant to the orders made [in] July
2024. I was told it has
not advanced to this point, although [Dr F] has indicated his willingness to
undertake it. That said, [Dr
F] could not undertake the assessment before
November this year and has foreshadowed a cost of $8,000, which exceeds the
allocation presently made by Legal Aid Western Australia.
Court contacted the father by telephone during the hearing. The father
confirmed that he has engaged with the Public Advocate
and that his preference
would be that the court proceedings do not continue. He would agree to submit
to a psychiatric assessment,
but regards the existing report of [Dr C] as
inadmissible, saying that it has been interfered with. He questions the
probative value
of the documents produced by the [Mental Health Service] and
sees no complication in representing himself.
the Court's clear request to the Public Advocate, which was acknowledged by
their office, no officer of the Public Advocate
attended the hearing. Instead,
a relevant officer wrote to the Court in terms outlined and discussed in more
detail below. As will
be seen, I regard the approach taken by the Public
Advocate, apparently as a matter of internal policy, as inappropriate and
That is so notwithstanding any degree to which resourcing issues may
be thought to inform that policy.
Initial observations – the roles of the Public Trustee
and the Public Advocate, and their interaction with courts
Public Trustee is established by the
Trustee Act 1941
Public Trustee Act
"), which also defines
its role, powers and functions. As already noted, the Attorney
on advice and consistently
with the stated object of the
Public Trustee
supports the expressed
view of the Public Trustee that it cannot appropriately be appointed as a Case
Guardian other than in a financial
case. This Court does not in any event have
the power to directly appoint the Public Trustee as a Case Guardian;
Public Trustee Act
empowers only the Supreme Court to do
so in proceedings in that court. This Court can only appoint the Public Trustee
as Case Guardian
with its consent.
Office of the Public Advocate is established by the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and Administration
"). Again, its role, powers and functions are defined by the
legislation. It is empowered to make applications to the State Administrative
Tribunal under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, and to act as a
guardian or administrator for a represented person when appointed by the State
Administrative Tribunal to act in
that capacity. Again, this Court does not
have the power to make such an appointment and can only appoint
the Public Advocate as
Case Guardian with its consent, and
after the relevant appointment has been made by the State
Administrative Tribunal.
in circumstances where no suitable volunteer is available to assume the role of
Case Guardian for a person under disability
in proceedings in this Court, no
power rests with the Court to compel either of the agencies charged with
statutory responsibility
to support and assist persons under a relevant
disability to take on the role.
specifically, where this Court has made a finding that a litigant is a person
under a disability in the relevant sense, that
finding does not bind the Office
of the Public Advocate, which retains its investigatory function under
Guardianship and Administration Act
function empowers the Public Advocate to "investigate any complaint or
allegation that a person is in need of a guardian or
administrator". It is that
investigation, conducted by investigators employed by the Office of the Public
Advocate, which informs
its decision as to whether an application to the
State Administrative Tribunal will be made. The extent, if any, to which
the determination
by this Court that the relevant person is under a
informs that decision is
a matter entirely at the discretion of the Public Advocate.
this Court may make a finding that a party is a person under a disability and
the Public Advocate may simply state that it
disagrees and take no further
action, as occurred in this case. That leaves the person under a disability
unable to conduct their
case, and the other party to the case unable to
Difficulties
of the nature just briefly summarised are not limited to proceedings before this
Court. Pullin JA has
Having stated my conclusion,
should observe that in my opinion legislative attention is required in this
area. I say this because of the uncertainty created
by the existence of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Public Trustee
. It would surprise me if there has not been discussion or debate
between the Office of the Public Trustee and the Office of the
Public Advocate
resort. This is because on the one
Guardianship and Administration
authorises the State Administrative Tribunal but not the Supreme Court
to appoint the Public Advocate to act as guardian or administrator,
result that the Public Advocate would then be obliged by O70 to act as
litigation guardian, whereas, on the other hand,
Public Trustee Act
authorises [the Supreme Court] but not the
State Administrative Tribunal to appoint the Public Trustee as
litigation guardian. The
result of that bifurcation in the legislation is
seen in this case where both authorities resist appointment as
litigation guardian.
Both claim to be too underfunded or under resourced to
be able to take on the role as litigation guardian.
The response of the Public Advocate to this Court's request
that it participate in the hearing
letter dated [redacted] May 2025, the relevant officer of the Public Advocate
advised that [they were] "unable" to participate
in today's hearing.
my staff contacted the relevant officer and enquired as to whether her inability
to attend the hearing was due to a timing
or scheduling issue. If so, the
possibility of rescheduling the hearing was proffered. They were told that
rescheduling the hearing
would not assist, as the relevant officer would still
be unable to attend as a matter of course. While the officer concerned made
efforts to be helpful, it was made clear that as a matter of policy by
which [they] [were] bound, and at the directive of the legal
team at the Office
of the Public Advocate, [they] would not be able to attend.
appears that the internal policy adopted is that representatives of the Public
Advocate will not attend a hearing at this Court,
even if requested to do so,
unless and until the Public Advocate is appointed as Case Guardian. Of
course, that appointment can
only be made with the consent of the Public
Advocate, and only after the Public Advocate has, at its sole discretion,
made application
to the State Administrative Tribunal.
is both surprising and disappointing that a statutory body established to
protect the personal and legal rights of vulnerable
persons would decline a
request from a superior Court that it attend a hearing. That is
particularly so when the hearing in question
is scheduled for the express
purpose of considering how those rights might appropriately be protected, and
how the Court might assist
that statutory body to better undertake its function
by granting it access to information it might not otherwise have.
response is even more surprising when the statutory body is aware that the Court
has made a finding of incapacity. While I accept
that the Public Advocate has
its own investigative function, and must exercise that function independently,
it is remarkable that
it would initially dismiss the relevant finding, and then
decline a request to then engage with the Court other than by correspondence.
One might reasonably expect that in the proper discharge of its duties the
Public Advocate would feel compelled to ensure that it
understanding of the basis upon which the finding of incapacity had been made,
before being dismissive of it.
that would be so even if the finding of incapacity were not so unarguably
correct as it is in this case.
the most recent correspondence from the Public Advocate confirms that, following
receipt of the orders made [in] March 2025,
its officers have spoken both with
the ICL and with the father. The father's "presentation and responses to
questions" lead the
to "believe that there
is a need to further investigate his capacity", and to "identify
need for a referral pursuant to
section 97(1)(c)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Thus, the present position of the Public Advocate is that further investigation
of the question of the father's capacity is required,
yet it has declined a
request to attend this hearing listed for the purpose of considering whether
information and documents might
be released to it by the Court to inform that
investigation.
father apparently told the relevant officer that the parenting orders which his
application seeks to set aside are working effectively
and had no clear
understanding of why the current proceedings (which he commenced) are on
father has earlier expressed a consistent view in his correspondence to the
Court. The mother has sought that the father's substantive
application simply
be dismissed. Of course, no such step can be taken in circumstances where the
father has been found to be a person
with a disability in the relevant sense;
the proceedings cannot be continued, even to dismiss all outstanding
applications and responses,
without a Case Guardian in place.
the same letter, the Public Advocate requested that the Court consider providing
it with the subpoenaed materials, and any court
orders made to date to "assist
in identifying if [the father] would benefit from an application being made to
the State Administrative
Tribunal for the consideration of the appointment of a
the Public Advocate attended the hearing as requested, the difficulties which
arise from its response and request for access
to the documents in the
possession of the Court could have been explained, discussed and addressed.
Instead, it has become necessary
to explain those difficulties in this judgment,
which will be published to the parties and to the Public Advocate.
difficulties arise in relation to a variety of questions.
The first question – is the capacity assessment for which
the Independent Children's Lawyer has obtained limited funding
will be clear from the observations already made, from the Court's perspective
the answer to this question, at least at this stage,
is "no". The relevant
finding of disability has been made. It was clearly correct at the time it was
made, and subsequent events,
the father's actions and documents, and the
subpoenaed medical records in evidence, simply reinforce that it remains
had intended to ask the Public Advocate whether, notwithstanding that, the
exercise of the Court's power to compel an assessment
and the grant of access to
relevant court documents, coupled with orders permitting the use of the
assessment and documents in any
application to the State Administrative
Tribunal, might be of assistance to it in the exercise of its responsibilities
to the father.
the Public Advocate chose not to attend the hearing, that dialogue could not
do not require the ICL to take any steps to advance the capacity assessment, nor
spend Legal Aid funds doing so, at this stage.
That question can be
revisited at the request of the Public Advocate (or for that matter the
request of the ICL or the mother if
the Public Advocate maintains its limited
engagement) if need be.
The second question – should the Public Advocate be given
access to court documents, the Single Expert Witness report, and documents
produced under subpoena?
its letter, the Public Advocate has requested access to those documents. Again,
it is not as simple as that.
Fundamentally,
documents filed by the parties in proceedings in this Court are confidential to
those parties. Section 236B of the
Family Court Act 1975
prohibits the communication to the public of any account of proceedings that
identifies parties or others involved in them.
Documents produced by parties in
the course of disclosure, and documents produced to the Court by others for the
purposes of the
proceedings, must not be used for any purpose other than that
for which they were given, unless and until they are received into
Documents of that
nature may not be disclosed, nor their contents disclosed, to any person without
the Court's permission.
Access to court orders and documents filed by the
said, publication to a specific person, class of persons, or organisation can be
readily permitted by the Court in appropriate
cases. The obvious example is the
common practice of permission being granted for the provision of court orders to
schools attended
by the children the subject of those orders.
grant that permission, however, the Court must be satisfied that the provision
of the documents to third parties is appropriate
and reasonably required. It
must afford the parties the opportunity to be heard on the point and consider
what (if any) safeguards
and limitations should be imposed.
the bald request made in its letter, I do not know the basis upon which the
Public Advocate contends that access to the documents
filed by the parties is
appropriate and reasonably required. That is so, as I have been given no
indication as to what other information
the Public Advocate already has. I
hasten to add that I would anticipate that both conditions are likely readily
satisfied –
but I cannot simply act on that assumption.
I had intended to raise that with the Public Advocate or its representative at
this hearing.
Access to the report of [Dr C]
observations apply. In addition, where [Dr C] provided her report for the
specific purpose of these proceedings, I would
not authorise its
release to third parties without first seeking [Dr C's] consent.
had hoped to enquire of the Public Advocate or its representative at this
hearing as to whether it sought a copy of that report,
and to explain the
circumstances in which it was obtained, the terms of reference it addressed
(which were not specifically directed
to questions of capacity) and its timing
by reference to subsequent events. It may well be that on receipt of that
information,
the Public Advocate would not seek a copy of the report, and the
additional step of seeking the consent of [Dr C] would be unnecessary.
Access to medical records and other document produced under
produced under subpoena attract different considerations to those already
outlined, notwithstanding that they have been
received into evidence. That is
so, as the documents are produced to the Court under compulsion, and subject to
the right of the
subpoena recipient to object to inspection by parties and their
representatives. Even where no such objection is raised, the subpoena
is entitled to proceed on the clear basis that the documents will not be
disclosed to any third party.
documents produced under subpoena, including reports, notes and clinical
observations of the mental health professionals involved
in the care of the
father, clearly support the conclusion that the finding of disability made by
the Magistrate in 2023 was correct,
and remains so.
may be that the Public Advocate considers that its responsibility to
independently investigate relevant matters does not permit
it to simply accept
the findings of the Magistrate, and my confirmatory and current finding, and to
act on them. In the absence of
submissions, I make no further observations
on that point, other than to acknowledge that such a view, if held, would not be
inconsistent
with the absence of legislated power of this Court, or for that
matter the Supreme Court, to compel the Public Advocate to accept
appointment as
a Case Guardian.
on the assumption that is the view of the Public Advocate, the question
then arises as to whether the documents concerned
are likely to be relevant and
of probative value in the exercise of that independent investigatory function.
The answer to that
question is clearly "yes".
questions then arise.
the parties must be afforded the opportunity to address the question of whether
the documents should be released. That was
one of the purposes of this hearing.
No objection has been raised by the mother, and the ICL supports the release.
The father, albeit
with some hesitancy, did not actively oppose the
the subpoenaed parties must be given the opportunity to raise any objection.
There was no point in putting the subpoenaed
parties to the trouble and
potential expense of considering that question until the parties and the Public
Advocate had been heard
or given the opportunity to be heard. I propose now to
make orders requiring the relevant subpoenaed parties to raise any objection
within a specific time frame; self-evidently, if they have no objection, they
need not do anything. If they do object, the determination
of that objection
would be better informed by submissions not only by the parties and the ICL but
also by the Public Advocate.
on the assumption that subpoenaed documents are to be released to the Public
Advocate, consideration must be given to the
question of what limitations or
conditions (if any) should be imposed. I do not know, for example, whether
upon inspection the Public
Advocate would seek liberty to produce the
documents in any application to the State Administrative Tribunal. Thus, I do
whether for that reason, or other reasons potentially associated with
its internal decision-making processes, the Public Trustee
would consider that
an order permitting its officers to inspect but not copy the documents would be
insufficient for its purposes.
permission to copy the documents is sought, I do not know whether the Public
Advocate has particular obligations to retain documents
once received for a
specific timeframe, or whether an order for subsequent destruction or return of
the documents could appropriately
be made, as might more typically be done.
unduly labouring the point, again those are all matters I had intended to
address in open and transparent dialogue with the
Public Advocate or its
representative had they attended the hearing as requested.
as requested would also have facilitated a consideration of the "need for a
referral pursuant to
section 97(1)(c)
Guardianship and Administration
" identified by the Public Advocate in its recent letter.
Guardianship and Administration Act
sets out the functions of
the Public Advocate.
Section 97(1)(c)
includes in those functions –
to investigate any complaint or allegation that a person is in need of a
guardian or administrator, or is under an inappropriate
guardianship or
administration order, or any matter referred to him by a court or under
course, by its correspondence [in] December 2023 the Public Advocate has
confirmed that it had investigated the matter first referred
to it by the Court
via the required request to the Attorney General [in] October 2023.
By its correspondence dated [redacted] May
2025, the Public Advocate has
confirmed that it has undertaken some further investigation consequent to my
orders [from] March 2025
and seeks access to documents so as to investigate
is not apparent to me that any further referral by this Court is required, nor
that there is any other formal step to be taken
by the Court to trigger the
investigation, but if I am wrong in that understanding I would have sought
to address it at today's hearing.
Disposition
will be clear, in my view, the apparent policy reflected by the Public Advocate
declining the Court's request that it attend at
today's hearing is unhelpful,
inefficient and wrong.
propose to adjourn the hearing for a number of reasons.
adjournment is required to afford the persons and organisations who have
produced what would otherwise be confidential documents
the opportunity to be
heard if they object to the provision of those documents to the Public
is also required to enable the Public Advocate to consider the matters raised
above as to whether it should be provided with copies
of documents or merely be
permitted to inspect them, what conditions might apply to that, and whether
those conditions if imposed
run in any way contrary to its own obligations in
relation to the management and retention of information and documents.
adjournment is also necessary to afford the mother and the ICL the opportunity
to be heard if in fact the Public Advocate intends
to seek permission to place
evidence, orders, or subpoenaed documents from this Court in evidence in any
application to the State
Administrative Tribunal.
intend to publish a copy of these reasons to the Public Advocate to inform what
I hope will be a reconsideration of its position
as to the Court's request that
it participate in what will be the adjourned hearing. Had it attended today, all
of the matters just
articulated could have been addressed with it, and a further
hearing avoided absent receipt of any objection from a subpoenaed party.
will be the following orders:
letter [redacted] May 2025 from the Independent Children's Lawyer regarding the
children, [Child A] born [in] 2012 and [Child
B] born [in] 2014 and the
documents produced under subpoena from the [Mental Health Service] are received
into evidence.
proceedings are adjourned for further hearing at 10.00 am on [redacted].
Office of the Public Advocate is requested to participate in that hearing, by
having the relevant officer appear with or without
representation.
orders, and the reasons for them, will be published by the Court to the Public
the Medico-Legal Officer, or other responsible officer of the [Mental Health
Service] objects to either inspection by the Public
Advocate of documents
produced by them to the Court under subpoena, or to the provision of copies of
the said documents to the Public
Advocate, they must inform the Court of
that objection in writing by no later than [redacted].
the Medico-Legal Officer, or other responsible officer of the [Mental Health
Service] objects to the submission into evidence of
the said documents in any
application by the Public Advocate to the State Administrative Tribunal for
guardianship or administration
orders in relation to the Applicant Father, [Mr
Prescott], they must inform the Court of that objection in writing by no later
[redacted].
orders, and the reasons for them, will be published by the Court to the
Medico-Legal Officer of the [Mental Health Service].
These reasons are the reasons for decision
delivered on [Redacted], edited in places but only as to correct grammatical
some infelicity of expression without variation to the substance
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Family Court of Western Australia.
That document was filed
personally by the father, notwithstanding that solicitors were then on the
record as representing him.
Commencing what will be referred to as the "financial proceedings" for
simplicity.
Pursuant to
Family Court Rules 2021
As the guardianship
order would be required to authorise the acceptance of that role in the
parenting proceedings and the administration
order would serve the same function
in the financial proceedings.
The [Mental Health Service], which forms part of the suburban hospital and was
responsible for the father's psychiatric
Albeit, not the current
Attorney General, but there is no reason to suppose a different position would
be adopted.
Trustee Act 1941
states "to provide community services in respect
of trusts, estates and related
And thus, in the view
of the Court, in need of a guardian and/or administrator to conduct the
proceedings as Case Guardian.
Farrell v Allregal Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2009] WASC 65
, [41]; cited
[2025] WASCA 21
That the Supreme Court
had no power to appoint the Public Advocate as next friend in proceedings in
that court without the Public
A different
officer, who did not conduct the earlier
investigation.
Anor v Street and Ors
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
Family Court Rules
(WA), r 203.
Although, given he is a person under a disability, I do not suggest that he is
relevantly bound by that.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (224 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter