URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2020/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PAPPEL and WEAVER [2020] FCWAM 52 (27 May 2020)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA AT 150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
PAPPEL and WEAVER
[2020] FCWAM 52
6 & 7 MAY 2020
DELIVERED :
27 MAY 2020
FILE NO/S :
PTW 1197 of 2015
Final parenting orders;
where mother seeks to relocate child to Country A; where father opposes
relocation; comparison of competing
proposals; where a good bond exists between
the child and both parents; discussion of evidence by single expert witness;
benefit to the child of further developing a meaningful relationship
with the father outweighs any potential benefit to living with
the mother in
Country A; where the difficulty and expense of maintaining contact with the
father would adversely affect the child's
relationship with him; relocation not
permitted; extended time ordered between the child and the father.
Legislation:
Representation:
Jane Johnson
Self Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Richard Bannerman
Solicitors:
Kim Wilson & Co
Self Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Bannerman Solicitors
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT
– PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court
under the pseudonym Pappel & Weaver has been approved by the Magistrates
Court at 150 Terrace Road, Perth pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
Pappel], at 22 years of age, came to Australia from [Country A] on a
12‑month working holiday. Within about 18 months,
she met [Mr Weaver];
they fell in love and started living together. They got married in [late]
2012 and their child [K] was born
in [mid] 2013. Their relationship ended in
March 2015.
Pappel obtained permanent residency in Australia, and has continued to live in
Western Australia. Since separation, K has primarily
lived with Ms Pappel and
spent time with Mr Weaver.
Pappel wants to move back to Country A with K.
must decide whether that is in K’s best interests. I must then decide
what time should be spent between K and Mr Weaver
whether K is living in Country
A or in Australia. Ms Pappel has made it clear that she will not move back to
Country A without K
and, on that basis, Mr Weaver seeks to spend extended time
with him. He does not seek orders for K to primarily live with him.
Ms Pappel’s sister:
Pappel has a good relationship with her sister, [Ms T]. Given her own
commitments in [Country B], she sees Ms Pappel and their
parents irregularly.
Her evidence was of little assistance to deal with the issues in dispute.
Ms Pappel’s mother:
was a refreshing witness who gave her evidence in a thoughtful manner. I accept
her evidence that, in the event Mr Weaver was
to travel to Country A to spend
time with K, he would be welcome at her home, and she would do everything
possible to ensure that
the time K spent with him was enjoyable. I formed the
view that she would, as she said she would, put aside her feelings in relation
to Mr Weaver, because what was important was that K enjoy his time with him.
confirmed that, if K was allowed to live in Country A, and orders were made for
Ms Pappel to fly him to Western Australia to
see Mr Weaver, and Ms Pappel was
unable to afford such airfares, then she would pay the fares herself. She said
that she would do
whatever was necessary to ensure that the orders were complied
with. I accept that evidence. She has the financial capacity to
assist in that
Mr Weaver’s partner:
D] confirmed that K and her child [F] get on well together, although F can be
boisterous. F is 2 ½ years old. Ms D has
spoken to Mr Weaver about his
lack of payment of child support for K. She confirmed that K is sometimes
clingy at handovers but
takes a maximum of 10 to 15 minutes to settle.
consider she gave her evidence in a truthful manner and was supportive of Mr
Weaver and understood some of his limitations.
Single Expert Witness: Mr E:
[E] provided a report on 16 January 2020. With respect, the report was
convoluted and difficult to follow. I accept that neither
Ms Pappel nor Mr
Weaver would have found it easy to understand.
E appeared to be careful not to present a view in relation to the vexed issue of
relocation. He was careful to provide recommendations
on the basis that the
mother was permitted to relocate, and on the alternate basis that the mother was
not permitted to relocate.
Full Court in
Albert & Plowman
[2020] FamCAFC 23
(from [19] onwards)
[19] Single experts, either by court appointment or consensual engagement by the
parties, are called as witnesses because their qualifications
and experience
equip them to provide opinion evidence to the court which is relevant to the
determination of the issues in dispute.
But they are just witnesses. Their
expert opinion evidence is not necessarily decisive of the dispute. Judicial
power to decide
the legal dispute rests in the hands of the trial judge, not the
expert witness.
[20] Additionally, expert witnesses are not witnesses of fact, except as to
matters that they directly saw or heard, including for
example, that which
occurs during interviews they conduct. They express opinions by applying their
qualifications and experience
to certain factual assumptions. Their opinions
can only ever be as reliable as the facts upon which they are premised. If, at
the facts assumed by the expert to be true are either not proven or are
proven to be incorrect, then the opinion evidence will necessarily
compromised. Moreover, expert witnesses usually breach their remit if they
are drawn into and express an opinion about the underlying
factual conflict.
[21] As was observed in this jurisdiction long ago (see Hall and
[1979] FamCA 73
(1979) FLC 90-713
at 78,819):
... There is no magic in a [single expert report].
A Judge is not bound to accept it and there should never be any suggestion
the [expert] is usurping the role of the court or that the Judge is
abdicating his responsibilities...
While the [single expert]’s views will normally have weight with the court
because of his expertise and experience, the [expert]
does not usually have the
same opportunity as the trial Judge to weigh the evidence, observe the demeanour
of the witnesses in court
under examination and cross-examination, and make
findings of fact based on evidence before the court which might not have been
to the [single expert]... (References
[22] Those observations have been successively endorsed by the Full Court (see
Carpenter & Lunn
[2008] FamCAFC 128
(2008) FLC 93-377
Friscioni & Friscioni
[2010] FamCAFC 108
Bostoi & Bostoi
[2011] FamCAFC 132
Whipp & Richards
[2012] FamCAFC 11
(2012) 257 FLR 395
but more importantly by the High Court of Australia, which confirmed
a court hearing a dispute under
of the Act is not bound to accept or reject the whole or any part of the
evidence given by an expert witness (
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
my view, Mr E could have presented an opinion as to the relocation issue, as
long as it was explained and backed up by other empirical
evidence or
observations of the parties. He appeared to be unduly cautious in his report.
I have taken into account his entire report, the following is a convenient
snapshot of his views and opinions:
(a) K is developing normally.
He has no special needs and presented as an intelligent, active, inquisitive and
well‑adjusted
child, with no major behavioural, emotional or developmental
difficulties;
(b) K has a positive relationship and close bond with both parents. Both
parents made him feel safe and secure when observed. The
conflict between his
parents does not seem to have had a significant detrimental impact upon K;
(c) Time and again, Mr E emphasised that K has missed out on time with Mr
Weaver. He said that the conflict has impacted significantly
on the amount of
time K spends with the father.
(d) He said that the most significant potential risk to K, should Ms Pappel
relocate to Country A, will be that he will not be able
to benefit as much from
what Mr Weaver has to offer;
(e) K was at ease with Ms D and her young child F;
(f) Neither Ms Pappel nor Mr Weaver presented with any major concerns or
risks regarding their psychological/personality profile.
He noted Mr
Weaver was compliant with medication, and his post‑traumatic stress
disorder and other health issues did not seem
to interfere with his capacity to
(g) Ms Pappel and Mr Weaver have a distant, distrusting and
non‑communicative relationship. Ms Pappel perceives Mr Weaver
dangerous and sees him in a negative light. Mr Weaver says Ms Pappel is
a good parent, but feels he needs to ward off her allegations;
(h) Neither parent indicated any significant risk that K will be exposed to
neglect, abuse, risk of family violence, substance use
or mental health issues.
page 32 of his report, Mr E set out what I considered to be the most confusing
aspect of his report. He set out a number of risk
factors and protective
factors that he has gleaned from quoted research. Each of these factors were
placed into subcategories referring
to “within K”, “within the
non-relocating parent” and “within the relocating parent”. He
indicated risk factors and protective factors in relation to parental
relationship and the characteristics of the move.
then highlighted which of those factors under each category were present in this
then summarised this passage by saying that should K relocate, there seems to be
more risk than protective factors, particularly
in relation to factors within K
and within the non‑relocating parent (Mr Weaver).
also said that there seem to be some protective factors within the child if he
relocates, but mostly risk factors pertaining to
other areas.
relation to K he identified the risk factors as being:
under 10 years of age;
(b) he is attached to the father; and
(c) he is involved in his home community.
protective factors in relation to K were:
(a) he is intelligent and
emotionally mature;
(b) he is well-adjusted;
(c) he has a good relationship with the mother; and
(d) he is not attached to the father’s extended family.
note this last comment does not appear to take into account the good bond that
appears to exist between K and Ms D and F.
E was asked, as part of his terms of reference, what the likely impact would be
upon K should the mother not be permitted to relocate
with him to Country A,
including but not limited to the effect on his relationship with the mother
and any other significant persons
in his life. With respect, this question was
worded badly. The court’s decision is not about whether the mother should
permitted to relocate but whether K should be permitted
to relocate. The way that question was formed may have led Mr E into
confusion. He answered that question by indicating that the likely
impact on K should he remain in Perth is a positive one in that
continue developing his relationship with both parents and benefit from what
they both have to offer. He provided a view
the mother decided to relocate on her own. That was never really a serious
E proffered no opinion about any potentially negative effects upon K of staying
my view, for all of the reasons stated, Mr E was in favour of K remaining in
Perth. He could see many positive benefits to K
in that situation and could see
no negative aspects to it.
Mr Weaver represented himself, I provided him with some procedural assistance in
accordance with the guidelines set out in
Re F: Litigants in Person
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072.
Weaver made some appropriate concessions. He accepted that some incidents had
happened (which will be explored later). He provided
explanations for them.
was unable to accept that his previous behaviour had a significant impact on Ms
Pappel. I formed the view that he believed he
had not acted improperly, but did
not understand that he had hurt and upset Ms Pappel.
was very firm on the importance of his relationship with K. He was clearly
emotional when asked to consider the impact of K moving
to Country A. He
realised that his relationship with K would be very badly affected. He accepted
that he could not afford to travel
to Country A to visit and, in my view,
realised he would be at the beck and call of the mother in bringing K to Western
to see him.
Weaver’s demeanour changed when he was discussing the relationship
between K and F. It was clear that this was an important
aspect of his life.
The importance of K in his life was also without doubt.
asked to describe three positive things about Ms Pappel as a mother, he quickly
answered that she was loving and nurturing;
was protective and had good
morals and values that she passes on to K. I formed the same conclusions about
Pappel was emotional giving her evidence, in particular, when talking about the
ways she says the father behaved during their
relationship. Ms Pappel has made
allegations of physical, emotional, sexual and financial abuse. Fairly early in
their relationship,
Mr Weaver suffered a traumatic event. He became involved in
an altercation with a neighbour and the neighbour attacked him with
[weapon]. He suffered physical injuries but also experienced
post‑traumatic stress disorder.
Weaver denied virtually every allegation made against him in relation to the
various forms of abuse and family violence.
he represented himself, Mr Weaver did put various propositions to Ms Pappel to
indicate that he did not agree with certain
elements of her evidence. He
failed, however, to produce any evidence or elicit any answers in cross
examination that led me to
consider that her evidence, on a whole, was
untruthful.
balance, I generally preferred Ms Pappel’s evidence on these issues to
that of Mr Weaver. Her evidence was given in a manner
that indicated these were
very serious issues for her. It may be that, because of Mr Weaver’s
difficulties arising from the
traumatic attack, he does not recall precise
events or he does not appreciate the impact of his behaviour upon Ms Pappel.
said that, I did not accept all of Ms Pappel’s evidence.
In my view, she relied upon a lack of memory to avoid answering
questions where she thought they would be against her interests. She was
not prepared to make concessions, when that concession
might be seen in a
negative light by the court. An example is that she obtained [a] Country A
passport for K. She was asked whether
she was able to obtain the passport
without Mr Weaver’s authority. Clearly the answer to that question
because she got it without his authority. While she had
some consular assistance in obtaining that passport, it would have been
very clear to her that she was applying for and obtaining the passport without
Mr Weaver’s knowledge or consent. Her answer
was that she could not
my view, Ms Pappel exaggerated elements of her affidavit evidence. One example
is that she said Mr Weaver forced her to breastfeed.
In cross examination, she
changed that evidence to say that he wanted her to continue breastfeeding, but
that she had difficulties
with it. They are very different things.
further example is that, in her original case information affidavit, Ms Pappel
said that Mr Weaver had refused to return K to her
following separation. In
cross examination, she revealed that she never had a discussion with him after
he took K into his care,
and she had never even asked him to return K. It was
therefore not possible for him to have refused to return K to her. Despite
she gave sworn evidence in her case information affidavit that he did refuse. I
find that she exaggerated that evidence potentially
in an effort to make her
case appear stronger than it was to support an urgent application.
Pappel seemed to say that because of inadequate legal advice, she did not
get a proper chance to raise her concerns with the court
before final orders
were made in September 2017. There are two reasons why I do not accept that
proposition. One is that Ms Pappel
was interviewed in January 2016 by the
(then) single expert witness, [Mr B]. She accepted that she was given an
opportunity to raise
all of her concerns with the single expert witness and she
did so. In addition, the final orders, made on 8 September 2017, were
Pappel first mentioned the prospect of moving back to Country A to Mr
Weaver shortly after her return from her holiday in 2018.
She had no intention
or plan to move to Country A until then, even after her father’s accident
in 2015. Interestingly, it
was Mr Weaver who first raised the prospect of Ms
Pappel not being happy in Australia. In text messages at the end of her
he asked whether she was happy living in Australia and expressed his
understanding that whilst it would have been lovely to see her
family again, it
must have been hard to leave them and return to Australia. In response, Ms
Pappel said that she would love to live
in Country A.
Pappel struggled to answer questions about any positive aspects of the
relationship between K and Mr Weaver. When asked what
benefits there were in K
having a relationship with Mr Weaver, she struggled, but answered that he
provides a link to his Australian
heritage and that Mr Weaver is a “father
confirmed that she does not have photos of Mr Weaver in her house and has not
ensured that there is at least a photo of him in
K’s bedroom.
she was asked what three things K might lose if he was to live in Country A, she
took a very long time to answer. In the end,
all she could say was that she
hoped that he would not lose anything. She clearly does not accept or
understand the importance of
the ongoing relationship between K and Mr Weaver.
She does not accept that he has anything of value to offer K. In my view, her
honest answer would have been that K would lose nothing if he were to move to
Country A, because losing his relationship with Mr
Weaver would be of no
significance.
late October 2018, Mr Weaver refused to agree to K moving to Country A. As a
result, Ms Pappel said, she commenced these proceedings.
Those proceedings
began in December 2018, but her initial documents said nothing about any
proposed move to Country A. It was not
until she amended her application
in February 2019 that she included an order to relocate K to Country A. In my
view, even though
she says that in October 2018, she wanted to move; this was
not a high priority, as her original documents did not seek that order.
Pappel said in cross-examination that when she suspended K’s time with Mr
Weaver, she did not tell K anything about why
he was no longer seeing him. I do
not accept that evidence. K had been in a routine of seeing his father every
second weekend for
a significant period. I have no doubt that there would have
been at least one question from K about why those arrangements had changed
why he was not seeing him.
Pappel provided no explanation whatsoever to Mr Weaver, except to say that K was
unavailable. Ms Pappel accepted that, when time
restarted, she did explain to K
why there would initially be a person present when he went to see Mr Weaver.
She told him that a
lady would be there to make sure mum and dad were alright.
that she provided this explanation, this confirms my view that she would have
provided some explanation to K about why he was
not seeing Mr Weaver. In my
view, she simply refused to give that evidence. I infer that this evidence
would not have assisted
the time of trial, K was spending every second weekend with Mr Weaver from
Saturday morning to Sunday afternoon.
the conclusion of the evidence, Ms Pappel’s proposals revolved around a
maximum of two nights with Mr Weaver until K
reached 10 years of age ([mid]
2023). There appeared to be no particular “magic” to this proposal
in relation to the
age. Nothing in her evidence justified a change to a more
extensive arrangement after the age of 10, as opposed to any other age.
Extraordinarily,
at the end of the trial, after all witnesses had given their evidence and before
closing submissions, Ms Pappel
sought to rely upon a revised minute of proposed
orders. These new proposals made some dramatic changes:
“maximum of two nights with the father” proposal was gone. Pending
relocation or if relocation was refused, she
now proposed that K could spend two
nights with Mr Weaver on the weekend immediately after the trial.
A fortnight later, he could
commence spending three nights with Mr Weaver
from Friday to Monday on each alternate weekend;
(b) the school holiday proposals changed from a maximum of two nights with Mr
Weaver to one full week in the July 2020 school holidays
(and in other term
holiday periods);
(c) in the event K was to live in Country A, Ms Pappel proposed that K spend
time with Mr Weaver in Country A for 10 days in December
2020. He could then
spend four weeks with Mr Weaver in Australia from July 2021. Her earlier
proposals provided for a maximum of
two days in Mr Weaver’s care until
Pappel’s counsel submitted that the following evidence caused Ms Pappel to
reconsider her proposals and concede that there
was effectively no risk to K in
Mr Weaver’s care:
(a) Mr Weaver conceded in his evidence that
he threw K into a pool, as K had told Ms Pappel, but he explained it was
and harmless;
(b) He conceded that K had cried on several occasions at handovers;
(c) He also conceded that K had cried about soiling himself at Mr
Weaver’s home on one occasion, whereas he had previously only
said that K
was embarrassed.
three elements were said to be so significant that Ms Pappel changed her case
dramatically, in that she felt comfortable with
K spending much more time in Mr
Weaver’s care, including for long extended holiday periods.
to that point, K had only ever spent two consecutive nights with Mr Weaver.
do not accept that these three elements could have caused such a change for
Ms Pappel. During her evidence, she maintained an
underlying concern about Mr
Weaver’s parenting and K’s safety in his care. She relied upon the
allegations and disclosures
that led to the Department’s investigation,
and comments made by K.
Pappel says she no longer considers there is any significant risk to K in being
in Mr Weaver’s care. I consider that this
conclusion could have been
reached well before the end of the oral evidence at trial. Throughout the
proceedings, it appears that
Ms Pappel has elevated her concerns to a level that
was not justified. That has, indirectly, led to K having fairly limited time
with Mr Weaver.
single expert witness provided his report in January 2020. Given the content of
that report, Ms Pappel could have made these
concessions at that stage of the
proceedings. She did not do so, and instead, pressed for orders at trial that
provided ongoing
limited time between K and Mr Weaver.
International relocation: What are the principles?
the parents of K were married, these proceedings are determined by the
reaching my decision, I must treat the best interests of K as the paramount
consideration, but not the only one. I am also guided
by the objects and the
principles set out in the Act.
objects are to ensure that the best interests of a child are met
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their
parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
consistent with the best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their
responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their
principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be
contrary to a child's best interests):
(a) children have the right
to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their
parents are married, separated,
have never married or have never lived together;
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children;
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to
enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
determining a case such as this, the court must examine the proposals by each
party to determine which of them is more closely
aligned with the best interests
of the child.
[2011] FamCAFC 16
(2011) FLC 93-460
, the Full Court said at
We emphasise that it is not the law that a parent wishing to relocate must
establish compelling reasons for this to be permissible:
(1999) 199 CLR 160, 179; and
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
, 259‑260. Equally, there is no onus on a
parent who may be "left behind" to demonstrate reasons as to why the other
should not relocate. But it is properly part of a Court's inquiry to
consider what each parent proposes and to determine the context
of those plans
and reasons for them in determining what is in the best interests of a
making a parenting order, the Court must apply a presumption that it is in
the best interests of the child for his parents to
have equal shared parental
responsibility. This presumption does not apply where there has been abuse or
family violence. The presumption
can also be rebutted by evidence which
satisfies the court that it would not be in the child’s best interests for
his parents
to have equal shared parental responsibility.
consequence of making an order for equal shared parental responsibility is that
the court must consider equal time and if not,
substantial and significant time
with each parent.
this matter, Mr Weaver seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility,
whilst Ms Pappel seeks an order for sole parental
responsibility.
my view, there is reasonable cause to believe that Ms Pappel was subjected to
family violence during the relationship. I preferred
her evidence over Mr
Weaver’s in that regard. For that reason, the presumption does not apply.
Weaver and the Independent Children’s Lawyer both proposed an order
for equal shared parental responsibility. Whilst the
presumption does not apply,
I can still consider making such an order. Whilst Ms Pappel’s stance
softened at the end of the
trial, it was very clear that she still had a
significant difficulty communicating with Mr Weaver. Mr Weaver presented well
and no doubt has improved his ability to communicate over the years
since separation. Text messages tendered during the trial showed
that, at least
prior to the end of 2018, Ms Pappel and Mr Weaver communicated fairly well in
relation to arrangements. I accept,
however, that it may be difficult for
Ms Pappel to communicate with Mr Weaver in the future.
parties did, however, reach agreement earlier this year about extending
K’s time with Mr Weaver, without involving the
Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
imposition of equal shared parental responsibility involves requiring the
parties to communicate and attempt to agree on major
long‑term issues that
Act defines these long-term issues as including:
issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long‑term
nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues
of that nature
child’s education (both current and future); and
(b) the child’s religious
and cultural upbringing; and
(c) the child’s health;
(d) the child’s name;
(e) changes to the child’s
living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to
spend time with a
Act makes it clear that, to avoid doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to
form a relationship with a new partner is not,
of itself, a major long-term
issue in relation to the child. However, the decision will involve a major
long-term issue if, for
example, the relationship with the new partner involves
the parent moving to another area and the move will make it significantly
difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent.
issues may not arise, but if they do they will be infrequent. I am therefore
going to make an order for equal shared parental
responsibility. The
alternative is to provide sole parental responsibility to Ms Pappel. This would
mean that she could make some
very important decisions concerning the long-term
wellbeing of K without reference to Mr Weaver at all. I do not consider that
is in K’s best interests.
time is not sought by either Mr Weaver or Ms Pappel. Substantial and
significant time is proposed.
assist me, the legislation sets out a number of considerations that I must
primary considerations are the benefit to K of having a meaningful relationship
with both of his parents, and the need to protect
him from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
family violence.
have no doubt that K would benefit from having a meaningful relationship with
both of his parents.
cross examination, Mr E said that the current relationship between K and Mr
Weaver could potentially be maintained by regular
communication and visits
at least once per year. Ms Pappel’s original proposals provided for
holidays twice per year, in different
locations. This was never a realistic
proposal, as the father would be responsible for sharing the cost of K
travelling from Country
A. He would also be responsible for his own travel and
accommodation costs for two trips to Country A each alternate year. All
that would be beyond his means.
Pappel’s amended proposals (made after hearing Mr E’s evidence)
decreased the frequency of visits to one in each calendar
year. Trips were,
however, envisaged in December in one year and in July in the next year. They
would alternate thereafter. That
would mean there would be gaps of seven months
and then 17 months between each visit. Ms Pappel had made the travel
arrangements
more palatable to Mr Weaver, by proposing that beyond a single
period in December 2020, all further visits would occur in Western
Australia. She would meet the costs of return travel of K and of any
accompanying adult to and from Western Australia.
accept that Ms Pappel would maintain regular Skype and/or telephone
communication between K and Mr Weaver. She was proactive in
this respect
when she holidayed in 2018 (Exhibit M5).
am concerned that the good relationship that currently exists between K and Mr
Weaver would be damaged if K lived in Country A.
In addition, if K stayed
in Australia, on Ms Pappel’s current proposals, he would have much more
extensive time with Mr Weaver.
my view, this would likely lead to an improvement in the strength of the bond
and the relationship between K and Mr Weaver. K
would miss out on this
opportunity were he to live overseas. Ms Pappel’s Counsel conceded this
point in closing submissions.
am not satisfied that Ms Pappel’s proposals would be sufficient
to maintain the quality of the current relationship between
Weaver. There would also be no prospect of improving that relationship if K was
in Country A.
am also not satisfied that K has been subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect
or family violence, save to the extent that, as
a young child, he may have
been present when family violence took place between his parents. I am
satisfied that any such exposure
has had no impact on him. I am also satisfied
that it is not necessary to craft orders to protect him from such harm in
the future.
Any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the
child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are
to the weight it should give to the child's views
is too young for his views to be given any significant weight.
The nature of the relationship of the child
(i) each of the child's parents; and
(ii) other persons
(including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
has an excellent relationship with Ms Pappel. She has been the primary and
constant guiding force in his life to date.
also has a good relationship with Mr Weaver. Mr Weaver clearly is very attached
to him, and the depth of his feelings showed
in cross examination.
time that K has spent with Mr Weaver has been fairly limited, but, despite this,
he has forged a good bond – one that is
worth nurturing.
The extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or
failed to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making
decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child;
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
communicate with the child
has been no need to make any significant long-term decisions for K.
am not satisfied that Ms Pappel’s actions in withholding K from November
2018 to March 2019 were justified. Until her holiday
to Country A from
September to October 2018, K was having alternate weekend time with Mr Weaver.
For all intents and purposes, that
time was progressing well. K gave no
indication to Ms Pappel that there were any issues with this time. K then had
an enjoyable
holiday in Country A.
a few weeks of returning from that holiday, K had made a disclosure to a
counsellor (not to Ms Pappel). That led to a Department
of Communities
investigation which found that there was insufficient evidence to substantiate
any allegations of impropriety against
precise nature of the disclosures are at the lower end of the spectrum of
behaviour. The disclosure related to Mr Weaver pushing
K. There could be any
number of innocent explanations as to why K may have made such a disclosure.
Roughhouse play might have occurred
and this is simply K’s interpretation
of what occurred.
incident was clarified during the trial. Ms Pappel said that K had claimed the
father had thrown him into a pool. She took
this very seriously. At trial, Mr
Weaver accepted that this had happened, but explained that this was in the
context of having fun;
that there were others in the pool and that K enjoyed it.
Ms Pappel appears to have accepted this explanation, as it formed one of
reasons why she made very significant changes to her proposed orders at the end
of the trial.
my view, once the Department’s investigation was concluded, time between K
and Mr Weaver could have been reinstituted immediately.
Since then, K’s
time with Mr Weaver has been quite restrictive. It began with a few hours. It
was only early in 2020 that
Ms Pappel agreed to extend that time to include an
overnight period.
has no relationship with any of Mr Weaver’s close relatives, as he has no
family, given they
live [overseas].
The extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled,
or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child
sad aspect of Mr Weaver’s evidence is that his desire to own real estate
was expressed as a means of one day being able
to provide for K by paying some
expenses such as university fees. The unfortunate aspect, which I accept
he understood by the end
of the trial, is that he has paid virtually no child
support to date. He has therefore ignored K’s current needs. These needs
are forgotten in the (perhaps) forlorn hope that he might be able to provide
some financial assistance when K is much older. What
K needs is Mr
Weaver’s assistance now.
Weaver had overlooked that point and Ms Pappel has been left to cover all
of the expenses required to maintain K on a daily basis.
She works full time
and has received virtually no child support from Mr Weaver.
The likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances,
including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child,
or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with
whom he or she has been living
my view, Ms Pappel has not carefully thought through the reality of a potential
life in Country A. She has a relatively vague
plan about obtaining employment
and her potential living arrangements. She relied upon a March 2018 letter
offer, were she to return to Country A. There is no
indication that offer might still be available.
Country A, Ms Pappel has the option of living with her grandmother, that is, the
maternal great grandmother. She is elderly and
lives in a two‑bedroom
apartment. The reality is that, if she was to live there, she and K would
share one room whilst her
grandmother would have the other room. That may be
appropriate on a short-term basis.
also has the option of potentially renting an apartment from a friend, which
would be sufficient for her and K. She was unable
to give much detailed
evidence about the cost of living apart from the potential rental cost of the
friend’s apartment.
am not satisfied that Ms Pappel has carefully thought out the prospect of
surviving financially in Country A, but I am also confident
that, if she was
struggling, her mother would help her.
would experience significant change by relocating. Apart from no longer
spending regular time with Mr Weaver, he would have to
change schools. He has
recently commenced school and is no doubt starting to form friendships within
his school environment. Those
friendships would cease. Not only would he have
to change school, but he would be attending school in a different country with a
different culture and language. He is, however, relatively fluent in Country A
[language] and speaks to Ms Pappel’s extended
family in Country A language
rather than English.
accept the evidence that English is taught in Country A schools from
Year 3. K, however, would be entering Year 1 in Country A
later this year.
He therefore would not be formally taught English for another two years. It
would be up to Ms Pappel and her family
to maintain his level of English, so
that he could continue to communicate effectively with Mr Weaver. The maternal
grandmother
confirmed that she speaks Country A language in her household, and I
have no doubt that Ms Pappel would generally speak Country A
language in her
household, and with her family and friends. It would require a significant
conscious effort on Ms Pappel’s
part to continue to speak English
frequently with K, so that his level of English does not drop off to an extent
that he is unable
to properly communicate with Mr Weaver. Were that to
occur the last remaining method of maintaining a relationship with him would
lost. That would not be in K’s best interests.
would benefit from the support of Ms Pappel’s extended family. Her
parents currently reside in different homes but the maternal
grandmother visits
the maternal grandfather on a daily basis and supports him. The maternal
grandfather suffered an unfortunate
accident, which has led him to require care
on a daily basis. He works part-time but the maternal grandmother still
provides him
daily meals, because he is unable to cook for himself.
is [a] Country A citizen by birthright and has [a] Country A passport, so living
in Country A on a permanent basis is possible.
may be some delay in obtaining flights out of Australia to Country A given
the current pandemic and travel restrictions.
am satisfied, in particular, given the maternal grandmother’s evidence
that any orders I make in relation to holidays for
K in Western Australia
would be complied with, either by Ms Pappel or with financial assistance from
her mother.
is no realistic possibility of Mr Weaver affording travel to Country A to
see K. He is on a disability pension and has no
with extended members of his own family. Whilst he owns some property in
[Country Town A] and [Country
Town B], they have little equity. Mr Weaver has
plans to potentially live in the Country Town A property.
other property is co-owned with Mr Weaver’s brother, with whom he
conceded he does not speak. Selling a property would
require his
brother’s consent and that might be difficult. There may be little equity
in that property but at least if it
is sold, Mr Weaver would no longer have
to pay ongoing mortgage repayments. He could, potentially, put those savings
towards future
airfares in order to see K, or to the payment of ongoing child
E observed a good bond between K and Ms D and F. Mr Weaver’s evidence was
telling when discussing how K gets on well with
F. I accept that this is the
Ms Pappel has amended her proposals to provide that K spends time with Mr Weaver
in Western Australia on one occasion in each
calendar year, that is not
enough to avoid damage to K’s relationship with Mr Weaver, if K was living
in Country A.
The practical difficulty and expense of a child spending
time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or
will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents on a regular
discussed, Ms Pappel amended her proposals, and this alleviated the future
expenses for Mr Weaver. The significant distance between
Country A and
Australia, and the associated difficulty and expense of K spending time with Mr
Weaver would, however, substantially
affect K’s right to maintain personal
relations with his father.
K to remain in Australia, there are no such issues.
The capacity of:
(i) each of the child's parents;
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative
of the child);
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and
intellectual needs
Pappel would be happier and more settled were she to be able to return to
her home country with K. In Australia, she is without
significant family
members. There is, however, no evidence to indicate that her sense of isolation
has impacted upon her parenting
of K in any significant way. The parties and
the single expert witness all agreed that she has done a marvellous job and that
is a lovely and well-cared for child. Therefore, although she may prefer to
live in Country A and may be saddened by the prospect
of having to remain
in Australia for the time being, this has not adversely affected her parenting.
K is by all accounts a happy,
settled and well‑loved child.
have no doubt about Ms Pappel’s ability to care for all of K’s
needs, whether in Country A or in Australia.
also have no doubt as to Mr Weaver’s capacity to care for K for regular
and extended periods. By the end of the trial, Ms
Pappel had conceded this
The maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including
lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's
parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are
have canvassed the importance of K’s Country A heritage and his link to
Australia. Both are equally important.
If the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander
(i) the child's right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture
people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed
parenting order under this Part will have on that right
applicable.
The attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of
parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents
have canvassed much of this topic when discussing other factors. A further
concern was Mr Weaver’s evidence that he moved
to Perth to be closer to
K’s school. Since that time, however, he has not attended at the school.
It has clearly been open
to him to become more involved in K’s education.
There has been no order preventing him from doing so and his lack of action
at complete odds with his statement that this was the reason he moved to Perth.
Any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child's family
have found there was likely family violence during the relationship, and
whilst it has had an ongoing impact on Ms Pappel, it has
not had an ongoing
impact on K.
If a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the
child or a member of the child's family—any relevant inferences that
be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for,
(v) any other relevant matter
applicable.
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be
least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation
I ordered that K was to live in Country A, there is little prospect in Mr Weaver
making a further application for his return to
I ordered K to remain in Australia, Ms Pappel could potentially make a further
application, when K is older and there has been
some significant change in
circumstances. That door would remain ajar.
Any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is
applicable.
holiday to Country A in 2018 was the impetus for Ms Pappel wanting to relocate
can be a significant difference
between the amount of fun and excitement one experiences during a holiday (in
particular a return
to a former country of origin) and the reality of living in
that country. Part of the joy Ms Pappel experienced was to see family
who she had not seen for a significant period. She no doubt felt the nostalgic
pull of her country of origin, and missed
her family and friends. Those
feelings are heightened during a holiday. Those feelings are not necessarily
experienced at the same
level in the event that person returns to live in that
Ms Pappel conceded in cross examination, had she not had that holiday in 2018,
she may not have proposed a move back to Country
Notwithstanding
that, I accept that Ms Pappel feels isolated in Australia. She came to
Australia on a working holiday. Whilst here,
she got married, had a child and
separated. As a result, Ms Pappel has been in Australia for nearly 10 years,
whereas her original
plan was to travel to Australia for a 12‑month
working visa, with the possibility of a further 12 month extension.
balance, however, I consider K’s best interests lie in remaining in
Australia. A move to Country A would deny K the prospect
of further developing
his meaningful relationship with Mr Weaver.
must, therefore, consider what time arrangements should now be put in place. Ms
Pappel’s proposals at the end of the trial
were very similar to those of
Mr Weaver. Ms Pappel’s proposals were couched as the alternative
“if relocation was not
permitted”. Subject to the precise timing,
it was agreed that K could spend alternate weekends from school Friday to school
school holidays, Mr Weaver proposed half; whereas Ms Pappel proposed one week.
The difference is minimal. In my view, Ms Pappel’s
proposals are
appropriate.
Weaver sought no orders in relation to Christmas or Easter periods. Ms
Pappel’s proposals were reasonable and I therefore
adopt them.
was no real contention in relation to Mother’s Day or Father’s
Day in each year and I therefore adopt Ms Pappel’s
was very little difference between the proposed orders in relation to each
party’s birthday, and Mr Weaver sought no
specific order in relation to
K’s birthday. Again, I adopt the mother’s proposed orders.
Other issues:
The timing of alternate weekends:
Pappel’s proposal was to start alternate weekends (Friday to Monday) from
21 May 2020 and start a full week from the July
2020 school holidays. The
Independent Children’s Lawyer wanted to start with two weekends being from
Friday to Sunday and
then extending to the Monday morning. The Independent
Children’s Lawyer also proposed a limitation on the time with Mr Weaver
he moved outside the Perth metropolitan area, so that K would not be travelling
a significant distance on a Monday morning. I
agree with the restriction
in relation to Mr Weaver moving, but consider that the “full”
weekends can commence immediately.
trial concluded on 7 May 2020. The parties agreed that on the weekend
commencing 8 May 2020, K would be with Mr Weaver from
Friday to Sunday. The
next due weekend is that commencing 22 May 2020. K may well have already
spent a full weekend with Mr Weaver.
These reasons are to be delivered on
27 May 2020. K has, therefore, had at least one weekend from Friday to
Sunday. In my view,
it is appropriate to extend that time to the Monday
immediately.
also agree with the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s proposal that
there be some time during the week, in accordance
with paragraph 5(c) of his
Weaver sought no particular orders. I therefore intend to adopt Ms
Pappel’s proposal for handovers to be at an agreed neutral
also agree with her proposed order in paragraph 19. If Mr Weaver elects to move
outside the metropolitan area, he will create
a significant distance between the
parties. He therefore should do most of the travelling. In my view, it is not
in K’s best
interests to have to travel backwards and forwards to a
country town such as Country Town B, but that is an issue for Mr Weaver to
consider in the future.
International travel:
Pappel wants to be able to take K to Country A for up to six weeks each year.
Mr Weaver wants to restrict that holiday to four
weeks. Given the distances
involved, and my earlier findings, I have no issue with the holiday being up to
six weeks. I therefore
propose to adopt Ms Pappel’s suggested orders. I
am content that her orders include Christmas Day in alternate years.
Weaver also wants to restrict such travel so as to not interfere with K’s
education. I am not satisfied that such a restriction
is necessary. Given his
age and my view that Ms Pappel will avoid clashing with school times to the
extent possible, there is no
need to impose such an order on her.
Weaver also seeks orders that Ms Pappel prove she has an ongoing lease in
Australia upon her return from any such holiday. This
appears to be part of a
method of ensuring that Ms Pappel does not travel to Country A and stay there
with K. I am satisfied that
Ms Pappel is not a flight risk. She has sought
permission from the court to relocate K to Country A. She has complied
with orders
in the past and I am satisfied she will comply in the future. In
any event, Country A is a Hague Convention country. I therefore
do not propose
to put in place this requested order.
similar reasons, I do not consider it necessary for Mr Weaver to retain
K’s passport. Realistically, it is only Ms Pappel
who would have the
financial capacity to travel overseas in the near future. Ms Pappel should,
therefore, be responsible for the
cost of the passport renewals.
Communication:
Pappel seeks orders in relation to communication between the parties. Mr Weaver
does not canvas this issue and, in my view, Ms
Pappel suggestions are
appropriate.
Various injunctions:
Pappel seeks various injunctions in relation to the way the parties are to
behave in the future. In my view, it is important
to make these orders to
ensure that both Ms Pappel and Mr Weaver understand their obligations. The
orders may assist in creating
a harmonious environment for K. I therefore
propose to adopt the order suggested in paragraph 26.
Independent Children’s Lawyer suggested that Ms Pappel be restrained
from moving outside a 50‑kilometre radius from
Perth. In my view,
there is insufficient evidence to justify such an order. The imposition of
equal shared parental responsibility
will also impress upon each party certain
obligations, including the requirement to consult with the other parent if
that parent
to move to another area and this would make it significantly more
difficult for the child to spend time with the other parent.
Extra-curricular activities:
Weaver seeks a range of orders that will allow his involvement in such
activities. In my view, an order for equal shared parental
responsibility and
the absence of any injunctions should allow him to be involved in such
activities. The independent children’s
lawyer, however, suggested an
order in paragraph 16 which, I consider to be sensible, and should alleviate any
future conflict over
these issues.
Family therapy:
Independent Children’s Lawyer proposed this. The single expert witness
indicated that Ms Pappel and Mr Weaver do not co‑parent,
have adopted a parallel parenting model. This effectively means that they make
their own decisions about K whilst he is
in their care and there is little
capacity to reach agreement about issues such as discipline, et cetera.
report at page 35 stated that
if concerns are noted or if the mother remains concerned about the
father’s parenting, or if [K] says or reports concerning
issues about the
father I recommend reportable family therapy by a psychologist experienced in
Family Court matters to help the parents
and child to adjust to the changes so
that they can co‑parent and communicate regarding child related matters
and ensure the
parents promote [K]’s relationship with the other
the mother’s concessions at the end of the trial and given that I have no
such concerns, in my view, no useful purpose
will be served by forcing these
parties to engage in family therapy.
parties have equal shared parental responsibility for [K Weaver] born [mid]
live with the mother.
spend time with the father:
(a) from 5 June 2020, and on each
alternate weekend thereafter, from the conclusion of school Friday until the
commencement of school
(b) the above alternate weekend regime applies only whilst the father lives
in the Perth metropolitan region. In the event he moves
outside of that
region, alternate weekend time is to end at 5.00 pm on Sunday;
(c) upon the proviso that the father lives in the Perth metropolitan region,
there be additional time from the conclusion of school
until 6:30 pm each
(d) the above alternate weekend regime be suspended during all school holiday
periods, during which [K] spend time with the father
for the first week of the
school holiday periods at the end of terms one, two and three in each year;
(e) in 2020, and in each alternate year thereafter, from 12 noon
on 25 December until 5.00 pm on 26 December;
(f) in 2021, and in each alternate year thereafter, from 5.00 pm
on 24 December until 12 noon on 25 December;
(g) in 2021, and in each alternate year thereafter, from 9.00 am on Good
Friday until 6.00 pm Easter Saturday;
(h) in 2022, and in each alternate year thereafter, from 6.00 pm on Easter
Saturday until 6.00 pm on Easter Monday;
(i) notwithstanding any other order to the contrary, on the weekend of
Father’s Day in each year from 5.00 pm on the Saturday
immediately
preceding Father’s Day until 5.00 pm on Father’s Day;
(j) [K’s] time with the father be suspended on the Mother’s Day
weekend in each year until 5.00 pm on Mother’s Day;
(k) on [K’s] birthday in each year, from after school, or from 12 noon
if his birthday does not fall on a school day, until
6.30 pm with the parent he
is not normally living with or spending time with on that date;
(l) on the father’s birthday in each year from the conclusion of school
or 3:30 pm if a non‑school day until 6.30 pm;
(m) [K’s] time with the father be suspended on the mother’s
birthday in each year, from the conclusion of school or 3:30
non-school day until 6.30 pm;
(n) at such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
that do not take place at school are to take place at an agreed neutral venue
between the parties’ respective homes.
the event the father relocates to any place outside the Perth metropolitan
region, then handovers are to take place at a location
nominated by the mother
close to her home.
mother be at liberty to travel to [Country A] with the child on one occasion in
each year for up to 6 weeks, as follows:
(a) commencing 2020 and in
each alternate year thereafter, such travel may include Christmas Day;
(b) in 2021 and in each alternate year thereafter, such travel must exclude
the period of 24 to 26 December; and
(c) the mother is to notify the father at least 28 days prior to her intended
travel of the dates of travel.
any such travel, whether within Australia or outside Australia, each party is to
ensure that [K] is contactable via Skype,
FaceTime or such other video
communication method as is agreed, on at least two occasions per week.
as provided for in these orders, each party is restrained and an injunction is
hereby granted restraining each of them from
removing the child from the State
of Western Australia and the Commonwealth of Australia without the prior written
consent of the
other parent (such consent to not be unreasonably withheld) or of
parties do all things and sign all documents necessary to obtain and then renew
the child’s Australian passport as and when
that becomes necessary, with
the mother to meet the cost of renewal of the child’s passport.
communication between the parties is to be by email or text message
(or telephone call in the case of an emergency) and relate
only to matters
concerning the care, welfare and development of the child.
party shall notify the other party as soon as possible following any change in
their email address or mobile telephone number.
a without admission basis, each party be restrained by injunction and an
injunction is hereby granted restraining each of them
(a) denigrating the other party or their family, in front of
the child or within his hearing and each party use their best endeavours
ensure other persons do not denigrate the other party in the presence of the
child, and will immediately withdraw the child from
any situation in which any
such denigration occurs;
(b) discussing these orders, proposals or any details all documents relating
to the family court proceedings with the child;
(c) showing the child copies of any Family Court documents, including
solicitor correspondence, or any other documents created for
the purposes of the
Family Court proceedings, or causing or allowing any third party to do so;
(d) publicly posting any comments, whether derogatory, inflammatory or
demeaning, on Facebook, or any other social media platform
party, their families, partners, de facto spouses, or spouses or causing or
allowing any other person to do the same;
(e) causing or imposing any physical punishment on the child.
13 The proceedings otherwise be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Magistrates Court of
Western Australia at 150 Terrace
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (419 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter