URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/174.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE and CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES & ORS [2025] FCWA 174 (28 July 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE and CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES & ORS
[2025] FCWA 174
28 JULY 2025
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
5876 of 2025
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES & ORS
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
WELFARE JURISDICTION – Where the child has been diagnosed with [redacted]
leukaemia and has been taken into provisional
protection and care – Where
orders are sought to secure the provision of treatment in circumstances where
the medical evidence
is that without such treatment the child will likely
succumb to the disease and die within a few weeks – Where the child's
father is opposed to the proposed treatment and has taken active steps to
prevent it - Where the father describes the child as the
"property" of the
parents – Orders made to secure the ongoing hospitalisation and treatment
of the child until further
Legislation:
and Community Services Act 2004
Family Court Act 1997
Representation:
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
No Appearance
Independent Children's Lawyer
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's Office
First Respondent
Department of Communities
Second Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Third Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Legal Aid Western Australia - Family Law Division
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Child and Adolescent Health Service and Chief Executive Officer of
Department of Communities & Ors
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Court Act 1997
This copy of the Court's Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Court Act 1997
(WA) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
[Child A], who was born in [2012], is the son of [Mr Edwards]
("the father") and [Ms Torres] ("the
A has been diagnosed with [redacted] Leukaemia. Concerns arose as to his
access to treatment, and in [July 2025], he was taken
into provisional
protection and care by a relevant officer pursuant to
Children and Community Services Act 2004
("the Act"). That section of
the Act permits a child to be taken into provisional protection and care if the
relevant officer suspects
on reasonable grounds that there is an immediate and
substantial risk to the child’s well-being.
that process, Child A was placed in the provisional care of the Chief Executive
Officer of the Department of Communities ("the
Department"). Subject to
any interim order, the CEO of the Department thereby had responsibility for
Child A’s day-to-day
care, welfare and development to the exclusion of any
other person. That responsibility included responsibility for making
of the Act sets out the duties of the CEO of the Department when a child,
like Child A, who was not previously in care is taken into
provisional
protection and care pursuant to
If the CEO decides not to make a
protection application or other relevant application under the Act, then the
child must be returned
to the care of a parent or other person who is providing
day-to-day care as soon as practicable. If the CEO decides to make a
application or other relevant application under the Act, that must be
done as soon as practicable and, in any event, not more than
two working days
after the child is taken into provisional protection and care.
CEO made a protection application promptly in [July 2025]. That
application was listed for an initial hearing in the Children's
Court of Western
Australia [two days later] ("first Children’s Court hearing").
[July 2025], Child A was transported urgently to [Hospital A]. He was
reviewed by the on-call consultant paediatric oncologist
[Dr A]. He presented
as profoundly pancytopenic. In layman's terms, leukaemia cells were
significantly present in his bone marrow,
such that haemoglobin and neutrophils
which protect the body including from infection were not being produced to
adequate levels,
and he was at extreme risk. With the consent of the CEO,
Child A undertook diagnostic procedures which confirmed that leukaemia
were present in his spinal fluid.
presence of leukaemia cells in Child A’s spinal fluid meant that standard
treatment by way of intravenous chemotherapy
necessarily had to be supplemented
with the administration of chemotherapy via lumbar puncture. That is so,
as the standard administration
of intravenous chemotherapy via a Double Lumen
Broviac does not reach the spinal fluid.
the CEO had the necessary statutory authority to consent to immediate treatment
required by Child A, the Child and Adolescent
Health Service considered it
prudent to commence proceedings in this court on an urgent basis, prior to the
first hearing date in
the Children's Court. An application was filed
in [July 2025], naming the CEO as the First Respondent, and Child
A’s parents
as the Second and Third Respondents respectively.
The first Family Court hearing
application was heard urgently after hours by the Chief Judge, who took oral
evidence from Dr A and received Dr A’s letter
of report of the same date
into evidence. Her Honour acknowledged that the hearing was proceeding on an ex
parte basis, as Child
A’s parents had not been served with it nor had an
opportunity to be heard. That said, her Honour was informed that Child
A’s mother would consent to the proposed treatment, but that Child
A’s father likely opposed it.
considered the report of Dr A and heard [redacted] the evidence, the Chief Judge
was satisfied that it was appropriate to
make orders relating to Child A’s
welfare pursuant to
Family Court Act 1997
to ensure that Child A
received the treatment he needed urgently and continued to receive it. The
treatment involves an initial
cycle of multiagent chemotherapy and requires
Child A to remain in hospital as an inpatient for supportive care. It is
anticipated
that he will need to remain in hospital for four to six weeks at
this stage. His response to the first cycle of chemotherapy will
indicate what treatment will then need to proceed; in some cases, a bone marrow
transplant can be required. Most children who do
not require a transplant
proceed with a further three cycles of inpatient multiagent chemotherapy.
Each such cycle involves 4 to
6 weeks in hospital as an inpatient because of the
level of supportive care required.
supportive care includes the need for isolation within the hospital with
specific provisions made to protect from exposure to
possible infection, pain
management, nutritional support, intravenous antifungal treatment and
antibiotics, blood product support
and potentially admission into intensive
evidence of Dr A, which the Chief Judge accepted, was that Child A’s need
for treatment amounted to an emergency, and that
without such treatment he would
likely succumb to the disease and die within a few
Chief Judge accordingly made orders to secure that treatment for Child A, and
enabling the clinical staff at Hospital A to make
necessary treatment decisions.
Her Honour also ordered that Child A remain at Hospital A until discharged with
the consent of the
clinical staff unless otherwise directed by those clinical
staff. Her Honour otherwise made procedural orders, and orders for the
application made by the hospital and supported by the CEO of the Department to
be served on Child A’s parents. The application
was otherwise adjourned
to this afternoon for further hearing. Both parents were served [two days
after] the hearing before the
Chief Judge.
The proceedings in the Children’s Court
At the first Children’s Court hearing at which the protection application
came on, an interim order was made pursuant
s 133(2)(b)
of the Act for
Child A to remain in the provisional protection and care of the Department. A
further order was made, for the avoidance
of doubt, confirming that the
Department may consent to medical treatment for Child A, and that where that
treatment relates to his
leukaemia diagnosis it is to be consistent with any
medical treatment directed pursuant to the orders made by the Chief Judge
at the first Family Court hearing.
first Children’s Court hearing was otherwise adjourned to [six days
later] for mention, with the record noting that the
Department is to advise the
Children's Court as to whether it intends to pursue the protection application
in that court, in light
of the orders already made by the Chief Judge.
as matters presently stand:
(a) Child A is under the provisional protection and care of the Department, and
the CEO has the responsibility for making decisions
regarding his day-to-day
care, welfare and development, including as to medical treatment or procedures,
to the exclusion of any
other person;
(b) interim orders have nevertheless been made in this court, with the consent
of the CEO, to facilitate Child A’s continuing
treatment as directed
by the clinical staff at Hospital A, and the continuation of his admission there
as an inpatient until discharged
with the consent of those clinical staff;
(c) mirror orders have been made in the Children's Court to the same effect;
(d) Child A’s parents have not yet been heard by the Court other than to
the extent that the father made submissions today;
(e) the learned Magistrate in the Children's Court has made clear his
expectation that the Department will consider whether to proceed
protection application in that court, in circumstances where orders have been
made on the application of Child and Adolescent
Health Services in this court;
(f) the CEO has confirmed that the Department consents to a continuation of the
orders made by the Chief Judge on the application
of the Child and Adolescent
Health Service at the first Family Court hearing and to the further orders
sought today, that consent
being required by
Family Court Act
The hearing this afternoon
father attended the hearing this afternoon. He stated that his position was
that Child A is his "property" and the "property"
of his mother, and has been
"kidnapped" by the State. He resisted the proposition that Child A is a child,
saying rather that he
is a boy. He said that he attended the hearing in
order to retrieve him.
father stated further that he charges for his time at a rate of $200 per hour,
and that he would propose to render a bill to
me should I make any order
directed to him. He made other submissions consistent with the approach taken
by persons who describe
themselves as sovereign citizens. Those
submissions do not require further recital.
stood the matter down to ensure that the father had available to him copies of
all relevant documents, so that he could make any
further submissions he wished
to make. Those documents were:
(a) the application filed by the Child and Adolescent Health Service in July
(b) the orders made by the Chief Judge that day;
(c) the orders made by the Children's Court at the first Children’s Court
hearing, the father having confirmed to me that he
did not attend that
(d) the letter sent to the Court today by the CEO confirming that the Department
consents to a continuation of the orders made by
the Chief Judge;
(e) a Minute of Orders now proposed by the Child and Adolescent Health Service.
That Minute seeks the continuation of the orders
made by the Chief Judge until
further order, and injunctions restraining the father from interfering with or
obstructing the provision
of medical treatment or care to Child A by staff at
Hospital A, and from removing or attempting to remove Child A from Hospital A
other than with the prior written consent of the Child and Adolescent Health
Service, or an order of the Court. A further injunction
is sought compelling
the father to comply with any reasonable directions made by Hospital A staff;
(f) the affidavit sworn today by [Dr B], a consultant paediatrician and Senior
worker at the relevant Unit at Hospital A.
affidavit had annexed to it notes taken by hospital staff over the last several
days. In short, the hospital staff report that
the father removed Child
A’s intravenous line through which chemotherapy was being administered,
apparently having cut it,
and taped the end of the intravenous line into a urine
bottle. The treatment fluids which should have been entering Child A’s
system were instead being discharged into that urine bottle.
hospital notes record that the father has stated that he does not consent to
chemotherapy for Child A, and that he videoed staff
despite them making clear
that they did not consent to that. He is recorded as having written signs
saying "I do not consent to
any man or woman touching my body", apparently with
a view to Child A signing that document. Child A is recorded as having
referred to himself as having been kidnapped.
the request of hospital staff, police interacted with the father and at their
request he left the hospital room. He was advised
by police not to return to
the hospital for the remainder of the relevant day and night, failing which he
would be considered to
be trespassing, but it does not appear that a formal move
on notice was issued.
is on that basis that the Child and Adolescent Health Service seeks injunctions
restraining the father from interfering in Child
A’s treatment and from
removing him from Hospital A.
his further submissions this afternoon the father did not dispute the account
given by the hospital. He otherwise confirmed his
position as earlier
summarised in these reasons.
Disposition
medical evidence clearly supports the steps taken by the hospital to date. The
evidence given by Dr A before the Chief Judge
at the first Family Court hearing,
which I have reviewed, was clear and compelling. Critically, that evidence
made it clear that
any delay in administering the appropriate treatment to Child
A would place him at grave risk. It is on that basis that the Department
its initial action, that the Chief Judge made her orders, and that the
Children’s Court made its confirmatory orders at
Children’s Court hearing.
father is entitled to his beliefs. He is entitled to advance them in this court
and in the Children's Court, and he will be
given the opportunity to do so.
That said, it is clearly appropriate for Child A’s treatment to continue
without interference
unless and until the father persuades this court to set
aside the orders already made facilitating that treatment, or the proceedings
this court are discontinued and appropriate orders are made in the
Children’s Court.
injunctions sought today do not prevent the father from spending time with Child
A in hospital, at least at this stage. They
seek only to ensure that in doing
so, he does not interfere with Child A’s treatment or therapy in any way,
that he does not
seek to remove Child A from hospital, and that he complies
with directions made by
hospital staff.
said, the father must understand that if he does not comply with the orders to
be made today, and if he seeks to interfere in
any way with Child A’s
treatment other than as permitted by an order of this or the Children’s
Court, then the Child
and Adolescent Health Service may consider that it has no
option but to take legal steps to prevent him from attending at the hospital
premises at all. At a time when Child A clearly needs the support of his
parents, it is to be hoped that the father will not act
in a way that puts the
Service in that position.
will be orders until further order in terms of the Minute filed today.
parties, which of course includes both parents whether individually or together,
are at liberty to seek a relisting to vary or
set aside the orders already made
at short notice. I record that I have explained to the father that if he or the
mother seek to
take that course, they will need to file a Response to the
application already brought by the Child and Adolescent Health Service,
out clearly the orders they seek, and an affidavit in support setting out the
evidence upon which they rely.
record further that the Independent Children's Lawyer sought a broad suppression
and non-publication order pursuant to
Family Court Act
. I was not satisfied that the order in the broad terms sought
should be made on the evidence presently available, bearing in mind
well‑established principles that:
(a) Safeguarding the public interest in open justice is a primary objective
required to be taken into account in considering making
any such order;
(b) The grounds upon which a Court may make an order are restricted only to
those within the four sub‑paragraphs of
, and in all cases
the order must be "necessary" to achieve the particular purpose; and
(c) The suppression or non-publication order itself must specify the ground or
grounds upon which it is made.
Noting the consent of the CEO, Department of Communities to these
Until further order of the Court
the avoidance of doubt, the orders made by the Honourable Justice Sutherland at
the first Family Court hearing in the proceedings
remain in place.
a without admission as to need basis, the Second Respondent father, [redacted],
be restrained by injunction and an injunction is
hereby granted restraining him
(a) Interfering with or obstructing the provision of medical treatment or care
to the child, [Child A], born in 2012, by staff at
[Hospital A];
(b) Removing or attempting to remove said child from [Hospital A] save with the
prior written consent of the Applicant or order of
Second Respondent must comply with any reasonable directions made by [Hospital
parties, any other interested person, any media, and any person having knowledge
of the proceedings be and are restrained by injunction
from publishing or
permitting to be published any account of the proceedings, including reference
to any evidence or submission made
in the proceeding, in any manner that would
identify the child, [Child A], born in 2012, the subject of the proceedings,
either parent,
any other party to the proceedings, any witness, or any person
providing treatment to the child.
oral application of the Independent Children’s Lawyer for a suppression
order is otherwise dismissed.
documents required to be served on the parents or either of them may be served
on them by email to [redacted].
service of the orders made today on the Second Respondent father prior to
enforcement is dispensed with.
parties are at liberty to seek a relisting to vary or set aside these orders,
and the orders made on the first Family Court hearing,
at short notice.
said proceedings are otherwise adjourned generally.
reasons are the reasons for decision delivered on 28 July 2025, edited in places
but only as to correct grammatical errors and
some infelicity of expression
without variation to the substance thereof.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Family Court of Western Australia.
During this hearing the father
indicated that both his name and Child A’s are spelled differently to what
is contained in the
documents filed [redacted]. No birth certificate for Child
A is presently filed. I adopt the spelling used in the documents filed
orders made to date both in this Court and in the Children’s Court, and
mean no disrespect to the father in doing
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
[redacted] During this
hearing, the father indicated that he and the mother were not legally married,
albeit they had a ceremony
attended by friends and regard themselves as married.
The relevant provisions of the
Family Court Act
are identical in any
(Suppression and Non-Publication Orders)
[2015] FamCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter