URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/226.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NEVILLE and BOWEN [2025] FCWA 226 (24 September 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
NEVILLE and BOWEN
[2025] FCWA 226
DELIVERED :
24 SEPTEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
7350 of 2016
PROPERTY - Where during a long
marriage the parties were both injured in a serious motor vehicle accident and
individually received
damages awards as a result – Where the wife alleges
relevant family violence both before and after the motor vehicle accident
– Where the injuries suffered by the husband caused behavioural changes,
which impacted on the contributions necessarily made
by the wife – Where
subsequent to separation the wife acquired interests in trusts originating at
the instigation of her late
father – Where both parties contend for
significant "addbacks" - Where those contentions would have been untenable even
to recent legislative amendments and the decision in
Shinohara &
Shinohara -
Discussion of relevant principles, particularly in relation to
the treatment of paid legal fees and interim property distributions
Turns on its own
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Provision Act
Representation:
Ms T Farmer SC
Dr R Ingleby
Solicitors:
Mills Oakley
Kim Wilson & Co
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Neville and Bowen
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court
(WA)) or to record a variation of the orders pursuant to r 311 of the
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
long-running proceedings between [Ms Neville] ("the wife") and [Mr Bowen] ("the
husband") as to the alteration of their property
interests went to trial
commencing [in early] July 2025. At the conclusion of the trial [three days
later in] July 2025, I reserved
my decision.
23 July 2025, the Full Court delivered judgment in
Shinohara &
That decision dealt with matters potentially relevant to the determinations
required between these two parties, and in respect of
which I considered it
appropriate to give them the opportunity to make submissions. The parties
sought to take up that opportunity
and agreed a timetable within which they
would do so. The husband filed written submissions on 15 August 2025 and
the wife filed
written submissions on 5 September 2025.
parties were both born in 1964. While neither is now working, they are
well-qualified professional people – the husband
[health professional] and the wife as a [specialised clinician].
They began living together in 1995, married in [1996], and
in [2016]. They were divorced in [2021]. They have two adult children,
[Olivia] who is now 27 and [Emily] who is 26.
identification of the interests of the parties in property, the assessment of
their respective contributions, and the consideration
of their current and
likely future financial circumstances are made more complicated by several
parties were involved in a serious motor vehicle accident [in late] 2014.
Both suffered significant injuries, which continue
to affect them. Both pursued
claims for damages with mixed outcomes that are outlined in more detail
later in these Reasons. In
short, the husband received significantly more
in damages than did the wife.
progress of these proceedings was necessarily delayed to await the outcome of
those claims. Olivia and Emily also pursued damages
husband is now the sole owner of the family home [at an address in Suburb A]
("the [family home]"). The family home was previously
in joint names. The
proceeds of sale of a property previously owned by the wife [at an address in
Suburb B] ("the [Commercial Property]")
are presently preserved in an
account ("the [Commercial Property proceeds]").
parties are the only members of the self-managed [Neville Bowen Pension
Fund], and the husband is the only member of a separate
fund, the [Mr Bowen
Pension Fund].
wife is a beneficiary of [a Discretionary Trust], which was established at the
instigation of her late father [Paul Neville]
in 2021. She says that the
Discretionary Trust was established with an initial payment from her father, and
that Olivia and Emily
subsequently paid their own damages awards into the trust
by way of loan. She says that all distributions from the trust to date
been exclusively for the benefit of Olivia and Emily. As will be seen, that
statement by the wife tells only part of the story.
wife is also a beneficiary of [a Testamentary Trust] ("the [Testamentary
Trust]"). Her father died in 2022 and his estate is
the corpus of the trust. It
is primarily comprised of a property [in Suburb C] ("the [Testamentary
Trust Property]"), in which the
wife currently lives with Emily, and a
motor vehicle.
The contentions of the parties and relief sought
Contributions – the positions of the parties as
expressed at trial
difficulty is faced in expressing in clear terms the contentions of the parties
and the assessments of contributions which they
wife contends that the parties "made similar initial contributions" and
"approximately equal contributions to the acquisition,
maintenance and
conservation of the matrimonial assets and resources" during cohabitation. That
said, she contends that because
of the husband's conduct, particularly but not
exclusively after the motor vehicle accident, her contributions were made more
Overall, nevertheless, she contends that the contributions of the
parties of all forms over the entirety of the relationship and
up to trial
should be assessed as being equal.
husband contends that the parties should each, in effect, retain the damages
awards received by them. In his Papers for the
Judge, he contended that
"after the parties each retain their respective payments received as a result of
their personal injury sustained
by each of them, their contributions from the
date of marriage up to 29 June 2018 [should] be assessed as
Elsewhere in the same
document, he said that he had "admitted for the purposes of the proceedings that
the parties' contributions
were equal from the date of the marriage to the date
of his Affidavit filed on 29 June 2019." Leaving aside the typographical error
as to the date of his Affidavit, those two positions expressed in the same
document were potentially inconsistent, where the pursuit
of the husband's claim
for damages had commenced prior to the date identified.
answer to a question from me, counsel confirmed that the husband contends that,
but for the respective damages awards, the contributions
of the parties up
to the date of trial would appropriately be regarded as equal. On his case, it
would not be just and equitable
for the wife to, in effect, receive "a share" of
the damages he received "when the purpose of the damages is to compensate him."
He contends that the contributions of the parties in all forms over the entirety
of the relationship and up to trial should be assessed
in the proportions of
57.5 percent to him and 42.5 percent to the wife.
his written submissions filed on 15 August 2025 as to the impact of
the husband sought to alter his
expressed position in relation to the assessment of contributions as
summarised above. He did so
in recognition that the approach for which he had
previously advocated, described in those submissions as having "relied on the
of addbacks to increase the size of the pool", by the addition of
certain sums representing funds no longer held by the parties,
was untenable.
As will be seen, that approach was always untenable, and was not made so by
. A "pool" of existing property available for division cannot,
and never could be, "increased in size" by reference to non-existent
her written submissions filed on 5 September 2025, the wife submitted that
"stands prima facie for the proposition that 'add backs' as
they stood prior to [the recent legislative] amendments... were extinguished".
Having said that, she submitted that while "add backs' are not to be
included in the asset and liabilities schedule... of the parties
continue to be relevant pursuant to
submitted in effect that the mathematical approach to the consideration of
individual contributions apparently contended for
by the husband was
misconceived.
Prospective factors
wife contends that, because of the injuries they suffered in the motor vehicle
accident, neither party can return to work. The
husband disputes that,
asserting that the wife has retained an earning capacity. He points to findings
to that effect made in the
litigation regarding her damages claim. The wife
says those findings were made without evidence to the contrary from her treating
psychiatrist being adduced. She says that evidence was available at the relevant
time and that she had expected it to be adduced
by her then lawyers.
wife says that an adjustment of five percent in her favour to what would
otherwise be the contributions-based division of property
should be made.
Notwithstanding his assertion as to the wife's earning capacity, the husband
says that there should be no such adjustment
in favour of either
The division of property
in-specie division of property is largely noncontentious.
husband lives in the family home and seeks to retain it. The wife is
content for him to do so, provided that does not inhibit
his ability to pay her
the cash adjustment which she seeks. It is common ground that the wife should
retain the Commercial Property
proceeds and pay a Capital Gains Tax liability
from those proceeds.
parties are the only members of the Neville Bowen Pension Fund. It is
common ground that the wife should retain the full benefit
of her member
interest. She says that her interest should be rolled out, and that the husband
should retain his member interest
in the fund and control of it. The husband's
position at the start of the trial was that a superannuation splitting order
be made in favour of the wife, to see her receive 100 percent of his
member interest in the fund, from which he would then resign.
By the conclusion
of the trial counsel acknowledged that, if the cash payment the husband
sought from the wife was to be made, there
would be no utility in that
splitting order. That was so as, in those circumstances, the wife would need to
access the funds split
in her favour in order to make the payment.
is common ground that the wife should retain her beneficiary interests in the
Discretionary Trust and the Testamentary Trust,
albeit the extent and value of
those interests is in dispute. It is also common ground that the husband should
retain his interest
in the Mr Bowen Pension Fund. Subject only to specific
orders by which the wife seeks to recover some jewellery currently in the
possession of the husband,
common ground that each party should retain their own motor vehicles, chattels
and personal bank accounts including funds already
received by them by way of
interim alteration of property interests. Similarly, it is common ground that
the parties should retain
responsibility for liabilities in their name and
liabilities of any entity of which they are each to retain control.
real terms, therefore, the dispute is as to the amount of any cash adjustment to
be paid by one party to the other.
the initial premise that the superannuation splitting order he proposed was
made, at the commencement of trial the husband said
that to meet the overall
division for which he contends, the wife would need to pay him $684,895. If the
splitting order is not
made, the wife would need to pay him $189,737.
the premise that no superannuation splitting order is made, and she receives the
jewellery items she seeks, at the commencement
of trial the wife said that to
meet the overall division for which she contends the husband will need to pay
her $1,050,776.
in dollar terms the positions of the parties were apart by approximately
$1.24 million. In circumstances where in percentage
terms their positions
as to the appropriate division of the available property are apart by
12.5 percent of the identified total,
that might be thought to lead to a
conclusion that the value of the property available for division is something
approaching $10
million. It is not. Rather, the apparent disparity between the
positions of the parties expressed in percentage terms and their
positions in
dollar terms arises because of a dispute as to the extent of the wife's interest
in the property of the Testamentary
Trust, and a slew of addbacks for which each
party contended.
the time of trial, and without allowing for the costs of the trial itself, the
parties had spent something in the vicinity of
$1 million in legal fees
between them.
The legal principles
Alteration of property interests
Court has a wide discretion conferred by
(Cth) ("the Act"). That discretion must be exercised in accordance
with legal principle, and without assuming that the parties'
interests in assets
are or should be different from those determined by common law and
Court must be satisfied that it is just and equitable to make an order adjusting
existing property interests. That requirement
is readily satisfied in most
cases, including this one. The parties are long separated, and both seek to
discontinue any joint ownership
of property. Steps to give effect to that have
already been taken by the making of interim orders.
considering what order (if any) should be made, the Court is required
(1) identify the existing legal and equitable rights and interests in any
property of the parties or either of them, and their existing
liabilities;
(2) take into account considerations as to contributions which are listed in
so far as they are
(3) take into account considerations relating to current and
future circumstances which are listed in
so far as they are
Court is required to consider the respective contributions of the parties, both
financial and non-financial, holistically over
the whole period to trial.
That does not lend itself to a strictly mathematical approach. The holistic
approach to the assessment
of contributions accommodates the wide range of
factual scenarios dealt with by the Court.
is no presumption that, even over the course of a long marriage, the
contributions of the parties are to be regarded as having
been equal. There is
no requirement for an entirely discrete consideration of the impact of initial
financial contributions, nor
that the contributions of the parties be quantified
at a particular past moment in time, whether by reference to the date of
commencement
of cohabitation or, for that matter, the date of separation.
is relevant in this case to bear in mind that
requires the
consideration of the contribution made by a party to the "welfare of the
family... including any contribution made in
the capacity of homemaker or
parent." The section contemplates a contribution to the welfare of the
family as being "something more
than a contribution in the capacity of homemaker
and/or parent".
As has been
observed, "whilst parenting as an occupation might stop or become less
burdensome once children become adults, the ongoing
role of both parents and
later grandparents is no less an ongoing
contribution".
contributions of the nature contemplated by
not automatically come to a halt when relevant children turn 18,
nor on separation.
the recent amendments to the Act, the Court must consider the effect of any
family violence on the ability of a party to make
contributions,
and on the current
and future circumstances of the party subjected or exposed to that
Those are matters
squarely raised on the wife's case.
in the Act requires the Court to express in percentage terms its assessment of
contributions, or its assessment of considerations
relating to current and
future circumstances, although that is often convenient and practical.
Similarly, nothing in the Act requires
the Court to allocate a percentage
entitlement of the property to each party. What is required is a conclusion
that the order proposed
to be made is just and equitable in all the
circumstances.
The evidence relied upon by the parties
wife relied on her affidavits accepted for filing on 20 February 2024 and
21 May 2024, and her Form 13 Financial Statement filed
on 17 June 2025. She
otherwise relied on the affidavit of her general practitioner [Dr Ross] filed on
19 April 2024, and the affidavit
of her psychiatrist [Dr Bernard] filed that
husband relied on his affidavit and Form 13 Financial Statement both filed on 9
parties jointly instructed a Single Expert Witness real-estate valuer, who
reported as to the value of the family home and the
Testamentary Trust Property.
Based on [the] reports, the values of those properties were agreed by the
parties for the purposes of
trial. [The real-estate valuer] was accordingly not
required to give evidence.
Observations to the evidence
assessment of the credibility of witnesses, relying solely or primarily on their
presentation in the witness box, is potentially
problematic in any case. To the
extent possible, credit findings should be grounded in objective analysis of the
evidence, rather
than personal impressions of the witness. While those personal
impressions can have a role to play, and can be pivotal where there
is a lack of
independent evidence, they must be considered with caution. The most confident
and articulate witness can be a liar;
the most hesitant witness can be truthful.
In addition, even absent trauma of the nature that these parties have
undoubtedly experienced,
memories, particularly of
events which occurred long ago, can be reconstructed without
intentional dishonesty.
this case, the ongoing disabilities suffered by the husband severely affected
his ability to give oral evidence. He struggles
to speak and to construct
coherent sentences. He is often unable to identify the relevant word for what
he seeks to describe; that
is not limited to adverbs and adjectives but extends
to simple nouns.
suffers from no similar disability.
the conclusion of the trial, I raised with counsel the question of whether my
assessment of the husband's credibility could be
informed in any way by his
presentation in the witness box. His counsel suggested that it could and that
it should inform a positive
finding. With respect, I disagree. Through no
fault of his own, the husband's presentation was such that it could not
confidently
be interpreted, nor inferences or conclusions drawn from it, by a
stranger without the relevant and specialised medical experience.
also raised with counsel the question of whether, in those circumstances, any
global assessment of the wife's credibility might
be informed by her
presentation in the witness box. Counsel suggested that it could. Counsel for
the husband pointed in that regard
to what he would consider to be a discrepancy
between the wife's presentation and that which might have been expected based on
evidence of Dr Bernard. Again, with respect I disagree. Where I
simply cannot assess the husband's presentation, any negative overall
drawn from the wife's presentation might work an injustice to her. To the
extent I might form a positive overall impression
from her presentation, that
might work an injustice to the husband.
conclusions as to credit, therefore, are driven primarily by reference to the
objective evidence, rather than by broad observations
of the presentation of the
parties in the witness box.
that context, as will be seen, some of the wife's evidence and conduct fell well
short of the level of candour and honesty required.
She gave false evidence as
to the amount of money deposited by Olivia and Emily into the Discretionary
Trust from their damages
claims; when she admitted to that in oral evidence at
trial, she did so at my direction and on the basis that a certificate under
Evidence Act 1906
(WA) would be given to her. She
admitted also taking active steps to distribute funds from the Discretionary
Trust once she became
aware that the husband's lawyers were enquiring about it.
Her evidence as to the husband's conduct towards her and their daughters
to the motor vehicle accident was inconsistent with her case in the civil
proceedings, during which she attributed the husband's
behaviour and alleged
family violence exclusively to the effect of his injuries.
professional witnesses gave their evidence in a straightforward and professional
manner. I accept that they were truthful,
and that the opinions they expressed
were genuinely held.
The existing interests of the parties in property and their
liabilities
parties conferred prior to trial. The extent of their interests in property,
the values of those interests and the amounts of
their liabilities were largely
agreed. While various amounts held by the husband in accounts were noted on the
joint schedule prepared
for trial as requiring vouching, and that task was
apparently not undertaken, they were not actively disputed by the wife in
submissions.
matters requiring determination in that regard are:
(1) the values of motor vehicles and chattels in the possession of each party;
(2) the value of a horse float and tack in the possession of the wife;
(3) the amount if any of a debt said by the husband to be owed by him to his
(4) the amount if any of a liability claimed to be owed by the wife in the form
of unpaid medical expenses; and
(5) the value of the wife's beneficiary interests in the Discretionary Trust and
the Testamentary Trust.
joint schedule filed by the parties indicated agreement as to the value of
furniture in the possession of the husband. No value
was attributed to
furniture and household items in the possession of the wife, nor to the
jewellery she seeks to recover and retain.
values of the motor vehicles and the horse float and tack were not the subject
of any admissible evidence. Accordingly, the
value can only be determined by
reference to admissions made against
husband seeks to retain the [Motor vehicle A] in his possession.
In his most recent sworn Form 13 Financial
he estimated the value
of that vehicle at $36,000. The wife contends that the vehicle has a current
value of $35,000. In fairness
to the husband, I adopt the lower figure.
wife seeks to retain the [Motor vehicle B] in her possession.
She estimates its value at $24,000. I accept that admission and
value. Similarly, she seeks to retain the horse float and tack, estimating them
to have a combined value of $5,000.
In the absence of admissible evidence to
the contrary I accept that admission and adopt that value.
are the most significant chattels. I otherwise accept the relevant admissions
against interest of each party in respect of
chattels they seek to
The alleged debt of the husband to his parents
his most recent Form 13 Financial Statement filed on 9 May 2024, the
husband said he had a liability described as "loan to parents"
(sic) estimated
at $21,000. No further detail was given and there is no mention of any such
liability in the husband's lengthy trial
affidavit filed the same day.
the joint schedule of assets and liabilities filed by the parties on the first
day of trial, the husband asserted a debt to his
parents again "estimated" at
$24,000. No evidence as to a precise amount, or the circumstances of any
advance was adduced. That
stood in contrast to evidence given earlier in the
proceedings as to a specific advance made by the husband's parents to assist him
in the period before he received his damages award, with an expressed
expectation of repayment, and his evidence at trial of having
the paucity of evidence, I am not satisfied that the husband presently has a
repayable liability to his parents in either of
amounts estimated.
The wife's alleged minor liabilities
was a dispute on the papers as to the current amount owed by the wife on her NAB
Visa credit card. The wife's figure as to
the amount of the liability was
actually lower than that noted on behalf of the husband. The absence of an
agreement as to the lower
figure likely reflects an oversight on the part of the
solicitors for the parties. I adopt the lower figure.
wife included on the joint schedule a figure of $2,584 said to represent "unpaid
medical expenses". That figure was not accepted
by the husband. The wife's
notation on the joint schedule referred to evidence given in her affidavit filed
on 21 May 2024 asserting
that liability. That evidence clarified that of
the outstanding invoices she had detailed in her trial affidavit, only two
remained outstanding totalling $2,583.50. However, in her Form 13
Financial Statement filed only shortly before trial, the wife
asserted that
any "outstanding medical expenses not agreed to be paid by ICWA" totalled
$9,183. No other detail was provided –
the evidence did not even go to
the extent of asserting that the expenses in question were related to injuries
sustained in the motor
vehicle accident.
matter and the discrepancy in her evidence was simply not addressed in
submissions at trial. I decline to make any finding
that the wife has unpaid
medical expenses in circumstances where I could not rationally attribute an
amount to them.
The Discretionary Trust
is common ground that the only asset of this trust is an amount of $378 in a
bank account. In those circumstances, for obvious
reasons it is tempting to
treat the dispute as de minimus.
fairness to the husband, however, I do not take that approach. That is so, as
he contends that the wife prematurely disposed
of property belonging to the
trust to avoid it being directly available for division between them. He
initially sought to notionally
add back a relevant figure for the purposes of
calculation, as if those funds were still held by the trust. In turn, he
that the assets of the trust should be regarded as being the property
of the wife at full value. That argument was amended in written
submissions filed after trial, to which I will return.
late as the commencement of the trial the wife did not concede that the assets
of the trust should be regarded as being her property
– but if they were,
she said it could only be to the extent of one third of their value given the
interests of the two adult
children. By the conclusion of the trial, her
counsel conceded that position was untenable, and that the property of the trust
be regarded as the wife's property.
was an appropriate concession for the following reasons.
Discretionary Trust was established by a discretionary trust deed executed [in]
April 2021. The wife is the appointor of the
trust. [A proprietary limited
company] is the trustee; the trust deed records that the wife is the sole
director and secretary of
that company, but she says that subsequently Olivia
was also appointed as a director. The wife acknowledges being the majority
shareholder
of the company.
wife, Emily and Olivia are the named beneficiaries of the trust. There is
a broad class of eligible beneficiaries to include
spouses, children and
relatives of the named beneficiaries. Indeed, the husband is an eligible
beneficiary, as a parent of Emily
and Olivia.
trust deed confirms the absolute discretion of the trustee as to any
distribution of income and capital. That discretion extends
to the addition and
removal of beneficiaries. Some of the trustee's powers can only be exercised
with the consent of the wife as
Accordingly,
the Discretionary Trust is under the effective control of the wife, and
distributions of capital and income can only
be made at the absolute discretion
of the corporate trustee which she controls. No beneficiary has an
entitlement to any part of
the trust fund; the discretion of the trustee is
unfettered. At all times it has unquestionably been open to the wife to effect
the distribution of the whole of the property and income of the trust to
herself. Indeed, she has made distributions to herself when
convenient,
including it would appear of nearly $80,000 to meet legal fees.
property of the trust is properly regarded as property of the wife. That
position is unchanged since the establishment of the
trust. Any premature
dissipation of trust property, if established, would thus represent dissipation
of property otherwise available
for division between the parties. As will be
seen, however, that does not mean that moneys already distributed should simply
added back for the purpose of calculations as if property still held by the
wife, as the husband initially contended, nor that the
modified approach he
proposed should be adopted.
The Testamentary Trust
Testamentary Trust was established by the will of the wife's late father. That
will was executed on 28 August 2017, after the
parties separated. The
wife and her father's friend and accountant, [Ms Whitney], were named as
joint executors and trustees. Paul
Neville passed away on 19 April
will provided for Paul Neville's residual estate to be held on trust for the
named primary beneficiaries (being the wife, Emily
and Olivia) and for a
wide range of descendants and others as eligible beneficiaries. The primary
beneficiaries hold the power of
appointment as to a trustee. Specific provision
is made to permit the primary beneficiaries, with the consent of the trustee, to
live in any home owned by the Testamentary
Relevantly,
the terms of the trust include the following provision under clause
The written consent of the Primary Beneficiary will be required before the
Trustee may ... (other than to or for the benefit of the
Primary Beneficiary or
equally between the Residuary Beneficiaries) ...
(i) allocate the [Testamentary Trust] capital;
the relevant provision under clause 5(e):
Where the power of appointment in respect of the [Testamentary Trust] is held by
more than one person, the Trustee may only exercise
a discretion:
(i) with the written consent; or
(ii) in favour of and for, as nearly as is practicable, the equal benefit,
of each of those persons who are also Beneficiaries.
finally, as relevantly provided under clause 5(h)(xvi):
My Trustee may from time to time appoint new Trustees and if thought fit to
increase the number of my Trustees.
the wife and Ms Whitney as the trustees of the Testamentary Trust, may only
exercise a discretion as nearly as practicable
for the equal benefit of the
wife, Emily and Olivia, or otherwise with the written consent of each of them.
It is on that basis
that the wife contends that her interest in the Testamentary
Trust is limited to one third of its value.
for the husband submitted that the wife, Olivia and Emily are "inextricably
interlinked", and further that I should find
that Olivia and Emily will
inevitably act at the direction of the wife, such that they should be regarded
as her "alter egos" when
considering the beneficial ownership of the property of
the Testamentary Trust. He suggested further that I should draw an adverse
inference from the failure of the wife to call either Olivia or Emily as
are obvious problems with those propositions. While the husband's own
relationships with Olivia and Emily are fractured, and
he would attribute much
of that to the wife's influence, that only goes so far. There is nothing in the
husband's trial affidavit
to even raise a contention that Olivia and Emily would
simply act at the direction of the wife in relation to the Testamentary Trust,
let alone to their own financial detriment. The finding sought is unsupported
by any evidence. That in turn means that the adverse
inference proposed
simply cannot be drawn – in circumstances where the relevant allegation
was not made by the husband in his
evidence, no inference can be drawn from the
wife's failure to call evidence from Olivia and Emily to refute it.
conclude that the wife's interest in the Testamentary Trust is property rather
than a financial resource and that the value of
that interest is one third of
the value of the entire property of that trust, after deduction of
liabilities.
the wife's evidence, the Testamentary Trust has a liability to her of $53,143 to
repay costs met by her to "maintain the estate."
That evidence was not
challenged. Accordingly, the net value of the Testamentary Trust must take that
liability into account, and
it must also be reflected as a personal asset of the
agreed value of the Testamentary Trust Property is $870,000. The only
other asset of the Testamentary Trust is the [Motor vehicle
C]. There is no
admissible evidence as to the value of that car, but it is admitted by the wife
to be $9,150 and I accept that admission.
After allowing for the debt to
the wife, the net value of the assets of the Testamentary Trust is $826,007.
The value of the wife's
one third interest is $275,336.
Disposition
reference to the findings above, and the otherwise agreed positions, I find that
the existing interests of the parties in property,
and the extent of their
liabilities, are as set out in the table which
appears below.
Assets and Liabilities
Husband's Assets
The family home
Westpac Choice Account ending [redacted]
NAB Classic Banking Account ending [redacted]
Westpac eSaver Account ending [redacted]
Westpac BT Cash Management Account ending [redacted]
Furniture and Personal Effects
Motor vehicle A
Funds held in Kim Wilson Trust Account
Total Assets:
Husband's Liabilities
Pepper Money
NAB Visa Account ending [redacted]
Total Liabilities
HUSBAND'S NET ASSETS
Wife's Assets
Interest in the Testamentary Trust – 1/3 interest
ANZ Bank Progress Saver Account ending [redacted]
NAB Account ending [redacted]
ANZ Bank Account ending [redacted]
Motor vehicle B (Reg No. [redacted])
Horse Float and Tack
Funds owed to the Wife by the Testamentary Trust
Interest in a proprietary limited company as trustee for the Discretionary
Total Assets:
Wife's Liabilities
NAB Visa Account ending [redacted]
Personal taxation liability arising from the capital gains associated with
the sale of the Commercial Property
Total Liabilities:
WIFE'S NET ASSETS
Joint Assets
NAB Classic Banking Account ending [redacted] (net proceeds of sale of
the Commercial Property)
TOTAL NET VALUE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY OF THE PARTIES
Neville Bowen Pension Fund Assets
1,750 ANZ Group Holdings Ltd Shares
575 BHP Group Ltd Shares
1,900 NAB Ltd Shares
500 Rio Tinto Ltd Shares
1,750 Westpac Banking Corp Shares
1,103 Woodside Energy Group Shares
NAB Business Account ending [redacted]
Income Tax Refundable
Total Assets
Neville Bowen Pension Fund Liabilities
Deferred Tax Liability
Sundry Creditors
Total Liabilities:
NEVILLE BOWEN PENSION FUND TOTAL NET ASSETS:
Mr Bowen Pension Fund Assets
Australian Shares
Shares held in fixed interests
Shares held in international equities
Shares held in managed funds
MR BOWEN PRIVATE PENSION FUND TOTAL ASSETS:
TOTAL NET VALUE OF PROPERTY AVAILABLE FOR DIVISION:
joint schedule tendered by the parties did not indicate any agreed value for the
individual member entitlements of the parties
in the Neville Bowen Pension Fund,
in circumstances where it was not common ground that any superannuation
splitting order should
be made. There was no clear evidence on that point,
albeit the financial statements for the fund for the year ended 30 June 2022
(being the only direct evidence on point) indicated that the individual member
entitlements were roughly equal. The matter was not
addressed by either party
my direction, the Principal Registrar wrote to the solicitors for the parties on
23 July 2025 drawing that issue to their attention
and advising that in the
absence of any agreed position, or a request for a relisting by a specified date
to address the matter,
I would proceed on the basis that the parties were
content for me to find that their individual member entitlements are equal.
parties conferred and reached an agreed position as to the values of their
individual member entitlements. I accept that agreed
this case, as in many others, issues arose as to the appropriate treatment of
property no longer owned by the parties, but which
was owned by them prior to
trial. While the Court's power is only to adjust existing interests in existing
property, circumstances
often arise where the disposal of property post
separation must be taken into account if a just and equitable order is to be
there are two approaches which were taken, at least prior to the recent
amendments to the Act. The Court was often asked
to notionally "addback" the
value of disposed property. That could be considered, but merely as an aid to
calculation in determining
the appropriate division of existing property. Error
could arise where a clear distinction was not drawn between that approach,
only to inform the broad exercise of discretion, and the sometimes-used
descriptor of "notional property".
where that clear distinction was drawn, the approach which was often taken could
be problematic. More recently, the Full
has firmly cautioned
against what it described as "the conceptually dubious practice of notional add
could arise where the parties, or the Court, injected that concept into the
required task of identifying the existing interests
of the parties in property.
For obvious reasons, property "that was owned at some time in the past but no
longer exists at the time
of trial, cannot be adjusted or
recent amendments to the Act make a number of relevant matters clear, without
otherwise departing from what was already established
Court must first identify the existing legal and equitable rights and interests
in any property of the parties or either of
The Court must take
into account the considerations relating to contributions listed at
, which includes a consideration of contributions made to the
acquisition, conservation or improvement of any property, whether or
parties still own it. The Court must also take into account the considerations
relating to current and future circumstances
includes a consideration of the effect of any material wastage of property or
financial resources, caused intentionally or
recklessly, and any liabilities
incurred by either party including the nature of those liabilities and the
circumstances relating
to them. Finally, what was
replicated in
- the Court must take into account any other fact or
circumstance which the justice of the case requires to be taken into
further question arises whether following the legislative amendments and the
recent decision in
, there remains a place for mathematical
calculations regarding property which no longer exists in the determination of
what orders
altering interests in existing property are just and equitable.
as already noted, confusion can arise where addbacks or related concepts are
injected into the fundamental first task of the
Court - the identification of
existing legal and equitable interests in property. The risk of that confusion
is nothing new.
Trevi & Trevi
Court said this:
The essence of a claim for add backs is that the asserted sum/s should be added
to the value of the existing property interests of
the parties and,
subsequent to the assessment of contributions
, (emphasis added) credited
to the spending party as part of the value of their assessed entitlements.
Doing so does not offend what
was emphasised by the High
Adding back
does not seek to create property interests that do not exist.
added) Rather, doing so emphasises that satisfying the respective requirements
and (4) can require an "accounting" or "balance sheet" exercise
for the purposes of
and (4) so as to include the value of the
dissipated property or expended sums within the total value of the parties'
existing interests
in property, and to credit the value of same against the
assessed entitlement of the dissipating or spending
my view, subject only to the effect of the recent amendments to the Act, that
remains an accurate statement of the law. While
the Full Court in
did not refer specifically to the paragraph just quoted,
neither did it suggest otherwise, nor suggest that any aspect of
was wrongly decided.
adding back has always been the "exception rather than the
Again, the Full Court in
did not suggest otherwise; rather, it expressed concern at the
"practice of notional add backs generally [continuing] unabated"
the Full Court observed in
Two fundamental premises emerge from
and the authorities
preceding it. First, "adding back" is a discretionary exercise. When the
discretion is exercised in favour of
adding back, it reflects a decision that,
exceptionally, in the particular circumstances of a case, justice and equity
requires it.
The second premise is its corollary: in cases that are not
"exceptional" justice and equity can be achieved, not by adding back,
exercise of a different discretion – usually by taking up the same as a
factor. Indeed, it has been said that the latter is "a
course which is, perhaps, technically more correct" than adding back to the
of existing interests in property.
my view, the very recent admonition of the Full Court in
reinforces the observations clearly
, while drawing attention to the now express relevant
provisions of the legislation.
first key point, which has been unchanged for years, is that there is no such
thing as "notional property". The Court can only
make orders altering interests
in existing property.
second point, which again in my view is unchanged, is that mathematical
calculations are properly to be avoided in the necessary
holistic assessment of
contributions. That applies not only to purported addbacks, but also (for
example) to considerations of the
impact of particular forms of
contribution.
reinforced not only by the reference in
to any claim for addbacks
being considered "subsequent to the assessment of
contributions",
emphasis given to the point by the Full Court in
, as to the
holistic approach remaining applicable, and that (citations
The proper approach to assessment of contributions ... Is not a mathematical
exercise, but rather involves the identification and
assessment of all of the
parties' respective contributions, in a holistic way across the course of the
relationship and in the post
separation period to the point of assessment. When
engaging in such holistic assessment, all contributions must be weighed
collectively
and not by way of compartmentalising one against the other or the
it is in my view clear that the mathematical approach to the consideration of a
specific form of contribution, as proposed
by the husband in his written
submissions, cannot be adopted. Again, in my view, that is unchanged either by
the recent legislative
amendments or by
question then is whether a mathematical approach can inform the required
consideration of wastage under
, or the required consideration of
any other relevant fact or circumstance required to be taken into account in
order to do justice,
as contemplated by
s 79(5)(v).
considerations, like the consideration of contributions, require a holistic
approach. No one consideration listed under
inherently takes
precedence over others. The relevance of each consideration in the facts of the
particular case, and the relative
weight to be given to them, must be the
subject of that holistic approach.
that is understood, and the process adopted by a Judge in making the necessary
"leap from words to figures"
does not muddy or obscure that understanding, in my view there is nothing
inherently objectionable in that process including limited
mathematical
calculations designed only to inform the required holistic consideration.
such approach, however, should be cautious. An approach which simply serves to
assist and clarify the required overall exercise
of discretion is one thing; an
approach which risks attributing disproportionate weight to considerations which
might lend themselves
to a mathematical calculation, over considerations which
might not, is to be avoided.
the Full Court cites without demur the observation in
Vass v Vass
"there is no error committed
in adjusting the parties' actual
property interests
by a calculation
(emphasis added) involving notionally
adding back into the pool sums which have been dissipated by the
issues which commonly arise, and which are unlikely other than in unusual
circumstances to fall for consideration pursuant to
invite consideration pursuant to
s 79(5)(v).
Those are the questions
of paid legal fees and interim property adjustments. In my view, nothing in the
decision in
alters that, other than to reinforce that any
consideration does not occur at the first step identified in
legal fees have historically "[occupied] a particular position in the
consideration of addbacks by reason of s [114UB(1)] of
Against the
background of s 114UB(1) the Court has traditionally been alert to consider
notionally adding back legal fees paid from
monies which would otherwise have
been properly available for division between the parties, and which were not
generated by one party
post separation from his or her own endeavours, so as to
avoid a contribution by one party to the legal fees of the other, other
a proper application of
s 114UB(2).
The need to be alert to that issue remains,
regardless of the approach taken to its consideration.
it is not uncommon for interim orders altering property interests to be
made, particularly in the course of long‑running
proceedings. Where
those orders effect equal interim distributions to the parties, little
difficulty arises. Where, however, they
effect a distribution only to one
party, or otherwise unequal distributions, attention must still be paid to them
in determining
the justice and equity of the final outcome. That will often be
appropriately achieved by direct reference to the value of the property
by either party as a result of that interim alteration, whether or not that
property still exists.
parties each contended at trial for addbacks of significant amounts. As will be
seen, their contentions are problematic. In
my view, frankly, they were
inherently problematic even had the case been decided before the recent
legislative amendments, and before
simplicity, in the discussion below I adopt the shorthand of "addbacks"; by
that, I refer only to the undertaking of mathematical
calculations as to either
wastage, or other facts and circumstances which the justice of the case requires
to be taken into account,
and even then only as an aid to the required holistic
consideration of the matters listed in
The wife's contentions
the reasons that follow, I do not propose to adopt any of the addbacks proposed
by the wife.
wife initially submitted that an amount of $665,758 should be notionally added
back as if retained by the husband, representing
the amount paid by him for
legal fees in these proceedings up to the commencement of trial. She submitted
that an amount of $273,000
should be similarly added back as if retained by
Historically,
the exercise of notionally adding back paid legal fees to inform the exercise of
discretion in adjusting interests
in existing property, in circumstances
where the fees were met from capital rather than post separation personal
exertion income,
was largely noncontentious and uncomplicated. That is not
the case here, even before any consideration of
is so, as the figure initially proposed by the wife to be notionally added back
as if retained by her represents only an undefined
portion of the legal fees she
has incurred and paid in these proceedings. It is described as her "best
estimate" of "net legal fees
paid to date ... from capital."
proceedings were commenced by the wife in November 2016. At that point, she was
represented by O'Sullivan Davies. That firm
acted for her until it filed a Form
9 Notice of Ceasing to Act on 21 October 2022. It may reasonably be
inferred that considerable
work had been undertaken, given that the matter had
progressed to the point of a trial being listed in October
wife was then represented by McClelland Lawyers, who filed a Form 8 Notice of
Address for Service on her behalf on 26 October
2022. That firm
remained on the record until 19 June 2023, when the wife's current lawyers filed
a Form 8 Notice of Address for
Service on her behalf.
Doing the best that I can based on the costs notification letter of the wife's
lawyers, most of the $273,000 estimate relates to
fees for her current
solicitors and counsel. It does not appear to include any amount for fees paid
to O'Sullivan Davies over a
period of nearly six years, McClelland Lawyers over
a period of some eight months, or disbursements, including counsel fees
may have been incurred by either firm.
the wife's proposition was that the whole of the husband's legal fees incurred
and paid to the firm which has represented him
throughout the proceedings should
be notionally added back, while only an unspecified proportion of her legal
fees incurred and paid
should be similarly added back. That had the obvious
potential to work an injustice to the husband, potentially by an amount of
$200,000 or more.
had squarely raised that issue [on the first day] of the trial [in] July
2025, so that it could be addressed. No evidence was
then adduced by the wife
directed to that issue, nor was I advised of any agreement as to the total
amount of the legal fees incurred
by her. Rather, at the conclusion of closing
submissions I was advised that an updated costs notification letter could be
difficulty with that proposed approach is clear. While the parties are required
to exchange and lodge costs notification letters,
they do not form part of the
evidence unless tendered for that purpose. In most cases that is unnecessary, as
the letters themselves
provide the information which leads to agreement between
the parties as to the relevant figures. There was agreement in this case
the total legal fees paid by the husband, but there was no such agreement as to
the fees paid by the wife. Thus, evidence
was required.
difficulty was acknowledged by counsel for the wife. No application to
reopen to adduce the required evidence was made. The
potential injustice in
adding back the whole of the husband's paid legal fees, and only an undefined
proportion of the wife's paid
legal fees, was not obviated. In those
circumstances, I consider the only proper course available is to decline to add
fees for either party, or otherwise consider them in any mathematical
calculation.
as appears likely, the wife has paid less towards legal fees than has the
husband, such that the failure to consider paid legal
fees by any form of
mathematical calculation operates to her disadvantage, that is regrettably a
circumstance of her own making.
Monies spent by the husband and sourced from his damages
wife initially submitted that an amount of $189,689 should be notionally added
back as if retained by the husband, asserting
that he placed that amount from
his damages award into his personal account and subsequently spent it.
the husband's evidence, the damages award was $1,520,000 plus costs to be agreed
or taxed. The Insurance Commission of Western
Australia subsequently paid him
$173,400 by way of costs.
total award of $1,693,400 was then paid by the husband
as follows:
(a) $108,845 to the Australian Taxation Office;
(b) $1,060,000 into the Mr Bowen Pension Fund;
(c) $255,013 in legal fees associated with the personal injuries litigation;
(d) $60,328 to his lawyers in these proceedings;
(e) $7,231 to his speech therapist;
(f) $12,295 to his accountants; and
(g) the amount of $189,689 referred to above into his personal account.
$1,249,689 remaining after tax, legal fees
and other noncontentious expenses were met, the husband was said by the wife to
have failed
to account for expenditure of $189,689. The husband deposed to
having given disclosure of all statements for the account to which
that amount
was deposited, both before and after the deposit.
subsequently emerged that of the $189,689 in question the husband had paid
$115,000 to his parents, repaying them for payments
of legal fees they had made
on his behalf. In closing, counsel for the wife indicated that she no longer
pursued the proposed addback
of $189,689 but instead pursued an addback of
$115,000 as having been identified as being paid towards legal fees. No
was directed to the question of whether that amount was included in
the total legal fees already identified as having been paid by
the husband,
which would raise the clear possibility of the same amount being
"added back" twice, but nothing turns on that.
the reasons already articulated, it would be unfair to add back only a specific
identified portion of the legal fees of either
party. The purpose of
undertaking mathematical calculations regarding legal fees paid from funds which
would otherwise have been
available for distribution between the parties is to
ensure that neither party indirectly subsidises the legal fees of the other,
other than in the context of a properly made costs order. Achieving that
purpose requires an even‑handed consideration of
all legal fees met by
either party from funds which would have otherwise been available for division.
concession by counsel for the wife as to the additional $74,689 initially sought
to be added back to reach the total of $189,689
was appropriate. The evidence
clearly supports a finding that at relevant times the husband's expenses
exceeded his available income.
Even before
, capital spent by
parties on reasonably necessary living expenses was not susceptible to being
added back.
Share of accounting fee in relation to the Neville Bowen
Pension Fund
the wife sought that an amount of $1,491 be added back as if property retained
by the husband, representing the portion
of accounting fees for the Neville
Bowen Pension Fund paid by her and for which he should have been responsible.
Sensibly, that
proposition was abandoned in closing submissions.
Interim property settlement
orders for what was described as "partial property settlement" were made on 5
February 2019. Each party received $117,283.
On the joint schedule of
assets, liabilities and superannuation filed and relied on by the parties, the
wife proposed that those
equal amounts should be added back for the purposes
of calculation. The husband did not agree.
closing submissions, counsel for the wife submitted that the amounts received by
each party pursuant to those orders should be
notionally added back. Counsel
for the husband said that he had no strong view as to whether that should
happen, or whether instead
the amounts received by each party should simply be
ignored for the purposes of calculation.
parties received equal amounts. It is unnecessary to undertake any mathematical
calculation to inform a consideration under
s 79(5)(v) of their receipt of
those funds. That is so, even though neither proposes an equal division of the
available property,
and both contend for a calculation of percentage based final
entitlements. Any minor mathematical discrepancy which might arise
would not be
such as to lead to any injustice or inequity. I do not propose to add back or
otherwise consider in any calculation
either interim distribution.
The husband's contentions
the reasons that follow, I do not propose to adopt any of the addbacks proposed
by the husband.
Funds drawn by the wife against joint redraw facility at
or about the time of separation, the wife drew down $100,000 from a joint loan
facility secured against the family home and paid
those funds into an account in
her sole name. She also accessed a further sum of $70,000, said to be from the
proceeds of sale of
her [clinic], which had been sold some years prior to
separation. She applied those funds to her own use. The husband proposed
that they be notionally added back for the purpose of calculations as if
property retained by her.
the wife's evidence, upon which she was not challenged, she spent those funds on
a family holiday, school fees, establishing herself
in a rental property after
separation, rent, and various expenses for the benefit of Emily and Olivia
including expenses associated
with their equestrian activities.
the relevant time, like the husband, the wife had not received her damages
award. She was reliant on rental income and payments
from her income protection
insurance policy. On her evidence, her expenses exceeded her income, and
she had the care of both Emily
and Olivia.
am not persuaded to add back the amount proposed by the husband, nor give the
relevant expenditure weight in any consideration
under s 79(5)(v), in
circumstances where the unchallenged evidence of the wife is that at least the
bulk of the funds in question
were spent on reasonable living
Interest estimated by the husband as having been paid by him
on funds drawn by the wife from the joint redraw account at or about
the time of
the husband submitted that an amount of $62,000 should be added back as if
property still retained by the wife. That
figure represented his estimate of
interest paid by him in servicing that part of the joint loan facility which
equated to the wife's
withdrawal of what he alleged was
at the date of
separation, with that interest being paid over the period 3 June 2015 until the
relevant account was closed in 2024.
that proposition was abandoned in closing submissions.
Funds paid by the wife to settle claim against the estate of
her late father
of the will of the wife's late father was granted to her and to Ms Whitney [in]
September 2022. [In] February 2023, [Alex
Neville] and [Daniel
commenced proceedings
in the Supreme Court by originating summons, naming the wife and Ms Whitney
as defendants in their joint capacities
as executor of the estate, and the wife,
Emily and Olivia as individual defendants, presumably as named primary
beneficiaries of
the Testamentary Trust. They each sought a payment of $200,000
pursuant to
Family Provision Act 1972
proceedings were settled by payment of a total of $130,000 divided between Alex
Neville and Daniel Neville. Legal costs of $20,000
were incurred. The
Testamentary Trust had no liquid assets, and the wife, Emily and Olivia did not
want to sell the Testamentary
Trust Property to make funds available. The wife
accordingly made the payment required to Alex Neville and Daniel Neville, and
the legal costs, from her own resources.
husband initially sought that the amount of $150,000 just described be added
back for the purposes of calculation as if it were
property still held by the
wife. In closing submissions, I asked counsel for the husband how that
proposition could be maintained
in circumstances where the husband's case is
that the wife is the beneficial owner of the whole of the property of the
Testamentary
Trust; thus, on the husband's case, the wife merely paid expenses
otherwise payable by her from her trust property but chose to pay
them from a
different source.
for the husband abandoned the proposed addback, and an associated further
proposed addback of $9,559 representing legal fees
paid on behalf of the wife,
Emily and Olivia as defendants in their personal capacities.
acknowledge that, contrary to the husband's primary position, which may have
been the only basis upon which the concession was
made, I have concluded that
the wife has only a one third interest in the Testamentary Trust. Nevertheless,
even absent the concession
made, I would not have exercised the relevant
discretion to add back the amounts in question, nor considered the amounts
the purposes of s 79(5)(d). It was reasonable for the wife to
seek to settle the claim against the estate without having to sell
Testamentary Trust Property.
said, the wife's failure to record those payments made as a loan to the
Testamentary Trust, and the effect of that in preserving
the net asset
position of the Testamentary Trust while effectively reducing her personal
assets, is appropriately considered by reference
to s 79(5)(v). I do
not propose to do so by reference to any mathematical calculation.
Funds distributed to the wife by the Discretionary Trust and
applied to legal fees
one point, the wife asserted that she had a liability of $77,321 to the
Discretionary Trust. The husband disputed the liability,
while accepting
that she had received that amount by way of distribution and applied it to legal
fees. He contended that amount
should be added back for the purposes of
calculation as if it were property still held by her. In closing submissions,
did not contend for the alleged liability and the husband abandoned the
proposed addback.
Monies distributed by the wife from the Discretionary
earlier noted, despite the position previously maintained by her, by the
conclusion of trial the wife conceded that property of
the Discretionary Trust
should be regarded as her property. She did so without resiling from the
submission that notwithstanding
her effective control of the trust and her
ability to distribute capital and income exclusively to herself, she regarded
as having been established for her benefit, and that of Olivia and
Emily, and would act accordingly.
trust was established [in] April 2021. At that point, these proceedings were
effectively in abeyance, having been adjourned
on 28 September 2018 to
await the outcome of the parties' personal injuries claims, subject only to the
resolution of a number of
interlocutory
28 August 2023, the wife's current lawyers (who had only then relatively
recently been instructed)
schedule of the wife's documents subject to her duty of disclosure to the
husband's lawyers. The schedule was dated 5 July
2023. It made no reference to
any documents associated with the Discretionary Trust, nor to the existence of
15 September 2023, the husband's lawyers wrote to the wife's lawyers seeking
specific disclosure. In particular, they sought
the financial statements,
constitution or memorandum and articles of association for all entities
controlled by the wife or in which
she had an interest, including but not
limited to the proprietary limited company which was the corporate trustee of
the Discretionary
20 October 2023, the wife's lawyers provided an updated disclosure list,
and answered various queries raised by the husband's
lawyers. Specifically, they
stated that they had been "recently instructed" in respect of the
proprietary limited company and the
trust, having "received some instruction on
12 October 2023, some disclosure on 13 October 2023 and
17 October 2023, and confirming
instructions on 20 October 2023."
said further that the wife "instructs that she did not consider same to be
relevant to her disclosure obligations", by which
they referred to the
proprietary limited company and the Discretionary Trust.
wife was represented from the commencement of the proceedings in November 2016
(at the latest) until 21 October 2022 by O'Sullivan
Davies, a specialist
family law firm. She gave an Undertaking as to Disclosure on 6 July 2018,
confirming in standard terms that
she understood her duty of disclosure and had
complied with it. While I appreciate that undertaking was given before the
establishment
of the trust, the representation as to her understanding of her
duty of disclosure was nevertheless made.
acknowledge also that, as the proceedings were largely in abeyance, the
wife was not required by any procedural order to file an
updating Form 13
Financial Statement until she did so on 23 October 2023. That,
however, only goes so far. The wife was clearly
required by rule
to file a new Form 13
Financial Statement or affidavit in lieu within 21 days after the change in her
circumstances which arose from
the establishment of the trust. She did not do
wife was also obliged to disclose the existence of the trust, and her interest
in it, and relevant documents within her possession
power or control relevant to
it. She was required to do so promptly and proactively, not simply to wait for
the husband to "ask
She did not do
the Form 13 Financial Statement the wife eventually filed on 23 October
2023, she acknowledged that she was the appointor of the
Discretionary Trust and
one of three specified beneficiaries. She described her entitlement in the
trust as a financial resource.
She said that the trust was established in
2021 for the benefit of herself, Olivia and Emily.
for present purposes, she said this:
[The proprietary limited company] has held cash in a bank account on behalf of
the [Discretionary Trust]. My father paid in $280,000.
My daughters each
paid in a sum too, by way of loans to the trustee company which have now been
repaid. The trust is discretionary.
Recent distributions leave the trust
balance at $84,457.67.
evidence was unacceptably vague in the circumstances described below.
statements tendered into evidence established the following:
(1) the bank account for the trust was opened on 15 June 2021 with a nil
(2) Emily deposited $47,391 into that account in three transactions on 22 August
2021, 2 September 2021, and 3 September 2021;
(3) no further deposits were made until 5 January 2022, when the wife's father
deposited $280,000;
(4) Olivia transferred $30,000 into the account in three separate transactions
on 5 January 2022, 7 January 2022 and 11 January 2022,
bringing the balance
of the account to $357,391;
(5) various expenses were met from the account on behalf of Olivia and Emily
over the period of June 2022 to 12 October 2023, of
relatively modest
individual amounts, reducing the balance in the account to $320,109; and
(6) a total of $236,110 was then transferred to Olivia in four separate
transactions on 19 October 2023, 20 October 2023 and 21 October
2023 bringing the balance down to $83,999. As already noted, the husband's
lawyers had sought information and disclosure about the
15 September 2023 and received a reply on 20 October 2023.
her responsive trial affidavit filed on 21 May 2024, in the context of
explaining her nondisclosure the wife said:
I did not think it was relevant to the asset pool available for division,
especially considering it was established 6 years after
separation, it was for
the sole benefit of the children, and [the husband] had not contributed to it.
balance in the trust bank account at the time the wife swore that affidavit was
$81,699. Having sworn to that position, notably
as to the trust being for the
"sole benefit of the children", she subsequently transferred some $79,367 from
the trust bank account
to her own bank account, with the notations on the
withdrawals recording that she did so to pay legal fees.
is clear that the wife took the steps just described to reduce the amount held
in the trust which could be regarded as her property
and thus available for
division. In cross-examination she admitted as much. I asked her why she paid
$236,110 out of the trust over
the course of three days. She replied, "because
when we found out that this was counted in Family Court, the girls asked me to
their money out."
the time of the commencement of trial the wife's position was that her interest
in the trust was limited to "1/3 of the corpus",
which as a result of her
withdrawals was only $378.
is in those circumstances that the husband contended that the whole of the
amounts distributed should be notionally added back
for the purposes of
calculation, as if property still held by the wife.
that contention is understandable, it is simplistic. Emily and Olivia are
eligible beneficiaries of the trust. Each had paid
monies into the trust. It
was always open to the wife to exercise her discretion to make distributions to
either or both. The fact
that she did so in the manner already described does
not alter that. The evidence does not support a conclusion that, were it not
for these proceedings, no such distribution would ever have been made. The
distribution cannot be characterised as wastage for the
purposes of
s 79(5)(d).
to add back the amounts withdrawn by the wife to her own benefit and applied to
legal fees would raise the same issues already
canvassed as to selective
addbacks of that nature.
those circumstances I decline to simply add back the relevant amount. I record
that I would have reached the same conclusion prior
Neither party should misunderstand that. The wife's actions may, and will,
appropriately be more broadly considered in the context
s 79(5)(v), albeit not by reference to any mathematical calculation.
Her conduct of the proceedings, including the matters just
recounted, may be the
subject of submissions and consideration in any costs application brought by
either party.
The contributions of the parties
Background to the required consideration
an earlier stage of the proceedings, the wife served a Notice to Admit Facts
calling on the husband to admit, for the purpose
of the proceedings, that "the
parties' respective contributions and their contribution based entitlements to
the property and superannuation
of the parties (but excluding any payments
received by the parties as a result of the personal injuries sustained by each
during the relationship) from the date of marriage to the date of
separation be regarded as equal." A further admission was sought
that "on the
basis that payments arising from the parties' respective personal injury claims
are treated separately from the balance
of the property of the parties", the
only relevant factors for consideration pursuant to what was then s 75(2)
were s 75(2)(b) "only
in so far as this relates to monies which may be
received and retained by either party arising from their respective personal
claims for past and future economic loss" and the commitments of each
party necessary to enable them to support a relevant child.
admission was sought by the wife before either party had received their damages
award. It may reasonably be inferred from subsequent
events that it was sought
at a time when the wife did not anticipate that the husband's award would exceed
hers by any significant
his affidavit filed on 28 June 2018, the husband said that he was "prepared to
admit that our contributions are equal from the
date of our marriage up to the
current date (not the date of separation as stated by [the wife] in her Notice
to Admit)", subject
to each party retaining the benefit of the individual income
protection insurance policies and the proceeds of their respective personal
injury claims.
trial, neither counsel addressed the question of whether the "facts" which the
wife sought to have the husband admit were capable
of being the subject of a
Notice to Admit Facts nor whether it might be suggested that either party was in
any sense estopped from
departing from the positions just described.
matter not having been addressed, it remains necessary to consider the evidence
as to the respective contributions of the parties
over the whole of the period
from the commencement of their relationship to trial. In the absence of clear
agreement at trial as
to the assessment of those contributions, notwithstanding
the steps earlier taken, that would have been necessary in any event.
earlier noted and as eventually distilled at trial the wife's position was that
the contributions of the parties overall from
the commencement of the
relationship to trial should be assessed as equal.
husband's consistent position was that, excluding the contributions of their
respective damages awards, the contributions of
the parties from the
commencement of the relationship to trial should be assessed as equal. He
contended that, when the damages awards
are taken into account, the overall
assessment of contributions should be in the proportions of 57.5 percent to him
and 42.5 percent
to the wife.
acknowledge that in his written submissions filed on 15 August 2025,
responding to the decision of the Full Court in
, the husband
submitted that the "contribution-based percentage entitlement for which he
contends be increased by 8.48%", on the basis
that an amount he had contended
should be added back as if property still held by the wife would, if it still
existed, have increased
the property available for division by that percentage.
That submission, as noted above, was fundamentally flawed and cannot be
accepted. It was, in fairness, issue specific and did not purport to
otherwise alter the consistently advanced position of the husband
appropriate assessment of contributions were that submission not to be
the contributions of the parties of all forms must be considered holistically,
and it is inappropriate to "segment or compartmentalise
the various
contributions and weigh one against the
remainder",
it is nevertheless
convenient to consider in this case the history of the relationship, and
contributions made, in a sequence which
acknowledges the critical points of that
history – the commencement of the relationship, the motor vehicle
accident, the separation,
and the period from separation to trial. In doing so,
I acknowledge that the contributions of the parties prior to the motor vehicle
accident are largely noncontentious, other than in one respect – the wife
now contends that her ability to make contributions
of all forms was affected by
family violence perpetrated by the husband even before the accident.
Initial financial contributions
parties began living together in 1995. At the time, the husband was a health
professional in private practice, working full‑time.
The wife was a
specialised clinician in private practice, also working full‑time. They
were earning roughly equivalent incomes.
husband owned a property in [Suburb D], which he had purchased in 1993 for
approximately $87,000. That property was sold in
early 1998 for approximately
$92,000. It is common ground that the property was encumbered, but there is no
evidence as to the precise
net proceeds of sale. At the commencement of
cohabitation, the husband also had a car, nominal savings, and modest
superannuation.
wife owned a property in [Suburb E], which she had purchased in early 1993. That
property was sold in mid-1998 for $233,000.
Again, it is common ground
that the property was encumbered, but there is no evidence as to the precise net
proceeds of sale. At
the commencement of cohabitation, the wife also had
an interest in a clinic, a car, a horse float, nominal savings and
modest superannuation.
Financial contributions during the relationship and prior to
the motor vehicle accident
parties worked, operating their professional practices. Both contributed
their income to their mutual benefit and that of the
children. In broad
terms, at times when they were both working full‑time, they earned roughly
similar incomes. At times,
the wife had other clinicians working in her
the children were born, both parties wound back their work commitments to a
degree, so that each could continue their professional
roles while spending time
caring for the children. There is no suggestion by either party that those
decisions were made other than
the course of the relationship, the parties bought and sold various properties.
Most of those transactions, including the wife's
purchase of the Commercial
Property, are uncontroversial.
evidence of the parties differed as to the precise circumstances in which
they acquired an interest in a property [located in
Suburb F] owned by the
wife's parents; it is common ground that they paid approximately $400,000 for
that interest, and that on the
sale of the property they received approximately
$110,000. On the wife's evidence the initial purchase price was loaned to the
by her parents with the debt subsequently being forgiven, such that in
effect the payment of $110,000 amounted to a gift to her.
No cross‑examination or submissions were directed by either counsel
to those matters. The wife's evidence just described
was only given in
response to the husband's trial affidavit; the Suburb F property was not
mentioned at all in her initial trial
affidavit. I am unable to make any
finding as to the circumstances of the acquisition of the interest the parties
apparently took
in that property, or the characterisation of the amount they
received upon its sale.
in November 2003 the parties purchased a [previous property in Suburb C]
for $825,000. The wife's parents contributed
an amount towards that purchase
price; the parties made use of the property as a holiday home, and the wife's
parents lived there,
paying nominal rent. Again, neither party was
cross-examined about those transactions, nor were any submissions made directed
them. On the husband's unchallenged evidence, on the eventual sale of
the property the wife's parents were repaid an amount reflective
contribution to the purchase
evidence supports a conclusion that the financial contributions of the parties
during cohabitation, and prior to the motor vehicle
accident, were broadly
Non-financial contributions during the relationship and
prior to the motor vehicle accident
parties gave evidence as to their respective non-financial contributions during
the relationship and prior to the motor vehicle
accident. The wife
contended that during the marriage the parties "maintained traditional roles",
such that she was responsible
for most domestic tasks while the husband would
"from time to time" assist with "some cooking". The husband contended that his
contributions
were greater than that, suggesting that he cooked so often that
friends jokingly nicknamed him "Nigella." On his case, the parties
consciously
decided not to maintain "traditional roles", both because of their desire to
keep working professionally, and as an example
to the children. As noted
earlier, it is common ground that both parties reduced their professional
commitments in order to spend
more time parenting. It may also fairly be
noted that on the wife's evidence the children had somewhat higher care needs
their perspectives might differ on matters of detail, both parties made
contributions to the welfare of the family, including
as homemakers and parents.
Neither was cross-examined in relation to those matters of detail. Subject only
to any consideration
of the wife's contentions as to family violence, the
evidence supports a conclusion that the non-financial contributions of the
during cohabitation, and prior to the motor vehicle accident, were
broadly equal.
Family violence and the question of any effect on the wife's
ability to make her contributions – relevant principles
violence is defined in s 4AB(1) of the Act. The definition is "necessarily
broad", and any interpretation creating "unnecessary
hurdles to an alleged
victim proving an allegation of family violence" is to be
Particularly
when considering whether particular behaviour is coercive or controlling in the
relevant sense, the Court must identify
the behaviour itself, identify the full
context of the behaviour including any explanation, identify its impact, make
all relevant
factual findings and explain why the behaviour in question is or is
not family violence that coerces or controls the relevant family
party alleging family violence bears the burden of proving it on the balance of
probabilities. Of potential relevance in this
case, intention on the part of
the alleged perpetrator is not an essential component of a finding of family
violence. In the context
of behaviour said to coerce or control, the intention
of the alleged perpetrator is not irrelevant, but neither is it dispositive.
Equally, a perception by an alleged victim that particular behaviour is coercive
or controlling does not necessarily make it so;
there must be an objective
assessment of the behaviour itself.
The wife's contention that, even prior to the motor vehicle
accident, she was subjected to family violence which affected her ability
make financial and non-financial contributions
wife contends that she was subjected to behaviour by the husband properly
characterised as family violence even prior to the
motor vehicle accident, and
that exposure adversely affected her ability to make contributions. In the
terms more frequently used
prior to the recent amendments to the Act, she
contends that her contributions were made more onerous. The husband denies any
prior to the motor vehicle accident that could properly be
construed as family violence.
her trial affidavit filed on 5 February 2024, the wife said that prior to the
car accident the husband "engaged in behaviours
and conduct which [she]
ultimately made excuses for." She said that he was rude to friends, was
critical of her for dressing in
clothing which he did not choose and made it
difficult for her to spend time with friends. She said that he commented
on the expense associated with her passion for horses and that he
"insisted that [she] lie to the children about being previously
married." She
described him being derogatory towards the children, particularly Olivia, and
placing them under undue pressure in
relation to their academic performance.
She recounted other examples of controlling behaviour, all of which the husband
a different point in the same affidavit, she said that both daughters often said
words to the effect that it is as if the husband
"died in the accident, and
that he has changed so much from the loving father he used to be prior to the
accident." How that sat
with the evidence just described as to his behaviour
towards them prior to the accident was not explored at
the first affidavit she filed in the proceedings, the wife said that the parties
were "happily married until 5 November 2014."
In cross‑examination, she acknowledged that but said that she had
made concessions for the husband's behaviour.
her evidence before the District Court, in response to a suggestion that she was
seeking psychological help for issues to do with
her separation from the
husband, rather than for issues arising from the motor vehicle accident, the
Well, if we hadn't had the accident, I wouldn't have got divorced. It was
the head injury that my husband sustained in the accident
that changed him.
said, it is apparent from the judgment in the District Court proceedings that
the wife had received some help from a psychologist
prior to the motor vehicle
accident, relating to pre-existing anxiety and an associated depressed mood.
When the wife's attendance
on that psychologist was explored further in a
psychiatric assessment, the wife indicated that she had contact with that
psychologist
because of psychiatric difficulties being experienced by one of the
children, rather than by her. Other evidence before the District
Court, adduced
by the wife, suggested that any mental health difficulties she may have suffered
prior to the motor vehicle accident
were mild, and related to health issues of
her mother as well as the children. On her evidence, the only medication she
for mental health issues prior to the accident was prescribed when her
brother passed away in 2000.
was also adduced in the District Court proceedings from [Ms Ford], who was
described at the time as being the wife's "treating
psychologist", having seen
her for the first time on 6 March 2015 and continued to treat her until at
least the time of trial in
August 2020. In a report dated 17 June 2018,
Ms Ford said that "the family disintegration is, according to [the wife],
due to [the husband's] trauma as a result of the MVA and his actions
toward, and reactions to his family."
Bernard provided a medicolegal report for the purposes of the wife's damages
claim, dated 9 July 2020. In her initial report to
the wife's general
practitioner, immediately following her initial consultation with the wife on 28
November 2018, she noted that
the wife had reported a "good relationship" with
the husband prior to the motor vehicle accident and that he had been "strongly
to his daughters." She noted also the wife's report that the "car
accident resulted in an alteration of her husband's behaviour."
Elsewhere in
the medicolegal report, Dr Bernard said that the wife had described her
relationship with the husband prior to the
motor vehicle accident as "close and
supportive" and said that he was a "caring and attentive father". She said
further that prior
to the motor vehicle accident the wife "had excellent
psychosocial functioning."
a separate report dated 31 January 2024, Dr Bernard expressed the view that
Emily was suffering mental health issues "secondary
to familial trauma related
to her parents' car accident and her father's brain injury which caused
behavioural changes and domestic
violence." In her evidence at trial, Dr
Bernard confirmed that she has been treating Emily since April 2019.
cross-examined, the wife explained that her reports to Dr Bernard were
believed by her to be truthful at the time and that it
was only two to three
years later that she understood that certain behaviours were coercive and
controlling. While I accept that
victims of coercive and controlling behaviour
may not recognise it as such at the time at which it occurs, that only goes so
The wife described her "good relationship" with the husband to Dr
Bernard in November 2018 and maintained a positive recount of
relationship to her at least as late as July 2020. Her case at trial in the
District Court in August 2020 was consistent with
that recount. More
particularly, as recently as January 2024, Dr Bernard has confirmed her
understanding from Emily that the husband's
behaviour dramatically changed
because of his injuries and that any family violence occurred after that
as in this case, allegations of family violence are disputed they "must be
subjected to the same forensic rigour as any other
contested factual
The wife has not
discharged the burden of proving, on the balance of probabilities, that she was
subjected to family violence by
the husband prior to the motor vehicle accident.
The question of whether her ability to make relevant contributions prior to the
accident was affected by family violence must be answered in
the negative.
Contributions between the time of the motor vehicle accident
and separation
is clear, however, that the circumstances of this family dramatically changed
because of the accident, and the injuries both parties
Statement of Claim filed on behalf of the husband on 14 August 2018 is in
evidence. That document provides particulars of the
closed head injury he
received in the motor vehicle accident. Those particulars include impaired
perfusion of the frontal, cortical
and temporal lobes.
Statement of Claim also provides particulars of the residual disabilities
suffered by the husband. They include gross speech
impairment and
stuttering, as was readily observed during trial. They also include
impaired intellectual functioning affecting memory,
word finding and
problem-solving, post-traumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorder,
depression, frustration in difficult situations,
difficulty with impulse
control, unstable volatile mood and poor judgment.
Statement of Claim also pleaded that as a result of his injuries the husband
"required gratuitous care and assistance from family
and friends in a number of
aspects of daily activities." I readily conclude that the bulk of those
gratuitous services were, prior
to separation, provided by the wife. As the
husband's damages claim was settled, there is no evidence as to any value
to those gratuitous services in the global settlement sum paid.
accept that, following the accident, the wife made significant contributions in
caring for the husband including arranging and
facilitating medical appointments
and the like. I accept further that she had to make increased contributions
in the management of
the parties' financial affairs, management of the household
more generally, and care and support for the children. Both children
own health and mental health difficulties, which made those contributions more
evidence also supports a conclusion that, because of his brain injury, the
husband experienced difficulties with impulse control,
judgment, and volatility
of mood. I accept the wife's evidence that those difficulties impacted on his
behaviour prior to separation
to her detriment and that of the children. I
accept also that those behaviours contributed to the breakdown of the parties'
relationship;
I do not accept the proposition that the husband's behaviours were
exclusively responsible for it. Both parties clearly struggled
significant effects of their own injuries and suffered mental health issues as
a result. While the husband's volatile behaviour
contributed to, and no
doubt exacerbated, those issues on the part of the wife, the evidence of Dr
Bernard makes clear that it was
not exclusively responsible for them.
real terms, the characterisation or otherwise of the husband's behaviour as
family violence does not inform the analysis required.
That is so, as I am
comfortably satisfied that in the period between the motor vehicle accident and
separation the wife's contributions
necessarily exceeded those of the husband
and were made more onerous not only by his physical injuries and the needs
associated with
that, but by the behavioural impacts of his head
Financial contributions after separation
separation, the husband continued to live in the family home. The wife
continued to receive rental income from the Commercial
parties had a portfolio facility with National Australia Bank ("NAB"). The
facility comprised four separate sub accounts:
(1) a home loan (sub account [redacted]) in joint names, secured by mortgage
against the family home;
(2) a business loan (sub account [redacted]) in joint names;
(3) a further business loan (sub account [redacted]) in the wife's sole name and
secured by mortgage against both the Commercial
Property and the family home as
security; and
(4) a further facility (sub account [redacted]) in joint names on which only a
modest amount was owed.
were made, and undertakings given, in April 2017 requiring the husband to
continue to meet the repayments associated with
[the home loan in joint names
secured against the family home and the business loan in joint names]. In
addition, the husband maintained
responsibility for [the further facility in
joint names on which only a modest amount was owed]. At the same time, orders
and undertakings given, requiring the wife to continue to meet the
repayments associated with [a further business loan in the wife's
sole name and
secured against the Commercial Property and the family home]. The most
significant loans were [the home loan in joint
names secured against the family
Commercial Property
and the family home].
the husband continued to service the debt associated with the family home and
had the benefit of living in the home. The wife
continued to service the
debt associated with the Commercial Property and received the rental income from
it until it was sold.
That income amounted to approximately $56,000 per
annum at the time the wife filed her trial affidavit in February 2024.
April and May 2020, the husband received the settlement proceeds from his
personal injury claim, and a contribution towards his
legal costs. The
amount received from the Insurance Commission of Western Australia totalled
$1,693,400. The disbursement of those
funds is summarised earlier in these
reasons. $1,249,689 remained after tax, legal fees and other noncontentious
expenses were met.
The Mr Bowen Pension Fund was established entirely from
the proceeds of the damages claim, and the amount of $755,676.00 remained
that fund as at the date of trial.
August 2021, the wife's solicitors in those proceedings received her gross
damages award, having proceeded to trial in the District
Court, being
$850,313.24 before any contribution by the insurer towards her legal costs and
the consideration of any subsequent appeal
or costs application. Later in
August 2021, the wife received the settlement proceeds from her personal injury
claim in the net
sum after legal fees of $444,816.77. In November 2023, the
matter having proceeded on appeal to the Supreme Court, the wife's
received a net contribution towards her legal fees from the
Insurance Commission of Western Australia of $106,000. That figure was
calculated after deductions were made for costs payable by the wife in relation
to unsuccessful aspects of her appeal, a reduction
of the damages award, and the
addition of costs payable to the wife both from the District Court proceedings
and the parts of the
appeal and cross‑appeal in which she was
successful.
the wife's evidence, which was not challenged, she ultimately received a net
compensation award of $432,474 after paying all legal
costs, including those
associated with the appeal.
the time of swearing her trial affidavit in February 2024, the wife said
that she had "expended much of the $432,474 already,
in expenses including
defending [her] late father's Estate." Her evidence did not descend into
more detail, beyond saying that she
had to meet costs of approximately $53,143
to maintain her father's estate as earlier noted and incurred approximately
$150,000 in
expenses related to the challenge to the estate by Alex Neville and
Daniel Neville. Had she not paid those expenses, the property
Testamentary Trust would necessarily have been sold. Thus, to a degree at least
the fruits of that contribution remain available
for division.
making that observation I acknowledge that the wife's interest in the
Testamentary Trust is as to only one third of the property
of that trust, but
she chose to make the payments in question in full without any contribution from
Emily or Olivia. In effect,
of the $150,000 spent by the wife settling the
claim against the estate, $100,000 was spent for the benefit of Olivia and Emily
was thus made unavailable for division between the parties.
damages awards received by each party are appropriately considered as
contributions predominantly by the party
receiving them.
not mean they should be considered in isolation, as appeared to be the position
adopted by both parties early in the proceedings;
all contributions by each
party of whatever form must be weighed and considered holistically.
already noted, the Discretionary Trust was established by a discretionary trust
deed executed on 30 April 2021. I have determined
that it was at all material
times property of the wife. In the circumstances earlier described, that
represented a financial contribution
by her, albeit only a modest amount remains
to show for that contribution.
the wife's interest in the Testamentary Trust represents a financial
contribution by her.
parties received payments from income protection insurance policies post
separation. The payments received by the husband were
higher than those
received by the wife, but both parties applied the whole of the income so
received to their own support and other
expenses. Neither applied the
payments directly to the support of the other, certainly after separation.
Neither contended that
any payment, for example, towards what would otherwise be
joint liabilities should inform the overall assessment of their respective
contributions.
Non-financial contributions after separation
from any steps he may have taken to maintain and preserve the family home, the
husband has not made any identifiable non‑financial
contributions after
separation. Sadly, he has no ongoing relationship with Olivia and Emily.
wife has continued to make non-financial contributions as a parent since
separation. Olivia and Emily both have various issues
which impact on them; it
is clear that they continue to require support, and that they receive that from
the wife. The husband readily
acknowledged that Emily in particular continues
to need support and assistance.
may also be readily inferred that the wife made non-financial contributions
after separation in maintaining and preserving the
Commercial Property before it
was sold and the Testamentary Trust Property in which she continues to
Conclusion as to the contributions of the
have considered all of the contributions of the parties of all forms, for the
whole of the period from the commencement of the
relationship to trial.
broad terms, over the roughly 20 years of cohabitation prior to the motor
vehicle accident those contributions would likely have
been assessed as having
been equal. For the period of roughly 18 months between the accident and
separation, largely because of
the significance of the husband's injuries, the
wife necessarily made greater contributions, and those contributions were made
onerous by the effect of the husband's head injuries on his personality and
behaviour. The direct contribution by each party of
their respective damages
awards favours the husband, and not only because his net award was significantly
higher than that received
by the wife – the actions he took have preserved
much of that award so that it remains available for division, when the same
cannot be said for the wife. The relevant interests in the Discretionary Trust
and the Testamentary Trust were contributed by the
wife, but nothing remains of
the former. The wife has also continued to make a significant parenting
contribution over the nine
years post separation, in difficult circumstances,
where the husband has made no such contribution. The husband has maintained the
most significant asset available to the parties, the family home, but has had
the benefit of living in it.
inevitability of a "leap from words to figures" in the assessment of
contributions is well known,
cannot be minimised by "scoring each factor and then somehow calculating the
Having considered all
the matters discussed above, I conclude that the respective contributions of the
parties are appropriately
assessed as 55 percent by the husband, and 45
percent by the wife.
of property interests based solely on that assessment would see the husband
retain property to a net value of $2,187,828,
and the wife retain property to a
net value of $1,790,041.
Prospective matters
husband did not suggest that any alteration by reference to prospective factors
should be made to what would otherwise be the
contributions-based outcome in the
case. The wife contends that an adjustment in her favour of five percent of the
value of the
overall property available for division should be made. She does
so by reference to the income disparity between the parties, the
fact that the
husband has a home in his sole name and she does not, her ongoing
responsibilities to support Emily in particular,
and what she would contend to
be the ongoing impact on her of family violence.
wife will shortly turn 61. She has not been employed since the motor vehicle
accident. It was appropriately conceded by counsel
for the husband that she is
not physically capable of returning to work as a specialised clinician. I am
satisfied based on the
evidence of Dr Bernard in particular that there is
no reasonable prospect of the wife returning to any substantial paid employment
of any form.
wife's current income is $2,146 per week from her income protection insurance
and a modest government allowance related to her
care of Emily.
husband has recently turned 61. Properly, it is accepted by the wife that there
is no prospect of him returning to any form
of paid employment. In his
most recent Form 13 Financial Statement, he said that his income was $3,199 per
week from his income
protection insurance and a modest carers allowance.
parties have significant, and ongoing, health issues. Neither has a legal
obligation to support any other person, but I acknowledge
that the wife has
provided significant support to both Olivia and Emily since separation,
including financial support, and that she
will likely continue to do so. I note
in that regard that while Emily requires support, she has a partner and splits
her time between
the wife's home and her partner's home. Neither Emily nor her
partner gave evidence. The wife's evidence about Olivia's circumstances
vague and Olivia did not give evidence.
the husband's ongoing income from insurance exceeds the wife's by a significant
margin and it is correct to observe that he
has a house in his sole name while
the wife does not, that tells only part of the story.
wife's ongoing treatment needs are likely less than those of the husband.
While she does not have a house in her sole name,
she has the ongoing
right to occupy the Testamentary Trust Property and there is nothing in the
evidence to suggest that Olivia and
Emily would join forces to bring that
to an end. She will, based on the contributions‑based outcome, receive a
significant
payment. If she has not already reached a condition of release for
her superannuation, noting there was no evidence adduced in that
regard, it may
fairly be inferred that she will do so in the relatively short term.
am not persuaded that any extent to which the effects of the husband's behaviour
following the motor vehicle accident have impacted
on the wife's current mental
health is such as to justify an adjustment.
response to questions from me, Dr Bernard confirmed that a mixture of factors
contributes to the wife's current mental health.
The experience of the
accident itself had a psychological impact. Having to deal with her own physical
injuries received in the
accident and all that flowed from that, including the
loss of her capacity to work, had a psychological impact. The ongoing effects
of those psychological impacts had a compounding effect. Dealing with the
impact of the injuries to the husband, and the effect
of that on his behaviour
and their relationship, also had a psychological impact. Dr Bernard agreed
with the proposition that she
would "not really be able to apportion the total
package in any shares to those different contributing factors."
the dissipation of funds by the wife post separation is appropriately considered
by reference to s 79(5)(v).
already noted, the wife chose to meet from her own resources (likely the
proceeds of the damages claim) an expense of $150,000
to deal with the challenge
to her father's will. She chose not to do that by the available mechanism of
lending that money to the
Testamentary Trust, such that it would be
recoverable by her in due course. Rather, she met the whole of the expense
in circumstances
where $100,000 of that amount will stand to the benefit of
Olivia and Emily. That stood in contrast to the other expenses of $53,143
she met on behalf of the Testamentary Trust which were recorded as a loan and
remain an asset available for division.
the wife took active steps to reduce the funds in the Discretionary Trust by an
amount well over and above the amounts
deposited by Emily and Olivia from their
damages claims, by distributing the monies immediately prior to swearing her
Form 13 Financial
Statement on 23 October 2023. She also spent funds from
that trust on legal fees as earlier noted.
the wife chose to give no detailed evidence as to the disposition of a
significant component of her damages claim once she
received it.
of those matters mitigate against any adjustment in favour of the wife to what
is otherwise the contributions-based outcome.
have considered whether an adjustment in favour of the husband might be
appropriate in all the circumstances, notwithstanding the
matters raised by the
wife. I have done so, as it is tolerably clear that the husband's case at trial
was that an overall division
which would see him receive
57.5 percent
by value of
the available property (with addbacks for which he contended taken into
account) would be just and equitable, even though
no express submission was made
to the effect that an adjustment should be made to reach that outcome if it was
not achieved simply
by the assessment of
contributions.
balance, I have concluded that no such adjustment should be made. Quite
apart from the fact that the proposition just contemplated
was not squarely
advanced on behalf of the husband, I remain conscious that it is highly
likely that the legal fees met by him for
the purpose of these proceedings from
what would otherwise be property available for division significantly exceeded
those paid by
the wife for the same purpose.
all the circumstances, I conclude that no adjustment in favour of either
party should be made to what is otherwise the contributions‑based
Disposition
any adjusting payment is made, the wife will have property already in her
possession to a net value of $204,751. It is common
ground that she should also
receive the whole of the net proceeds of sale of the Commercial Property,
amounting to a further $334,594,
and retain her interest in the Neville Bowen Pension Fund amounting to
$498,191.50.
all the circumstances, including the desirability of both parties being able to
stay in their present accommodation should they
choose to do so, I conclude that
the superannuation splitting order proposed by the husband, whereby the whole of
his interest in
the Neville Bowen Pension Fund will go to the wife, should be
those steps, the wife will retain property and superannuation to a value of
$1,523,013. As previously noted, I have determined
her proper entitlement to be
$1,790,041. Thus, the husband will need to make an additional payment to her of
$267,028. I am satisfied
that he has the capacity to do so, either from his
member benefits in the Mr Bowen Pension Fund, or potentially by borrowing
against the family home if he chooses to do so.
outcome will see the husband retaining the $2.2 million home in which he lives,
subject to the mortgage, plus his savings and
chattels, and pension funds to a
value of approximately $488,648, if he chooses not to borrow further against the
family home. He
will continue to receive his income protection payments, which
exceed those received by the wife.
the adjusting payment is made, the wife will have her one third interest in the
Testamentary Trust Property, her savings, including
the net proceeds of the
Commercial Property after paying Capital Gains Tax, chattels, pension funds to a
value of $983,668 and the
required cash payment. She will continue to receive
her income protection payments, and to enjoy the benefit of living in the
Testamentary
Trust Property for the foreseeable future should she choose to do
am satisfied that the outcome just described is just and equitable in all the
circumstances.
Proposed orders
wife proposed pre-emptive orders for the sale of the family home if the husband
could not make the cash payment which she sought.
The payment sought in
that context was just over $1.050 million. In light of the findings made, I
do not anticipate that the wife
would press for that order now to be made, where
the husband has the capacity to make the cash payment I have determined to
be appropriate.
If I am wrong in that anticipation, submissions may
are no remaining joint liabilities, and the husband is to resign from all
positions in the Neville Bowen Pension Fund. I do
not perceive a need for
orders requiring the parties to indemnify each other in relation to
liabilities for which they already have
sole legal responsibility, but the
parties are at liberty to make submissions in that regard.
to those observations, and to any other submissions as to form, I propose to
make the following orders:
Noting that the Court determines that the
value of the member interest of the wife in the [Neville Bowen Pension Fund] is
$498,191.50,
and that the value of the member interest of the husband in the
said fund is $485,476.50:
30 days, the Respondent husband,
, must pay to the
Applicant wife,
[MS NEVILLE],
section 90XT(1)(b)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
(a) the wife is entitled to be paid the specified percentage out of the
husband's interest in the [Neville Bowen Pension Fund];
(b) the husband's interest in the said fund is correspondingly reduced by force
of this order; and
(c) the specified percentage for the purposes of this order is 100 percent.
trustee of the [Neville Bowen Pension Fund] must do all acts and things and sign
all such documents as may be necessary to:
(a) calculate, in accordance with the requirements of the
and the Family Law
(Superannuation) Regulations 2021 ("the Regulations") the entitlement awarded to
the wife in the immediately preceding
clause of this order; and
(b) pay the entitlement whenever the trustee makes a splitable payment from the
husband's interest in the said fund.
order has effect from the operative time and the operative time is 4 business
days after service of these orders on the trustee.
trustee having been afforded procedural fairness, this order binds the trustee
to observe the provisions of the
and the Regulations.
the trustee complying with the orders contained in paragraphs [2] and [3] of
these orders, the husband must do all such acts
and things and sign all
documents necessary to:
(a) resign from his position as a member and trustee of the [Neville Bowen
Pension Fund]; and
(b) transfer to the wife of all rights and responsibilities for the management
and administration of the said fund, including but
not limited to the
termination of his rights to sign, operate and access or bank accounts, share
accounts or other accounts related
to the said fund, whether personally or by
digital means, including surrender of all passwords and other digital rights and
Thereafter,
the wife must indemnify the husband and keep him indemnified in respect of any
liability of the [Neville Bowen Pension
14 days, the parties must do all things necessary to transfer the remaining
funds in the joint NAB Classic Banking account
ending in [redacted] to an
account of the wife's choosing and close the said joint account.
14 days, the husband must cause any of the wife's jewellery which remained at
the [family home in Suburb A] at the date of
separation to be delivered to the
wife or to her solicitors.
interest of the wife in the husband's AMP Income Protection Insurance Policy and
the associated financial benefits arising therefrom,
forthwith vest in the
interest of the husband in the wife's AMP Income Protection Insurance Policy and
the associated financial benefits arising therefrom,
forthwith vest in the
right, title and interest the husband may have in the following do vest in the
wife absolutely:
(a) the remaining proceeds of sale of the [Commercial Property];
(b) the [Discretionary Trust] and the [Testamentary Trust];
(c) all bank accounts held in the wife's sole name, including but not limited
(i) ANZ account ending [redacted];
(ii) ANZ account ending [redacted]; and
(iii) NAB account ending [redacted].
(d) any life insurance policies held in the wife's name;
(e) furniture, personal effects and jewellery in her possession;
(f) any motor vehicles registered in the sole name of the wife, including but
not limited to that:
(i) [Motor vehicle B] (registration number [redacted]);
(ii) horse float; and
(g) any horses registered in the sole name of the wife, including tack and
riding equipment.
right, title and interest the wife may have in the following do vest in the
husband absolutely:
(a) the [family home];
(b) all bank accounts held in the husband's sole name, including but not limited
(i) Westpac Choice account ending [redacted];
(ii) NAB Cash Management account ending [redacted];
(iii) NAB Classic Banking account ending [redacted];
(iv) Westpac eSaver account ending [redacted]; and
(v) Westpac BT Cash Management account ending [redacted].
(c) the [Mr Bowen Pension Fund];
(d) any life insurance policies held in the husband's name;
(e) furniture, personal effects and jewellery in his possession; and
(f) any motor vehicles registered in the sole name of the husband, including
[Motor vehicle A].
outstanding applications and responses other than as to costs be and are hereby
any party seeks orders for costs of these proceedings, that party must file and
serve written submissions within 28 days from the
date hereof.
respondent to any such application for costs must file and serve written
submissions in response within 28 days thereafter.
party has liberty to seek a relisting for the making of oral submissions on the
issue of costs, such request to be made within
14 days after the expiry of the
time for the filing of any responsive written submissions pursuant to the
immediately preceding order.
the event that a submission seeking costs is filed and served pursuant to
paragraph [15], and no request for relisting is received
pursuant to paragraph
[17] of these orders, any costs application stands to be determined by the
Presiding Judge in Chambers on the
papers with reasons to be delivered and
orders pronounced from Chambers without necessity for further appearance and
without future
notice to the parties.
documents produced by named persons pursuant to subpoena in these proceedings be
returned or destroyed in accordance with the
request from the named person on
the expiration of 42 days from the date hereof.
relation to material tendered as an exhibit into evidence in these
proceedings:
(a) all parties must collect the exhibits tendered by them ("their exhibits")
from the Chambers of Justice O'Brien, at least 28 days,
and no later than 42
days, from the date hereof;
(b) all parties must contact the Chambers of Justice O'Brien to arrange the
collection of their exhibits;
(c) in default of compliance with subparagraph (a), all material tendered as an
exhibit, save and except for material produced pursuant
to subpoena, will be
destroyed by the Court without notice to the parties.
the event of an appeal being lodged prior to the expiration period of 42 days,
paragraphs [19] and [20] do not apply.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
24 SEPTEMBER 2025
[2025] FedCFamC1A
On the wife's evidence she
eventually received a net award of $432,474. On the husband's evidence,
he eventually received a net award
$1,249,689.13.
That date being
the date on which he filed an affidavit responding to a Notice to Admit Facts
that had been filed on behalf of the
wife in which he stated that he was
"prepared to admit that our contributions are equal from the date of our
marriage up to the current
The husband did not
dispute the proposition that the wife should receive her jewellery and neither
party attributed any value to
As will be seen, a precise
figure as to the amount spent by the wife in legal fees over the course of the
litigation was not made
Other than for the purpose of
making an order with respect to ownership of a companion animal as that term is
defined, which is not
Fields & Smith
[2015] FamCAFC 57
(2015) FLC 93-638
, [97] and the authorities there
Bulleen v Bulleen
[2010] FamCA 187
(2010) 43 Fam LR 489
, [170] per Cronin J cited with approval in
(2015) 93-638,
Family Law Act 1975
s 79(4)(ca).
s 79(5)(a).
discussion in
Ryan v Zekas
[2020] WASC
By way of example, when
being sworn in before being cross-examined the husband was initially unable to
state his name. Later, where
he was unable to identify the word he needed to
use he often said "thingy."
No evidence was adduced as to the value of jewellery to be returned to the wife,
and no findings can
Khademollah
and Khademollah
[2000] FamCA 1045
Filed on 9 May
Having initially
resisted the proposition that her interest in the Testamentary Trust could be
characterised as property, the wife
abandoned that position. Her counsel
conceded in closing submissions that the interest should be so
characterised.
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
All figures are rounded
to the nearest dollar.
Whilst this was shown as an asset of the wife on the joint schedule filed by the
parties, in closing submissions counsel confirmed
that the account is in joint
For simplicity, I
refer to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) sitting
in its appellate jurisdiction as
& Shinohara
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Shinohara &
[2025] FedCFamC1A 126
Family Law Act 1975
s 79(3)(a).
[2018] FamCAFC 173
FLC 93-858.
(2012) 247 CLR
Trevi & Trevi
[2018] FamCAFC 173
(2018) FLC 93-858
[1998] FamCA 143
Ibid [30]; referring
Omacini and Omacini
[2005] FamCAFC 104
See for example,
albeit in a different context,
Jabour & Jabour
[2019] FamCAFC 78
(2019) FLC 93-898
Hurst & Hurst
[2018] FamCAFC 146
(2018) FLC 93-851
Barnell & Barnell
[2020] FamCAFC 102
(2020) FLC 93-961.
[2018] FamCAFC 173
(2018) FLC 93-858
Shinohara &
[2025] FedCFamC1A 126
Steinbrenner &
Steinbrenner
[2008] FamCAFC
[2015] FamCAFC 51
(2015) 53 Fam LR
Shinohara &
[2025] FedCFamC1A 126
Trevi & Trevi
[2018] FamCAFC 173
(2018) FLC 93-858
Chorn and Hopkins
[2004] FamCA 633
That trial listing
was vacated by an order made on 28 September 2018, to await the determination of
the personal injury compensation
claims of the
Later amended to
niece and nephew.
resolved by consent [in] February
Having filed a Form 8
Notice of Address for Service in these proceedings on 19 June
Family Court Rules
[2020] FCWA 51
and the authorities there cited in relation to the
issue of disclosure.
Benson & Drury
[2020] FamCAFC 303
(2020) FLC 93-998
, [35]; See also
[2019] FamCAFC 78
(2019) FLC 93-898
, [73] – [87],
Gadhavi v Gadhavi
[2023] FedCFamC1A 117
67 Fam LR 174.
apparent in any event that neither party attributed any particular importance to
the transactions in relation to this property.
It’s acquisition and
subsequent sale were not, for example, mentioned in either party’s
chronology filed for the purposes
The husband says that
the wife's parents contributed $285,000 and were repaid that amount when the
property was eventually sold.
The wife did not respond to that evidence beyond
saying that the property was "purchased 50/50" with her parents. Neither party
any evidence as to any
borrowings.
Pickford and Anor
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
(2024) 70 Fam LR 85
per Aldridge and Carew JJ,
Pickford v Pickford
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
(2024) 70 Fam LR 85
, [79] citing
Edinger v Duy
[2023] FedCFamC1A 194
(2023) 68 Fam
Aleksovski v
[1996] FamCAFC 111
(1996) FLC 92-705
, 83,437 and
Falcken & Weule
FamCAFC 140.
Steinbrenner
& Steinbrenner
[2008] FamCAFC 193
Blandford &
[2022] FedCFamC1A 67
Leaving aside his
subsequent submission received in response to
, as already
Noting that the
wife's personal capital gains tax liability, reflected in the net property
already retained by her, is to be paid
from the Commercial Property
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (761 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter