URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/203.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BABIC and TACCINI [2024] FCWA 203 (13 September 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
BABIC and TACCINI
[2024] FCWA 203
[REDACTED] SEPTEMBER 2024
DELIVERED :
13 SEPTEMBER 2024
FILE NO/S :
2418 of 2015
PARENTING - Where following a trial
final orders were made in December 2023 whereby the husband has sole parental
responsibility,
and the children live with him and spend limited supervised time
with the wife - Where the wife commenced fresh proceedings in June
2024 seeking
to reverse those arrangements such that she would have sole parental
responsibility, and the children would live with
her and spend alternate
weekends with the husband - Where there is no relevant change in circumstances
since the primary orders were
made - Consideration of the application of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") and whether
relevant principles have changed since the legislative amendment which enacted
it - Where the relevant principles are
HARMFUL PROCEEDINGS
ORDERS - Where the husband seeks a harmful proceedings order pursuant to
- Discussion of relevant principles - Where there are clearly reasonable
grounds to believe that the children would suffer harm if
the wife institutes
further proceedings - Order made
COSTS - Where there are circumstances
justifying an order for costs - Turns on its own
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
Representation:
No Appearance
Mr J Hedges SC
Solicitors:
Self-Represented Litigant
Bloxham Legal
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Babic and Taccini
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
Babic] ("the wife") and [Mr Taccini] ("the husband") are the parents of two
children, [Lucy] born on [redacted] and [Ellen] born
on [redacted]. There is a
long history of litigation between the parties. The most recent litigation
concluded in a five-day trial,
following which Tyson J made final orders for the
husband to have sole parental responsibility, and for the children to live with
him, and spend supervised time only with the wife. Her Honour published a
judgment, to which reference is made later in these reasons
judgment").
[early] June 2024, the wife commenced the present proceedings. She seeks sole
parental responsibility, and that the children
live with her and spend alternate
weekends with the husband. She seeks other ancillary orders similar to those
made in earlier proceedings,
orders in relation to her passport, and a
"reassessment" of child support. She seeks further orders that the
children "attend catholic
education", with the husband meeting 50 percent of
associated costs, and that their surname be changed from "Taccini" to
"Babic‑Taccini".
his response filed [later in] June 2024, the husband sought the dismissal of the
wife's application, a declaration that there
has been no significant change of
circumstances since the making of orders by Tyson J in December 2023, a harmful
proceedings order
made orders in chambers on 24 June 2024 listing the husband's response for
hearing and determination [in] September 2024. Those
orders required each
party to file documents for that hearing within a specified timeframe. The
husband filed affidavit material;
the wife did not. By reference to
correspondence between the wife and the Principal Registrar and noting that the
wife accessed
the relevant orders on the court portal on 25 June 2024, I am
satisfied that the wife was aware of the listed hearing, and of the
requirement
that she file documents. I am satisfied also that the affidavits relied upon by
the husband were served on her in a
wife did not attend the hearing, which was delayed for 20 minutes in case
she had been unavoidably detained. Unsuccessful efforts
were made to
I proceeded to hear submissions from counsel for the husband and reserved
my decision. Orders were published permitting the wife
to file an application
to reopen the hearing within a specified timeframe, failing which judgment would
be delivered from chambers
without further notice. No such application has been
filed, and no further correspondence has been received from the wife.
The evidence
evidence to be considered against the background of previous published judgments
in earlier proceedings between the parties is:
(1) the Case Information Affidavit filed by the wife [in] June 2024 with her
initiating application;
(2) the wife's affidavit verifying the information set out in the Notice of
Child Abuse or Family Violence (or Risk) filed [in] June
(3) the Case Information Affidavit filed by the husband on [in] June 2024 with
his response;
(4) the affidavit of the husband filed [in] August 2024;
(5) the affidavit of the husband's now wife [Ms Torres] filed [in] August
(6) the affidavit of the children's therapist [Ms A] filed [in] August 2024;
(7) the affidavit of [Ms B], a teacher present at a graduation assembly for
Lucy's [redacted] class [in] December 2023, also filed
[in] August 2024.
counsel properly acknowledged, the husband's application for a harmful
proceedings order pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") necessarily falls away, at least at this interlocutory
stage, if the wife's primary application is not dismissed. It is
appropriate
therefore to deal first with the husband's application grounded in
The husband's application grounded in
Relevant legal principles
as in this case, parenting orders concluding proceedings have been made the
legislation does not preclude further applications
being brought. Indeed, the
legislation specifically empowers the Court to discharge, vary or suspend all or
part of a previous order.
said, it has long been recognised that continual or protracted litigation over
parenting arrangements is detrimental to the
children concerned, and contrary to
public policy. What is generally described as the "rule in
" set out the following principles:
... the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for and
the material on which that order was based. It
should not lightly entertain an
application to reverse an earlier custody order. To do so would be to invite
endless litigation
for change is an ever-present factor in human affairs.
Therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that...
is some changed circumstances which will justify such a serious step, some new
factor arising or, at any rate, some factor
which was not disclosed at the
previous hearing which would have been
material...
a result of recent amendments to the
, those principles are reflected in
, which is in the following
65DAAA. Reconsideration of final parenting orders
(1) If a final
in relation to a
must not reconsider the final
considered whether there has been a significant change of circumstances since
is satisfied that, in all the circumstances (and taking into account whether
there has been a significant change of circumstances
since the final
it is in the best
for the fina
to be reconsidered.
(2) For the purposes of determining whether the
is satisfied as mentioned in
(1)(b), and without limiting section
have regard to any matters that the
relevant, including the following:
(a) the reasons for the final
and the material on which it was based;
(b) whether there is any material available that was not available to the
(c) the likelihood that, if the final
is reconsidered, the
will make a new
that affects the operation of the final
in a significant way (whether by varying, discharging or suspending
, in whole or in part, or in some other way);
(d) any potential benefit, or detriment, to the
might result from reconsidering the final
(3) Despite
may reconsider a final
with the agreement or consent of all the parties to that order.
(4) The failure of a court to comply with
(1) does not affect the validity of any order made by the court.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
(Cth) makes
it clear that s 65DAAA is intended to codify the common law principles
established by
Rice and Asplund
and elaborated on in subsequent
recently noted by Altobelli J and by Judge O'Shannessy, by its terms s 65DAAA in
fact departs from those principles as developed
in jurisprudence post
and Asplund
in one respect.
Previously,
a party applying to discharge or vary existing final parenting orders bore an
onus to establish "a prima facie case of
changed circumstances that would
justify embarking on a second contested parenting hearing as being in the
child's best interests".
The "overarching test" to be applied by the Court was that
"having regard to the best interests of the child new events or changed
circumstances have to be sufficient to provoke a new
The Court's
consideration of any argument to dismiss the fresh application required a
determination on that point.
its express terms s 65DAAA provides that the Court must not "reconsider the
final parenting order" already in place unless it
has considered whether there
has been a significant change of circumstances since the final parenting order
was made, and is satisfied
that in all the circumstances (and taking into
account whether there has been such a change) it is in the best interests of the
for the final parenting order to be reconsidered.
as their Honours observed, the section does not expressly require proof of a
significant change of circumstances as a preliminary
threshold which must be
cleared. Rather, the Court must first specifically consider the question of
whether there has been a significant
change of circumstances, and then take that
into account in considering whether it is satisfied that in all the
circumstances it
is in the best interests of the child to embark on the
reconsideration. The failure of the new applicant to establish that there
has been a significant change of circumstances since the making of the final
order is not expressed in s 65DAAA to be necessarily
fatal to the new
application.
Notwithstanding
that, the proper application of s 65DAAA still requires a clear focus on
just what change of circumstances is said
to have occurred since the making of
the final orders, and the circumstances in which those orders were made. While
the considerations
in s 65DAAA(2) are neither mandated nor exclusive, their
purpose is clear.
my respectful view, the departure accurately identified by their Honours is a
distinction without a meaningful difference.
appellate intervention the starting presumption on the commencement of new
parenting proceedings must be that the primary
orders were
- that is, that they
were in the best interests of the children
at the time they were made
That presumption is capable of rebuttal by cogent evidence that a material
factor was not disclosed at the primary hearing; failing
that, it must follow
that it cannot be in the best interests of the children to discharge or vary
those orders unless there has been
a relevant change in circumstances since they
my view, notwithstanding that the authorities which established them predate the
legislative amendment, the following principles
remain intact:
rule as now codified applies in every case in which final parenting orders are
sought to be discharged or varied subsequently.
It recognises the benefits of
finality of litigation, while also recognising "that considerations acutely
relevant to a child's best
interests can change, including, for example, by
reference to the child's age and level of
consideration of s 65DAAA can occur at any stage of the
proceedings.
order dismissing an application for parenting orders following the application
of s 65DAAA is not itself a parenting order. In
my view, neither is an
order at a preliminary stage declining to dismiss the application, without more.
Nevertheless, the consideration
of s 65DAAA is a manifestation of the "best
interests" principle.
nature and extent of the court's consideration of the matters set out in
s 60CC will depend on the circumstances of the case,
the nature and breadth of the issues the subject of
the proceedings.
the consideration of s 65DAAA occurs at a preliminary stage, when the
evidence is not tested, the applicant's evidence must
be considered at its
but the matter is
nevertheless determined on its merits, and not by reference to the principles
applied to applications for summary
common law position is supplemented by the express provisions of
s 65DAAA(2). That provision permits consideration of the reasons
final parenting order and the material on which it was based, whether there is
any material presently available that was
not available to the court which made
the final parenting order, the likelihood that if the case proceeds to
conclusion a new parenting
order significantly affecting the operation of the
existing order will be made, and any potential benefit or detriment to the child
that might result from reconsidering the final order.
those principles are understood, the form of orders proposed by the husband in
his Form 1A Response was inappropriate, albeit
their intent was clear both to
the Court and to the wife. As his counsel confirmed at the hearing, in fact
what the husband seeks
is the dismissal of the wife's application based on a
consideration by the Court of s 65DAAA at this preliminary stage.
xThe first question – has there been a significant change
of circumstances since the final parenting order was made?
the reasons that follow, the answer to this question is "no".
The primary orders
final parenting orders ("the primary orders") were made [in] December 2023.
They discharged all previous child-related orders.
They provide for the husband
to have sole parental responsibility, and for the children to live with
him. They provide for the children
to spend limited time with the wife, under
professional supervision to be provided at her expense. They further provide
effect from Lucy's 15
birthday on [redacted], those
limited time orders are discharged, and both children will spend time with the
wife in accordance with
their wishes.
primary orders also provide for the children to be at liberty to communicate
electronically with the wife in accordance with
their wishes. They provide
further for the children to continue to attend for individual therapy with Ms A
at the husband's expense,
for the means by which the parties are to communicate
with each other, the exchange of information and the like, and for the
by which overseas travel for the husband with the children can be
is unnecessary for present purposes to set out the primary orders in further
detail. I confirm that I have considered them in
The wife's evidence – Case Information Affidavit [in]
this affidavit, the wife sets out various matters which she asserts to be
relevant, but which by their terms predate the primary
Self‑evidently, those matters cannot evidence a change of circumstances
since the primary orders were made. It is
unnecessary to refer to them
the extent that the wife makes sweeping assertions that the children have been
"coerced [by the husband and his wife] into lying
for extended periods and isolating them from [her] and the maternal family,
having sexual intercourse
in front of children" and have been manipulated by
being forced to witness inappropriate behaviours and convinced to make false
statements,
she does no more than repeat in slightly different terms allegations
previously made. Those allegations were considered at the trial
culminated in the final orders and were found by the trial judge to be
broad tenor of the wife's current accusations is consistent with those she
raised prior to the making of the final orders. It
is sufficient to note that
the trial judge observed:
During the mother's evidence, she said, with conviction that:
(a) the father was a sociopathic, complete and utter malignant narcissist and
manipulator who had kidnapped the children;
(b) she had been the victim of the father's campaign to alienate the children
from her, which was designed to destabilise her life,
torment her and persecute
(c) the father engaged in cult-like, obsessive conduct, and has behaved in a
hostile, adversarial and abusive manner towards her;
(d) the father used the children as pawns, to intentionally hurt her, and he
derived joy from doing so."
wife's Case Information Affidavit does not evidence any change in circumstances
since the making of the final orders.
The wife's further evidence – her affidavit verifying
the information set out in the Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
Risk) filed [in] June 2024
in this document the wife sets out various matters which she asserts to be
relevant, but which by their terms predate the
primary orders. Again, those
matters cannot evidence a change of circumstances since the primary orders were
made. It is unnecessary
to refer to them further.
the document contains further sweeping assertions along the same lines as those
set out in the Case Information Affidavit.
Again, those assertions are
consistent with those raised by the wife prior to the making of the final
orders. It is unnecessary
to repeat what is set out above; it is sufficient to
note that the 2023 judgment makes it clear that the broad accusations now made
by the wife were made prior to the making of the primary orders, and were
rejected by Tyson J.
wife's affidavit verifying the Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence (or
Risk) does not evidence any change in circumstances
since the making of the
final orders.
readily conclude, therefore, that even taking the wife's evidence as its
highest, that evidence does not establish any change of
circumstances since the
final orders were made. It follows that there has been no "significant" change
in circumstances.
The second question – is it in the best interests of the
children for the final parenting orders to be reconsidered?
the answer to this question is emphatically "no".
have reviewed and carefully considered the 2023 judgment. The reasons are
comprehensive and clear. While it is unnecessary to
summarise them in detail,
the following findings bear repetition. Tyson J found that:
(a) the children have a meaningful relationship with the husband and feel loved,
settled, safe and secure in his
(b) the children love their mother, but their relationship with her is fractured
and cannot be characterised as
meaningful;
(c) the wife has caused the children emotional and psychological harm, and they
remain at risk of ongoing harm in her
(d) the wife is unlikely to engage in the professional support she requires to
ameliorate and address the harmful aspects of her
(e) that behaviour includes continuing to deny and reject the children's
expressed views to the extent they do not accord with her
own desires, exposure
of the children to her negative views of the husband and his wife, and
maintenance of her rigid belief that
the husband, rather than her own conduct,
is wholly responsible for the state of her relationship with the
(f) there is no cogent evidence to indicate the children are or will be at any
risk of harm in the father's care, nor anything to
suggest manipulation,
coaching or alienation by
(g) the children are intelligent and emotionally mature, and have consistently
and repeatedly expressed their desire to live with
the husband and a preference
to spend only supervised time with the
(h) the husband is capable of providing for all of the children's needs, while
the wife is not;
(i) an outcome leading to a change of residence, such that the children live
with the wife would be "catastrophic for the
course, that is the outcome now sought by the wife in her present
application.
findings, and the absence of any evidence as to any change of circumstances
since they were made, lead to a ready conclusion
that it is not in the best
interests of the children for the final orders to be reconsidered even taking
the evidence of the wife
at its highest.
conclusion is only reinforced by the recent evidence of Ms A, who has been
the children's therapist since she was initially
appointed to that role by
consent orders in June 2020. Ms A was found by Tyson J to have a trusting
therapeutic relationship with
both children and an affection towards them,
while displaying empathy towards the
It is sufficient for
present purposes to note that her present evidence is entirely consistent with
the findings made at trial;
that the current arrangements provide the children
with "stability and predictability", that they do not want those arrangements
change, and that they both hope for a better relationship with the wife and
foresee a time where they have a more equal relationship
with her subject to
their own choices.
in the context of the wife's present complaints that the children should be
attending catholic schools, in circumstances
where she agreed on the fourth day
of the 2023 trial that they attend their current public
Ms A confirms that
"both girls are much happier in their new schools and have both made friends and
are thriving socially and
academically".
have considered the 2023 judgment carefully, and in its entirety. The reasons
are clearly sound and were based on comprehensive
evidence. There is no
material presently available that was not available to Tyson J, other than
updating affidavit material filed
on behalf of the husband which simply confirms
the accuracy of the findings made.
the 2023 judgment pre-dated the recent amendments to s 60CC, her Honour
clearly considered what arrangements would promote
the safety of the children,
their views, and their developmental, psychological, and emotional needs. She
also considered the capacity
of each parent to provide for those needs, and the
benefit to the children of being able to have a relationship with both parents
to the extent it is safe to do so. I have considered those matters in the
context of this judgment, and there is no evidence to
suggest that material
evidence was not disclosed, or that there has been any change since they were
made such as to make her Honour's
clear findings no longer accurate.
is no reasonable likelihood that, if the final orders were to be reconsidered at
this time, the Court would make a new parenting
order that affects the operation
of those orders in any significant way.
is no identifiable benefit to the children that might result from
reconsideration of the final orders. There is clear identifiable
These children have been the subject of proceedings in this Court since 2015,
with little respite. They have lived with
the husband since September 2021 and
spent time with the wife, albeit not without difficulty, on a supervised basis
since then.
The evidence both at trial and more recently makes it clear that
exposure to further conflict and litigation will be detrimental
to them. That
is a matter to be further considered in the context of the husband's application
for a harmful proceedings order.
the limited extent that aspects of the wife's present application might be
interpreted to seek orders not properly characterised
as parenting orders, it is
sufficient to note that where the orders sought are predicated on a change in
the present parenting arrangements,
there is no reasonable prospect of them
being made. To the extent the wife seeks that child support be "reassessed",
the relevant
statutory considerations are not addressed. Those aspects of the
wife's present application which seek orders not properly characterised
parenting orders, have no reasonable prospect of success.
Form 1 Application of the wife filed [in] June 2024 will be dismissed.
Harmful proceedings order
husband seeks an order prohibiting the wife from instituting further proceedings
against him without being granted leave to do so under
At the hearing [in] September 2024, through counsel he confirmed
his wish that if such an order is made, the Court not notify him
application for leave, nor if any such application is
earlier noted, the wife has been given the required opportunity to be heard in
relation to that application.
She has not availed herself of that opportunity.
the reasons that follow, I am satisfied that the order sought should be
Relevant legal principles
is in the following terms:
102QAC. Making harmful proceedings orders
exercising jurisdiction
proceedings
may make an order (a
proceedings
) prohibiting a
proceedings
from instituting
proceedings
against another
proceedings
without the leave of the
under section
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that:
(a) the other
would suffer harm if the first
instituted further
proceedings
against the other
(b) in the case of
proceedings
(within the meaning of
who is the subject of the
proceedings
would suffer harm if the first
instituted further
proceedings
against the other
Proceedings
includes cross-
proceedings
and incidental
proceedings
(2) For the purposes of
(1), harm may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) psychological harm or oppression;
(b) major mental distress;
(c) a detrimental effect on the other
capacity to care for a
(d) financial harm.
(3) In determining whether to make an order under
may have regard to:
(a) the history of the
proceedings
between the first
and the other
(b) whether the first
has frequently instituted or conducted
proceedings
against the other
or tribunal (including
proceedings
instituted (or attempted to be instituted) or conducted, and orders
before the commencement of this section); and
(c) the cumulative effect, or any potential cumulative effect, of any harm
resulting from the
proceedings
referred to in
(a) and (b).
may make a harmful
proceedings
order on its own initiative or on application by a
proceedings
must not make a harmful
proceedings
order in relation to a person without hearing the person or giving the person an
opportunity of being heard.
(6) An order
(1) is a final order.
Order about notifying other
in relation to application for leave etc.
makes an order under
must also make an order as to whether the
is to notify the other
in the event that the first
makes an application under section
for leave to institute
proceedings
against the other
of either or both of the following:
(a) that the application has been
(b) if the application is dismissed - that the application has been dismissed.
must have regard to the wishes of the other
in making an order under
where a harmful proceedings order is sought, the Court is required to consider
the impact of potential further proceedings
on the respondent to them, and on
any child the subject of those proceedings. That is distinguished from the
traditional concept
of vexatious proceedings orders, now reflected in
, where the focus of consideration is on the actions and motivation
of the litigant who commences the further proceedings.
making of a harmful proceedings order does not shut the door of the Court; the
person the subject of such an order may still
seek to commence further
proceedings but will require leave to do
The protection
afforded by a harmful proceedings order is extended in those circumstances, as
an applicant for leave must not serve
that application unless and until leave is
On applying for leave,
the applicant bears the onus to satisfy the Court that the proposed proceedings
are not frivolous, vexatious
or an abuse of process, and that they have
reasonable prospects of
The first question – are there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the husband or the children would suffer harm if the wife
institutes further proceedings?
points are usefully made about this fundamental question.
proof that the husband or children would suffer harm if further proceedings were
instituted is not required. What is required
is the establishment of reasonable
grounds to believe that they would suffer harm - the distinction is important.
There must be
facts sufficient to induce that belief in the mind of a reasonable
"The objective
circumstances necessary to found reasonable grounds to believe must point
sufficiently to the subject matter of that
belief, [but] they need not be
established on the balance of
probabilities."
the provisions of
s 102QAC(2)
as to the nature of harm bear careful
attention. By definition, harm may include psychological harm or
oppression,
major mental
distress, a detrimental effect on the husband's capacity to care for the
children, or financial harm. Those types of
harm are listed in the
legislation as examples only - the list is inclusive, not exclusive. Other
determining whether to make a harmful proceedings order, the Court may have
regard to the matters set out in
s 102QAC(3).
I refer to those
matters below only as relevant.
The history of proceedings
parties separated in [redacted]. Proceedings were first commenced in this Court
by the husband's application filed in [mid]
2015. Those proceedings continued
to what was to be a five-day trial before Moncrieff J, which commenced in
[early] 2017. There
were multiple interim and interlocutory applications
and hearings along the way.
parties reached agreement in relation to parenting orders on the first day of
trial, and orders were made by consent in [early]
matters were not able to be agreed, and the trial continued in relation to them.
Judgment was delivered in [early] September
2017. In [early] 2018, the wife
filed an application for leave to appeal out of time against the financial
orders. Leave was granted,
but the wife did not comply with relevant orders and
the appeal was deemed abandoned.
It became necessary for the husband to bring an application for enforcement of
the financial orders.
[mid] 2018, Moncrieff J made an order for costs in favour of the husband. Costs
were awarded for the substantive financial proceedings
from [late] 2016 to the
conclusion of trial, the enforcement proceedings, and the costs argument itself.
His Honour did not fix the
amount of costs payable, and an assessment was
required. That assessment was subsequently conducted by a Registrar. The
payable by the wife was fixed at $70,985.66. In [early] 2021 the husband
filed an enforcement warrant for the seizure and sale of
property to in an
attempt to enforce the costs assessment.
June 2018, in circumstances where consent orders had been made permitting the
husband to travel with the
it was necessary for
him to bring a further application to facilitate that and the issue of
September 2018, the husband filed a contravention application alleging that the
wife contravened the then current parenting orders,
and an application in a
case. There were at least a further eight court events, including steps to
progress the matter towards trial.
The husband brought a further
application [in mid] 2019. In that application he alleged that the children
were at risk from the
wife and sought that they spend supervised time only with
[early] September 2019, the wife was
to enrol in an anger
management program, and it was deemed necessary to grant an
restraining both
parties from recording the children "for the purposes of evidence gathering for
these proceedings". Over 20 further
court events ensued.
[late] April 2020 the husband applied for an urgent recovery order. [Later in]
April 2020 orders were made for the children to
be returned to him.
[late] May 2020 the husband filed a further contravention application. In [late]
June 2020, the wife admitted multiple contraventions
alleged, and was ordered to
enter into a bond.
[mid] September 2020, the husband filed a further contravention application. In
[mid] February 2023 a Magistrate found the wife
to have contravened orders
without reasonable excuse, and she was required to enter into a further bond and
to pay the husband's
the meantime, in [early] September 2021, the husband commenced further
proceedings alleging that the children were at risk and
seeking that they spend
supervised time only with the wife. Those proceedings were expedited to trial
and culminated in the final
orders made by Tyson J in [mid] December 2023.
can be seen from that brief summary, proceedings in this Court commenced when
Lucy was nearing her third birthday, and Ellen was
not yet two. They have
continued relatively unabated since. Lucy is now 12, and Ellen is 11.
required consideration of the history of the proceedings is not limited to the
mere recital of a chronology.
proceedings in this Court proceed smoothly and efficiently, with minimal
acrimony, and in circumstances where the parties comply
not only with
substantive orders, but also with interlocutory and procedural orders designed
to assist in a prompt resolution of
their disputes. Other proceedings do
litigants in this Court approach parenting proceedings in a manner consistent
with the principles set out in the legislation.
Many also accept
determinations made by the Court, even where they opposed them, and move on with
their lives. Others do not.
this case, the wife's conduct has led to the outcomes of contravention
proceedings already described, enforcement proceedings
in the financial case,
substantial costs orders, and further proceedings required to enforce those
costs orders. It may fairly be
anticipated that any further litigation driven
by the wife would be conducted in a similar vein. The documents filed in
of her present application make that clear. They also confirm that she
maintains the beliefs expressed at the last trial and summarised
in the words of
Tyson J quoted earlier in these reasons. If anything, escalation of those
beliefs and conduct is more likely than
not. There is no identifiable prospect
of the wife accepting determinations of the Court with which she does not agree,
nor is there
any identifiable prospect of her conducting any further proceedings
in a manner different from what has gone before.
The cumulative effect, or potential cumulative effect, of
any harm resulting from the proceedings.
is a logical and factual overlap between this consideration in the context of
the application for a harmful proceedings order,
and the consideration required
in relation to the dismissal grounded in
of the wife's
application. The latter seeks, among other considerations, to protect the
children from the potential harm of ongoing
exposure to litigation. The former
focuses singularly on protection from such harm, whether that be to the
respondent or to the
children, or both.
can be no doubt that Lucy and Ellen have already suffered psychological harm and
major mental distress as a result of the proceedings
previously before the
Single Expert Witness in the previous proceedings, [Mr C], reported in [late]
2016 that the children were "absolutely delightful"
and "attractive, energetic,
intelligent, vibrant, children" who were "very busy, on the go, actively
exploring things, copying each
other and full of energy and life". No concerns
were raised about their development, albeit he observed some issues surrounding
their emotional regulation - a characteristic they shared with the
the time he reported in August 2019, Mr C observed that the children had been
subjected to inappropriate physical discipline by
the wife, who had instructed
them "not to talk about it to [him]". He took the view that the husband
was priming the children in
relation to allegations which they made at school,
and that his discussions were "creating significant psychological pressure" on
them. He regarded the wife's behaviour as a "much greater concern" as she was
"recording the children while trying to get
August 2022, Ms A described both girls as "reporting to be sick with anxiety"
of recriminations". The wife
was unable or unwilling to shield the children from her negative views of the
husband and his wife,
or for that matter to refrain from interrogating the
children - even going to the extent of asking the children in the presence of
A "what did you think would happen when you told people these things about me?
I feel sad".
primary judgment includes detailed descriptions of difficulties encountered by
the children during time with the wife, which
was supervised by virtue of orders
with which she vehemently disagreed. At times the children were distressed or
in tears. At others
they found it necessary to use a prearranged "safety
signal" to the supervisor to extract them from difficult situations. Again,
children were interrogated by the wife in relation to matters relevant to the
litigation then on foot.
her evidence at trial, Ms A described the children as fatigued and exhausted.
In her view they were at risk of developing chronic
anxiety and other mental
health conditions if they continued to have negative and psychologically
damaging experiences with the wife.
as found at trial, the children have already suffered psychological and
emotional harm as a result of the actions of the
wife. While there is a proper
distinction to be drawn between harm caused by those actions, and the present
required consideration
of risk of harm arising from proceedings, there is an
obvious factual overlap.
wife's behaviours towards the children which have caused them harm in the past
were often directly related to the conduct of
the litigation then on foot.
There are clearly reasonable grounds to believe that such a pattern would resume
in any future litigation,
and thus that the children would suffer harm as a
the children's ages, their views would be important in the determination of any
future litigation and would thus be sought
and scrutinised. They would almost
certainly have to engage again with either or both an Independent Children's
Lawyer and a Single
Expert Witness. The problematic conduct of the wife would
almost certainly escalate that process.
most recent report of Ms A is instructive in that regard. She said that she
exercised caution in "sharing all of the issues
[the children] have
expressed in counselling", noting their need for privacy and confidentiality,
and that "their lives have been
heavily scrutinised over the past few years, and
they also wish to have more control over who they share their experiences
A said this:
[The children's] current mental health is of serious importance due to the risks
faced by young people with poor mental health. Their
mental health is largely
stable, however both of them experienced varying levels of anxiety. If their
life situation is not managed
well in terms of stability, that could change, and
I would expect a worsening of anxiety symptoms. It is important to note that
is often a precursor to more serious and debilitating conditions such as
[Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder], depression, and substance
use in adolescents.
readily conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that both children
would suffer harm in the form of psychological
harm or oppression, and major
mental distress, if the wife institutes further proceedings against the husband.
I accordingly propose
to make a harmful proceedings order.
husband did not adduce current evidence directed to the question of whether he
would suffer psychological harm or oppression,
major mental distress, or a
detrimental effect on his capacity to care for the children if further
proceedings are instituted. While
the findings at trial, and for that matter in
earlier proceedings, support a conclusion that the stress associated with those
proceedings impacted the husband, no prospective finding as to the
possible effect on him of further proceedings being commenced
is required, given
the conclusion already reached.
while there are reasonable grounds to believe that the husband would incur legal
costs in opposing any further proceedings
instituted, it is unnecessary to
consider whether that would amount to "financial harm".
husband seeks his costs of the current proceedings. He understandably does
not wish to incur the delay and expense associated
with an assessment of costs,
and proposes a fixed sum of
His actual costs up to
the hearing were $9,659, with estimated further costs to the conclusion of the
hearing of $5,445.
provisions of
are familiar to both parties and need not be
party is in receipt of legal aid. I have no up-to-date evidence in relation to
their financial circumstances but note that
the husband describes himself as a
[manager] who works 38 hours per week, and the wife describes her
occupation as "self‑represented
litigant FCWA - self - home duties".
While I am prepared to assume for present purposes that the wife is of limited
impecuniosity is not of
itself a barrier to a costs
conduct by the husband of the present proceedings has been entirely appropriate.
As earlier noted, the wife did not comply with
orders requiring her to file
affidavit material and did not participate in the hearing before me which was
self-evidently necessitated
by her commencement of the proceedings. Those
failures were against the background of correspondence to the Court stressing
urgency with which she sought to pursue substantive and interim relief.
proceedings were not necessitated by the failure of either party to comply with
previous orders, and I was not informed of any
written offers to settle.
wife was wholly unsuccessful in the relevant
am satisfied that an order for costs is justified.
the permitted broad approach,
and that the power to order costs in a fixed sum need not be exercised in any
"scientific or formulaic
I conclude that an
order that the wife pay the husband's costs fixed in the sum of $10,000 is
will be the following orders:
Form 1 Initiating Application of the Applicant wife, MS BABIC, filed on
[redacted] June 2024 is dismissed.
Applicant wife is prohibited from instituting proceedings under the
Law Act 1975
(Cth) against the Respondent husband, MR TACCINI, without the
leave of the Court under
section 102QAC.
the event that the wife makes an application under
section 102QAE
for leave to
institute proceedings against the husband, the Court is not to notify the
husband either that the application has been
made, or if it is dismissed, of
that dismissal.
wife must pay the husband's costs fixed in the sum of $10,000.
Form 1A Response of the husband filed on [redacted] June 2024 is otherwise
that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family
Court of Western Australia.
13 SEPTEMBER
[2023] FCWA 291.
Note that the husband referred
to s 60DAAA of the
in his Form 1A, but filed correspondence [in] July 2024
in which he stated that the correct section is
See Exhibit 1.
Noting also that the wife's
telephone did not allow voicemails to be left.
Rice and Asplund
[1978] FamCAFC 128
Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
(Cth), [97].
Rasheem & Rasheem
[2024] FedCFamC1F 595
Whitehill & Talaska
[2024] FedCFamC2F
Defrey & Radnor
[2021] FamCAFC 67
See the discussion,
albeit in the context of a stay pending appeal, in
Cape & Cape
[2013] FamCAFC 114
Poisat & Poisat
[2014] FamCAFC 128
[2008] FamCAFC 150
(2008) FLC 93-383.
SPS and PLS
[2008] FamCAFC 16
FLC 93-363.
See for example
(2014) 51 Fam LR 340
Banks & Banks
[2015] FamCAFC 36
[2017] FamCAFC 119
(2017) FLC 93-788.
Dauntry & Wemple
[2018] FamCAFC 237
(2018) FLC 93-876.
judgment at [21].
Ibid [196]-[197].
[201]-[202].
[206]-[208].
Ibid [210]. At
trial counsel for the wife appropriately conceded that an order for the children
to live with the wife was not supported
The 2023 judgment
at [34]; Report dated [redacted] August 2024, annexed to an affidavit filed on
[redacted] August 2024.
Ms A's Report
attached to her affidavit filed [in] August 2024 at 6.
Sections 102QAC(7) and
102QAC(1) and 102QAG.
Section 102QAE(4).
Commissioner of Police (NSW)
(2019) 269 CLR 219, [44] (Bell, Keane, Nettle
and Edelman JJ) citing
George v Rockett
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104
, 112. See also
R v Tillett; Ex parte Newton
(1969) 14 FLR 101
Prior v Mole
[2017] HCA 10
(2017) 261 CLR 265
Proceedings may be
oppressive where their effect is "seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial
or damaging": See
GLJ v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the
Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 414 ALR 635
Husband's affidavit filed
[in] August 2024 at [24]-[25].
In [late] February 2017.
The 2023 judgment
[106]-[108].
Transcript of
Proceedings from [early] September 2024 at
See Exhibit 2, husband's
Cost Notification Letter, handed up in court on [redacted] September 2024.
Albeit noting that in her
Financial Statement filed in the earlier proceedings in [redacted] 2023 she
deposed to owning a unit in
[Suburb A] with a value of
Lenova (Costs)
[2011] FamCAFC 141
Anison & Anison
[2019] FamCAFC 108
(2019) FLC 93-908
The Estate of the Late AParke
[2016] FamCAFC 248
(2016) FLC 93-748
Idoport Pty Ltd v
National Australia Bank Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 23
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (439 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter