URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/88.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
STANHOPE and STANHOPE [2025] FCWA 88 (9 April 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
STANHOPE and STANHOPE
[2025] FCWA 88
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
6561 of 2018
MS STANHOPE
MR STANHOPE
Parenting proceedings
– Where the proposed length of trial estimated by the parties has
increased significantly and the husband
indicates his intention to call numerous
additional witnesses – Consideration of the provisions of
Division 12A of Part VII
Family Law Act 1975
Consideration of the principles for the conduct of child related proceedings and
the duties and powers of the court in those
proceedings – Consideration of
the duties and powers of the Court in relation to evidence – Orders made
requiring the
parties to clearly identify the final relief sought and what they
would assert to be the relevant issues for determination –
Further orders
made requiring the parties to clearly identify what they would say is the
probative value of evidence intended to
be adduced from various witnesses in the
determination of those identified issues – Where the Court foreshadows
power to limit the number of witnesses, the matters upon which they
may give evidence, the extent of cross‑examination, and
the length of the
trial – Turns on its own
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Representation:
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Solicitors:
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Stanhope and Stanhope
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court
(WA)) or to record a variation of the orders pursuant to r 311 of the
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
Stanhope] ("the husband") and [Ms Stanhope] ("the wife") are the parents of one
child [Child J] born on [in] 2016. Earlier parenting
proceedings concluded
with the making of final orders [in] January 2020. Those orders
provided for the parties to have equal shared
parental responsibility, for Child
J to live with the wife, and for him to spend time with the husband for five
nights per fortnight.
Other orders were made for special occasions and in
relation to specific issues.
present proceedings were commenced by the wife [in] October 2022. The
husband responded, and both parties seek the discharge
of the orders made [in]
January 2020. While the positions of the parties have fluctuated, they are
presently articulated as set
The husband's position
a Minute of Proposed Final Orders filed [in] August 2024, the husband proposes
that he have sole parental responsibility in relation
to Child J's education,
health and religious upbringing, subject to a requirement to consult with the
wife and various specific orders
regarding religious observations. He proposes
that Child J should live with the parties on a week about basis, and otherwise
various specific issues orders, including as to handover, exchanges of
information, medical treatment and travel. While he proposes
an order in
generic terms requiring both parties to follow all advice and recommendations
from Child J's medical practitioners, he
separately proposes an injunction
restraining the wife from taking Child J to any medical or allied health
professional without his
consent other than in an emergency and restraining her
upon provision of that consent from taking Child J to anyone other than his
"usual treating" professionals, as advised by him.
proposes that Child J remain enrolled at [School O] for the duration of his
primary and secondary education.
husband otherwise seeks an order for "judicial referral", by which he seeks
that the Court refer the wife to the "Attorney General's
office and the WA
Police for investigation as to whether she has committed" perjury, perversion of
the course of justice or conspiracy
to do so, or otherwise given a false
husband has previously made application for the recusal of the Chief Judge, and
the discharge of the Independent Children's Lawyer
("ICL") grounded in what he
contended to be a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of each by virtue
of involvement in a legal
professional association, being the Women Lawyers of
Western Australia. His contention was that a reasonable apprehension of
against men arose from that involvement. Both applications were
The wife's position
a Minute of Proposed Final Orders filed [in] January 2025, the wife proposes
that she have "sole decision-making in relation to
all major long-term issues"
concerning Child J, and various associated orders requiring the parties to keep
each other informed of
all relevant information. She proposes that Child J
live with her and spend time during school term with the husband each alternate
weekend from Friday afternoon until 6.00 pm Sunday, with extended periods during
school holidays, which in effect amount to equal
time or something approximating
that. She proposes specific orders for special occasions, handover and other
specific issues.
wife proposes an order requiring the husband to comply with the treatment
recommendations of Child J's treating medical and allied
health practitioners at
all times, including as to medications.
proposes that she be at liberty to change Child J's school enrolment from
the School O to [School S].
can be seen from the orders sought by the parties, there are issues between them
in relation to Child J's health, and his education.
J has been diagnosed with [various Disorders]. He has support from the
National Disability Insurance Scheme. There are disputes
between the
parties as to his appropriate treatment, and the use of medication in
particular.
J has attended School O since 2021. Both parties presently live close to the
school, but for some time the wife has sought
to move to [Suburb T] to live with
her partner in the property owned by him.
are also issues between the parties in relation to questions of travel. The
wife seeks the ability to travel internationally
with Child J; the husband
seeks to place restrictions on that.
Self-evidently,
there are issues between the parties as to parental responsibility more broadly
and as to the living arrangements
for Child J. There are also issues in
relation to communication between the parties.
previously noted in interlocutory judgments, contested allegations of family
violence loom large in the proceedings.
Status of the proceedings
proceedings were listed to a trial to commence [in] September 2024.
That trial had to be vacated in circumstances described
in a judgment published
[in] September 2024,
incorporate into these Reasons. Relevantly for present purposes, that trial was
listed for five days. The trial had previously
been listed to commence [in]
April 2024; at that stage, it was listed for three
efforts to progress the matter towards trial have been delayed by the inability
of the husband to source legal representation
under the relevant scheme, in
circumstances where a ban on personal cross-examination is in place. The
husband has taken appropriate
steps to try and secure representation, and his
inability to do so reflects difficulties with the scheme more broadly rather
any fault on his part.
proceedings were included in a Callover [in] March 2025 by orders made [in]
January 2025. Those orders anticipated a requirement
for five days to be
allocated for trial. Callover certificates filed by both parties and by the ICL
were initially consistent with
that estimate.
day after filing a Callover certificate indicating an estimated hearing time of
five days, the solicitors for the wife filed
an amended certificate estimating
the hearing time at 10 days. No explanation for that change was proffered. The
matter was therefore
removed from the Callover [in] March 2025 and listed
to today's hearing for directions only.
ICL and the solicitors for the wife were ordered to file a trial plan by 4 April
2025 and the husband was given liberty to do
so. The trial plan filed by
the wife's lawyers confirmed the estimated hearing time at 10 days and was
subsequently confirmed to
be agreed by the ICL. On 7 April 2025, the
husband wrote to the wife's lawyer and to the ICL, copying his correspondence to
Court, saying that he was unable to agree to any proposed trial plan until
he is "properly represented", but nevertheless expressing
his view that the
timing proposed was "significantly underestimated". He indicated that he
anticipates "needing to call an additional
9 – 12 witnesses and also
to file numerous subpoenas, again, dependent on the advice of [his] legal
representative."
husband's letter consistently expressed his view that he could not properly
address the matters raised without the benefit of
having been assigned a lawyer
under the relevant scheme. That is problematic for reasons outlined later in
this judgment.
addition to the matters just outlined, certain interlocutory matters remain
outstanding.
October 2024, the husband filed a Form 2 Application. Many of the matters
raised in that application were resolved by the subsequent
making of consent
orders. The balance of the application was dismissed [in] January 2025.
February 2025, the husband filed a further Form 2 Application. He sought
what he described as "immediate" orders for sole parental
responsibility and for
Child J to live with him until such time as the wife "undergoes a psychiatric
assessment by an approved psychiatrist,
trained and qualified in the diagnosis
of Antisocial Personality Disorder (ASPD) and Pseudologia Fantastica (PF)."
He proposed that
the psychiatrist conducting the assessment be "appointed
as an expert witness to the case" and give evidence including "recommendations
pertaining to the care and welfare" of Child J.
proposed that the psychiatrist should be provided with comprehensive background
information regarding the wife's life, including
details of known significant
traumatic events [redacted], and "the effects of working as a [redacted] from
such a young age". He
sought further orders requiring the wife to
undertake six separate parenting programs. He sought a raft of other orders in
the alternative,
and an order that the wife pay his costs incurred "in relation
to [her] refusal to comply with orders and co-parent in this matter."
in circumstances where he is presently self-represented.
application is listed for hearing [in] May 2025. The wife is required to file a
response to it by 24 April 2025. The husband
has not, at this point, sought to
amend the final orders he seeks.
filing that application, the husband has filed two further affidavits sworn by
him in support of it. The first was filed the
day after the application was
filed with an accompanying affidavit, and the second was filed [in] March 2025.
The husband has also
filed affidavits by 10 witnesses. For present purposes, I
assume that he would intend to rely on each of those affidavits for the
trial plan prepared by the wife's lawyers anticipates that the husband would
seek to cross-examine the wife for nearly two days,
but that the ICL would seek
to cross-examine her for only an hour. The plan also indicates the
intention of counsel for the wife
to cross‑examine the husband for two
full days, and the intention of the ICL to cross-examine him for two hours.
trial plan refers also to a number of witnesses proposed to be called on behalf
of the wife who have not yet filed affidavits.
also indicates the intention of the wife to call as her witness [Ms U], who
in an affidavit filed on behalf of the husband [in]
February 2025,
described herself as being in a "romantic/intimate" relationship with him. That
affidavit is noted as having been
sworn [in] September 2022.
husband has confirmed today that he is no longer in a relationship with Ms U.
The wife's counsel indicated that Ms U has now
said she is willing to give
evidence on behalf of the wife. There is no present indication as to why the
affidavit already sworn
has been filed by the husband at this time.
trial plan also indicates the intention of the wife's counsel and the ICL to
cross-examine eight witnesses who had by that point
sworn affidavits filed by
the husband.
trial plan also refers to evidence to be given by [Dr F], [Dr X], [Ms Y] and an
unnamed school principal as witnesses to be called
by the ICL. Each is marked on
the plan as "to be confirmed". The Single Expert Witness [Name redacted] is
noted at the relevant
part of the trial plan to give evidence on the ninth day
of trial, with it not being suggested that any other witness would be called
that day nor that closing submissions would then proceed until the following
of those matters, and frankly many more that have emerged over the course of the
proceedings, squarely raise concerns as to the
appropriate management of the
case moving forward. For the benefit of the husband, who is presently
self-represented, I propose
to summarise the relevant principles.
Principles for the conduct of child related proceedings
69ZN of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") sets out principles for
the conduct of child related proceedings. Relevantly, it provides that the
Court must (not may) give effect
to those principles in performing duties and
exercising powers in relation to child related proceedings, and in making other
first principle is that the Court is to consider the needs of the relevant child
and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings
may have on the child, in
determining the conduct of the proceedings.
second principle is that the Court is to actively direct, control and manage the
conduct of the proceedings.
third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will
safeguard the parties against family violence,
and safeguard the child from
being subjected to or exposed to family violence, abuse or neglect.
fourth principle is that, as far as possible, the proceedings are to be
conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and
child focused parenting by
the parties.
fifth principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay
and with as little formality, and legal technicality
and form, as possible.
69ZQ provides that in giving effect to those principles the Court must (not
may), among other things:
(1) decide which of the issues in the proceedings require
full investigation and hearing and which may be disposed
of summarily;
(2) in deciding whether a particular step is to be taken – consider
whether the likely benefits of the taking the step justify
the costs of taking
(3) deal with as many aspects of the matter is it can on a single occasion.
giving effect to the principles, the Court is empowered by s 69ZX to, among
other things:
(a) give directions or make orders about the matters in relation to which the
parties are to present evidence;
(b) give directions or make orders about who is to give evidence in relation to
each remaining issue, and about how particular evidence
is to be given;
(c) make orders as to the matters in relation to which expert evidence is
to be given, the number of experts who may provide evidence,
and how that
evidence is to be provided;
(d) limit the time for oral argument and for the giving of evidence;
(e) direct or order that evidence in relation to a particular matter, or
evidence of a particular kind, not be presented by a party;
(f) limit, or decline to allow, cross-examination of a particular witness;
(g) limit the number of witnesses who are to give evidence in the proceedings.
powers are self-evidently directed not only to the principle requiring the Court
to actively direct, control and manage the
conduct of the proceedings, but also
to the required consideration of the needs of the child and the impact that the
conduct of the
proceedings may have. They are also directed to the
principles requiring matters to be determined without undue delay, to promote
cooperative parenting to the extent possible, and to safeguard the parties
against family violence, the broad definition of which
can include coercive or
controlling behaviour in the conduct of
litigation.
Principles for the conduct of litigation more broadly
Court has inherent power to stay or dismiss proceedings or parts of proceedings
which are frivolous, vexatious or an abuse
That is so even
if it is not demonstrated that proceedings are brought for an ulterior motive or
an illegitimate purpose –
the concept extends "to the use of [Court]
processes so as to cause vexation or
oppression".
Court has an implied power more generally to ensure the effective exercise of
its jurisdiction, subject to the requirements of
power includes the taking of appropriate steps to limit evidence to that which
is relevant to the determination of matters in
issue, and of probative value,
even before any consideration of the limitations of that nature encompassed by
the rules of evidence.
proper scope and purpose of cross-examination of witnesses, particularly
non-expert witnesses, is well-established. As has been
"the aim of
cross-examination of a non-expert witness will usually be to attempt to impugn
the credibility of the witness's evidence,
obtain admissions or concessions as
to matters of primary fact within the witness's personal knowledge, and to
comply with the rule
Cross-examination need
not necessarily be lengthy to achieve that aim. The credibility of witnesses
whose evidence, even if taken
at its highest, is of limited or no probative
value, need not be impugned. Those witnesses need only be cross‑examined
necessary to comply with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
, or where it is
sought to obtain relevant admissions or concessions as to matters of primary
fact within their knowledge.
of course case management principles are not an end of themselves, and the
primary consideration in the conduct of any proceedings
is to do justice between
the parties, and in child related proceedings to ensure that properly informed
decisions are made in the
best interests of the child, nevertheless the Court
has an obligation to litigants more generally to ensure that its limited
used efficiently.
Application of relevant principles to the present case
will be apparent from the matters just summarised, I hold a number of concerns
as to the appropriate conduct of the trial in these
proceedings. They are
related to, but not limited to, the obvious concern at the fairly last-minute
doubling of the time required
for trial as estimated by the solicitors
it is not clear whether by his recently filed interlocutory application the
husband intends also to seek to amend the final
relief he seeks. That is
so for a variety of reasons, not least the filing by the husband of a subsequent
witness affidavit expressing
the view that "shared custody" is in Child J's best
as presently informed I am unconvinced that it is reasonably necessary for each
of the parties to be cross-examined for two
the asserted probative value of the evidence to be given by a number of lay
witnesses is unclear.
as earlier noted, the trial plan is less than definite in relation to witnesses
apparently to be called by the ICL, although
some limited clarity was achieved
in that regard this morning.
the husband has indicated his intention to call a significant number of further
as yet unnamed witnesses. No view can presently
be reached as to whether that
should be permitted, and if so whether any conditions should be imposed.
propose to make orders directed towards addressing those issues. I foreshadow
that I am considering the robust exercise of the
powers to direct, control and
manage the conduct of the proceedings explained earlier in these reasons,
including the powers of the
Court to limit the number of witnesses, the matters
in respect of which evidence can be given, and cross-examination. For obvious
reasons, I would not exercise those powers without giving the parties and the
ICL proper opportunity to consider relevant matters
and to be heard on the
acknowledge that the husband has indicated in correspondence that he does not
consider himself able to be specific about the evidence
he intends to call at
trial, or other matters, without the benefit of the legal advice he anticipates
receiving once he is allocated
a lawyer under the relevant scheme. There are a
number of observations to be made in that
is nothing in the conduct of the proceedings to date to indicate any reticence
on the part of the husband to articulate the
relief he seeks, prepare documents,
identify potential witnesses and have them swear affidavits. He has filed at
least 10 interim
and interlocutory applications to date. He has demonstrated
capacity to identify what he would regard as being relevant legal issues,
including for example by applying for the recusal of the Chief Judge by
reference to the principles of apprehended bias.
a significant percentage of litigants in this Court proceed to trial
unrepresented and find it necessary to undertake all
relevant preparation and
advocacy themselves. While I accept that the husband is taking appropriate
steps to secure representation
for trial by accessing the relevant scheme, that
only goes so far. The current limitations faced by those administering the
both in terms of funding and the availability of lawyers willing to take
assignments, mean that lawyers are not being allocated to
those eligible under
the scheme until after a trial has been listed. By that mechanism, priority is
given to cases where trials
are looming, and the scope of preparatory work to be
done under the relevant grant is limited to that ordinarily done after
all relevant
trial affidavits have been filed, and the matter is ready
to proceed.
all those circumstances, there is no utility in deferring the required
definition of issues, and consideration of limitations
on evidence, until after
a lawyer is assigned to the husband under the scheme. A trial will not be
listed until the issues are defined
and limitations on evidence considered, and
a lawyer will not be allocated until after a trial is listed.
Disposition
propose therefore to make orders requiring the parties and the ICL to take
necessary steps to enable proper consideration of the
appropriate management of
the case moving forward, and the potential exercise of the powers referred to
earlier in these reasons.
Those steps must necessarily be taken in a logical
sequence. I propose to ensure that they are taken in a timeframe which will
enable them, and any submissions the parties wish to make, to be considered at
the hearing which is already scheduled [in] May 2025.
In that way, any delay of
the progress of the matter towards trial will be minimised to the
extent possible. So that there can be
no confusion, I confirm that the
orders already made directed towards the hearing of the husband's Form 2
Application filed [in]
February 2025 at that scheduled hearing remain in
reasons which should be obvious from what has already been set out, there is no
utility in the matter remaining in the Callover
listed [in] May 2025. I will
remove the matter from that Callover to avoid the need for an unnecessary Court
attendance and associated
will be the following orders:
the event that the Applicant wife, [Ms Stanhope], seeks final orders which
differ from those set out in her Minute of Proposed
Final Orders filed
[in] January 2025, she must file and serve a further Minute of Proposed
Final Orders by no later than 4.00 pm
on 17 April 2025.
the event that the Respondent husband, [Mr Stanhope], seeks final orders which
differ from those set out in his Minute of Proposed
Final Orders filed
[in] August 2024, he must file and serve a further Minute of Proposed
Final Orders by no later than 4.00 on 17
April 2025.
no later than 4.00 pm on 24 April 2025, each party and the Independent
Children's Lawyer must file and serve the following:
(a) Papers for the Judicial Officer in the usual form;
(b) a list of all witnesses who have already sworn affidavits which have been
filed in the proceedings upon which that party or the
Independent Children's
Lawyer would intend to rely at trial;
(c) in respect of each such witness, a short statement of the factual issue or
issues in the proceedings to which the evidence of
that witness is asserted to
be relevant;
(d) a list of any other witnesses in respect of whom that party or the
Independent Children's Lawyer would propose to prepare, have
sworn and file
affidavits to be relied upon at trial;
(e) in respect of each such proposed witness, a short statement of the factual
issue or issues in the proceedings to which the evidence
of that witness is
asserted to be relevant;
(f) a list of any other witnesses that party or the Independent Children's
Lawyer would propose to subpoena to give evidence at trial;
(g) in respect of each such proposed subpoenaed witness, a short statement of
the factual issue or issues in the proceedings to which
the evidence of that
witness is asserted to be relevant.
the listed hearing [in] May 2025, each party and the Independent Children's
Lawyer must be in a position to make submissions as
to the appropriate exercise
of the Court's power to limit the matters in respect of which evidence can be
given, make orders as to
by whom evidence may be given, limit the number of
witnesses and limit cross-examination.
written submissions to be relied upon by either party or by the Independent
Children's Lawyer addressing the matters referred
to in the immediately
preceding order must be filed and served by no later than 4.00 pm on 2 May
proceedings are removed from the Callover [in] May 2025.
These reasons are the reasons for decision delivered on [Redacted], edited in
places but only as to correct grammatical errors and
some infelicity of
expression without variation to the substance thereof.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
[2023] FCWA 174;
and Stanhope
[2023] FCWA
[2024] FCWA
[2024] FedCFamC1A
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) FLC 90-674
and the authorities there
Rogers v The Queen
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251.
[2015] FamCAFC
P v Q (No 2)
[2023] WASCA 163
67 Fam LR 399
(1893) 6 R 67 (HL).
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
239 CLR 175
The State of Queensland and Anor v J L Holdings Pty Ltd
(1997) 189 CLR 146.
Affidavit of [Ms N] affirmed [in] August 2024 and filed [in] February 2025 at
paragraph [159].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter