URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2019/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HADZHIEV and PIONTEK [2019] FCWAM 78 (5 June 2019)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA AT 150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
HADZHIEV and PIONTEK
[2019] FCWAM 78
20, 21, 22 & 23 MAY 2019
DELIVERED :
5 JUNE 2019
FILE NO/S :
PTW 3482 of 2017
MR HADZHIEV
FAMILY LAW - Where a party
brings a substantive claim under Div 2 of
- Whether there was a de facto
relationship and if so when it commenced and when it ended - Whether a party
meets the relevant conditions
established by
s 205Z(1)(a)
or (c) of the Act
- Where material evidence is strongly contested - Where a party applies for
Centrelink benefits - Where there are
substantial cash
transactions
Legislation:
Court Act 1997
s 205Z(1)(a)
Interpretation
Representation:
Ms N Hossen
Dr R Ingleby
Solicitors:
FamLaw Legal
Cobalt Legal
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE
BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES’
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
INTRODUCTION
proceedings for determination comprise the initiating application of [Mr
Hadzhiev] ("the Applicant") filed on 2 June 2017 and
the response of [Ms
Piontek] ("the Respondent") filed on 16 August 2017 (as amended on 2 April
substantive claim of the Applicant is for relief under Div 2 of
Family Court Act 1997
(WA) ("the Act"). The Applicant seeks orders
that the Respondent pay to him the sum of $268,000 and otherwise transfer to him
interest in a certain motor vehicle.
Applicant's case is that a de facto relationship existed between the parties,
commencing in February 2014 and ending on 22 December
2016. In the
alternative, the Applicant contends that if it is found that there was a de
facto relationship which extended over
a period of less than two years, he made
substantial contributions of the types covered by
s 205ZG(4)(a)
the Act and that a failure to make a substantive order in his favour would
result in a serious injustice to him.
Respondent's case is that a de facto relationship never existed and that their
personal relationship was something less than
that. The Respondent acknowledges
that the Applicant resided with her and her adult daughter in the latter's
property at [Suburb
A] from about July 2014 until late August 2015 but says that
otherwise the parties have never resided together.
principal issues in contention are:-
(a) whether a de facto
relationship existed between the parties;
(b) if so, when did it commence and when did it end; and
(c) if there was a de facto relationship of less than two years duration, has
the Applicant met the conditions set out in
s 205Z(1)(c).
COMPOSITION OF THE EVIDENCE
evidence‑in‑chief of the Applicant was comprised of his trial
affidavit filed on 12 June 2018 and his responding
affidavit filed on 8 May
the Applicant's affidavits were not prepared with the aid of an interpreter,
during the trial the Applicant was assisted
by a professionally qualified
[Country A] translator, namely, Ms L.
12 June 2018 the Applicant filed seven witness affidavits, being those
(a) his friend, [Mr H];
(b) his friend, [Mr G];
(c) his friend, [Mr C];
(d) his friend, [Mr K];
(e) his friend, [Mr M];
(f) his former mother-in-law, [Ms P]; and
(g) his former father-in-law, [Mr P].
Applicant did not rely on the affidavits of Ms P and Mr P and so they will
be disregarded. All of the other deponents attended
cross‑examination.
Applicant also relied on an earlier witness affidavit being that of [Mr R],
registered builder, filed on 2 June 2017. Mr R also
attended for
cross-examination.
Applicant filed three subpoenas for witnesses to give oral evidence at trial,
directed to:-
(a) [Mr J];
(b) [Ms J]; and
(c) [Mr S].
the Respondent's objections, the Applicant was permitted to call all those
and Ms J are the Respondent's current neighbours. Mr S is the parties'
former neighbour when they resided at the Suburb A property.
evidence‑in‑chief of the Respondent was comprised of her trial
affidavit filed on 2 April 2019, a document which
is annexed to a short
affidavit of hers filed in support of an interlocutory application.
Respondent filed six witness affidavits, being those of:-
T], filed on 24 August 2017;
(b) her elder daughter, [Ms N], filed on 2 April 2019, another document
annexed to the short affidavit of the Respondent filed on
the same day;
(c) her friend and accountant, [Ms B], filed on 24 August 2017;
(d) [Mr D], filed on 16 August 2017;
(e) [Mr V], filed on 17 August 2017;
(f) [Mr I], filed on 17 August 2017; and
(g) [Ms Y], filed on 25 August 2017.
Respondent elected to rely only on the evidence of Mr T (who has carried out
work at her property), her elder daughter and Ms
B. Those three witnesses
attended court and were cross‑examined. The affidavits of the four other
deponents will be disregarded.
BRIEF FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Applicant is a 59 year old self-employed [mechanic] operating a mobile business
who lives in shared rental accommodation situated
in Suburb A.
Respondent is a 47 year old company director who lives with one of her daughters
in a property owned by her and situated in [Suburb
Respondent is the sole director/shareholder of [Company A], a company which has
conducted business importing goods from China.
A holds half of the issued shares in [Company B], the other half being held by
an entity under the control of her friend
and witness, Ms B.
Respondent and Ms B are the only directors of Company B, a company which has
only conducted business in a single project, the
development of a property in
[F] Street, Suburb A .
Respondent said that Company A has not been active for the last year or so.
is common ground that the parties met on or about 24 August 2013.
parties have children from previous marriages. The Applicant has two children
living with their mother who were aged 10 and
11 years at the time he signed his
trial affidavit. The Respondent has two daughters both of whom are now
the time the parties met the Applicant was living in rental accommodation
situated in [Suburb C] and the Respondent was living
in rental accommodation
situated in [Suburb D].
Applicant's evidence is that the parties resided together, as
(a) from February 2014 until about June 2014 in the
Respondent's rented Suburb D property;
(b) from about June 2014 until about February 2016 in the property at Suburb
A owned by the Respondent's elder daughter; and
(c) from about February 2016 until 22 December 2016 in the Suburb B property
owned by the Respondent.
Respondent says that the only place of common residence for the parties was the
Suburb A property and that the period of common
residence extended only from
Applicant took up residence
there, at his request and not by invitation, simply
as a boarder, because he had nowhere else to live.
is common ground that on 24 January 2013, that is, well before the parties met,
the Respondent became the sole registered proprietor
of the Suburb B property,
which at that stage was only a vacant block of land.
Respondent described the parties meeting for the first time as a matter of
coincidence. The place they met was a McDonald's
restaurant carpark. At that
time, the Respondent's younger daughter, who was then only 16 years of age, was
spending time with a
young man known to the Applicant and who customarily
referred to him as "uncle".
is common ground that shortly after their meeting the Respondent visited the
Applicant at his mechanic workshop in Suburb E for
the purpose of him carrying
out some repairs to her motor vehicle. The Respondent said that one of her
reasons for staying in contact
with the Applicant was that she could gain a
sense of the character of the young man spending time with her younger daughter.
it transpires, the young man in question is not actually the nephew of the
Applicant, but calls the Applicant "uncle" out of respect.
The Respondent said
that she was concerned about the significant age difference between her younger
daughter and the young man in
question and so wanted to keep an eye on
July 2014 the Applicant closed his mechanic business and in September that year
applied for Centrelink benefits. Subsequently,
he was granted the Newstart
allowance. He remained in receipt of Centrelink benefits until late 2016 when
he started his present
mobile mechanic business.
Applicant has been in the practice of purchasing damaged motor vehicles at
auction, repairing them, licensing them and then selling
them at a profit.
After meeting the Applicant, the Respondent also purchased motor vehicles at
auction, including the motor vehicle
claimed by the Applicant in his initiating
application. Taken into evidence were documents subpoenaed from Department of
which show the considerable extent of this activity.
Applicant is aware that a licence is required to conduct the business of selling
motor vehicles to the public. However, he said
that provided such transactions
are limited to five per year it is not necessary for an individual like him to
hold a motor vehicle
dealer's licence.
Respondent entered into a building contract with the Applicant's witness, Mr R,
for the construction of a new home on the Suburb
B block. The build commenced
in March 2014 and took a considerable amount of time to be completed. The
Respondent moved into the
Suburb B property on 19 February 2016. The
Respondent and Mr R have had several contractual disputes. Mr R lodged a
caveat against
the title to the Suburb B property. It appears that the various
disputes between them have now been resolved.
is common ground that whatever relationship existed between the parties after
they met on 24 August 2013, it ended acrimoniously
on or about 22 December
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS
first key statutory provision is
of the Act which holds, relevantly,
as follows:-
205Z Where court may make
order under this Division
(1) A court may make an order in relation to a de facto relationship
only if satisfied —
(a) there has been a de facto relationship between the partners for at
least 2 years; or
(c) the de facto partner who applies for the order made substantial
contributions of a kind mentioned in
section 205ZG(4)(a)
, (b) or (c) and failure
to make the order would result in serious injustice to the partner.
second key statutory provision is
Interpretation Act
Interpretation Act
") which holds, relevantly, as
13A De facto relationship and de facto partner,
references to
(1) A reference in a written law to a de facto relationship shall be
construed as a reference to a relationship (other than a legal
marriage) between
2 persons who live together in a marriage-like relationship.
(2) The following factors are indicators of whether or not a de facto
relationship exists between 2 persons, but are not essential
(a) the length of the relationship between them;
(b) whether the 2 persons have resided together;
(c) the nature and extent of common residence;
(d) whether there is, or has been, a sexual relationship between them;
(e) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any
arrangements for financial support, between them;
(f) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property (including property
they own individually);
(g) the degree of mutual commitment by them to a shared life;
(h) whether they care for and support children;
(i) the reputation, and public aspects, of the relationship between them.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE EVIDENCE
a view to assisting the parties to understand the reasoning process underpinning
these reasons, something might briefly be said
first and most basic point to make is that it is the Applicant who has carriage
of the proceedings and who carries the burden
of satisfying the Court that the
relationship between the parties carries sufficient of the necessary indicators
of a de facto relationship.
That is, it is for the Applicant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the parties lived together in a marriage-like
relationship.
The onus is not upon the Respondent to prove the reverse.
for the evidence of the parties themselves and their various witnesses, there
are some broad observations which may be made at
this point.
Unfortunately,
it has to be said that there are good reasons to have serious doubt about the
reliability of the evidence of each
of the parties.
select one example regarding the Applicant, his evidence about the parties
having an "engagement party" at the Respondent's home
on the day of her 42nd
birthday, is simply implausible.
parties had only met for the first time less than two months prior and in that
period the Respondent had spent time travelling
in Europe. The Respondent's
younger daughter was having surgery around the time of the Respondent's
the Applicant to suggest that it is realistic to accept that his unexpected
arrival at the Respondent's home on the day in question
with a group of some
five male friends (some of whom the Respondent had never even met) and holding a
birthday cake and another cake
with love hearts on it, constitutes an engagement
party is something which casts serious doubt over the reliability of the balance
of his evidence.
the so-called engagement party there were no friends or family of the Respondent
present. It is highly unlikely that there was
ever any agreement reached on
[the day of the Respondent’s 42nd birthday] or earlier for the parties to
marry. The Applicant
has not given any evidence of any agreed date for the
alleged intended marriage to actually take place. The Applicant's evidence
strongly contested, as indeed most of the Applicant's
oral evidence regarding
financial interactions between the parties was strongly contested.
substantial defect in the Applicant's evidence leads the Court to view the
Applicant's evidence regarding events post-dating
the day of the
Respondent’s 42nd birthday in a very cautious fashion.
for the Respondent, there are also good reasons to have doubt about the
reliability of all of her evidence. A prime example is
her evidence regarding
some transactions on a particular ANZ Bank account in the name of the
relevant documents comprise annexure 6 to the Applicant's trial affidavit. The
number of the account in question ends with the
digits [xxxx]. The entries of
particular concern are those dated 10, 12 and 16 June 2014.
10 June 2014 the Respondent caused $67,000 to be deposited into the Applicant's
account. The same amount was withdrawn by her
on that day. Her explanation is
that the $67,000 was her money and that she was providing a short-term loan to
the son of Mr V in
order to assist him to settle the purchase of a property
from his parents. She also added that on the day in question she was on
to China and so placed the money in the Applicant's account trusting him to pay
it over to Mr and Ms V.
the Respondent's evidence on point was unconvincing. She did not satisfactorily
explain why it was necessary for her to
use an account in the name of the
Applicant to achieve the desired outcome when, presumably, she could have used
an account of her
own or one held by one of her friends or members of
on 12 June 2014 the sum of $288,681 is deposited into the same account of the
Applicant. The Respondent says that this sum
represents the net proceeds of
sale of the property of Mr and Ms V. Then, on 16 June 2014 there are two
transfers, to the same account,
out of the Applicant's account, totalling
Respondent says that Mr and Ms V mistakenly gave their settlement agents the
Applicant's bank account details instead of their
own or hers. This evidence
is, on its face, implausible. The amount in question is substantial. This is
not the type of careless
mistake that ordinary people would make.
Respondent could have called Mr V to corroborate her version of events.
Although the Respondent led the Applicant to believe
that she would be calling
Mr V as her witness, at the eleventh hour her counsel told the Court, without
prior notice to the Applicant's
lawyers, that Mr V would not be called. It is
very difficult to do anything other than draw the conclusion that the reason the
did not call Mr V is that she knew his evidence would not support her
case on this point and perhaps more broadly.
the Respondent truly knows the truth behind those deposits and withdrawals.
There is no suggestion that any of those particular
transactions caused any
financial loss to the Applicant. That is, the Applicant does not lay claim to
any of those particular monies
that went in and out of his account. It is
unclear why the Respondent was not completely truthful regarding those
transactions.
There is obviously a reason why she and Mr and Ms V decided to
effect these transactions the way they did. The reason is not apparent.
Applicant's counsel suggested to the Respondent in cross‑examination that
the $67,000 transaction in question was actually
related to the settlement of
the purchase of the Suburb A property owned by the Respondent's elder daughter
and had nothing to do
with the son of Mr and Mrs V. It appears that this
settlement took place on or about 16 June 2014. However, the Respondent
the narrative in her trial affidavit and said that it was pure
coincidence that the settlement of these two property transactions
occurred at
or around the same time.
the conclusion of the evidence it was extremely difficult to make sense of the
evidence regarding the transactions allegedly concerning
the V family. The
Respondent could have led all the evidence necessary to establish the truth on
point but elected not to do so.
It is difficult to see how her case would have
been disadvantaged by a full and frank account on this issue.
there was some other curious evidence regarding another deposit into the
Applicant's ANZ Bank account # xxxx. It emerged in
the trial that some rent
paid by the occupier of the old home formerly sitting on the F Street, Suburb A
property that was due to
the Respondent and Ms B (or their entities) somehow
found its way into the Applicant's account. The Respondent's explanation on
point was unconvincing. It seems unlikely that a person as financially savvy as
the Respondent could have made a mistake in directing
the relevant property
manager to deposit rent into the Applicant's account instead of her own or that
of Company A.
there is another good reason to be cautious about the evidence of both parties.
Most of the financial transactions between
them were, on both accounts, carried
out in cash. That is to say, the evidence of the parties is that tens of
thousands of dollars
in cash changed hands from time to time. Indeed, it would
appear that the Applicant is claiming the $268,000 figure specified in
initiating application as representing the total amount he allegedly paid in
cash to the Respondent in various instalments and
for various reasons.
is no paper trail to follow. Neither party has produced a complete set of bank
statements to cover the relevant periods.
The Applicant has provided copies of
tax returns for only the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2018. They are not
particularly helpful.
Although the Applicant apparently lodged an income tax
return for the year ended 30 June 2014, a copy of it was not put into
Applicant, despite some prompting from the Bench, did not produce any income tax
assessment notices. For her part, there are
no taxation records at all from the
Respondent in the evidence.
Applicant said that he did not lodge income tax returns for the years ended 30
June 2015 and 2016 because his income was limited
to Centrelink benefits and
therefore he did not have an obligation to lodge. However, the Applicant did
not lead any expert evidence
to prove that he had no such obligation. Further,
the evidence of Ms B given in answer to questions from the Bench suggested that
there is a serious doubt as to whether the Applicant should have lodged returns
for the two years in question, or at least for one
of the reasons why a complete set of income tax returns and assessment notices
from the Applicant would have been helpful is
that evidence of his taxable
income would ordinarily be expected to support a finding that he had the
capacity to make the large
cash payments to the Respondent and to others that he
said he actually made.
for the witnesses for each party, it has to be said that all of those witnesses
gave evidence in a reasonably satisfactory fashion.
That is, under
cross-examination, none of them was caught out telling a blatant untruth.
However, most of them spent only a short
period of time in the witness box and
some were cross-examined only very briefly. In those circumstances, it is
difficult to gain
a complete sense of the reliability of their evidence.
most impressive of all the witnesses to be called was Ms B. She herself drafted
her own affidavit, albeit that the final product
was produced out of the offices
of the solicitors then acting for the Respondent. She answered every question
put to her in a clear,
considered and forthright fashion. To the extent that
her evidence conflicts with that of the Applicant or any of his witnesses,
evidence of Ms B is strongly preferred. That said, Ms B acknowledged that her
knowledge of the Respondent's financial affairs
was very limited, being
restricted to those matters necessary for the production of the Respondent's
income tax returns. Otherwise,
the only knowledge Ms B has of the Respondent's
financial affairs is that concerning their joint involvement in the property
development
carried out by Company B.
was nothing to emerge from the cross-examination of any of the witnesses called
by each party to lead the Court to conclude
that any one of them was being
deliberately dishonest.
it needs to be stressed that many of the witnesses gave evidence about
relatively mundane events occurring several years
ago. Most of the Applicant's
witnesses were clearly aligned with him as the Respondent's most important
witness, her daughter, was
clearly aligned with her. It would be unrealistic to
expect that people with no financial interest in the outcome of the proceedings
would have a perfect recollection of unremarkable events occurring so long
STATUTORY INDICATORS
statutory indicators will be addressed in the order in which they are listed in
the Act and not necessarily in order of importance
in the particular
circumstances of this case.
Length of relationship
parties have known each other since August 2013.
either party's version of events, any relationship between them broke down
completely by no later than 22 December 2016.
the parties' relationship, however it is ultimately characterised, was
relatively short, standing at less than three years.
Given the ages of the
parties and their considerable life experience before they met each other, the
relevant period can fairly
be described as being only modest.
Whether the parties have resided together
is common ground that the parties resided together at the Suburb A property as
from June or July 2014. However, whereas the Applicant
says that they lived
there together from that time until February 2016 when the Suburb B property was
ready to be occupied, the Respondent
says that, at her request, the Applicant
vacated the Suburb A property at the end of August 2015.
Applicant alleges that the parties lived together in the Respondent's rental
property in Suburb D between February 2014 and June/July
2014. The Respondent
denies this.
Applicant alleges that the parties lived together in the Suburb B property from
February 2016 until 22 December 2016. The Respondent
denies that they ever
lived together at this property.
Applicant has provided evidence that on 20 January 2014 he gave 21 days notice
to the lessor of the Suburb C property that he
was terminating his tenancy.
Whilst this evidence is consistent with his case on point, it does not of itself
prove that he moved
from Suburb C into the Suburb D property.
Applicant has not led sufficient evidence to prove that he ever lived at the
Suburb D property.
of his witnesses gave evidence that would support the conclusion that he resided
at the Suburb D property. There are no documents
which show the Suburb D
property as the Applicant's address, for example, tax records, motor vehicle
licensing records, Medicare
records, drivers' licence records and the like.
There was nothing to emerge from the cross‑examination of the Respondent
prove that the Applicant ever resided at the Suburb D property.
the Applicant's evidence on point is correct, then, after a chance meeting in a
McDonald's restaurant car park and the passage
of only some five months or so
(part of which the Respondent was in Europe) the Respondent invited him to move
into her home as her
de facto partner. Given the totality of the evidence this
seems highly unlikely.
Respondent's evidence on this issue is supported by her elder daughter who lived
with the Respondent at the Suburb D property.
Her evidence is that the
Applicant only ever visited this property. She also said that the Applicant did
not stay overnight at
the property nor did she ever witness any affectionate
interaction between them at this time.
the length of time the parties resided together at the Suburb A property is in
question. The Applicant has an admission from
the Respondent that he moved into
the Suburb A property in July 2014 and stayed there until late August 2015.
it is necessary for a finding to be made regarding the period from late August
2015 to February 2016. One fact that is
uncontested is that the Respondent
moved into the Suburb B property in February 2016.
the onus was on the Applicant to prove on the balance of probabilities that he
resided in the Suburb A property from late
August 2015 to February 2016. He has
not discharged that onus.
of the evidence given by any of the witnesses called by the Applicant proves
that the Applicant was resident in the Suburb A
property after late August
Mr S was clearly an honest witness trying his best to give accurate evidence, it
was unrealistic to expect that he would
have made any particular mental note of
his very limited and quite mundane interactions with the parties.
cross-examination Mr S acknowledged that he had never entered the Suburb A
property at any time the parties were his neighbours
and that he had never seen
any young children there.
S's evidence was general in nature and did not extend to proving that the
Applicant was still residing at the Suburb A property
after late August 2015,
even though he himself remained living next door until late 2016.
Applicant has not produced any documentary evidence, of the type referred to
above, that is, government department records and
the like, to show that he was
residing at Suburb A after late August 2015.
Conversely,
the Respondent's evidence on point is corroborated by the evidence of her elder
daughter. Whilst the Respondent's elder
daughter was not an overly impressive
witness, still, there was nothing to emerge from her cross-examination to
indicate that she
was being untruthful. Her evidence is plausible and her
answers under cross‑examination were given clearly and consistently.
the Respondent's evidence to the effect that the Applicant invited himself to
live in the Suburb A property is supported
by the evidence of the Respondent's
elder daughter. It is difficult to see why the Respondent and her daughter
would be minded to
invite another adult to share what was, by all accounts, a
small triplex home. It is also accepted that at the time the Applicant
in, neither the Respondent nor her daughter anticipated that the Applicant would
stay for as long as he did.
for the Suburb B property, the Applicant has failed to prove on the balance of
probabilities that he ever lived at that property.
His evidence in this area is
not supported by the evidence of any of his witnesses other than perhaps for
that of Mr and Ms J.
Mr or Ms J was ever invited inside the Suburb B property and neither saw the
Applicant actually inside the property. On
several occasions they saw a vehicle
used by the Applicant parked in the laneway behind their property late in the
night as they
were finishing work operating their [retail] business and trying
to park their car inside their garage, access to which was blocked
Applicant's vehicle.
and Ms J identified the relevant vehicle as belonging to the Applicant because
it carried conspicuous advertising of a particular
business on its side panels.
One such vehicle owned by the Applicant was sold by him earlier than the last
dates when these two
witnesses said they saw the Applicant's vehicle blocking
their garage. However, the Applicant says that there was a second vehicle
driven by him which, although a different make to the first vehicle, was similar
in appearance and carried the same advertising.
the evidence of Mr and Ms J does tend to prove that the Applicant was a much
more frequent visitor to the Suburb B property
than the Respondent would concede
and was more involved with the tradespeople working on site than the Respondent
would concede,
their evidence does not provide a great degree of support for the
conclusion that the Applicant was in full-time residence after
the building was
evidence of Mr T was given very convincingly. It is likely that if the
Applicant was in residence at the Suburb B property when
he was visiting for
contractual purposes, Mr T would have seen evidence of it. He did not.
Applicant has not produced a single document linking him to the Suburb B
Furthermore,
on the Applicant's own case he entered the Suburb B property on Christmas Day to
remove his clothing and belongings.
He left with a single item of clothing,
described in the evidence as being an item of traditional [Religion A] clothing.
unlikely that a person who had been living in a home for ten months
would be able to remove all of his/her clothing and belongings
Applicant may well have made several visits to the Suburb B property after the
building was completed and the Respondent may
well have understated the true
facts in this respect. However, there is a clear difference between being a
visitor and being a full-time
conclude under this sub-heading, it is found that the only period of common
residence for the parties is the limited period that
is admitted by the
Respondent.
Nature and extent of the common residence
Suburb A property has three bedrooms. The Applicant alleges the parties shared
the main bedroom whereas the Respondent alleges
that the three residents all had
their own bedrooms. The Respondent's evidence is corroborated by the evidence
of her elder daughter.
precise details of the sleeping arrangements are probably not material. This is
because the Respondent admits that there was
a sexual relationship between the
parties that commenced shortly prior to the Applicant moving into the Suburb A
property and which
extended until late August 2015.
of the Applicant's witnesses visited the parties at the Suburb A property and so
none of them was placed to provide any helpful
evidence on this issue.
the Applicant nor the Respondent said a great deal about the
day‑to‑day arrangements whilst they shared occupation
of the Suburb
A property. Given that there was a sexual relationship in place at the relevant
time, it is likely that the parties
shared meals together and otherwise spent
time together in the home. It needs to be borne in mind that the Suburb B home
construction as from March 2014, meaning that the Respondent did not
regard the Suburb A property as anything more than a stop-gap
accommodation
arrangement.
it would appear that neither party invited friends to the Suburb A property on a
regular basis, if at all.
Respondent's evidence on this issue is supported by the evidence of her elder
daughter. She says that whilst the Applicant agreed
to pay board to her of $150
per week for occupying her home he did not actually do so. She added that she
did not press for payment
because the Applicant had carried out repair works to
her motor vehicles without charging and so it was fair to off-set one liability
against the other. Also, the Respondent's elder daughter corroborated her
mother's evidence regarding the circumstances surrounding
the Applicant's
departure from the Suburb A property.
Whether there has been a sexual relationship between the
is common ground that there was a sexual relationship between the parties.
Applicant says very little about this issue in his trial affidavit. At page 19
thereof he says the following:-
I maintained an exclusive sexual relationship with [Ms Piontek] for the entire
period February 2014 - 22 December 2016 and to the
best of my knowledge, [Ms
Piontek] did with me.
Applicant says a little more about this subject in his responding affidavit. At
paragraph 32 thereof the Applicant says that
the sexual relationship ended in
early December 2016. At paragraph 18 of the same affidavit the Applicant
says, relevantly, the
following:-
...We were sexually intimate during the whole period of our relationship. I
recall that [Ms Piontek] got upset every month when
she had her period. She
often cried and said it was because she wanted a baby from me.
Respondent's counsel did not cross‑examine the Applicant to any
significant extent regarding this issue.
for the Respondent, she too did not say a great deal regarding this statutory
paragraph 27 of her trial affidavit the Respondent says the
following:-
During the time [Mr Hadzhiev] lived in the [Suburb A] Unit, [Mr Hadzhiev] and I
were sporadically and casually sexually intimate.
There were several periods
where we were not sexually intimate including periods of up to two months or
more when he would be away
for weeks and there were multiple occasions where I
was overseas.
Respondent remained steadfast throughout the trial that any sexual relationship
ended by no later than 30 August 2015.
Applicant's counsel did not cross‑examine the Respondent to any
significant extent, if at all, regarding this factor.
be fair to both counsel, this is obviously a very difficult and sensitive
subject upon which to cross-examine. By its very nature,
sexual relationships
are conducted privately. Only the parties themselves know exactly what
transpired between them in this respect.
It comes down to the word of one party
against the other.
said, the Applicant's evidence about the Respondent wanting to have a baby with
him probably deserves further consideration.
Respondent was born [in] 1971 which means that she was almost 42 years old when
the parties met and had two daughters who have
different fathers. The younger
daughter was then aged 16 years and the elder daughter was then aged 21
those facts, the Respondent's financial independence and her general
circumstances, is it really likely that she would be planning
to have another
baby with a man to whom she was not married and whom she had known for only a
relatively short time? That question
is answered in the negative. By all
accounts the Respondent has expensive tastes and places a very high value on
material possessions
and financial security. It seems highly unlikely that
having raised two children to adulthood, or near adulthood, she would seriously
consider starting all over again, with the attendant reduction in earning
capacity, by having a child with a man who did not even
own his own
Degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any
arrangements for financial support, between the parties
issue may conveniently be dealt with together with the following
sub‑heading because so much of the relevant evidence
overlaps the two
Ownership, use and acquisition of the parties' property
would be fair to say that the focus of the parties in the trial was heavily upon
the evidence of the multitude of individual financial
transactions and events
covered in the affidavits of the Applicant and the trial affidavit of the
Respondent. That is, most of the
time in the trial was spent considering the
evidence of the various financial interactions, alleged and admitted, as between
chronological order, the first contentious financial issue concerns the trip
taken by the parties to China in February 2014, that
is, only some three or four
months after the parties first met.
the only fact agreed in this respect is that the parties together flew from
Perth to China on or about 23 February 2014 and
arrived back in Perth together
on or about 7 March 2014. What happened in between is contested.
Applicant says that there was a romantic element to the trip in that the parties
shared the same hotel room and went to China
so that he could support the
Respondent sourcing products, building materials and furnishings for the Suburb
B property and otherwise
to further the conduct of the business of Company A.
It must be said it is difficult to see what type of material support he could
Respondent says that there was no romantic element to the trip whatsoever. She
says the parties stayed in different hotels,
albeit situated reasonably close to
each other.
the Respondent says that the Applicant accompanied her on this trip at his
request and for his own purposes, that is, to
use her contacts in China to
source cheaper materials and equipment for use by him in his mechanic
it transpires, neither party purchased anything on this trip. The Respondent
subsequently placed an order for various items investigated
by her. She said
that the Applicant was ill for part of the trip and spent a reasonable portion
of it alone in his hotel room.
The Applicant denies being ill.
Respondent made the point, which appears not to have been challenged, that the
particular place in China visited by the parties
is essentially a
commercial/industrial centre rather than a popular tourist location. It appears
to be a place generally visited
only by people conducting business. That is, it
would not be a destination of the type which would be expected to be favoured by
a romantic couple.
was the case with much of the disputed history, neither party could produce any
documentary evidence to support his/her version
of events. Neither party
produced any documents, such as credit card statements or receipts/booking
confirmations from the relevant
hotel(s). It might be thought that it would not
be an impossible task for a person to prove the name and location of the hotel
which he or she stayed only five years ago or so. Neither party provided a
hotel name or even a rough address. Again, in the end,
it was the word of one
party against the other.
the Respondent said that as the Applicant's ATM card did not function in China
(as hers also did not), she advanced him
cash so that he could meet his
expenses. She explains a payment of $5,000 to her by the Applicant on 27
February 2014 as a partial
reimbursement of this cash advance. She received
from the Applicant another $700 on 27 May 2014 and returned $100 of that sum to
the Applicant on 9 June 2014 because, according to her evidence, the total
amount she advanced was only $5,600. She added that the
Applicant told her he
could raise only $5,000 at the time of the 27 February 2014 transfer.
the trip to China there was a substantial amount of activity involving the
purchase of cars at auction, their repair by the
Applicant and their subsequent
sales. Each party has provided a very different account of the relevant
transactions. The Applicant's
version suggests there was a joint enterprise
whereas the Respondent's version suggests that there was a clear distinction
the transactions effected by the Applicant on the one hand and those
effected by her on the other.
Applicant alleges that the Respondent was in control of the process and that the
profits from these sales were wholly retained
by her on the promise that his
share of such profits would be "invested" by her for mutual benefit in the
course of conducting the
business of Company A and/or the business of Company B
and/or in the development of the Suburb B property. The Applicant's evidence
point is quite vague. It is unclear how he believed he was actually
"investing". That is, what were the terms and conditions
of such investment?
What was the particular financial return on investment that the Applicant was
expecting or was agreed? When
was the Applicant to receive a return on
investment? All of these questions remain unanswered by the conclusion of the
Respondent alleges that each party bought and sold vehicles in their own right,
using their own money and that each retained
the profits so generated. The
Respondent says that she paid the Applicant for work he performed repairing the
vehicles used personally
by her and her daughters and also that she paid him for
repair work done to vehicles purchased by her at auction for subsequent
alluded to above, clouding the issue is the fact that, on either account, the
vehicles in question were purchased and sold for
cash. There are records
produced by Department of Transport, but it would appear that these are not
entirely reliable, in the sense
that some of the figures recorded may not be
entirely accurate.
example, the Applicant was cross-examined about the sale by him of a particular
vehicle which is recorded in Department of Transport
records as having been sold
for $10,000. The Applicant said that he actually received $13,000 from the
purchaser and that, at the
purchaser's insistence, the sale price was noted at
only $10,000 so that the purchaser could save some stamp duty. The Applicant
did not appear to see any difficulty in agreeing with a third party to deprive
the State government of part of the revenue to which
it was entitled.
dispute between the parties regarding the motor vehicle claimed by the Applicant
in his initiating application also highlights
many of the evidentiary
difficulties to arise in this area.
Applicant says the motor vehicle belongs to him. The Respondent says the motor
vehicle belongs to her.
appeared to be common ground that:-
(a) [in mid] 2014 the
Respondent purchased the motor vehicle at auction from [the auctioneers] for the
total price of $56,076, using
(b) the motor vehicle was unlicensed at the time of purchase and required
(c) the Applicant carried out the necessary repairs;
(d) the Applicant took the necessary action with the licensing authorities to
have the motor vehicle licensed and registered;
(e) on or about 19 January 2015 the Applicant paid $50,000 in cash to the
Respondent and the motor vehicle became registered in his
sole name; and
(f) the motor vehicle was substantially under the control of the Applicant
until late 2016.
the motor vehicle is now in the possession of the Respondent and it is
registered in her name. The factual circumstances
under which this came to be
are fiercely contested.
Respondent's case is that on or about 21 December 2016 the parties agreed that
title to the motor vehicle be transferred to her
for $39,000. Further, the
Respondent says that at this time she paid $39,000 in cash to the Applicant and
that the Respondent signed
a transfer of ownership form which had been completed
by him. The Respondent then posted the form to the relevant authority and,
the intervening Christmas break it was several days before the form could be
processed. It transpires that the VIN included
in the transfer form was
incorrect and therefore the transfer request was rejected and the relevant form
returned to the Respondent.
due course the Respondent was able to satisfy the licensing authority about the
correct VIN and so the transfer of registration
was duly processed to the result
that the Respondent is now registered as the owner of the motor vehicle.
Applicant denies any agreement to sell the motor vehicle to the Respondent and
denies receiving $39,000 or any sum for his legal
interest in the vehicle. He
alleges that the Respondent used a blank form of transfer signed by him at some
earlier time and otherwise
fraudulently completed the balance of the form. In
response the Respondent said that if she had done so it would have been unlikely
that she would have included an incorrect VIN.
would appear that initially the Applicant thought that the Respondent had forged
his signature on the transfer form and so he
made a complaint to the licensing
authority. The Applicant's complaint has been investigated and the Respondent
has not been charged
with any offence relating to the transfer.
after his visit to the Respondent's home on Christmas Day 2016, and in
acrimonious circumstances, the Applicant ultimately
drove away with the motor
vehicle. However, once the Respondent was able to complete the licensing
registration into her name, she
obtained assistance from police to re-take
possession of the motor vehicle from the Applicant. The vehicle has remained in
the possession
of the Respondent since then.
there is a substantial difference in the respective accounts of the parties
generally regarding the transfer of funds between
them, it did not appear to be
the case of either party that he/she was financially dependent on the other at
any time. That is,
the Applicant says that when he met the Respondent he had a
substantial asset base and a business. The Applicant still has the earning
capacity as a mechanic that he had when the parties first met. For her part,
the Respondent had been financially self‑sufficient
prior to meeting the
Applicant. She had already purchased the Suburb B block with a view to building
a new home. She had been able
to support herself living in the rented Suburb D
property from her control of Company A and its business.
parties have never purchased any real property in their joint names. It does
not appear that any of the various motor vehicles
referred to in the evidence
were purchased in joint names. The parties have never had a joint bank account.
The Applicant has never
been a shareholder in Company A nor has he ever been one
of its directors or a director of Company B. There is no evidence that
parties have ever jointly acquired any item of property of any material
is clear that the development project executed by Company B did not involve the
Applicant, directly or indirectly. This has been
a project financed and driven
exclusively by the Respondent and Ms B, via their respective entities.
complete the consideration of these two indicators, it is determined that, given
the substantial deficits in the evidence and
the concerns already expressed (and
some other concerns which will be covered below) regarding the credibility of
the parties, it
would be quite unsafe to make definitive findings of fact
regarding each and every single financial transaction that occurred between
parties. Indeed, on reflection, it is considered unnecessary to do so for
present purposes.
is, in order to determine whether the parties were ever in a de facto
relationship it is not necessary for there to be a finding
(a) the Applicant is the legal or equitable owner of the
motor vehicle; and/or
(b) the Respondent is indebted to the Applicant to the extent of $268,000 or
any other amount.
Respondent signed a statutory declaration, a copy of which is in evidence, in
which she acknowledges that, at the time of signing,
she is indebted to the
Applicant to the extent of $50,000 and that she would repay this sum by a
certain date which has now passed.
However, the Respondent says that this
acknowledgement was given in recognition of the fact that the Applicant had paid
her $50,000
representing the price of some building materials owned by her which
the Applicant said he could sell on her behalf to his friends
or contacts. The
Respondent added that the sale fell through and in those circumstances she was
obliged to refund the money to the
Applicant. She says that, for his own
reasons, the Applicant did not want the money returned immediately. Her
evidence is that
ultimately she made a part-repayment of $10,000 into the
Applicant's bank account and was subsequently chastised by the Applicant
doing so, on the basis that he wanted to be repaid only in cash.
Applicant has provided a quite different version of events. The evidence in
this area highlights once more the difficulties
that arise when substantial
financial transactions are carried out in cash with little or no supporting
documentation. In such circumstances,
it is very difficult for courts,
generally, to make definitive findings of fact.
Degree of mutual commitment by the parties to a shared
is important to note the inclusion of the adjective "mutual" in this
evidence would suggest that the Applicant was to some extent committed to a
shared life, in the sense that he was attracted to
the Respondent and appears to
have been quite impressed with what he perceived to be the Respondent's
financial acumen and success.
The Applicant appears to have anticipated that
the Respondent would be sharing her financial success with him. He was to be
disappointed.
Applicant said that, within a relatively short time of meeting the Respondent
for the first time, he gave her $7,000 to purchase
a particular engagement ring
and that she kept all the money without actually buying a ring. The Applicant
would have been aware
that there was no such ring purchased by the Respondent or
worn by her. So, apart from the fact that it seems unusual that if the
question had been selected, the Applicant himself would not have carried out the
purchase rather than leaving it to the Respondent,
it seems very unusual that
the Applicant apparently did not complain that his fiancé pocketed the
$7,000 and never wore a
ring. The Applicant did not call as his witness the
particular jeweller he alleges the parties visited.
is some evidence from the Respondent (denied by the Applicant) that she assisted
the Applicant to register on an online dating
service at a time when, according
to the Applicant, there was a de facto relationship between them. Again, it is
difficult to know
what to make of this disputed evidence.
a similar vein the Respondent alleges that she was "dating" other men between
late August 2015 and late December 2016, although
she did not call any of them
to give evidence. At paragraph 66 of her trial affidavit the Respondent says
that she commenced her
relationship with her current partner in 2015. However,
the Respondent did not call the gentleman in question to give evidence.
Moreover, the Respondent was not cross-examined about this part of her
conclude under this sub-heading, the Applicant has not proved on the balance of
probabilities that the Respondent at any time
demonstrated any commitment to a
shared life. It is entirely possible that the Applicant was committed to a
shared life, or at least
was very interested in the possibility of a shared
life, particularly one that involved the sharing of the Respondent's financial
resources. However, having re-read the affidavit material and having seen the
Respondent in the witness box, it is highly unlikely
that she was ever committed
to sharing her life with the Applicant , in any substantial way, on a long-term
Whether the parties care for and support children
are no children of the parties' relationship. As noted above, both parties have
children from previous marriages.
Applicant has suggested that there was a good deal of interaction between his
children and the Respondent during the times that
he was able to spend time with
them. A little time was spent in the trial considering the significance of the
photograph taken of
the Respondent with the Applicant's children comprising
annexure 2 to the Applicant's trial affidavit. This photograph was
mischievously
sent to the Applicant's former wife, who, clearly enough, did not
appreciate receiving it. It depicts each of the Applicant's children
kiss on each of the Respondent's cheeks. It has to be said that the expression
on the Respondent's face is not consistent
with the version of events painted by
the Applicant. The Respondent was adamant that taking the photograph was
entirely the Applicant's
photograph was taken on 15 September 2013, that is, within only three weeks or
so of the parties meeting for the first time.
It was sent to the Applicant's
former wife with a caption reading "[Z] and [M] love my new wife". The response
from the Applicant's
former wife (delivered by her husband) was probably exactly
what the Applicant was hoping for. That is, it is likely that the Applicant
minded to provoke and irritate his former wife.
it is the Applicant's evidence that the Respondent sent this photograph to his
former wife. The Respondent's evidence
is that the Applicant sent it. It seems
more likely than not that the Respondent is telling the truth on this point.
a woman who barely knows a man take it upon herself to send a
provocative photograph of herself and a provocative message to a woman
not know and with whom she has no quarrel? Unfortunately, neither party was
cross-examined to any significant extent, if
at all, about who actually sent
this photograph and whose mobile phone was used for the purpose.
Reputation and public aspects of the relationship
is a substantial problem for the Applicant which arises under this
sub-heading.
concept of the reputation and public aspects of a relationship extends not only
to the perception of the relevant relationship
by individuals, such as friends
and family members, but also extends to how that relationship is presented to
institutions and people
in authority.
noted above, the Applicant applied for and was granted a Newstart allowance in
the early part of the 2014/15 financial year and
continued to receive that
benefit until late 2016.
is notorious that when such an application is made the relevant applicant needs
to provide to Centrelink a variety of information
including about the person's
relationship status and financial circumstances. This is because these matters
must be taken into account
to determine the threshold question of eligibility
for a benefit and then, if eligibility is established, the rate at which a
Respondent put into evidence some documents from Centrelink that were obtained
by her with the Applicant's consent. Those documents
show, amongst other
things, that when applying for benefits the
Applicant:-
(a) represented that the only other person he was living
with in the Suburb A property was the Respondent's elder daughter;
(b) did not state that he was living in a de facto relationship with the
Respondent and made no mention whatsoever of the Respondent
living in the
(c) represented that he was paying $150 per week to the Respondent's elder
daughter for "Lodging only", commencing 1 July 2014;
(d) represented that he had savings and cash totalling $2,645;
(e) represented that he had not borrowed money to purchase any investments or
did not still owe any money borrowed for that purpose;
(f) represented that he had three motor vehicles to a total value of $16,500;
(g) did not disclose any debts owing to him by the Respondent.
the face of it these representations and non-disclosures are fatal to the
Applicant's case because they are inconsistent with
(a) he was living with the Respondent in a de facto
relationship at the relevant time; and
(b) he had all the substantial assets, cash and financial resources necessary
to fund the significant payments of cash he allegedly
made to the Respondent
from time to time.
it is reasonable to assume that the Western Australian taxpayer would expect
that a person in the Applicant's shoes, who
has a trade and according to his
Centrelink application had no reason for not working other than for the fact
that his business closed
down, would make a concerted effort to find paid
employment and cease receipt of his Newstart allowance. However, it appears
the Applicant chose to spend time assisting the Respondent to complete the
project of building the home on the Suburb B block. Such
choice does not
reflect well upon the Applicant. That is, it appears the Applicant had no
difficulty accepting the Newstart allowance
without making a genuine effort to
find paid work and still has no difficulty with that history.
Applicant answers this part of the evidence by saying that he had nothing to do
with the application for Centrelink benefits,
in the sense that it was all the
Respondent's idea and that it was she alone who made the online application
without his input and
support and without his knowledge as to the answers he was
providing to Centrelink on the pro‑forma application. The Applicant
able to say accurately that his signature does not appear on the Centrelink
application. On that basis, the Applicant distances
himself from the
line of defence from the Applicant is rejected for the following reasons.
the Applicant is not an unsophisticated individual. He has conducted business
in his own right and it is highly likely
that he would know that Centrelink
would be interested in his true relationship status and his true financial
position. Moreover,
he would know that the provision of Centrelink benefits to
a person is conditional upon the recipient making a genuine effort to
employment rather than devoting time assisting someone else complete the
construction of their new home.
Applicant was prepared to accept his Centrelink benefits over a reasonably
lengthy period. His evidence is that he did not make
any visit in person to any
Centrelink office at any time he was receiving benefits. This evidence is
difficult to accept. It is
likely that the Applicant had adequate opportunity
to advise Centrelink of his true relationship status, and would have taken that
opportunity if he truly believed he was in a de facto relationship at the
time. Indeed, the documents produced by Centrelink show
multiple appointments
were made for the Applicant to attend upon his Centrelink Service Centre.
Furthermore,
as raised in the course of the trial, the Applicant has known from at least the
time that he was served with the notice
filed by the Respondent on 28 March 2019
to admit the authenticity of the Centrelink documents that he had been receiving
benefits as a single person with, ostensibly, very limited financial
resources of his own.
the Applicant's case he has received a substantial amount of Centrelink money
because of an innocent mistake on his part and because
of the dishonesty of the
Respondent. In those circumstances an honourable and honest person would be
expected to make a priority
of contacting Centrelink, making a full and frank
disclosure of the circumstances of the overpayment and then making an offer to
repay the amount to which he was not entitled. Has the Applicant done so? This
question must be answered in the negative because
there is no evidence that he
has, despite having more than adequate opportunity to do so. Furthermore, there
was no evidence from
the Applicant that he has any intention whatsoever of
making restitution to Centrelink.
Respondent was not cross-examined to any significant degree, if at all,
regarding her alleged role in making the Centrelink application.
It is her case
that insofar as the application purports to be a representation that the
Applicant was not in a de facto relationship
with her at the relevant time it is
a true representation. There is insufficient evidence to ground an adverse
finding against the
Respondent on this issue. The Applicant is the party in
whose name the application for benefits was made. The Applicant is the
who, over a lengthy period, was the sole recipient of the benefits. The
Applicant should not be permitted to simply wash his
hands of all
responsibility.
should be added that the Applicant is not to be given credit for consenting to
the release of those Centrelink records that the
Respondent was able to obtain.
Had he not given such consent then it is likely that an adverse inference would
have been drawn against
him for withholding consent. Furthermore, it is
certainly arguable that the Applicant himself should have been the party
these records and putting them to the Respondent and to the Court.
The duty of full and frank disclosure in financial cases requires
the disclosure
of all relevant documents, including documents that are adverse to a party's
for other institutions, there is no evidence that the Applicant ever represented
to the Australian Taxation Office or other government
body that he was in a
de facto relationship with the Respondent.
Applicant's witnesses Messrs H, G, C, K and M, all of whom are good friends of
the Applicant, have given evidence that their
perception of the parties'
relationship was consistent with it being a "marriage-like" relationship.
However, it is noted that whereas
they say they saw signs of overt affection
between the parties, that evidence is not supported by the evidence of Mr R, Mr
J and Mr S. Such evidence is also totally at odds with the evidence
of the three witnesses called by the Respondent. The evidence
of the five
friends of the Applicant is also consistent with the parties' relationship being
affectionate but less than "marriage-like".
is quite possible that in the presence of the Applicant's male friends the
Respondent behaved in ways that led them to believe
that the parties'
relationship was more important to her than it actually was. Much of the
impression of the relationship that those
male friends gained was a product of
discussions between them and the Applicant, not between them and the
Respondent.
it seems clear that in the presence of her own friends and family the Respondent
behaved quite differently towards the Applicant.
The Respondent presented as
something of a calculating individual who might well be prepared to do things to
advance her financial
interests that others might be reluctant to do. For
example, the Respondent acknowledges that she was prepared to mislead Mr R into
thinking the Applicant was her husband and had authority to speak on her behalf
regarding the building contract because she was fearful
that Mr R, and other
male workers and contractors in the construction project, might seek to take
advantage of her as a single woman.
Having seen the Respondent in the witness
box for some time, it is difficult to believe that, in fact, she could be taken
of in any commercial dealing.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
has been said and written about the concept of what constitutes a
"marriage‑like" relationship. The analysis necessarily
involves an
expression of a view about the nature of the institution of marriage in
contemporary Western Australian society.
there is no single template for a marriage-like relationship. Adults conduct
their personal relationships in an almost
infinite variety of ways. For
example, two people in a legal marriage or a de facto relationship might
maintain a very high degree
of financial independence from each other in ways
that would be completely unacceptable to another couple.
is necessary to stand back and look at the totality of the relevant evidence and
to decide whether the particular relationship
under consideration carries
sufficient of the indicia of a marriage-like relationship.
is expressly provided in
Interpretation Act
that none of the listed
indicators is essential. Moreover, the list is not exhaustive. No individual
indicator takes priority over
any other. Each has to be considered in
conjunction with the other.
had the opportunity to reflect on the relevant evidence and the closing
submissions of counsel it is concluded that the Applicant
has failed to prove
that the parties' relationship carried sufficient of the indicia of a de facto
relationship to be properly characterised
length of the relationship was relatively short and the relationship was
there was substantial evidence of a variety of individual financial transactions
involving the parties, neither party ever
had to depend on the other for
financial support.
were no assets acquired in joint names. There were no joint bank accounts.
There were no joint private health insurance policies.
There were no joint
recreational holidays. There were virtually no mutual friends. The Respondent
could have involved the Applicant
in the project undertaken by Company B but did
not. The Applicant could have formed a mechanic business partnership with the
but did not. The Respondent could have worn an engagement ring but
did not. The relevant officers at Centrelink dealing with the
Applicant's
application for Newstart benefits were unaware of any de facto relationship
between the parties and the application submitted
by the Applicant does not even
disclose the very existence of the Respondent.
essence of the Applicant's evidence is that the Respondent exploited him
financially. He maintains that he advanced significant
sums of money to the
Respondent. For her part, the Respondent recognises only the $50,000 advance
referred to in her statutory declaration.
noted above, there will be no definitive findings of fact regarding the various
individual advances of cash alleged by the Applicant
to have been made to the
Respondent nor in respect of the ownership of the motor vehicle. This is
because that exercise is not essential
for present purposes and because it may
well be that the Applicant will now pursue a remedy in another court.
if the Applicant's case regarding his cash dealings with the Respondent was
accepted at its highest, that would not, of itself,
prove the existence of a
"marriage-like" relationship. There are many examples of non-personal
relationships between individuals
which involve a multitude of inter-related
financial transactions of significance. Conversely there are many examples of
and de facto relationships which involve very few inter-related
financial transactions of significance.
Applicant believes, perhaps justifiably and perhaps not, that the Respondent
exploited him for her own commercial gain and so
he wants his money back.
Assume for the moment that his concerns are proven to be valid. Would that type
of behaviour by the Respondent
be indicative of a "marriage-like" relationship?
That question must surely be answered in the negative. It would be the
of a "marriage-like" relationship for one party to conduct it, from
the beginning, in a way designed to cheat the other party financially.
Marriage-like relationships are based on mutual love and respect. They are not
if the Applicant is correct when he says the Respondent is lying about not
receiving substantial quantities of cash from him
at various times for the
purpose of unspecified investing, then, surely, that indicates, on his own case,
that he cannot prove any
commitment on the part of the Respondent to a shared
life with him.
extent of the parties' sexual relationship is uncertain. It is highly likely
that the Applicant has grossly exaggerated its
extent and that the Respondent
has understated it to some degree.
any event, the fact that there was a sexual relationship that the Respondent
admits having extended to a period of about 14 months
or so would tend to
indicate that the parties' relationship was, for a time, more affectionate than
the Respondent is prepared to
is still regarded in contemporary Western Australian society as a very important
and respected institution. For a relationship
to be characterised as
"marriage-like" there needs to be evidence of behaviour which is similar to the
behaviour generally exhibited
by those who are legally married. Overall, the
evidence led in this case demonstrates many types of behaviours which are quite
inconsistent
with the conduct of a legal marriage. For example, is it usual for
two people in a legal marriage to submit an application to Centrelink
a premise that one of them does not even exist?
it is unnecessary to ascribe any particular adjective to the parties'
relationship, most reasonable observers would probably
characterise the
relationship as being, at its highest, no more than that of "boyfriend and
girlfriend" commencing when the sexual
relationship started. There is a marked
gap between a relationship that is merely "boyfriend and girlfriend" and a
"marriage-like"
relationship.
would appear that the Applicant's true motivation in bringing these proceedings
is to right what he perceives to have been a number
of financial wrongs done to
him by the Respondent. The Applicant may or may not have a case under the
general law to sue the Respondent
for recovery of any debts allegedly due to
him. Furthermore, insofar as the motor vehicle is concerned, the Applicant has
at common law if he is able to prove that legal title has never
validly passed from him to the Respondent.
from the usual limitation period rules, the only other possible restriction to
the Applicant seeking relief in another court
is that found in s 205V of
the Act which holds as follows:-
205V Right to certain civil proceedings
A de facto partner who is, or was, eligible to apply for an order with
respect to property under Division 2 may not apply to the Supreme
Court in its
equitable jurisdiction for relief in respect of that property.
course, it having been determined that the Applicant has not established that
the parties were ever de facto partners, the Applicant
is not eligible to apply
for an order under Div 2 of
Thus, there is no bar to him seeking to
apply for equitable relief.
given that the Applicant has not satisfied the Court that there was ever a de
facto relationship between the parties, it
is unnecessary to consider the
relevant s 205Z(1)(c) matters. That is, the issues of "substantial
contributions" and "serious injustice"
only arise if there is a finding that
there was a de facto relationship in place for a period of less than two
conclude, there will be an order that the Applicant's initiating application be
dismissed. If the Respondent is minded to bring
a costs application then, under
the relevant rules of court, she has 28 days from the date of the pronouncement
of final orders within
which to do so. She would need to file a form 2
interlocutory application with a supporting affidavit. However, on the
evidence, it appears doubtful whether the Applicant has the capacity
to satisfy any significant costs order and so enforcement of
any such order is
likely to be highly problematic. That said, it must be stressed that nothing in
this paragraph should be read
as an indication of the likelihood of success or
otherwise of any costs application that may be
forthcoming.
I certify that
the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Magistrates
Court of Western Australia at 150 Terrace
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (313 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter