URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/140.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WAYNE and FLETCHER [2015] FCWAM 140 (9 July 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
WAYNE and FLETCHER
[2015] FCWAM 140
2 FEBRUARY 2015
DELIVERED :
9 JULY 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 5633 of 2013
MR FLETCHER
Catchwords:
Property Settlement, Child Welfare and Child Support; undefended trial; lump
sum child support orders made – 6 years capitalised
at rate of current
child support assessment; to be deducted from father’s property settlement
entitlement.
Legislation:
Child Support (Assessment) Act
Family Court Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Did not attend
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT -
PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
1 These parties require the Court to determine a
number of issues including their respective property settlement entitlements,
there should be a lump-sum child support order and orders in relation to
the children, [Child A] and [Child B] (twins) born [in]
Background of the parties
2 The applicant was born [in] 1966, whilst the
respondent was born [in] 1965. They started living together in 2005 in Perth
applicant had moved from [Coastal Town N] in [Victoria]) and they separated
on 14 March 2012. They clearly lived in Western Australia
for more than
two-thirds of their de facto relationship, although they lived for a year
back in Coastal Town N.
3 The applicant obtained a violence restraining order against the respondent
in March 2012. That was made final in March 2014 and
was in place at the time
of the trial before me.
History of proceedings
4 This matter was listed for an undefended trial
before me. At trial, however, both parties initially appeared. I gave the
an opportunity to address the Court. He chose to allow the
undefended trial to proceed and was excused from any further attendance.
trial therefore proceeded in his absence.
5 The proceedings were initially commenced on 9 October 2013 by the
applicant filing a Form 1 application in relation to property
matters only. The
respondent filed a competing Form 1 application on 13 December 2013, but only in
relation to children’s
issues. The applicant amended her Form 1
application on 16 January 2014 to add child support orders.
6 On 1 May 2014, the applicant filed a further amended Form 1 application
which varied the terms of the child support and other orders
sought, but did not
include any fresh causes of action.
7 On 22 July 2014, orders were made given the respondent’s failure to
comply with earlier orders about the filing of documents.
The applicant was
granted leave to proceed on an undefended basis and the Court allowed the Child
Support Agency to deduct child
support arrears from a joint Commonwealth Bank
account which held the sale proceeds of a property in [Suburb P].
8 On 27 October 2014, further orders were made (at a time when the
respondent was represented) that provided for the respondent to
sign documents
to authorise the Commonwealth Bank to deduct the arrears of child support from
the term deposit and forward to the
Child Support Agency. A Registrar was
ordered to sign in default of the respondent.
Applicant’s case
9 The applicant says that she should receive 72% of
the term deposit. From the respondent’
share she says that a lump
sum child support payment should be paid to her equating to $96,000.
10 In the final minute of orders sought by the applicant filed 8 January
2015, she sought the following orders:
the applicant mother have sole parental responsibility for the children [Child
A] and [Child B] born [in] 2006.
the children live with the applicant mother.
the children will communicate and spend time with the respondent father as
agreed in writing.
respondent be restrained and an injunction is hereby granted restraining him
from removing the said children from the care and
control of the applicant
and/or any agent acting on her behalf and/or any educational or day-care
facility that the children attend,
unless with the prior consent of the
applicant have liberty to provide a copy of these orders to any educational or
day-care facility that the said children attend.
the applicant mother have liberty to apply to renew the children’s
passports as required and the requirement for the respondent
father to sign the
renewal application be dispensed with.
proceeds of sale of [Property P], deposited into Commonwealth Bank term deposit,
account number xxxxxxxxxxxxx (joint account in
names of [Ms Wayne] and [Mr
Fletcher]) be disbursed as follows:
(a) On closure of above term deposit, including closing interest (and/or Court
The applicant receive 72% and the respondent 28%;
the respondent’
of the term deposit: a lump sum payment be paid to
the applicant for child support other than in a form of periodic amounts:
That pursuant to
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Fletcher] provide child support to [Ms Wayne] for the children [Child A] and
[Child B], a payment of $96,000. The lump sum
payment is calculated using a
fixed monthly amount of $800 over 120 months, commencing 1 January 2015
until the children complete
year 12 at high school (December 2024).
[Mr Fletcher] pay to [Ms Wayne] $2,604 representing current outstanding child
support payments up to 31 December 2014 (please
see attached letter from Child
Support Agency (Annexure A) [sic];
the respondent father pay the applicant mother a further $4,216.23 (from the
28%) in lieu of child support payments taken by
the Child Support Agency, from
the joint proceeds of sale (settlement November 2013). Based on a 72/28%
division, the applicant
be paid 72% of the child support arrears payments and
the administration fee (146.05).
the respondent father pay the applicant mother a further $6,855.46 (from the
28%) in lieu of child support payments withdrawn
from joint finances:
Commonwealth Bank account (as above) on November 24 2014 (see attached
statement Annexure B). The total withdrawal
of $9,521.47 represented child
support arrears up to the end of September 2014. Based on a 72/28%, the
applicant paid 72% of the
child support arrears payments.
applicant and respondent to be liable for their own debts
e.g. personal/store credit cards, business debts and HECS debts.
other than the joint term deposit account:
The applicant and respondent each retain motor vehicles registered in their
personal/business names, tools of trade, furniture and
household contents
presently in their possession or control, and the applicant and respondent each
retain their own money in bank
accounts, shares, superannuation and business
Respondent’s case
11 The respondent has not filed any documents
regarding financial matters or child support issues. In relation to
issues he sought final orders in his Form 1A response
filed on 13 December 2013 in the following terms:
applicant father to have equal shared residency and spend time with the children
of the relationship [Child B] and [Child A] both
born 2 July 2006 to include the
equal sharing of health and educational information in relation to the [sic]
both children.
relation to Christmas/Boxing Days, Easter holidays and the children’s
birthdays, these days be shared equally between the
parties and alternating each
year thereafter.
other order deemed necessary by the honourable court.
Property settlement law
12 There is no dispute that the Court has
13 The parties were not married, therefore the provisions of the
Section 205ZG(1)
of the Act provides that the Court must make such
orders as it considers appropriate.
Section 205ZG(3)
provides that
“the Court shall not make an order under this section unless it is
satisfied that, in all the circumstances,
it is just and equitable to make the
15 Traditionally that has meant that the Court followed a fourstage process.
16 That process is as follows:
(a) identify the value of the assets and liabilities of the parties;
(b) assess the contributions made by each party to the assets;
(c) assess the factors set out in
(d) consider whether the proposed orders are just and equitable between the
17 The fourth step of this process was seen to be the check required
pursuant to
to only make an order if it was just and
equitable to do so.
18 The High Court examined these provisions in
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108.
19 The High Court noted at [36-40] that when exercising the property
settlement power, three fundamental propositions must not be
(a) One must first identify, according to common law and equitable
principles, the
legal and equitable interests of the parties in
the property [emphasis added];
(b) The Court’s power must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles; and
(c) To conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only
because of reference to the various matters set out
separately considering
, would be to “
conflate the statutory
requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the Act
that the provisions in the
Family Court Act
identical].
20 The Court also held that the mere fact of separation is not necessarily
enough to warrant exercising the property settlement power
and making an order.
21 The power under
is to alter a party’s interest
in property, which is why the High Court considered it is essential to begin
with an examination
of what interests in property the parties have. It may or
may not be necessary to alter any such interests.
22 The High Court at [42] acknowledged the reality that in many cases, the
“just and equitable” requirement is:
... readily satisfied by observing that, as a result of a choice made by one
or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer
living in a marital
relationship. It will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order
in such a case because there
is not and will not thereafter be the common use of
property by the husband and wife.
23 In the event that the Court decides that
demands that
an order be made, then the Court must make such orders as it considers
appropriate. It must also take into account
the provisions of
s 205ZD(3).
24 The parties’ assets and debts are set out in the table below.
Joint fixed term accounts
Commonwealth Bank [xxxxxxxxxxxxx]
Interest on the above account to the time of judgment
Joint account
[xxxxxxxxxxxxx]
Transaction account
Applicant’s name
[Toyota] car
Furniture and chattels
Arrears of child support added back in
Managed fund with Colonial First State added back in
Total Assets
$664,422.08
American Express
Commonwealth Bank account – credit card
Respondent – at 9/12/14
Commonwealth Bank MasterCard
Respondent at 10/12/14
Total debts
$605,912.29
25 Given the parties were in a de facto relationship, superannuation cannot
be treated as an asset. The applicant has a Hesta fund
worth $89,350.75. There
is no evidence of any fund in the respondent’s name.
Discussion in relation to assets and contributions
26 Firstly, it is clear that the Court must make
property settlement orders in this matter. The parties have a joint term
account. They can no longer have the common use of that asset and have
been unable to agree on the appropriate distribution. This
case falls within
the reality observed by the High Court at [42] in
27 The subpoenaed material shows that the respondent may have further debts
as set out above. It is appropriate that he retain liability
for those debts,
but it is also fair to consider if appropriate that he receive an amount that
might cover those debts so that he
can then discharge them if possible. I have
therefore taken into account the material produced pursuant to the subpoenas
the Colonial First State documents, being Exhibit W3; the
Commonwealth Bank documents, Exhibit W4; and the CommSec documents, Exhibit
28 At the start of the relationship the applicant owned a 50% interest in a
house in Coastal Town N, Victoria. The respondent worked
as a [labourer]
throughout the relationship. Prior to the relationship the applicant worked in
management earning approximately
$55,000 to $70,000 per annum.
29 The applicant reduced her work once pregnant with the two children (who
were born [in] 2006). She had planned to return to work
in June 2007 after
taking some maternity leave, but the child, Child B, was diagnosed with [health
issues], therefore the applicant
did not return to work as planned.
30 The parties bought and sold three houses during the course of the
relationship and maintained separate bank accounts throughout
that time. In
November 2013 (post separation) the family home was sold and the sale proceeds
currently remain in trust.
31 The applicant’s interest in the Coastal Town N. property was sold
in 2006 and she obtained net proceeds of about $180,000.
32 The parties bought a property in [Suburb D] at the end of 2005. The
applicant’s sale proceeds referred to above went towards
the mortgage on
the Suburb D property. The Suburb D property cost about $500,000 and the
parties initially obtained a mortgage of
therefore that the respondent therefore contributed about $170,000 to the
purchase price.
33 Once the applicant paid approximately $160,000 off the mortgage from the
sale proceeds of the Coastal Town N. property, the mortgage
was reduced to about
$150,000. A further $20,000 from the sale proceeds of Coastal Town N. went
towards renovation costs.
34 In the end, the applicant accepted that the parties had contributed
roughly equal amounts to the initial purchase of that property.
35 The Suburb D property was sold in about April 2008 for $845,000. The
parties received about $600,000 net. They used those proceeds
to buy a property
in Coastal Town N. for approximately $574,000 in May 2008. The property
purchase included a small mortgage, but
otherwise the cost was covered by the
sale of Suburb D.
36 The parties then moved back to Victoria to live in that property for
12 months. They returned to Perth in June 2009. They sold
the Coastal
Town N. property, reduced the overall mortgage size and bought a new property in
Suburb P. Suburb P cost $660,000 and
again was subject to a small mortgage.
Suburb P was sold on 19 November 2013 for $714,000. The net proceeds of
sale went to a joint
trust account and remain in that account.
37 It is clear that the mortgage repayments throughout the course of the
parties’ relationship came predominately from the
respondent’s
income. The applicant received child support from the father of her daughter
and received various Centrelink
benefits throughout the period of the
relationship.
38 Since separation the applicant has been living in the property until it
was sold in 2013. From March 2012 to January 2013 the
respondent paid the
mortgage repayments on that property. From January 2013 until November 2013,
when it was sold, the applicant
paid the mortgage repayments.
39 The respondent clearly had $78,000 in a managed fund, but he has
withdrawn that amount. The Court has no evidence as to whether
he still retains
any of that money, but he has certainly had access to it. From December 2012 to
28 May 2013 he made several withdrawals
to reduce the account to zero.
40 In addition, in December 2012 the respondent sold the last of his shares
in CommSec and received the amount of $10,226.30.
41 The applicant has been the predominant caregiver to the two children
during the relationship and almost exclusively since. There
have been no child
support payments received from the respondent. The previous arrears were only
paid from the real estate sale
proceeds held on trust and therefore have not
come from the respondent’s income.
Conclusions in relation to contributions
42 The applicant made the overwhelming
contributions towards the welfare of the family and to the care of the children.
The respondent
made greater financial contributions up to the date of
separation, being March 2012. The parties initially contributed about the
amount of money to the first purchase of real estate and the respondent has
contributed by way of his income since that date.
43 Since separation, however, he has clearly abdicated his responsibility
apart from paying mortgage repayments for the period referred
to above. It
seems clear that he is still living beyond his means, given that he cashed in
the amount held in the managed fund and
he sold his shares and his credit card
debt is still high, notwithstanding those amounts being received. In my view,
on balance,
given the contributions to property, contributions to the family and
the significant contributions made by the applicant since separation,
of 60% in the applicant’s favour is an appropriate adjustment.
Section 205ZD(3)
44 I have taken into account all of the relevant
factors pursuant to this provision. I note that the respondent has not
made voluntary
child support payments as required pursuant to the relevant
legislation. Orders made by this Court allowed the applicant to access
proceeds in order to repay the child support arrears. That however has used a
joint asset of the parties to pay child support
that should have come from the
respondent’s income. That has then potentially been prejudicial to the
applicant and therefore
I have added back into the asset pool that amount that
was withdrawn.
45 The applicant completed her Graduate Diploma of Early Childhood Studies
in December 2014 and at the time of trial was still hoping
to obtain employment
in that field. If she receives fulltime employment her initial wage will be
around $58,000 per annum.
46 The applicant has the ongoing care and control of the two children, aged
eight at the time of the trial.
Conclusions in relation to
47 The above-mentioned factors support a weighting
in the applicant’s favour. She will have the ongoing needs of the
to contend with, although I intend to put in place a lumpsum order for
a period of time. In doing so, I have been careful not to
double count in
relation to the property factors and the proposed lump sum child support order.
The applicant retains now a capacity
for a reasonable income subject to the
availability of work. The respondent still has significant credit card debts
and it would
appear has few resources left. I have no evidence before me as to
his current income. In my view, an apportionment of 10% in the
applicant’s favour is appropriate by way of
factors. Of the
assets that I have determined above, the applicant is to otherwise keep the
Transaction account
Furniture and chattels
48 She will also retain the following debts:
MasterCard debt
American Express
Net asset position to the applicant
49 The net assets amount to $605,912.29. Seventy percent of that figure is
$424,138.60; less the amount that the applicant would
otherwise retain of
$8,372.15; provides a net figure of $415,766.45 to the applicant. This is the
amount that should be deducted
from the sale proceeds to go to the applicant.
The proceeds of sale amount to $555,900.61 plus $3,500 in interest, totalling
$559,400.61.
By deducting the applicant’s amount referred to above of
$415,766.45, leaves an amount of approximately $143,634 to the respondent.
that figure the respondent has approximately $49,000 by way of credit card debts
that may still be payable.
50 I am satisfied that the above represents a just and equitable settlement
between the parties.
Child support
51 The current assessment is from the period of 1
January 2015 to 31 October 2015 and is set at $916.17 per month. There is a
of arrears being built up through a lack of proper payment by the
respondent pursuant to his income.
52 As I have mentioned, previous orders allowed the applicant to access the
term deposit to pay the outstanding arrears and I have
added that amount back
into the pool. I am satisfied, given that there have been no child support
payments made voluntarily to date,
and given the lack of involvement in the
proceedings, that there is no reasonable prospect of the respondent voluntarily
paying child
support in the future. The applicant seeks to capitalise an amount
of $800 per week until each child reaches the age of 18. The
basis upon which
she made that suggestion was that:
hundred dollars was less than the current assessment because she thought it was
a fair amount; and
infer that she thought there might be a variation in the respondent’s
income over time and this reduced amount might take
into account such
variations.
53 The children, at the time of trial, were eight
years of age. The applicant therefore seeks to capitalise the child support for
a period of 10 years. It is unusual to capitalise a lumpsum amount for such a
lengthy period of time, but it is open to the Court
54 Orders for lumpsum child support are contained in
Division 5 of
Child Support (Assessment) Act
That division allows for payment for
child support other than by way of period payments. The division has two
particular objects
which provides:
121 Additional particular objects of Division
Additional particular objects of this Division include ensuring:
(a) that children have their proper needs met from reasonable and adequate
shares in the income, earning capacity, property and financial
resources of both
their parents; and
(b) that parents share equitably in the support of their
55 These objects are, of course, in addition to the
objects provided in
that children receive a proper level of financial
support from their parents and that the support is determined according to their
capacity to provide such support.
Section 123A
provides the following:
(1) The court may make an order that a liable parent provide child support for a
child to a carer entitled to child support in the
form of a lump sum payment to
be credited against the amount payable under the liability under the relevant
administrative assessment
(a) the carer entitled to child support or the liable parent makes an
application to a court under paragraph 123(1)(b); and
(b) the court is satisfied that it would be:
(i) just and equitable as regards the child, the carer entitled to child support
and the liable parent; and
(ii) otherwise proper;
to make an order under this section; and
(c) the amount of the lump sum payment equals or exceeds the annual rate of
child support payable for the child under the administrative
assessment.
57 Subparagraph (3) provides that:
An order under subsection (1):
(a) must specify the amount of the lump sum payment; and
(b) must specify that the lump sum payment is to be credited against 100%, or
another specified percentage that is less than 100%,
of the amounts payable
under the liability.
Section 123A(4)
provides that the Court
must have regard to:
(a) the administrative assessment; and
(b) any determination in force under
(departure determinations) in
relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support and the liable
parent; and
(c) any order in force under Division 4 of this Part (departure orders) in
relation to the child, the carer entitled to child support
and the liable
parent; and
(d) whether the carer entitled to child support is in receipt of an income
tested pension, allowance or benefit; and
(e) if the carer entitled to child support is not in receipt of such a pension,
allowance or benefit—whether the circumstances
of the carer are such that,
taking into account the effect of the order proposed to be made by the court,
the carer would be unable
to support himself or herself without an income tested
pension, allowance or benefit.
59 In this case the applicant is
in receipt of an incometested pension, allowance or benefit.
60 In this case the provision of a lumpsum amount is designed by the Court
to take the place of the periodic payments and, therefore,
should be credited.
I therefore intend to make an order that the relative administrative assessment
is to be reduced given the lumpsum
payment contemplated.
61 What the Court intends to do in this matter is proceed under
to make an order for a lumpsum amount and have that amount credited against
future child support assessments. I am satisfied that
it is just and equitable
and otherwise proper to make a lump sum order.
62 It is necessary, in my view, to capitalise the current child support
payments for a period of time. The real issue though is
whether should be
for such a lengthy period as 10 years. In my view, it is too long a period
in the circumstances of this case,
in particular where I have no evidence
of the respondent’s current income.
63 In my view, a period of six years is sufficient and that will provide an
amount of $65,964.24 (at the rate of $916.17 per month).
The respondent is
entitled to his proceeds of sale from the property settlement pursuant to the
to financial matters, however, he is also
obliged to maintain his children at the rate assessed by the Child Support
Agency in the
event that he does not object to such decisions and seek a review
of them. He has failed in that obligation and it is entirely appropriate
lumpsum child support order to be made. I have therefore made orders that will
erode into his property settlement entitlement
in order to provide a proper
amount of child support for the two children whom he has an obligation to
support. On balance, in my
view, the amount left to the respondent is
sufficient.
64 I acknowledge the risk that in six years’ time when the lump sum
effectively expires, the parties will need to go back to
a child support
assessment and the applicant may be in no better position from that time
forward. By that time, however, the attitude
of the respondent towards his
obligation to support his children may have changed and the parties’
financial circumstances
at that time can be taken into account in a revised
child support assessment.
65 The arrears of $9,521.47 cover the child support arrears to
8 October 2014. I note that there were further child support arrears
up to the end of December 2014 in the amount of $2,604. I intend to make orders
that will allow for the payment of that amount as
66 In an overall sense, the respondent retains an amount of $143,634 or
thereabouts from the proceeds of sale. He may still have
approximately $49,000
in debt leaving him with $94,634. From that amount I have deducted the amounts
of $65,964.24 and $2,604, being
a total of $68,568.24, which leaves the
respondent with $26,065.76. I am satisfied that this is a fair result in
all the circumstances.
Children’s issues
67 The respondent last saw the children in January
2013 and last spoke to them by telephone in February 2013. He has been the
of 19 charges for breaches of violence restraining order by
communicating with the applicant whilst he was restrained by such an
respondent received a suspended sentence regarding these breaches, having been
convicted in March 2014. The orders proposed
by the applicant allow for ongoing
time between the children and the respondent as agreed in writing. The
respondent did not press
his position, although he commented that he wanted to
see the children when he left the Court at the commencement of the trial.
In the circumstances, therefore, the orders sought by the applicant are
entirely appropriate. I am not prepared to put in place
orders sought by the
respondent as they are not in the children’s best interests and he has not
pressed for those orders and
has provided no evidence in support. These include
orders in relation to passports and parental responsibility. I have, in coming
to that determination, taken into account the best interests of these children
and the entire history of this matter including all
of the primary and
additional considerations under the Act.
applicant be appointed sole trustee of the Commonwealth Bank term deposit,
account number [xxxxxxxxxxxxx] and is solely authorised
to deduct the following
amounts from the sale proceeds held in that account:
(a) $415,766.45 to the applicant by way of property settlement;
(b) A further $65,964.24 to the applicant by way of lumpsum child support to
8 October 2014;
(c) Plus a further amount of $2,604 by way of lumpsum child support to
31 December 2014;
(d) And the balance to an account in the respondent’s sole name.
28 days of these orders, the respondent notify the applicant and the
Commonwealth Bank of his nominated account referred to
in the above order.
pursuant to
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
respondent provide child support to the applicant for the children [Child A] and
[Child B], by way of a lump-sum payment of
$65,964.24, which payment is to be
credited to the current child support assessment at the rate of $916.17 per
month for a period
of six years, with effect from 1 January 2015.
the applicant have sole parental responsibility for the children [Child A] and
[Child B] born [in] 2006.
the children live with the applicant.
the children will communicate and spend time with the respondent as agreed in
respondent be restrained and an injunction is hereby granted restraining him
from removing the said children from the care and
control of the applicant
and/or any agent acting on her behalf and/or any educational or day-care
facility that the children attend,
unless with the prior consent of the
applicant have liberty to provide a copy of these orders to any educational or
day-care facility that the said children attend.
the applicant have liberty to apply to renew the children’s passports as
required and the requirement for the respondent
to sign the renewal application
be dispensed with.
proceedings before the Court are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [67] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (209 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter