URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/197.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARTHUR and JOYNER [2015] FCWAM 197 (4 September 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
ARTHUR and JOYNER
[2015] FCWAM 197
2 APRIL 2015
DELIVERED :
4 SEPTEMBER 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 6362 of 2014
Catchwords:
Interim child related proceedings; reasonable grounds to believe family
violence occurred; presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
applicable; commencement of unsupervised time between father and children;
extension to overnight time gradually.
Legislation:
Family Court Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Ms A Christou
Respondent : Ms S Tovey
Solicitors:
Applicant : Leach Legal
Respondent : Dwyer Durack
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN
THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
1 The mother and father in
this matter have two children namely, [Child A] born [in] 2007 and [Child B]
born [in] 2010.
2 The father commenced these proceedings in November 2014. On 28 January
2015, orders were made for the filing of material. The
matter was otherwise
adjourned to an interim hearing before me. A number of subpoenas were issued,
returnable to 12 March 2015.
3 The parties attended a Case Assessment Conference with Family Consultant
Collins on 20 February 2015. Whilst I have taken into
account the entire
content of the conference file note, I highlight the following in relation to
the outstanding issues before the
Court. The Family Consultant noted:
(a) There was no opportunity to reach agreement as the parties were too
polarised in their proposals.
(b) Both parties accepted that [Child A] was having seizures preceded by bouts
of shallow breathing. The father indicated he believed
the child’s
“attacks are triggered by emotional issues” and that these related
to the way the mother behaved.
[Child A] is currently almost eight years of age
and the mother said she had not had a seizure since she was three and a-half
old. [Child A] has been seeing a clinical psychologist since October 2014
and attends every fortnight.
(c) No health concerns were raised in relation to [Child B].
4 The Family Consultant referred to the police records produced
pursuant to
Family Court Act
which revealed the mother had three trafficrelated convictions and three
criminal-related convictions. The police incident
reports indicated a family
violence related offence where the mother was the victim and the father was the
person of interest. That
matter, however, did not proceed. The father had
14 convictions, nine of which were traffic related; the remaining five were
convictions.
5 The mother had obtained an interim violence restraining order in 2011
which was subsequently dropped.
6 The Family Consultant noted the current arrangements were that the
children live with the mother and spend supervised time with
the father once per
week through the supervision agency, Safe Oasis Solutions. That supervised time
commenced on 29 November 2014.
7 Each party raised issues in relation to mental health and drug use.
Whilst the mother denied she had been diagnosed with bipolar
disorder (which was
the father’s unqualified view), she accepted that she had engaged with a
psychologist after separation
and acknowledged that she had suffered from
anxiety both before and after separation. She ceased taking anti-anxiety
in November 2012.
8 The father, for his part, acknowledged that he was diagnosed with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in 2010. He
was prescribed
dexamphetamine medication for that condition. He also engaged with a
psychologist after separation and he had seen
him on some 36 occasions. He now
is also engaged with a psychiatrist in relation to his ADHD.
9 The father acknowledged he had used methamphetamines from 2010 to 2011.
He said he had not used that drug since 2012. He also
acknowledged that he has
had a history of excessive use of alcohol and claimed that he ceased using
alcohol only three weeks prior
to the conference. He is attending alcohol
counselling once a week. He raised similar concern about the
mother’s use of illicit
substances and alcohol. She acknowledges
having “experimented” with methamphetamines once when with the
father, but
otherwise denies any other illicit drug use. She says that she has
now limited her alcohol use to a reasonable level. The Consultant
that both parties undergo drug urinalysis before 5.00 pm on the day of the
Case Assessment Conference and the parties agreed
to do so. The mother did not
comply until 18 days later. The father complied within the required timeframe
and he noted that he
was taking dexamphetamine for his ADHD at the time of the
10 The father denied any physical violence during the relationship with the
mother. He acknowledged that there had “been domestics”
involved name-calling and putting each other down. The mother’s version
was that she was subjected to verbal and
psychological abuse with the father.
She alleged:
He would scream at me and hit the side of the wall near my face. He would
stand over me and would verbally abuse me.
11 She also claimed
that he “smashed my windscreen” and that she was fearful of him.
The mother also claimed that the
father had been physically, verbally and
emotionally abusive to the children whilst they were in the relationship and
post separation.
The post separation allegations relate to claims that the
children have told her that the father “smacks them very hard and
his partner to smack them”. The Family Consultant noted that she:
Holds concern about the allegations raised by both parties and is concerned
allegations that have
been raised.
In addition to this, the Consultant holds concerns around the father’s use
of alcohol and the fact that he has only addressed
this issue three weeks prior
to the Case Assessment Conference taking place.
12 The Family
Consultant recommended the appointment of an Independent Children’s
13 She also recommended that the parties enrol in various courses.
14 On 5 March 2015 the Department for Child Protection and Family Support
provided a report in answer to the Form 4 application filed
by the mother on
10 December 2014. It did not refer to the later Form 4 filed by the father
and a further report was then provided.
The report dated 5 March 2015, however,
The Department does not have a file in relation to this family.
On 10 October 2014 the mother made contact with the Department to report
concerns about the father’s care of the children.
These concerns were
deemed vague and not meeting the threshold for departmental involvement.
The father reported separate concerns to the Department on 18 March 2014, 27
October 2014 and 19 November 2014. Those allegations
also were too vague to
involve the Department.
Most of the allegations raised in the Form 4 notice relate to parenting skills
as opposed to specific child protection concerns.
Nonetheless the Department
met with the father on 4 March 2015 to discuss those concerns. On 4 March 2015
the Department spoke
with the mother. The Department’s view was that
there were no identifiable child protection concerns and there was no available
evidence to support the view that the children are at risk of harm in either
parent’s care.
The Department provided a view that it would be in the children’s best
interest to have stable and predictable contact arrangements
with both parents
and their extended family, and for both parents to make a concerted effort not
to denigrate each other, or allow
other people to denigrate the other parent, in
the presence of the children. The Department declined to be involved in any
15 The further report from the Department was
dated 24 March 2015 and referred to the later Form 4 notice filed by the father.
further arose from the later Form 4 report that had not already been
dealt with in the earlier report.
Background to the proceedings
16 At the interim hearing, a number of orders were
made by consent, namely:
Until further order of the Court:
until further order, the respondent mother have the children in her care when
the children are not spending time with the applicant
parents be at liberty to have telephone contact with the children at
4.00 pm on each Wednesday that the children are not in their
care, with the
parent who does not have the children in their care to place a telephone call to
the mobile of the other parent, and
with the other parent to facilitate that
phone call, and the parents be restrained from preventing the children from
engaging in
telephone contact with each parent outside these times.
respondent ensure that the applicant is fully informed, with prior written
notice by text message, as to each and every appointment
which the child [CHILD
A] attends upon a counsellor/child psychologist, with the applicant father
restrained by injunction from attending
any such appointment.
admission as to need, the parents be restrained and in injunction be granted
restraining the parents, their servants and agents
(a) Consuming alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit, or illicit drugs in
the 24 hours prior to and during contact with the
children, or allowing any
third party to do so in their presence;
(b) Denigrating or maligning the other parent, their partners and/or extended
family in the presence of or in the hearing of the
(c) Discussing the court proceedings or their wishes as to time spent with each
parent in the presence of or hearing of the children;
(d) Physically chastising the children or allowing any third party to do so.
admission as to need, the applicant father attend the following programs at his
(a) Anglicare “Changing Tracks”;
(b) “1-2-3 Magic”;
(c) “Triple P” parenting program; and
(d) Anglicare “Mums & Dads Forever” Program.
admission as to need, the respondent mother attend the Anglicare “Mums
& Dads Forever” program at her sole
cost, and the respondent mother
use her best endeavours to do so as soon as practicable.
the case of urgency or emergency concerning the children, the parents will
communicate by text message to their respective mobiles.
parents each keep the other advised by text message as soon as practicable, in
relation to any medical emergency involving the
children, or chronic serious
medical condition requiring ongoing treatment, and provide to the other parent
the name of the hospital,
treating medical or healthcare professional and/or
medical or healthcare facility which provided treatment for the children.
parents will communicate in respect of the children and parenting arrangements
in relation to issues or significant events concerning
the children, primarily
by way of a communication book which is to accompany the children at each
parties be at liberty to apply to relist this matter at short notice in the
respect of the implementation of these orders.
17 In addition to
those orders which were pronounced by consent, the Court also made the following
judgment in this matter, the children [Child A] born [in] 2007 and [Child B]
born [in] 2010, spend time with the Applicant,
[Mr Arnold], each Sunday from
9.00 am to 5.00 pm, commencing 5 April 2015.
judgment, handovers for the said children spending time with the Applicant be
conducted by Safe Oasis Solutions at the Applicant’s
costs [sic].
18 The Court is required to determine the balance of the interim
issues in dispute and provide reasons for those decisions. I also
indicated at
the end of the hearing that I would make orders for the appointment of an
Independent Children’s Lawyer. I intend
Father’s case
19 The father sought orders in terms of the minute
of interim orders sought by applicant. They were in the following terms:
the applicant father and respondent mother (together
“the Parents”) shall have equal shared parental responsibility
for the children.
forthwith and until further order, the applicant father shall spend time with
the children as follows:
(a) From 3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Wednesday to 8.45 am or the
commencement of school on Thursday, in each week; and
(b) Each alternate weekend, from 3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Friday
to 8.45 am or the commencement of school on Monday.
until further order, the respondent mother shall have the children in her care
at all other times.
parenting arrangements in paragraphs 2 and 3 of these interim orders be
suspended such that the children spend time with each
of the Parents as follows:
(a) Easter 2015, with the applicant father from 3.00 pm or the conclusion of
school on the Thursday immediately preceding Easter
to 3.00 pm on Easter
Saturday, and with the respondent mother from 3.00 pm on Easter Saturday to 5.00
pm on Easter Monday.
(b) 2015/2016 Christmas/New Year school holiday period, on a week-about
arrangement, with the applicant father from the conclusion
of school on the last
day of the school term to 3.00 pm on the second Sunday of the Christmas/New
Year school holiday period and
with the respondent mother from 3.00 pm on
the second Sunday of the Christmas/New Year school holiday period to
3.00 pm on the third
Sunday of the Christmas/New Year period, and
alternating each week thereafter.
(c) Christmas 2015 as follows:
the applicant father from 3.00 pm on 24 December 2015 to 11.00 am on 25
December 2015;
the respondent mother from 11.00 am to [sic] on 25 December 2015 to 3.00 pm on
26 December 2015; and
the applicant father 3.00 pm om [sic] 26 December 2015 to 3.00 pm on New
Year’s Eve 31 December 2015.
(d) Such other times as agreed between the Parents in writing.
otherwise stated in these orders, handover occurs such that the Parent who is to
commence time with the children:
(a) collects the children from school if such day and time correspond with a
school day; or
(b) if such day is not a school day, then handover occur at McDonalds [Suburb
Parents be at liberty to have telephone contact with the children between 6.00
pm and 7.00 pm on each day that the children are
not in their care, and the
Parents will not prevent the children from engaging in telephone contact with
each parent outside these
the respondent ensures that the applicant is fully informed, with prior written
notice, as to each and every appointment which
the child [Child A] attends upon
a counsellor/child psychologist, with the counsellor/child psychologist to
be agreed between the
parties within seven days of the making of these orders,
and to be jointly appointed and with the child to attend sessions for as
is recommended by the counsellor, with both Parents to share equally in the
associated costs of same.
until further order, [Ms Joyner] born [in] 1991, her servants and/or agents be
and are hereby restrained from removing or attempting
to remove or causing or
permitting the removal of the children [Child A] born [in] 2007 and [Child B]
born [in] 2010, from the Commonwealth
of Australia AND IT IS REQUESTED that the
Australian Federal Police give effect to this order by placing the name [sic] of
children of [sic] the Airport Watch List in force at all points of
arrival and departure in the Commonwealth of Australia and maintain
children’s name [ sic] on the Watch List until the Court orders its
the respondent mother, her servants and/or agents be restrained and an
injunction be granted restraining the respondent mother
from removing the
children from:
(a) The Perth metropolitan region; and
(b) The State of Western Australia;
(c) The Commonwealth of Australia without the prior written consent of the
applicant father or by order of this Honourable Court.
the respondent mother be restrained from applying for passports for the children
without the prior written consent of the applicant
father or by order of this
Honourable Court.
Parents be restrained and an injunction be granted restraining the Parents,
their servants and agents from using physical means
to discipline the children.
admission as to need, the applicant father attend the following programs at his
(a) Anglicare “Changing Tracks”;
(b) “1-2-3 Magic”;
(c) “Triple P” parenting program; and
(d) Anglicare “Mums & Dads Forever” Program.
admission as to need, the respondent mother attend the following programs at her
(a) Anglicare “Mums & Dads Forever” program;
(b) “1-2-3 Magic”;
(c) “Triple P” parenting program; and
(d) Anglicare “Mums & Dads Forever” Program.
Parents will communicate in respect of the children and parenting arrangements,
in relation to any issues or significant events
concerning the children, primary
by way of a communication book which is to accompany the children at each
the case of urgency or emergency concerning the children, the Parents will
communicate by telephone.
the purpose of telephone contact with the children or in case of urgency or
emergency, the Parents must keep each other informed
at all times of mobile and
landline telephone numbers at which they can be contacted, and must advise each
other of changes to those
mobile and landline telephone numbers at least two
days prior to any change being made.
Parents each keep the other advised, by telephone, as soon as practicable in
relation to any medical emergency involving the children,
or medical or
healthcare condition requiring ongoing treatment and provide to the other
Parent, the name of the hospital, treating
medical or healthcare professional
and/or medical or healthcare facility which provided treatment for the children.
the applicant father be at liberty to apply to relist this matter at short
notice in respect of the implementation of these orders.
father relied upon the following evidence:
(a) The affidavit of [Mr P] filed 10 March 2015;
(b) His own affidavit filed 6 March 2015;
(c) The affidavit of [Ms N] filed 6 March 2015; and
(d) A further affidavit filed 30 March 2015.
21 At the hearing
the father relied upon a further variation to his proposals by way of a
handwritten minute of proposed orders.
That document sought orders in the
following terms:
forthwith and until further order, the applicant father spend time with the
children as follows:
(a) For a period of four weeks, each Sunday from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm; and
(b) For a period of four fortnights once the four-week period in paragraph 2(a)
is completed, every second Saturday and Sunday from
9.00 am to 5.00 pm each day;
(c) Once the 12 weeks pursuant to paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) are completed,
alternate weekend, from 3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Friday to 8.45 am
or the commencement of school on Monday; and
3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Wednesday to 8.45 am or the commencement
of school on Thursday in each week.
Mother’s case
22 The mother filed an updated minute of interim
parenting orders on 20 March 2015 and she sought the following orders:
respondent be granted leave to amend her Form 1A interim application and for
this purpose, seeks leave to file this updated interim
minute of proposed
parenting orders.
12, 13, 14 and 15 of the applicant’s Form 1 initiating application filed 6
November 2014 be made by consent.
9 of the interim orders made 19 November 2014 remain in full force and effect.
the alternative to the preceding paragraph, the applicant spend time with the
children to be supervised by the paternal grandfather,
[Mr Arnold Snr] and his
wife, [Ms M], or such other person as may be agreed between the applicant and
the respondent as follows:
(a) From 9.00 am to 5.00 pm every Sunday;
(b) From 4.00 pm to 6.00 pm on each of the children’s birthdays; and
(c) From 4.00 pm to 6.00 pm on the applicant’s birthday.
the purpose of handover in the preceding paragraph, if the supervision is
undertaken by the paternal grandfather and his wife,
the paternal grandfather
and/or his wife shall:
(a) collect the children from the home of the respondent mother; and
(b) return the children to the home of the respondent mother.
applicant father be restrained and an injunction be granted restraining him
(c) [sic] consuming alcohol or illicit drugs in the 24 hours prior to and during
his contact with the children, or allowing any third
party to do so in their
(d) [sic] denigrating or maligning the respondent mother, her partner or her
extended family in the presence of or in the hearing
of the children;
(e) [sic] discussing the court proceedings or their wishes as to their time
spent with each parent in the presence of or hearing
of the children; and
(f) [sic] physically chastising the children or allowing any third party to do
Independent Children’s Lawyer be appointed forthwith in the usual terms.
costs of the Independent Children’s Lawyer shall be determined upon each
party filing a financial statement.
single expert be appointed, with the specific terms of reference to be agreed
between the parties, to produce a report for the court
with recommendations in
relation to the children’s time with the respondent.
1 to 5 of the interim orders made 19 November 2014 be discharged.
applicant forthwith do all acts and sign all documents necessary to obtain a
passport [sic] for the children, and deliver the
signed application forms to the
respondent.
time for compliance with paragraph 6 of the interim orders made 19 November 2014
be extended to such time as forthwith [sic] upon
the respondent receiving the
children’s passports.
applicant be at liberty to take the children on a holiday to New Zealand
departing in January 2016 for a period of no longer than
three weeks and for
this purpose, the applicant be at liberty to obtain from the registry the
children’s passports.
later than 21 days before the proposed departure date for the holiday in the
preceding paragraph the respondent shall provide the
applicant with a detailed
itinerary, including details of flights and accommodation for the duration of
applicant shall be entitled to “make up” time with the children for
any time missed as a result of the proposed holiday
in paragraph 13.
return the passports to the registry of the
Family Court where they shall be
held and not released to either party without the written consent of the other
party or order of
this Honourable Court.
matter otherwise be adjourned generally pending the production of a report by
the single expert witness.
23 The mother relied upon the
following evidence:
(a) The affidavit of [Ms Arnold] filed 20 March 2015;
(b) The affidavit of [Mr O] filed 20 March 2015;
(c) The affidavit of [Ms J] filed 20 March 2015; and
(d) Her own affidavit filed 20 March 2015.
24 At the hearing
before me, the mother did not press for orders in relation to travel, passports
or parental responsibility. The
issues to be determined by the Court therefore:
(a) whether the mother could take the children out of the Perth metropolitan
area within a range of approximately four hours of Perth;
(b) whether the father’s time needed to be supervised or not;
25 By the conclusion of the hearing, I was satisfied the
supervision was no longer necessary, but the extent of any ongoing time
the children and the father still needs to be resolved. Safe Oasis Solutions
provided a report dated 24 March 2015 which
was generally positive in terms of
the interaction between the father and the children. Whilst I have taken into
account the entire
content of the report I note the following:
The report is based on six supervised visits from 15 February 2015 until
22 March 2015.
I note that an earlier report dated 17 February 2015 covered the period from
29 November 2014 until 8 February 2015.
Transitions and greetings were positive. [Ms J] and/or her partner [Mr O]
were supportive and encouraged the children to have fun.
[Mr Arnold] and
his partner [Ms N] welcomed them warmly and the children generally appeared
eager to spend time with them.
Physical contact was natural, age appropriate and relevant to the moment. The
children generally appeared secure and relaxed in
the father’s company and
the father’s partner, [Ms N], appeared to have a warm and secure
relationship with both children.
The conversation flowed easily between the children, the father and his partner.
The children engaged in a variety of child-focussed activities with the father
and his family members. They were relaxed and secure.
The father also attended to the children’s safety and general wellbeing.
He provided any minor injuries with comfort and reassurance.
The children appeared relaxed and secure to leave the father’s care and
welcomed and helped
into the car.
26 As a result of these very positive
observations the service supported the transition with this family if it
proceeded to unsupervised
also upon other evidence, I was of the view at the conclusion of the hearing
that supervision was no longer required.
The relevant law
27 The Full Court recently provided some guidance
in relation to what appear to be very strict and comprehensive guidelines
by the Full Court in the decision of
Goode & Goode
FLC 93-286. The Full Court in
Banks & Banks
[2015] FamCAFC 36
set out what the Full Court said in
(supra) at [80,903]
concerning the way in which an interim parenting application should be
determined:
It is useful to recall what the Full Court said in
Goode and Goode (2006)
81 In making interim decisions the Court will still often be faced with
conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes between
the parents as
to what constitutes the best interests of the child. However, the legislative
pathway must be followed.
82 In an interim case that would involve the following:
(a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties;
(b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing;
(c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts;
(d) considering the matters in s 66CC that are relevant and, if possible,
making findings about them (in interim proceedings there
may be little
uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these
matters to take place);
(e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61DA that equal shared parental
responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies
or does not apply
because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the
child or family violence or, in an
interim matter, the Court does not consider
it appropriate to apply the presumption;
(f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because
application of it would not be in the child’s best
(g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order
that the child spend equal time with the parents
unless it is contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
matters in s 60CC, or
impracticable;
(h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests,
considering making an order that the child spend substantial
and significant
time as defined in s 65DAA(3) with the parent, unless contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of
consideration of one or more of the
matters in s 60CC, or impracticable;
(i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to
be in the best interests of the child, then making
such orders in the discretion
of the Court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of
consideration of one or more
of the matters in s 60CC;
(j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as
is in the best interests of the child, as a result
of consideration of one or
more of the matters in s 60CC; and
(k) even then the Court may need to consider equal time or substantial and
significant time, especially if one of the parties has
sought it or, even if
neither has sought it, if the Court considers after affording procedural
fairness to the parties it to be in
the best interests of the child.
28 The Full Court in
(supra) noted that it is the
making of an order for equal shared parental responsibility that triggers the
requirement to consider
making orders for equal time or substantial and
significant time. The Full Court in
(supra) went on to say at [48]
It should also be said that in parenting proceedings, as in all civil
litigation, it will be the issues that are joined that will
dictate which
s 60CC factors are relevant. By their nature, interim parenting
proceedings should be confined to those issues which,
in the best interests of
the child, require determination prior to a
determination at a
trial [emphasis in original]. The fact such disputes are commonly dealt with in
overcrowded Court lists makes
it even more desirable to identify with precision
those issues which can, or should, be resolved on an interim basis.
[49] Although the primary Judge discussed all the potentially relevant factors
in her ex tempore reasons, that luxury will not always
be available.
Furthermore, there is a risk that in discussing every s 60CC factor, the
judicial officer may lose sight of the forest
for the trees. It is also
important to stress here that the requirement to “consider” each
factor does not mean each
must be discussed, especially where the evidence leads
inexorably to a particular conclusion:
(2014) FLC 93582.
[50] When it is obvious that the findings made as to some of the s 60CC
factors will be determinative of the child’s best interests
on an interim
basis, it is a sterile and unnecessary exercise to address other factors.
Moreover, it would be a sterile exercise
to determine whether or not particular
facts are disputed if they are relevant only to one of the nondeterminative
s 60CC considerations.
Properly understood, we do not interpret what was
as meaning that in an interim case, each and every fact
must be characterised as disputed or not; and that each s 60CC factor must
be traversed where it is obvious on the facts and issues joined that there are
only one or two decisive factors.
29 I have no doubt the
children should have a meaningful relationship with both of their parents. I am
not satisfied that there
is any longer a need to protect either child from
physical or psychological harm from being in the father’s care. The
are too young to have any of their views be the subject of any
significant weight. The children clearly have a strong and loving
relationship with the mother who has been their primary caregiver. I am,
however, satisfied that the children have a good relationship
with the father,
especially given the observations in the supervised contact report. The father
has paid relatively little by way
of child support for the children. He has
incurred significant costs in relation to the supervision of his time with the
30 I do not consider there will be any significant adverse effects on the
children from the change from supervision to unsupervised
time with the father.
I also consider that some further extension of the father’s time would be
appropriate and would not
adversely impact the children. I have no difficulty
with the mother’s capacity to care for the children. I also have no
with the father’s capacity to care for the children in daytime
periods and including on overnight occasions in future.
Conclusions
31 As I mentioned, I made orders in relation to
unsupervised time immediately at the end of the hearing. I was satisfied and
satisfied that that was an appropriate order. I am not concerned about
any ongoing risks that would require continued supervision
either formally or by
relatives or friends. I remain confident therefore in that decision and now
must determine whether that order
should continue or whether overnight time is
proper having regard to all of the evidence.
32 Both parties have supportive partners who appear to behave well around
the children.
33 Prior to October 2014, the children spent alternate weekends in the
father’s care from, generally, after school Friday to
6.00 pm on Sundays,
together with the weekabout time during school holiday periods.
34 The parties live in the southern suburbs of Perth.
35 Each party has raised some concerns about the other party’s
behaviour and parenting. These have been canvassed and I find
that they are not
of sufficient concern to either require supervision of the father’s time
or to dramatically increase the
father’s time with the children beyond
what was happening prior to October 2014. The mother raised concerns about the
comments to her at about that period and that led to a
cessation of the father’s time.
36 Those concerns have also been canvassed and I am confident that the
parties understand that such behaviour towards the children
and comments to them
are inappropriate. They are hurtful and do nothing but potentially traumatise
the children.
37 I am of the view that such behaviour will not occur in the future.
38 On balance, the children should (in time) return to the pattern of time
they were enjoying prior to October 2014. The orders
that I put in place at the
interim hearing have now been in place for some time.
39 The mother’s proposals are unduly restrictive and do not accord
with the children’s best interests. The father’s
proposals provide
an appropriate timeframe for the extension of the children’s time with him
and for the reintroduction of
overnight time in due course. Given the
“one day per week regime” has been in place since the hearing, it is
to move to the next step as proposed in the father’s minute.
40 The presumption of equal shared parental responsibility does not apply
given that I find there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been
family violence in this relationship.
41 I do not intend to order equal shared parental responsibility on an
interim basis and therefore am not obliged to consider equal
time or substantial
and significant time.
42 I do however consider that an intervening mid-week time with the father
would be appropriate (once the overnight times commence)
and would otherwise
lessen the gap between times the children will see the father.
43 In my view, one overnight occasion per fortnight is reasonable in all the
circumstances. The father has addressed a number of
the concerns raised by the
mother in the orders made at the end of the hearing.
44 The issue regarding travel out of the Perth metropolitan area can be
disposed of quickly. There is insufficient evidence to support
an injunction
against the mother. The mother is the primary caregiver to these children. She
has family and support persons outside
of the Perth metropolitan area and, in my
view, there should be no injunction restraining her from taking the children
Ancillary issues
45 I decline to make orders in relation to Easter
given that this matter will be before the Court again before that event occurs.
46 The orders made in relation to handovers should continue, noting that the
arrangements will soon move to handovers mostly occurring
at school and thereby
reducing the cost to the father.
47 I am not satisfied that these parties could effectively meet at a public
place such as that proposed by the father.
48 The father makes proposals in relation to
Christmas. The mother seeks no such orders. In my view, the father’s
are appropriate.
be independently represented at the further hearing of these
proceedings and the Director – Client Services, Legal Aid Western
Australia (
LAWA”) be requested to arrange such
representation.
7 days from the date of this order, the parties or their lawyers, provide copies
of all documents filed in these proceedings
to the Director – Client
Services, LAWA except the documents the Client Administration Officer is to
provide pursuant to these
7 days from the date of this order, each party file a Form 13 Financial
Statement and provide a copy to the Director –
Client Services, LAWA.
Client Administration Officer cause a copy of this order to be forwarded to the
Director – Client Services, LAWA together
with copies of the following
(a) a copy of the Family Consultant’s Memorandum
dated 6 March 2015.
(b) a copy of the DCPFS report dated 5 March 2015;
(c) a copy of all orders made in these proceedings.
question of contribution by the parties to the costs of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer be reserved.
children, [Child A] born [in] 2007 and [Child B] born [in] 2010, spend time with
the father:
(a) For a period of four fortnights commencing the
first fortnight after the delivery of these reasons, on every second Saturday
Sunday from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each day; and
(b) Once the above period is completed:
alternate weekend, from 3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Friday to
8.45 am or the commencement of school on Monday; and
3.00 pm or the conclusion of school on Wednesday to 8.45 am or the
commencement of school on Thursday in each intervening week;
(c) During Christmas 2015 as follows:
3.00 pm on 24 December 2015 to 11.00 am on 25 December 2015; and
pm on 26 December 2015 to 3.00 pm on New Year’s Eve 31 December
further order of the Court, the children live with the mother.
interim applications before the Court are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [48] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter