URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/284.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WITHER and WITHER & ANOR (COSTS) [2024] FCWA 284 (4 December 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
WITHER and WITHER & ANOR (COSTS)
[2024] FCWA 284
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
DELIVERED :
4 DECEMBER 2024
FILE NO/S :
4906 of 2019
First Respondent
MRS WITHER SENIOR
Second Respondent
- Where the wife seeks costs against the husband - Where the wife successfully
applied to set aside transactions pursuant to
Family Law Act
which were opposed by the husband, and subject to a submitting notice by the
Second Respondent - Where the husband's conduct as
a litigant is a material
matter - Where the husband rejected offers of settlement made by the wife -
Where the wife claims the rejection
of the offers were unreasonable in the
circumstances - Where the Court finds the husband's rejection of two offers
were unreasonable
and imprudent - Where an award of costs in favour of the wife
is justified - Where the Court is not satisfied that an order for indemnity
costs is warranted - Costs fixed in a sum - Case turns on own
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Legal Profession (Family Court of Western Australia)
Determination 2020
Representation:
Written Submissions
First Respondent
Written Submissions
Second Respondent
Did not participate
Solicitors:
First Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Second Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED.
IT IS NOTED that
publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Wither & Anor
has been approved by the Family Court of Western Australia
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject
to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Court Rules 2021
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to
publish an account of proceedings that identify persons, associated
persons, or
witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
husband and wife were unable to agree on what orders should be made by way of
alteration of property interests, following the
breakdown of their marriage.
Following a trial in [month redacted] 2024, in August 2024 I delivered Reasons
("Reasons").
In the Reasons, I set
out the relevant procedural history, background facts, and findings. I adopt
and will not repeat what I have
set out in the Reasons, unless necessary for
this judgment.
husband and wife were given an opportunity to confer as to the form of the
orders, to give effect to the Reasons. They were
unable to agree, which
required further litigation, with ex tempore Reasons delivered [in] September
2024, at which time, the Court
pronounced Final
On that same date,
the Court heard and dismissed the husband's application for suppression, with
further ex tempore Reasons
wife now seeks an order that the husband pay her costs, either "in their
entirety", or alternatively, her costs "from the date
of an offer of settlement
elected by the Court to 10 October 2024 inclusive" or in such sum
determined by the Court.
husband seeks the application
be dismissed.
to the Orders dated [in] September 2024, I have determined the costs application
in chambers. I have read and carefully
considered the wife's amended
submissions filed 15 October 2024, the husband's submissions filed 28 October
2024, and the wife's
responsive submissions filed 8 November 2024.
Background Facts
put the application in context, I refer only to the following matters.
husband is a [specialised professional] and the wife is a [medical/science
professional]. The parties married in 2003, separated
in 2019 and have since
divorced. They have three children, born in 2007, 2009 and 2012.
July 2019, the wife commenced proceedings, seeking orders by way of alteration
of property interests. A trial was listed in March
2022. Upon the wife filing
an amended Initiating Application in February 2022, the husband's mother, [Mrs
Wither Senior] was joined
as a party. As a consequence, the trial was
proceedings were complicated by the question as to whether the husband owed a
debt to his mother, Mrs Wither Senior and the wife's
application to set aside a
2014 and 2017 Acknowledgment of Debt and Irrevocable Authority executed by the
husband, and two 2019 Demands
executed by Mrs Wither Senior, pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
trial, the wife sought final orders which included (apart from setting aside the
relevant transactions) her to retain the net
proceeds of sale of [Property A]
("[Property A]"), she receive "not less than 70% the net asset pool excluding
both parties' superannuation
entitlements and...the Husband's interest...in
[Company B Group]", and a superannuation split to provide her with 70% of the
member balance. She sought a declaration that the husband hold half
of the shares in [Company B (1)] ("[Company B] ") on trust for
her, and that she
retain the [Motor vehicle A] and a boat, and the husband retain her
husband sought the net proceeds of sale of Property A be paid to his mother, he
retain the boat and Motor vehicle A, and the
wife deliver up various items.
the commencement of the trial, the wife sought leave to amend her Application,
to seek child support departure orders. After
hearing from the parties, I
dismissed the application, for the oral reasons provided.
husband sought leave to rely at trial upon an affidavit from his mother, and
that she be excused from attending trial for cross-examination.
I granted the
husband leave to rely on the affidavit of [Dr G] his mother's general
practitioner, before entertaining his application.
After hearing Dr G's
evidence, and submissions from the parties, I declined the husband's application
and made orders requiring
Mrs Wither Senior to make herself available for
cross-examination on terms. The Court was then advised that Mrs Wither Senior
not be attending trial. The husband sought leave to rely upon his
mother's affidavit, which I dismissed.
wife sought orders for spousal maintenance. By the conclusion of the trial, her
senior counsel conceded the threshold had not
been established. I dismissed the
wife's application.
the Reasons, I found that:
(a) Each party attempted to give their evidence honestly, but at times their
negative view towards the other, infected their evidence,
and that each party's
focus on their own contributions came at the expense of a proper recognition of
the other party's efforts;
(b) Aspects of the husband's evidence were unreliable and
implausible,
and he was less ready
than the wife to make concessions, including where some such concessions should
have been readily made;
(c) The husband's financial statement was deficient and
inaccurate,
and his disclosure was
which had contributed
to the wife's suspicions about his financial affairs, and resulted in her
attempting to conduct a forensic
I was not satisfied
the husband had undisclosed assets or income, or that the wife's criticisms of
his financial management of the
parties' affairs were
I rejected the
wife's claims that the husband had behaved in a controlling or coercive manner
towards her;
(d) It was appropriate to exercise discretion to set aside the transactions in
accordance with the wife's
application.
As part of that
assessment, I concluded that:
I preferred much
of the wife's evidence, over that of the husband, on material matters;
satisfied that the wife had knowledge of either Acknowledgement until after
separation, contrary to the husband's
Acknowledgements and Demands were each
instruments,
which formed part
of a chain of connected
transactions,
which constituted
the relevant disposition;
The husband made
the Acknowledgements, and the Demands were made on the husband's
The transactions
were entered into with the subjective intention of defeating an anticipated
property settlement order;
Alternatively,
irrespective of intention, the transactions were likely to defeat an anticipated
order in the proceedings, because
they reduced the asset pool by $900,000, and
in light of the limited property of the husband and the
I was satisfied
it was appropriate to exercise discretion to set aside the
transactions.
(e) In the alternative, if I were wrong in the
conclusions, I would
not have otherwise considered it just or equitable to treat the alleged loan
from Mrs Wither Senior as a
(f) The wife's complaints about the husband's expenditure post separation were
not warranted;
(g) The net property and superannuation entitlements of the husband and the wife
amounted to $1,831,136;
(h) In light of the property of the parties', it was just and equitable to make
an order by way of alteration of their property
(i) An assessment of contributions favoured the husband, and his contributions
should be assessed at 65% and the wife's contributions
assessed at
(j) An assessment pursuant to
section 75(2)
favoured the wife and
made an adjustment of 25 percent in her
concluded a just and equitable outcome in the circumstances provided for the
wife to receive 60% of the parties' net property and
superannuation and the
husband receive 40%.
the division, it was agreed each party was to retain certain assets and
liabilities, as set out at [230] and [231] of
the Reasons. I found it was just
and equitable to make orders by way of a superannuation splitting order in
favour of the wife,
which required a base amount to be allocated to her of
proceedings to which the
applies, the starting point is that each party
shall bear his or her own costs,
If, however, the Court is of the
opinion that there are justifying circumstances, the Court may make such order
as to costs as the
Court considers just,
provides that in considering what order (if any) should be made
, the Court must have regard to:
(a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to
the proceedings;
(b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of
legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that
assistance to that
(c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings
including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the conduct of the
parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions
to answer questions,
admissions of facts, production of documents and similar
(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the
proceedings to comply with previous orders of the
(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings;
(f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the
other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings
and the terms of any
such offer; and
(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
is well-established that no one factor in
has priority, nor must more
than one factor be satisfied. Any one factor can
be sufficient.
first question is whether the wife has established any circumstances which
justify departing from the position that each party
should pay their own costs,
and the making of a costs order in her favour. The second question is if there
are circumstances justifying
a costs order, the husband should pay the wife's
costs as a fixed sum, or an indemnity costs, other than costs as agreed or
on a party/party basis.
have carefully considered all of the factors in
party has been in receipt of Legal Aid. I will therefore turn to consider the
relevant matters below.
Section 117
(2A)(a) - financial circumstances of each of the
the Reasons, at [189] I set out my findings in terms of the parties' assets,
liabilities and superannuation entitlements. To
give effect to the outcome
which I determined was just and equitable, I set out what each party was to
receive or retain. At [230]
of the Reasons, I recorded that the husband was to
receive or retain the following:
[Redacted] Office Furniture (including artwork)
Household Contents, trailer, outdoor equipment
[Bank A account (2)] [account number redacted]
Unpaid debtors
Motor vehicle A
[Family Trust B]
Company B shares (Family Trust B)
[Family Trust D]
Less [Bank A Loan account] [account numbers redacted]
-$1,130,120
Less [Bank A Business account] [account numbers redacted]
SUBTOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES
Credit card liabilities
Tax liability
TOTAL LIABILITIES
HUSBAND'S NET ASSETS
SUPERANNUATION
[Superannuation Fund A]
Less superannuation splitting order
TOTAL SUPERANNUATION
TOTAL NET ASSETS AND SUPERANNUATION
[231] of the Reasons, I recorded that the wife was to receive or retain the
[Bank A account (3)] [account number redacted] (joint)
[Bank A account (4)] [account number redacted] (joint)
[Bank E trading account (1) [account number redacted] and (2) [account
number redacted] (joint)
[Bank C (1), (2) and (3) accounts]
[Bank D account]
Solicitors' Trust Account
Furniture, artwork and chattels
[Bank C account (4)] [account number redacted]
[Bank F account] [account number redacted]
[Credit Card D] [account number redacted]
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES
Tax liability (Business B)
Tax liability (wife)
TOTAL LIABILITIES
WIFE'S NET ASSETS
SUPERANNUATION
[Superannuation Fund B]
Plus superannuation splitting order
TOTAL SUPERANNUATION
TOTAL NET ASSETS AND SUPERANNUATION
to the Final Orders, the husband was required pay to the wife $740,765 within 21
the time of trial, each party was self-employed and worked on a full-time basis.
The husband anticipated he would generate gross
[revenue] of around $1,000,000.
In the 2023 financial year, his taxable income was over $600,000, while the
wife's was around $130,000.
The husband was paying child support of around
$1,000 each week to the wife, which was anticipated to reduce, when the Agency
updated information about the children's living arrangements. The
husband was meeting private school fees for each child, but deposed
capacity to continue to do so, may be dependent upon the outcome of the
proceedings. Prior to the husband's [redacted]
diagnosis, he had indicated an
intention to continue paying the school fees.
upon the property the husband has received or retained, coupled with his income
and income earning capacity, I am satisfied
that he has the capacity to meet a
costs order.
Section 117(2A)(c)
- the conduct of the parties
relevant consideration is the conduct of the parties as litigants, as opposed to
their personal conduct more
wife argued that the conduct of the husband during the proceedings caused her to
incur significant and unnecessary costs. By
way of example, the wife refers
(a) the husband's opposition to her
claim and his insistence that he owed
his mother $900,000, which she contends "significantly increased the duration
and costs of
the proceedings";
(b) the husband transferring Company B shares, after he was on notice of the
wife's claim, which resulted in an interim order being
made setting aside that
transaction;
(c) complaints about the husband's disclosure, which caused the wife to incur
additional cost such as issuing subpoena to obtain
documents which the husband
failed to disclose, such as in relation to an insurance claim;
(d) the husband's refusal to accept the evidence of the Single Expert Witness,
until the conclusion of the trial, after having insisted
she attend for
cross-examination; and
(e) the husband's late application for his mother to be excused from attending
trial, which resulted in additional time taken at
trial including: (1)
cross-examination of Dr G; (2) entertaining the husband's application which was
dismissed; and (3) after the
application was dismissed, the husband failed to
produce his mother for cross-examination.
wife in submissions contends that the husband was "constantly obstructive about
every issue" and his conduct "significantly increased
the duration and
complexity of Trial which increased the Wife's legal costs and wasted Court
resources". In my view, that submission
overstates the criticisms which can
fairly be made of the husband. However, I accept that the husband's conduct as
a litigant warrant
complaint and has unnecessarily contributed to the wife's
costs. Specifically, I am satisfied that:
(a) the husband's disclosure was deficient, lacking and not timely, which was
the subject of specific findings throughout the
The husband's failure
to discharge his disclosure obligations in a timely manner, caused the wife to
incur additional costs, through
the issue of subpoena to obtain documents, which
he failed to disclose, putting questions to the husband to seek explanations and
documents about issues pertaining to his financial affairs. The husband's
submission that the Court made findings he had complied
with his disclosure
obligations, does not accurately reflect the
(b) the husband's failure to put questions to the Single Expert Witness, to
clarify her report. Instead, the husband required the
Single Expert Witness for
the purposes of cross-examination. Had the husband utilised the mechanisms
available under the Rules,
cross-examination of the Expert could have been
avoided, and the value of Property B settled, in advance of the trial. I
the requirement for the Single Expert to attend trial, increased the
duration of the trial, albeit not for a significant period;
(c) the husband's late application to have his mother excused from attending
trial, extended the duration of the trial, and was unsuccessful.
aspects of the wife's conduct as a litigant also warrant criticism and have
contributed to costs. The wife's late amendment
and joinder of Mrs Wither
Senior, resulted in an earlier trial being
The energy and effort
which the wife directed towards attempting to conduct a forensic tracing
exercise, and the volume of affidavit
material directed towards criticisms of
the husband's financial management, were not found to have merit, and occupied
much attention
cross‑examination.
I rejected the wife's complaints at trial that the husband's expenditure
post separation was
unreasonable.
The wife's late
application at the commencement of the trial, to introduce child support, was
dismissed. The wife's claim for spousal
maintenance was dismissed. The interim
hearing listed on [a date in] December 2023 was vacated, upon the wife's
application, with
an order that her senior counsel was to pay the costs of the
proposed intervenor.
Whether either party has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings
is well-established that a party being largely successful, is not the same as
being wholly successful.
observed in the Reasons, the wife was largely successful in terms of the relief
sought. She was successful in her application
to set aside transactions
pursuant to
. She was successful on an interim basis, in her
applications to: (1) set aside the husband's disposition of shares in Company
(2) dismiss the husband's
application for his mother to be excused from attending
and (3) to have the
husband answer further specific
The wife was not
successful in terms of her application for spousal maintenance. The wife did
not achieve 70 % of the parties'
property and superannuation entitlements. She
did not receive any shares in Company B, nor did she retain the boat, or
Motor vehicle
A. She was unsuccessful in her application for the husband
to retain her jewellery.
husband was unsuccessful in his application: (1) to oppose setting aside the
transaction with respect to shares; (2) to oppose
setting aside the transactions
relating to his mother; (3) leave to rely upon the affidavit of his mother at
trial; (4) for his mother
to be excused from being available for
cross-examination; and (5) a suppression order.
husband was largely unsuccessful in terms of the final relief he sought. The
Court did not order any payment to his mother,
and as identified, set aside the
relevant transactions.
party was wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings.
The terms of any offer
husband referred to two settlement offers he made, in March 2022 and April
2024. The first offer saw the husband offer to pay
to the wife $250,000, and
the second proposed to pay her $400,000. Both offers proposed the net
proceeds of sale of Property A be
paid to Mrs Wither Senior.
the husband's March 2022 offer, he told the wife that she was:
very very unlikely to get a better outcome than the previous settlement offers I
have previous made. If that's (sic) correct, then
you will have to contribute
to my legal fees to date which will see you even further behind... I presently
cannot see how in any
scenario you will get a better outcome than what I am
offering. The $900,000 from my Mum has to be factored into any outcome at
trial. That is, even if it is a gift it still gets assessed as a massive
contribution on my side of the ledger, plus all the money
I have made over the
years. If you do not see a way to accepting this offer, then I am very happy to
wait it out to get to a trial
again whenever that comes around.
husband's prediction as to the just and equitable outcome was inaccurate.
It is clear from his correspondence, that the husband
was acutely aware of the
prospect of a costs order being made, if either party did not achieve a more
favourable outcome at trial,
than in accordance with their offers.
of the husband's offers provided the wife with a more favourable outcome than
that which she achieved at trial. Accordingly,
they have no bearing on the
question of costs.
wife relied upon the following offers:
(a) in September 2019, the wife proposed: (1) the husband pay to her $373,887;
(2) she retain the proceeds of sale of Property A,
and the boat; and (3) the
husband enter into a Binding Child Support Agreement, to pay the children's
school fees and private health
(b) in October 2020, there were further negotiations between the parties.
I do not take these into account, in circumstances where
those negotiations were
not in writing;
(c) in September 2021, the wife proposed the husband: (1) pay her $330,000; (2)
50% of the proceeds of sale of Property B; (3) and
a Binding Child Support
Agreement in the same terms as earlier offers. Later that month, she made
a subsequent offer, for Property
B to be sold, and the proceeds divided
(d) in March 2022, the wife sought the husband pay her $400,000, she receive the
proceeds of sale of Property A, a superannuation
split of $137,870 in her favour
and the husband pay maintenance of $500 a week for a year, together with a
Binding Child Support
(e) on 6 May 2022, the wife sought to retain the proceeds of Property A and a
payment of $300,000, as well as a Binding Child Support
(f) on 13 May 2022, the wife proposed the husband pay her $300,000 and she
receive the proceeds of Property
(g) in April 2024, the wife sought the husband pay to her $700,000 and a
$100,000 superannuation split which is attachment 2 to her
submissions.
offers made by the wife in September 2019, September 2021, March 2022 and 6 May
2022 each included provisions for a Binding Child
Support Agreement. The offers
were each expressed as a package deal, and were not open for acceptance, in
part. It therefore cannot
be said that the wife achieved a more favourable
outcome at trial, than what was contained in each of those offers, when child
was not before the Court. I do not attach weight to those offers,
despite observing that each offer provided the husband with a
more favourable
outcome in terms of a property settlement, than what he achieved at trial.
wife's second offer made in May 2022 and April 2024, did not include child
support, and were limited to orders by way of alteration
of property interests.
Had the husband accepted either offer, he would have achieved a better outcome,
than what the Final Orders
provided, which included: (1) a cash payment to
the wife; (2) the wife retaining the net proceeds of sale of Property A, of
(providing her with cash of $851,302); and (3) a superannuation
splitting order of $102,957, in addition to the balance of property
[23] of these Reasons.
the husband accepted the May 2022 offer, he would have paid $300,000 to the wife
by 1 July 2023, with no superannuation splitting
order, while retaining Property
B, the car, boat and balance of his assets. That offer provided the husband
with a far more favourable
outcome than that achieved at trial, some two years
the husband accepted the April 2024 offer, he would have paid $700,000 to the
wife, within 60 days, with a $100,000 superannuation
split, while retaining
Property B, the car, boat and balance of his assets. Again, that provided the
husband with a more favourable
outcome, than what he achieved in the Final
Orders, and would have avoided the trial.
husband concedes the wife achieved a better outcome than "the asset allocation
advocated by the husband".
husband asserts that it was not unreasonable of him to reject the wife's offers,
because of the dispute as to the available
property, including the value of
Property B and the alleged $900,000 debt to Mrs Wither Senior. In summary, he
contends that the
balance sheet was unresolved to such an extent, that his
rejection of the offers should not attract a cost consequence.
do not accept that submission. The husband, and Mrs Wither Senior, were
entirely unsuccessful in their opposition to the wife's
application to set aside
the transactions, pursuant to
. The wife was put to the cost
of establishing relevant factual matters, and findings were made. The husband's
submissions about
whether a different finding would have been made, had Mrs
Wither Senior attended trial, is simply
speculative.
the Reasons, I was satisfied that: (1) the Acknowledgements and Demands were
part of a chain of transactions which were entered
into with the subjective
intention of defeating an anticipated property settlement order; (2) in the
alternative, irrespective of
intention, the transactions had the effect of
defeating an anticipated property settlement order; (3) in the exercise of
discretion,
it was appropriate to set aside the transactions; and (4) in the
alternative, I was not satisfied it was just or equitable to treat
the alleged
loans as a liability in the balance sheet. These matters inform the
exercise of discretion.
do not consider the husband's rejection of either offer was reasonable, because
he lacked the funds to pay the alleged debt to
his mother, in light of the
findings at trial.
husband refers to Property B, which was subject to a valuation by the Single
Expert Witness at $2,375,000, on 11 March 2024,
with an affidavit filed 11 April
2024. The value of Property B was clearly established and known to the husband,
at the time of
the April 2024 offer. The husband's refusal to accept the value,
in circumstances where he failed to utilise the relevant
Family Court Rules 2021
") to clarify the Expert's report, and his refusal to accept the
Expert's valuation, until after he had cross-examined the Expert,
do not in my
view, render the husband's rejection of the wife's offer reasonable in the
circumstances.
husband's reliance on an alternate value for Property B, at $1,800,000 which he
unilaterally obtained, [was] not in compliance
, [and] does not
assist his case.
husband contends at the time of the May 2022 offer Property B had an agreed
value of $1,750,000, and the offer required him to
pay to the wife $408,000 in
cash and "In the known circumstances at that time the husband did not act
unreasonably in rejecting that
offer because he did not have cash to pay to the
wife in the amount sought".
light of the husband's property, income and income earning capacity, there were
numerous options open to the husband, in which
to raise funds to pay
the wife. The May 2022 offer provided for $200,000 to be paid by
31 December 2022 and $100,000 by 1 July 2023.
The husband had time to make
the required arrangements.
assessing the reasonableness of the husband's failure to accept the May 2022
offer, I observe that: (1) the husband had the greater
grasp on the parties'
financial circumstances; (2) at the time of the offer, the proceedings had been
on foot since 2019, Mrs Wither
Senior had been joined to the proceedings and the
wife had sought orders to set aside the relevant transactions; and (3) in April
2022, Mrs Wither Senior had filed a submitting notice. In the circumstances, I
consider the husband was well able to assess the
strength of his position, in
respect to the litigation at the time of the
Further, the offer was
clear in [its] terms. Even adopting the husband's calculations as to the
parties' net property at that time,
and excluding the $900,000 loan to Mrs
Wither Senior, the offer provided for the wife to receive around 30%, and the
husband to receive
around 70%. The outcome achieved by the wife at trial was
far more favourable, in terms of percentage outcome, 60% and the proposed
cash payment. I consider the husband's rejection of the wife's May 2022
offer was unreasonable.
the time of the April 2024 offer, the husband had the benefit of the Single
Expert Witness' report. While there were some ongoing
disputes as to the
balance sheet, the husband remained in a far greater position than the wife,
with respect to the parties' financial
circumstances. The husband was
unquestionably in a much better position to assess the strength of his case,
including receipt of
the Court's Reasons published [in] January
in support of the interim
orders setting aside the husband's transfer of shares. The husband had the
benefit of those Reasons, which
set out clearly the relevant law concerning
. His rejection of the April 2024 was imprudent and
unreasonable.
consider the husband's rejection of the wife's offers made in May 2022 and
April 2024 were imprudent. Had he accepted either offer,
he would have achieved
a more favourable outcome, than that which he achieved at trial. This is a
material matter in favour of a
costs order.
Any other matter
wife raises a number of issues which she asserts the Court ought to take into
account, as relevant. Having read the submissions,
I am not persuaded that any
of those matters are properly taken into account, and I decline to do so.
wife has incurred costs of $460,300 at the time of her submissions, inclusive of
her legal fees and disbursements. The wife
has provided the costs
agreement with her current solicitors and senior counsel. She has not
provided the costs agreement with any
former solicitors or counsel.
wife asserts that her legal costs since the May 2022 offer are $240,797, and her
legal costs since her April 2024 offer, are
The wife has not provided an itemised schedule of her claimed costs, calculated
in accordance with the costs agreement, nor on scale.
wife relies upon the cost notification letter at trial, and an itemised debtor
statement to date. The wife's legal fees from
13 May 2022 until 10 August 2022
were $42,255 with the solicitors' fees being greater than the relevant Legal
Profession (Family
Court of Western Australia) Determination 2020
the costs charged by her then senior counsel, was less than
wife observes that: (1) her legal fees with her current solicitors from August
2022 were less than scale, as were the costs charged
by her senior
and (2) both her solicitor and senior counsel did not charge for various work
conducted on behalf of the wife, and charged discounted
rates, for some
discretion to award costs is a "broad" one, and the various enumerated factors
are not to be read in any restrictive
Any one of the factors may
be the sole foundation for an order for
Nevertheless, the
matters enumerated "must all be taken into account and all balanced in order to
determine whether the overall
circumstances justify the making of an order for
It is unnecessary to
spell out detailed reasons for costs decisions. An exercise of discretion to
order costs will be upheld if
it appears to the Appellate Court there are
reasons upon which the Trial Judge could
am mindful that an order for costs is compensatory,
not punitive.
The primary
rule in this jurisdiction is that each party bears their own costs.
Impecuniosity is not, of itself, a bar to a costs
order. The husband's
financial position may be relevant to the extent that it may inform the
structure of any costs order, such
as providing for the payment of costs over
time, to avoid hardship and improving the prospects
of compliance.
careful consideration and noting the broad discretion I have, I am satisfied it
is appropriate to depart from the usual principle.
The husband's conduct
as a litigant and his failure to accept the offers made in May 2022 and April
2024, justify an award of costs
in favour of the wife.
award of indemnity costs in the Court has been called a significant departure
from the normal standard, rare and requires something
exceptional.
costs are sought on an indemnity basis, and the costs incurred arise under a
cost agreement, the terms of the agreement must
be disclosed to the
The wife's failure to
adduce the costs agreement with her former solicitors and counsel, are fatal to
her application for indemnity
Irrespective
of that failure, despite the criticisms of the husband's conduct as a litigant,
and his imprudent rejection of the offers,
I am not satisfied the case falls
within the category to support an order for indemnity costs. I am fortified in
that view, in light
of the criticisms of the wife's conduct as a litigant, to
which I have referred.
335(1)(a) of the Rules permits the Court to make an order that a party is
entitled to costs of a specific amount. In the interests
of both parties, I
intend to exercise my discretion to fix the amount of costs, to avoid putting
the parties to the additional expense
of taxing the costs and further delay in
resolving the matter overall.
carefully considered the costs claimed by the wife, the issues in the
proceedings, the duration of the trial, and the circumstances,
concluded that the husband should be required to pay an amount, fixed in the sum
of $120,000.
propose to make orders which provides the husband three calendar months in which
to pay the wife. I consider the quantum and timing
of payment to be proper in
the circumstances.
PROPOSED ORDERS
husband is to pay the wife's costs, fixed in the sum of $120,000, by no later
than three calendar months.
outstanding applications for costs be and are hereby
I certify that the
preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of
Western Australia.
4 DECEMBER 2024
Wither and Wither &
[2024] FCWA 177
("Reasons").
Wither & Anor
[2024] FCWA
Wither and Wither &
[2024] FCWA 244.
Wife's Minute of Orders - Costs filed 11 October
Husband's Costs Orders
filed 28 October 2024.
[24] - [25].
Reasons [29] -
Reasons [151] -
Reasons [153] -
[2014] FamCA 850
[2013] FamCAFC 105
Wither and Wither
[2024] FCWA
For example, Reasons
[35] - [41], [59].
Submissions in Opposition to Costs, at
Court Order 11 March
Reasons at [38],
Reasons, [86] -
[2019] FamCAFC 108
Court Order [in]
January 2024.
Court Order
[in] May 2024.
Court Order
[in] April 2024.
1 to the Wife's Costs Submissions filed 15 October
Attachment 2 to the
Wife's Costs Submissions filed 15 October
Husband's Submissions
in Opposition to Costs, at
Husband's Submissions
in Opposition to Costs, at
[2021] FedCFamC1A 96
Wither and Wither
[2024] FCWA
Wife's Costs Submissions
filed 15 October 2024, at
Wife's Costs
Submissions filed 15 October 2024, at [59] -
Wife's Costs
Submissions filed 15 October 2024, at [63] -
Wife's Costs
Submissions filed 15 October 2024, at [68],
Collins and
[1985] FamCA 15
Fitzgerald (as
child representative for A (Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania)) v Fish &
[2005] FamCA 158
(2005) 33 Fam LR
[1995] FamCA 80
(1995) FLC 92-625
[2015] FCWA 65
Greedy and Greedy
[1982] FamCA 41
(1982) FLC 91-250
[1998] FamCA 1520
Braithwaite &
Braithwaite
[2007] FamCA 468
Northern Territory
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
Kohan and Kohan
[1992] FamCA 116
(1993) FLC 92-340
[2016] FamCAFC 25
(2016) 55 Fam LR 59
(2016) 55 Fam LR
[Family Court Rules 2021
(WA) r 331(3)];
Addison & Lahey
[2008] FamCA 248.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (403 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter