URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/236.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MOLLOY and FOUST & ANOR [2024] FCWA 236 (17 October 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
MOLLOY and FOUST & ANOR
[2024] FCWA 236
DELIVERED :
17 OCTOBER 2024
FILE NO/S :
2835 of 2016
First Respondent
Fourth Respondent
FINANCIAL - Application by the wife
seeking orders for property settlement against the husband - Application opposed
by the husband
- Where orders are made at the commencement of trial removing the
Fifth and Sixth Respondents from the proceedings - Where the husband
Fourth Respondent were not legally represented - Where there is one child of the
marriage and the wife has a child of a previous
marriage who are both adults -
Where the husband became the sole registered proprietor of the former
matrimonial home prior to the
commencement of cohabitation - Where the wife and
the child moved out of the former matrimonial home upon separation - Where the
husband sold the former matrimonial home in contravention of Court orders made
in 2016 and another property registered in his name
to the Fourth Respondent in
contravention of Court orders made in 2019 - Where the husband was found guilty
of contempt of Court
and imprisoned for a period of 18 months - Where the
husband did not seek to purge his contempt while serving his sentence - Where
the marital parties executed a Deed of Settlement and Release arising out of a
further contempt application filed by the wife in
October 2020 - Where the
husband denies having any remnant of the sale proceeds of the former matrimonial
or control and asserts that he used the funds to pay off
debts that he incurred while gambling with an underground syndicate in 2019
Where the Court is satisfied that the husband retains at least a portion of the
funds and treats the balance as a premature distribution
of property in favour
of the husband - Where the Court is satisfied that the Deed entered into by the
husband and the Fourth Respondent
in relation to the sale of the other property
is a sham - Where the Court is satisfied that each marital party made equal
contributions
and it is just and equitable to make orders dividing their
notional and actual asset pool equally - Orders made - Case turns on its
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Town Planning and Development Act 1928
Representation:
Mr R Bannerman
First Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Fourth Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Bannerman Solicitors
First Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Fourth Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that
publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Foust & Anor
has been approved by the Family Court of Western Australia
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
Introduction
Applicant wife, [Ms Molloy] (''the wife''), commenced these proceedings in May
2016, seeking orders for property settlement against
her former husband, the
First Respondent, [Mr Foust] (''the husband'').
the following eight years, a further six respondents were joined to the
proceedings. By the time that this trial date was allocated
in February 2024,
only three respondents in addition to the husband remained as parties to the
proceedings. At the commencement
of trial, orders were made including for the
removal of the Fifth and Sixth Respondents, leaving only the Fourth
Respondent, [Mr
Gallo], and the husband as the remaining two respondents in the
proceedings. The trial was conducted on the basis that the former
Respondent gave evidence as a witness called by the wife.
husband and Mr Gallo were not legally represented. The Court is satisfied
that the trial was conducted in a manner which was
procedurally fair to both of
Evidence relied upon
wife relied upon her primary trial affidavit filed
on 10 April 2018, together with her updating trial affidavits
filed on 5 May
2020, 17 March 2023 and 18 January 2024. The
wife also relied upon her financial statement filed on 18 January
The wife did not file an
undertaking as to disclosure.
wife called [Mr Davies], the former Sixth Respondent in the proceedings,
and relied upon his affidavits filed on 3 May 2021 and
husband relied upon his primary trial affidavit filed
on 10 August 2018, together with his updating trial affidavit
22 May 2023. The husband also relied upon
financial statement filed on 22 May 2023. The husband filed an undertaking as
to disclosure
on 22 May 2023 to which was attached a schedule of
disclosed documents.
Gallo relied upon his trial affidavit filed on 30 May 2023.
Court received a number of exhibits into evidence.
wife was born [in] December 1971 and the husband was born [in] January 1966
(''the marital parties''). The marital parties started
a relationship in 2003,
commenced cohabitation in October 2004, were married on 24 April 2005,
and separated on a final basis on
or around 16 April 2016. They were
divorced on 24 August 2017.
only child of the marriage, [Child A] (''the child''), turned 18 years of
age in April this year. The wife has one child of
a previous marriage, [Mr B],
who lived with the marital parties during the relationship and is now over 18
years of age.
husband became the sole registered proprietor of [the Suburb A
property], [Suburb A] on 15 September 2005. A copy of the
Certificate
of Title obtained on 4 October 2018 revealed that the only
encumbrances were two restrictive covenants, and a notification pursuant
Town Planning and Development
The Suburb A
property was ultimately owned by [the Foust Family Trust], an entity under the
control of the husband.
separation until the date that the husband disposed of the property, the
husband lived in the former matrimonial home situated
at [the Suburb B
property], [Suburb B] ("the former matrimonial home"), which was registered
in his sole name on
13 May 1997.
The wife and the Child A moved out of the former matrimonial home when the
marital parties separated.
husband conducted a [Trade BB] business during the relationship. The wife
worked at [Beauty Service Provider Z]. The former
Second Respondent,
[Mr C], and the former Third Respondent, [Mr D],
are the husband's brothers, and the wife was granted leave to
discontinue the proceedings against them on
22 March 2023.
3 August 2004, the husband (as grantor) signed an option agreement with his
brothers (as grantee) (''the Option Agreement'').
The Option Agreement was
stamped on 20 September 2004, very shortly before the husband and wife
commenced cohabitation. The salient
terms of the Option Agreement are as
grantee requests the grantor to grant an option to purchase the former
matrimonial home (and any other real estate that the grantee
owns from time to
$5.00 paid by the grantee to the grantor, the grantor grants to the grantee an
option to purchase the real estate (and any chattels
associated with the real
estate) [from the grantee] for $5.00.
grantor acknowledges receiving the $5.00 [from the grantee].
grantee may exercise the option by written notice.
the option is exercised, then the amount paid for the option is credited against
the purchase price.
husband included reference to the Option Agreement in his financial statement
sworn 2 September 2016.
wife commenced proceedings on 18 May 2016.
24 May 2016, the Court made an order restraining the husband
from alienating, encumbering or otherwise disposing of the former
matrimonial home.
the time that the wife filed her trial affidavit on 10 April 2018, she alleged
that the asset pool was worth at least $1,266,178.
According to the wife,
the principal asset was the former matrimonial home. Also, the wife
alleged that the Foust Family Trust,
controlled by the husband, owned the
Suburb A property. The wife also asserted that the husband had an
interest in [the Foust Superannuation
Fund] worth $120,000.
giving this evidence, the wife maintained that her knowledge of the asset pool
was incomplete, due to inadequate disclosure from
the husband.
Throughout the
proceeding, the wife has complained about the husband's deficient disclosure and
alleged disregard of the Court's
28 May 2019, the Court made orders to the following effect:
(a) restraining the husband from disposing of the Suburb A property,
until he has provided full and frank disclosure in relation
to his dealings with
the real estate agent appointed by him, and authorised the wife and her
solicitors to communicate with the real
estate agent and obtain all necessary
information in relation to the sale; and
(b) upon settlement of the sale of the Suburb A property, the net proceeds
of sale must be paid into a joint interest‑bearing
account in the marital
parties' joint names and requiring both parties' signatures to make
any transactions.
8 March 2020, the husband entered into a contract for the sale of the former
matrimonial home, in contravention of the Orders
made on 24 May 2016, in
circumstances later found by the Court to constitute a flagrant challenge to its
authority, before the former
matrimonial home was subsequently transferred to an
unrelated third party in accordance with the contract, for
Notwithstanding
the Orders made on 28 May 2019, the husband transferred the Suburb A property to
Mr Gallo for a dutiable value of
$140,000 on 30 April
husband and Mr Gallo signed a Deed dated
30 April 2020.
sole operative term of the Deed
THAT IN CONSIDERATION of the value of the property
[the Suburb A
hereby transfers to
the land described in the Schedule
[the Suburb A property]
, and the parties HEREBY RELEASE each other from
further payment in relation to the loan.
(As per original)
recital to the Deed
In consideration of
transferring the land
described in the Schedule
[the Suburb A property]
, who is entitled to receive the sum of one hundred and forty
thousand dollars ($140,000.00) from
, the transfer
of the property
[the Suburb A property]
shall be full and final
payment for the loan between them.
(As per original)
signatures of the husband and Mr Gallo on the Deed were witnessed by [Mr E],
transfer of land in respect of the Suburb A property was signed by the husband
and Mr Gallo on 30 April 2020 and registered by
[Settlement Agent M] on 4
May 2020. The transfer records a consideration of $140,000. The signatures of
the husband and Mr Gallo
were witnessed by [Ms F],
a conveyancer.
a letter to Landgate dated 4 May 2020, Mr E, in his capacity as a solicitor,
identifies both the husband and Mr Gallo as
his clients.
1 May 2020, the Court ordered the husband to immediately deposit the sale
proceeds from the former matrimonial home into the trust
account of the wife's
solicitors. The husband failed to do so, in contravention of the Orders
made on 1 May 2020, in circumstances
later found by the Court to constitute a
flagrant challenge to its authority.
8 June 2020, the wife filed a Form 19 Contempt Application in respect of the
husband's alleged flagrant breaches of Court Orders
made on 24 May 2016 and 1
May 2020, in respect of his disposal of the former matrimonial home.
husband swore an affidavit on 6 July 2020, prepared by Counsel, "
[the husband's]
admissions that I
was in contempt
" [in respect of breaching the Orders made on 24 May 2016
and 1 May 2020].
the husband's trial for contempt of Court on 10 July 2020, the
husband was found guilty, on his own admission, of two charges
of contempt
of Court. The contempts were contraventions of the Orders made on 24 May 2016
and 1 May 2020, in the circumstances already
described. On 17 July 2020,
the Court delivered reasons and made orders sentencing the husband to a term of
imprisonment for a period
The husband
served the term of imprisonment and did not at any time during his prison term
seek to purge his contempt by disgorging
any part of the net proceeds of sale of
the former matrimonial home.
husband retained and, on his evidence, disposed of the net proceeds of sale of
the former matrimonial home in the sum of $625,727.65.
The learned Family
Law Magistrate did not accept the husband's evidence about his alleged
disposal of the net proceeds of sale of
the former matrimonial
separate enquiry from the wife's solicitors in relation to the husband's
disposal of the Suburb A property on 30 April
2020, Ms F, in her capacity as a
director and conveyancer of Settlement Agent M, responded by email on 25 July
2020 and stated:
came in to our office and organised the settlement and
the agreement. Then a few days later both
came in and signed everything.
(As per original)
10 September 2020, the wife filed a Form 2 Application and an amended Form 1
Application, seeking orders to set aside the transfer
of land in respect of the
Suburb A property dated 30 April 2020 and the Deed entered into between Mr Gallo
and the husband dated
30 April 2020. The wife also applied
for an order that the husband and Mr Gallo be restrained by injunction from
alienating, encumbering
or otherwise disposing of the Suburb A property.
wife sought an order that the Suburb A property stand charged in her favour to
secure her entitlement pursuant to property settlement
and other relief pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(''the Act''), and/or the performance by
the husband of all or any obligations to comply with the provisions of any
orders made in
the course of the proceedings, including procedural orders.
19 October 2020, the Court made orders dispensing with the requirement for the
wife to personally serve her amended Form 1 Application
and Form 2 Application
upon Mr Gallo, on condition that such documents were served on [Mr G] of
[Real Estate Agent N] in [Suburb
C], together with a letter requesting that
the documents be brought to the attention of Mr Gallo as soon as
9 November 2020, the husband and Mr Gallo were ordered to each file and serve a
response and affidavit in respect of the wife's
Form 2 Application, within 28
days. The proceedings were adjourned for further hearing on 11 December 2020 at
11:00am, with respect
to the wife's Form 2 Application.
10 December 2020, the day prior to the hearing of
the wife's application, Mr Gallo transferred the Suburb A property to
Respondent for $125,000. The contract in respect of the transfer was
dated 8 December 2020.
to an extract from the records of the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission, relied upon by the wife, the former
Fifth Respondent was a
superannuation trustee company registered in 2011, and the former Sixth
Respondent has been the sole director
and secretary from the company's
11 December 2020, the Court made orders including the following orders:
[Ms Molloy]
, have leave to join
to the proceedings to be defined as the Fourth Respondent.
further order of the Court, the First Respondent and the Fourth Respondent be
restrained and an injunction is hereby granted
restraining them from
allenating (sic)
[alienating],
encumbering or otherwise disposing of
property stand charged in favour of the Applicant to
secure her entitlement to property settlement pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
Applicant be at liberty and do all things and sign all documents necessary to
permit her to lodge and maintain an absolute Caveat
secured over the Title
(As per original)
matter was next listed for directions only on 25 February 2021.
On 10 February 2021, the wife filed an amended Form 1 Application
the following additional proposed final orders:
Wife have leave to join
[Superannuation Trustee Company O]
[Mr Davies]
to the proceedings to be defined as the Fifth and
Sixth Respondent.
Section 106B
Family Law Act 1975
, the Transfer of Land entered
into between
[Superannuation Trustee Company
[Mr Davies]
concerning the property situated at
[the Suburb
A property]
in the State of Western Australia and the Deed entered into or
other contract relating to the transfer.
(As per original)
Court infers that the incomplete statement of the orders sought by the wife in
paragraph 14 should end with the words "
be set aside
Such an inference is compelling, given the terms of the Form 2 Application
and affidavit also filed by the wife on 10 February
2021. The wife
never amended her application to seek this order.
Court granted
orders in respect of the Form 2 Application on 12
February 2021, including orders which provided that:
(a) the Fifth and Sixth Respondents be joined as parties to
the proceedings;
(b) the Fifth and Sixth Respondents were restrained by injunctions from
alienating, encumbering, or otherwise disposing of the Suburb
A property;
(c) the Suburb A property stand charged in favour of the wife to ensure the
wife's entitlement to property settlement pursuant to
of the Act and
relief pursuant to the Act and/or the performance by the husband of all and
any obligations to comply with the provisions
of any orders made in the course
of these proceedings, including any procedural orders; and
(d) the wife be at liberty to do all things and sign all documents necessary to
permit her to lodge and maintain an absolute Caveat
secured over the title
to the Suburb A property.
wife filed an Undertaking as to Damages on 12 February 2021.
Court also ordered that the proceedings remain suppressed on the Commonwealth
Courts Portal until close of Registry on 15 February
subsequent orders, the period of suppression was extended until 19 February
18 February 2021, the husband was ordered to pay the wife costs fixed in the sum
of $33,488.84.
25 February 2021, Mr Gallo and the former Fifth and Sixth Respondents were
ordered to file and serve, within 28 days, a Form 1A
Response and
affidavit in support if they sought orders in the proceedings.
24 March 2021, the former Fifth Respondent and former Sixth Respondent were
directed and ordered, and the order was deemed sufficient
authority and an
irrevocable authority to direct [Settlement Agent P] in respect of the Suburb A
property, to deposit the proceeds
of sale into a trust account of the wife's
solicitors.
order further provided that Settlement Agent P were required to release to the
wife's solicitors any information or copies of
any documents that were requested
in relation to the sale of the Suburb A property. Further, the former
Fifth Respondent and former
Sixth Respondent were restrained by injunction from
dealing with the proceeds of sale of the Suburb A property in any manner
inconsistent
with the orders.
former Fifth Respondent and former Sixth Respondent were granted liberty to
relist the matter on reasonable notice.
4 August 2021, the Court ordered the Sixth Respondent to file and serve an
affidavit of evidence on his own behalf, and on behalf
of the Fifth Respondent,
by 30 August 2021. The Sixth Respondent filed an affidavit as ordered on 27
August 2021.
behalf of the Fifth Respondent, the Sixth Respondent sold the Suburb A
property for $160,000, after accepting an offer on
4 March 2021, the husband pleaded guilty to the five counts of contempt in
relation to the husband's disposal of the Suburb A
property to Mr Gallo. On 20
July 2021, the husband made an offer to the wife to purge the five counts of
contempt. On 21 July 2021,
the wife accepted the husband's offer. The
husband agreed that his brother, Mr C, the former Second Respondent,
would pay the wife
the sum of $100,000 within 28 days of execution of
the Deed, upon receipt of which the wife would discontinue the contempt
application.
The wife also consented to the husband transferring a [Car Make A]
motor vehicle to the former Second Respondent. The husband paid
settlement sum to the wife.
17 August 2021, the spouses and the former Second Respondent executed a
Deed of Settlement and Release. The Deed arose out of
a further contempt
application filed by the wife on 20 October 2020, alleging five counts
of the husband breaching the Orders made
on 24 May 2016, 21 March 2017 and
28 May 2019, in respect of his disposal of the Suburb A property.
22 October 2021, the following orders were made by consent:
consent, the Sixth Respondent,
[Mr Davies]
, in both his personal
capacity and as director of the Fifth Respondent,
[Superannuation Trustee
, (as trustee for the
[Davies Superannuation Fund]
restrained and an injunction is hereby granted restraining him from utilising,
disposing, spending or transferring to any other
party or account funds standing
in the name of the Fifth Respondent or the
[Davies Superannuation
received from the sale
[the Suburb A
in the State of Western Australia, save for the sum of $76,067.05
until further order of the Court or with the written consent of
[Ms Molloy]
consent, the Sixth Respondent provide a copy of the final settlement statement
for the sale of the property at
[the Suburb A property]
the State of Western Australia to the lawyers for the Applicant as soon
as practicable.
(As per original)
11 January 2022, an Anton Piller order (made on 21 December 2021) was
executed at the home of the husband's mother, where the
husband lives (but was
at that time still incarcerated). Pursuant to the Anton Piller order, the
husband's mother was then joined
as the Seventh Respondent. The course of
events was substantially recorded, and those recordings are annexed to the
wife's trial
execution of the Anton Piller order, Mr C, then the Second Respondent, attended
at his mother's home at her request and displayed
extreme and unprovoked
aggression, including the protracted shouting of obscenities and insults towards
the wife's legal representatives,
and assaulted them by pushing them out of
C obstructed and impaired the proper execution of the Anton Piller order. He
took control of the process and eventually led one
of the wife's lawyers and the
independent observer to a safe which he opened, and from which he removed
sentimental items. No cash
was removed from the safe. The wife
accepts that there was no cash in the safe.
Observations of the witnesses
wife gave evidence and was briefly cross-examined. The wife gave her
evidence in a straightforward and unremarkable manner.
The former Sixth Respondent, Mr Davies, gave evidence as a witness for the wife,
and was briefly cross-examined. The Court accepts
his evidence.
husband was an unsatisfactory and unreliable witness. The Court is
satisfied that the husband made no attempt to give full,
frank and honest
evidence to the Court. To the contrary, the Court is satisfied that the
husband's evidence about not currently
retaining the possession or control of
any of the proceeds of sale of the former matrimonial home is untruthful.
The Court is satisfied
that the husband does currently retain at least $400,000
of these proceeds.
Court also rejects the husband's evidence that he borrowed cash sums from Mr
Gallo between 2015 and 2020. The evidence that
he has given in this respect is
a fabrication, a device to alienate the Suburb A property from any just and
equitable settlement
with the wife.
Gallo was an unsatisfactory and unreliable witness. The Court rejects his
evidence that he advanced cash sums to the husband
between 2015 and 2020.
to the evidence of both the husband and Mr Gallo, the Court is satisfied
that Mr Gallo currently holds or has already paid
to the husband on dates
unknown after the execution of the Deed on 30 April 2020, the sum of up to
reasons for the Court's findings in these respects are explained later in this
Orders sought by the parties
wife seeks orders in terms of her Minute of Proposed Final Orders filed on 17
March 2023 and the husband seeks orders in terms
of his Minute of Response to
Proposed Final Orders filed on 22 May 2023.
number of matters are agreed between the marital parties, to the following
(a) that the husband retain particular assets and entities;
(b) that the wife retain particular assets and entities;
(c) that the wife indemnify the husband in relation to liabilities in her sole
name or encumbering any item of property to which
she is entitled pursuant to
these orders; and
(d) that the husband indemnify the wife in relation to liabilities in his sole
name or encumbering any item of property to which
he is entitled pursuant to
these orders, including particular liabilities as described.
wife otherwise seeks orders to the following effect:
(a) against Mr Gallo, an order that he pay the wife the sum of $63,933 or
alternatively the sum of $140,000;
(b) against the husband, that he transfer to the wife all assets and
superannuation held in his name;
(c) against the husband, that he pay the wife the sum of $531,867 within 30 days
of orders issuing being 85 percent of the sale proceeds
received by the husband
from the sale of the former matrimonial home; and
(d) against the husband, that he pay the wife the sum of $2,000 in costs
pursuant to Orders made on 6 March 2020, and further that
he pay the wife
the sum of $687.50 being one half of the valuation costs undertaken by [Real
Estate Appraiser R] pursuant to orders
made on 8 October 2018.
husband seeks that the wife's application be dismissed, to the extent the wife
seeks that the husband pay her any funds by way
of property settlement or costs,
on the basis that he does not have the financial resources to do so.
Gallo seeks that the wife's application against him be dismissed, on the
basis that he provided
consideration for the purchase of the
Suburb A property in April 2020, and does not hold any cash for the husband, nor
has paid any
cash to the husband following Mr Gallo's disposal of the
Suburb A property to Mr Davies or his company (the former Fifth and
Respondents) in December 2020.
Relevant statutory provisions:
proceedings
Court must identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the marital
parties in the property, which each owns individually
and jointly, pursuant
Section 79(1)
of the Act. The parties are not entitled to assume that their
respective interests in property are or should be different from those
exist at law and equity. The Court is not permitted to
simply consider the statutory considerations set out in
Section 79(4)
orders altering property interests. Prior to embarking on this exercise, the
Court must consider whether it is just and
equitable to make any order altering
property interests, pursuant to
satisfying itself of the matters referred to in
Sections 79(1)
Court must consider the matters set out in
Section 79(4).
These matters fall
into two broad categories.
, the identification and evaluation of
relevant contributions to property (including property which is no longer
presently owned by
the marital parties or either of them), pursuant to
Sections 79(4)(a)
and (b), and to the welfare of the family (including as
Section 79(4)(c)
, from the commencement
of cohabitation until trial.
, the identification and
evaluation of other adjustment factors, pursuant to
Sections 79(4)(d)
it is common for the Court to evaluate either or both of the two broad
categories of considerations in
Section 79(4)
in percentage terms, this is
not a statutory requirement.
Also, the Court may identify and evaluate contributions using a global or
asset‑by‑asset approach, and neither approach
should yield a
more just and equitable outcome than the
Court must assess contributions holistically and have regard to the myriad
disparate contributions made by the marital parties
from the commencement of
cohabitation until trial.
contributions must be weighed collectively, and so it is an error to segment or
compartmentalise the various contributions and
weigh one against
the remainder.
financial conduct or financial behaviour of the marital parties, including in
respect of the use of property after separation
which no longer exists, can be
taken into account under
Section 79(4)
in a number of ways, including
as a notional asset in the divisible asset pool, assessing
contributions and considering other
the Court must revisit
Section 79(2)
and ensure that the form and content of any
orders which it makes are just and equitable. In this respect,
has a dual aspect, both in determining whether it is appropriate, just and
equitable to make any order at all and ensuring that any
order actually made is
appropriate, just and equitable, both in form
and content.
Property of the parties to the marriage:
Section 79(1)
section of the reasons is structured under the following subheadings: (a)
financial Statements of the husband and the wife;
(b) drawings from
mortgage redraw account and proceeds of sale of former matrimonial
(d) other findings in
respect of the asset pool; and (e) conclusion in respect of the asset
(a) Financial statements of the husband and the wife
wife and the husband each gave evidence in their most recently sworn financial
statements about the property, liabilities and
financial resources currently in
their respective possession, custody or control, as
Description
Cash at bank
200 shares in [Financial Institution S]
Motor vehicle
Household contents
Funds in the wife's lawyer's trust account
Superannuation interest
Unpaid tax due on 21 March 2024
Personal loan from [Financial Institution T] (50 percent)
Outstanding legal fees owed
Cash at bank
Cash at bank (frozen by the Court)
600 shares in [Telecommunications Company U]
Superannuation interest
Personal loan owed to Mr C and [Ms H]
Court will make findings about the items to be excluded from the asset pool in
subsection (d) below.
(b) Drawings from mortgage redraw account and proceeds of sale
of former matrimonial home
addition to the property, liabilities and financial resources identified in the
financial statements just referred to, the wife
alleges, and the Court accepts,
that the husband received into a bank account in his sole name and under his
sole control the net
proceeds of sale from the former matrimonial home, in the
sum of $625,727.65,
on 14 April 2020.
The husband has retained the benefit of all these funds and denies having
any remnant of the funds in his possession, custody or
control. As earlier
indicated, the Court rejects this evidence for the reasons which follow.
to receiving the net sale proceeds on 14 April 2020, the husband withdrew
from the mortgage redraw account three sums of $10,000
each, on 24 March
2020, 30 March 2020 and 7 April 2020, and deposited these funds into the
same account which received the proceeds
of sale of the former matrimonial
25 March 2020, which was the day after the first $10,000 deposit, and 6
April 2020, the day before receiving the third deposit
of $10,000 into his
account from the mortgage account, the husband had withdrawn cash sums
totalling $18,530.
the same day that he deposited the third $10,000 payment into his bank account,
the husband withdrew a further $1,000 in
the time that the husband received the net proceeds of the former matrimonial
cash sums totalling $19,530,
out of the $30,000 which had been transferred from the mortgage
the deposit of the net proceeds of the former matrimonial home on 14 April 2020,
the husband dealt with the funds in the
(a) [Electronic Funds Transfer Service W] or ATM withdrawals totalling $76,120
between 14 April 2020 and 8 May 2020;
(b) [Electronic Funds Transfer Service X] payment to [Jeweller Y] in the
sum of $200,000 on 27 April 2020;
(c) Electronic Funds Transfer Service X payments transferred to the husband
totalling $300,000, conducted by four transfers,
April 2020; and
(d) withdrawal at [Suburb D] in the sum of $50,000
on 17 April 2020.
withdrawals conducted under the direction and control of the husband in the
brief period following the deposit of the net proceeds
of sale of the former
matrimonial home amounted to $626,120, which accounted for all of the net
proceeds of sale.
addition to these withdrawals, the husband withdrew cash sums totalling $19,530
between 25 March 2020 and 7 April 2020, derived
from the three transfers of
$10,000 from the mortgage account, as earlier described.
husband has not produced any further documents which explain, to the
Court's satisfaction, how he has dealt with or disposed
of these funds,
totalling $645,650.
his updated trial affidavit filed on 22 May 2023, the husband fails to address
or give any explanation for how he disposed of
these funds, nor does he
annex or otherwise rely upon any documents which show how he did so.
husband provided an account for how he purportedly disposed of the proceeds of
sale of the former matrimonial home in the contempt
hearing on 10 July 2020,
which may be summarised as follows, with interposed observations about his
evidence at this trial in relation
(a) the husband commenced gambling with an underground syndicate in November
2019, resulting in him owing the syndicate more than
$500,000 by January or
February 2020;
(b) the husband kept a notebook or diary of repayments that he made on the debt,
which he disposed of after 18 May 2020, despite
being in Court on 11 and 12 May
2020, and being ordered to produce documents in relation to the sale of the
former matrimonial home
[the notebook or diary of repayments has never been
disclosed, including at the trial in these property settlement proceedings];
(c) the husband was unable to identify a specific deadline by which the sum was
required to be paid, only that it was due by the
(d) the husband could not fully identify or provide contact details for any
members of the underground syndicate;
(e) the husband handed over $450,000 in cash and $200,000 in diamonds, but
could not identify to whom he gave the cash and diamonds,
other than that they
''debt collectors
'' whom he knew only as ''[Mr I]''
and ''[Mr J]'';
(f) the husband feared for his life, including that his legs would be broken,
and his children would be harmed, if the underground
gambling debt was not paid,
but paid his credit card balance on 30 April
and proposed to
the wife's lawyers in writing on 27 April 2020 that he would transfer 50
percent of the proceeds of sale to their
trust account; and
(g) the husband claimed that the gambling syndicate involved lawyers,
politicians, magistrates and judges.
husband's evidence is inherently incredible and simply not believable, both
in its content and manner of delivery. The Court
rejects his evidence.
Court is satisfied that the husband currently retains in his possession,
custody or control a substantial proportion of the proceeds
of sale, at least
The Court intends to
treat as a premature distribution of property in favour of the husband the sum
of $245,650, comprising the
balance of the capital funds
earlier identified, in respect of which the husband has retained sole
control and not adequately explained
disposition.
This add back is
included in the asset pool not as representing an existing legal or equitable
interest in property, but rather
as a notional asset relevant to the assessment
of considerations pursuant to
Section 79(4)
Court makes the findings in the preceding paragraph for the following
the almost four and half years which have passed since his receipt of the funds,
the Court accepts that the husband has dissipated
some of the funds to
supplement his lifestyle, including on prostitutes, as he explained in
cross‑examination, as well as to
supplement his income, following his
decision after separation to work less in paid employment. The husband may
also have elected
to repay Mr C and Ms H some of the unsecured debt that he
records as a liability in his financial statement. The Court finds this
expenditure to be reckless, careless and negligent, and justifies the
exceptional step of treating such expenditure as an add back,
in the sum of
husband intends to retain these funds for the rest of his life, to the
exclusion of the wife, and so will spread out his spending
to supplement any
personal exertions income and Commonwealth pension payments that he derives
over that time. The Court is satisfied
that the husband
retains $400,000.
husband's evidence that he dissipated $650,000 in a matter of months in 2019 and
2020 in favour of an underground gambling syndicate
is rejected.
failure of the Anton Piller order executed on 11 January 2022 to
locate cash in a safe, the location of which was identified by
Mr C, at his
mother's house does not exhaust other locations where the husband may store
husband is highly motivated to avoid paying the wife a just and equitable
property settlement, evidenced by his decision to serve
an 18 month term of
imprisonment rather than purge his contempt and dispose of two properties in
contempt of Court orders.
husband previously executed an option agreement in August 2004, in the
terms and circumstances earlier described which the Court
is satisfied was
simply a device intended to avoid creditors (and, taking into account the timing
of its execution, possibly a future
property settlement with the wife). The
execution of this option agreement, unless it was intended to be treated by
the husband
and his brothers, as the other parties, as a sham, appeared to
confer on the husband no relevant benefit or advantage.
respect of the asset pool identified earlier, the Court adds items 17 and
Description
Funds retained by the husband from the mortgage account and sale of the
former matrimonial home
Add back of the balance of funds from Item 17 which may have been
(c) Disposal of the Suburb A property
husband and Mr Gallo signed a Deed dated 30 April 2020.
sole operative term of the Deed
THAT IN CONSIDERATION of the value of the property
[the Suburb A
hereby transfers to
the land described in the Schedule
[the Suburb A
, and the parties HEREBY RELEASE each other from further payment in
relation to the loan.
(As per original)
recital to the Deed
In consideration of
transferring the land
described in the Schedule
[the Suburb A property]
, who is entitled to receive the sum of one hundred and forty
thousand dollars ($140,000.00) from
, the transfer
of the property
[the Suburb A property]
shall be full and final
payment for the loan between them.
(As per original)
husband transferred the Suburb A property to Mr Gallo pursuant to the Deed. Mr
Gallo became the sole registered proprietor on
4 May 2020.
Deed is a sham.
The husband
entered into the Deed as a device intended to avoid paying any property
settlement to the wife. The Court rejects the
evidence of the husband and
Mr Gallo that a loan existed between them at the time this Deed was executed.
Both the husband and Mr
Gallo gave inherently incredible and implausible
evidence about the circumstances surrounding the purported loan history,
Court rejects for the following reasons.
Court rejects the husband's evidence about the purported loan arrangements and
history for the following reasons:
the course of the husband's cross-examination, he stated that he retained a
record in a notebook of the loan arrangements between
himself and Mr Gallo.
The notebook was not disclosed by the husband prior to trial,
including in the schedule of documents annexed
to his undertaking as to
disclosure filed on 22 May 2023. Notwithstanding this omission, the husband
stated that the notebook was
'' after 2020. Counsel
for the wife called for the husband to produce the notebook. The husband
responded that the notebook was
not in Court and that he would need to recover
the notebook, and he was requested to bring the notebook to Court on the
day of trial. Upon producing the notebook on the following day,
which was inspected by Counsel for the wife and upon which the husband
further cross‑examined with leave of the Court, the husband sought to have
the notebook tendered into evidence, after being
advised by the Court of his
right to do so.
The notebook was received into
a page in the notebook appears the
following information:
[Mr Foust's initial and surname]
[Mr Gallo's first name]
11/9/15 cash $10K
19/12/15 cash $7K
27/6/16 cash $12K
BALANCE $29K
9/10/16 PAID $500 interest
6/1/2017 cash $8K
22/7/2017 cash $15K
16-9-2017 paid interest $500
26/10/2019 $5K cash
14/12/2019 $7 cash
22/12/2019 $6 cash
30/4/2020 76.500
TRANSFER OF BLOCK
(As per original)
The Court accepts the wife's proposition put to the husband that he sat down
on the first evening of the trial and substantively copied
this information into
his old notebook from the schedule attached to the trial affidavit of
Mr Gallo. The Court rejects the husband's
evidence, when he was
cross-examined for the second time, on the second day of trial, that he had this
notebook in Court for the
duration of the trial (by implication, when it
was called for on the previous day by cross-examining Counsel) and that he had
seen Mr Gallo's trial affidavit.
husband swore a financial statement on 2 September 2016, which
was prepared by the husband's solicitor then acting for him, on
the husband's instructions, as he acknowledged
in cross‑examination.
At this time, according to his notebook which, consistent with
the husband's evidence, was then in his possession, the husband owed
Mr Gallo a total of $29,000. This debt does not appear as a liability
in the husband's financial statement. But the husband does
the following liabilities in Part K of his financial statement, including
some of lower value, as follows:
(a) Home mortgage: $45,000;
(b) Loan from Mr C: $4,000; and
(c) Liability to F & P [Foust] F/T: $12,000.
Total liabilities:
The Court accepts the wife's submission that the husband would not miss out
on the opportunity to claim the existence of a liability
if it existed. The
husband's explanation that the $29,000 debt was omitted because it was a
private arrangement
'' rang hollow, given the two other unsecured
personal liabilities of lower value included in the financial
husband never referred to the existence of the purported loan arrangement with
Mr Gallo, or any outstanding loan balance, in any
documents that he filed with
the Court prior to 30 April 2020, including in Part K of his later financial
statement sworn on 9 October
2018 and filed on 16 October 2018, at
which time, according to the husband's notebook, he then owed Mr Gallo a total
of $52,000.
terms of the purported loan were vague, uncertain and never reduced to writing.
No interest rate was fixed. Whether the interest
was simple or compound was
not agreed. The date of repayment was not agreed. The total sum to
be advanced was not agreed. The
loan was unsecured. Neither party to the
purported loan countersigned a record of any advance being made or interest
being paid.
reasons for the loan being required by the husband were not plausible at any
stage of each alleged loan advance. The husband
said the loan was
required, initially, to cover living expenses because the wife spent a lot of
money and he needed to pay the wife's
credit card. Why cash rather than a funds
transfer was required to pay the wife's credit card was never adequately
explained. The
husband gave evidence that in April 2015, he lent $200,000
to Mr C and Ms H for investment purposes, from the mortgage line
Why he needed
to borrow cash from Mr Gallo in September and December 2015 is unclear,
particularly when he had substantial funds
available in the mortgage line of
credit during this period.
the time that the husband purportedly received each advance of loan funds, he
was accessing and did have access to other funds
under his control, as
(a) the combined value of the home loan balance and the redraw balance for the
mortgage facility secured over the former matrimonial
(b) during the period from 31 July 2015 until 2 September 2016, the home
loan balance did not rise above $379,000, meaning that not
than $91,000 was available for redraw at any time during this
(c) the closing balance for the mortgage at 2 September 2016 was
$46,355.94;
(d) the opening balance for the mortgage at 31 January 2020 was
$96,964.37, and the loan was discharged on 14 April 2020 with a final
repayment of $127,865.60;
(e) the increase in the mortgage debt by around $50,000 between September 2016
and January 2020 is substantially accounted for by
the Orders made on
21 March 2017, which required the husband to pay the wife the sum of
$12,000 in lump sum spousal maintenance,
and $30,000 to the wife's solicitors by
way of interim costs, by drawing down on the mortgage redraw facility.
husband correctly stated that injunctions were made [on 24 May 2016, 14
October 2016 and again on 21 March 2017] restraining him
from drawing
down on the mortgage redraw facility secured over the former matrimonial home.
Given the husband's flagrant disregard
of Court orders and the Court's
authority, evidenced by him pleading guilty to contempt on two separate
occasions, the Court does
not accept that these injunctions stopped him
from accessing funds if he needed to do so. The evidence does not satisfy
that the husband did need to access funds by way of borrowing
from Mr Gallo and did not do so.
Court rejects Mr Gallo's evidence about the purported loan arrangements and
history for the following reasons:
Gallo's evidence as to when he met the husband changed during the course of his
evidence. In his trial affidavit, he states that
he met the husband in
2015 when he was having lunch at a pub which he
cannot identify.
In his oral evidence, he stated that he met the husband 10 to 12 years
before the pub meeting
Gallo's evidence in his affidavit is that the husband asked him in March 2020 if
Mr Gallo could give him $50,000, and then the
husband would transfer the
Suburb A property to him. Mr Gallo deposes that he agreed to pay the
husband a further $45,000 and the
husband would transfer the Suburb A
property. Mr Gallo says that the husband agreed to this
Based on the
purported notebook record of Mr Gallo, this meant that he would have
advanced the husband a total of $115,000, in exchange
for the transfer
of the Suburb
A property.
this evidence, Mr Gallo records in his purported notebook record of the loan
amounts, the advance of $76,500 on 30 April 2024,
not $45,000 as agreed
with the husband, without further explanation in his
terms of the loan were entirely uncommercial and were purportedly entered into
between two individuals who were friendly acquaintances
at best: Point 5 above
with respect to the husband is repeated. According to Mr Gallo's note, he
received two interest payments
of $500 each over the first two years
of the loan, from September 2015 to September 2017, when $52,000 had
been advanced, and no
further interest payments after that date. No request for
repayment of the loan was made for the next two years, at which time
Gallo then advanced, at the husband's request,
a further $18,000 across three payments made in October
and December 2019, taking
the total advances
to $70,000.
Deed signed by the husband and Mr Gallo is inconsistent with the evidence of
both of them. Mr Gallo advanced the husband $146,500,
and the Deed records the
loan as $140,000.
evidence and submissions, Mr Gallo explained that he was prepared to pay
$146,500 for a block of land worth $140,000
because of settlement fees and other
fees, and because ''
it was better to do that than to lose the whole
In his oral
submissions Mr Gallo maintained that he needed to pay the husband a further
$76,500 to obtain the Suburb A
$76,500 was not consistent with the sum of $45,000 referred to in his trial
Court is satisfied that the husband transferred the Suburb A property to Mr
Gallo for no consideration, contrary to the terms
of the Deed. There never
was a loan or advance of funds from Mr Gallo to the husband. The purported loan
is a fabrication.
Gallo later disposed of the Suburb A property to the former Fifth Respondent,
being a corporate entity controlled by the former
Sixth Respondent, Mr
Davies, for $125,000 in December 2020. This transaction was undertaken
after Mr Gallo had been joined as party
to the proceedings and was subject to a
pending interim application from the wife to set aside the Deed, as earlier
Court is satisfied that the former Fifth and Sixth Respondents were
third parties who were unaware of the matrimonial circumstances of the
husband and wife, and the context in which Mr Gallo was offloading
the execution of the Deed, the Court is unable to determine whether Mr Gallo has
paid the husband $140,000 or a lesser
sum, given his sale of the property
to Mr Davies (or his company), or how much he has already paid to the
husband and how much he
currently holds for the husband. But the Court is
satisfied that the husband disposed of the property for a consideration
of $140,000
and must account for this sum which, in the exceptional
circumstances of this case, should be added back to the asset pool as a
distribution of property to the
Court is acutely aware that findings should not lightly be made, on the
balance of probabilities, that a party to civil litigation
has engaged in
fraudulent conduct; this reflects the conventional perception that members of
our society do not ordinarily engage
in fraudulent or
criminal conduct.
Particular care should especially be taken where fraudulent conduct is found
against a non-matrimonial party who has given evidence
of the transaction being
undertaken in a way that is not fraudulent.
Court is satisfied that a reasonable and definite conclusion can be found on the
balance of probabilities in terms of the Court's
findings. The Court
is satisfied that the case put by the husband and Mr Gallo on this
issue, as assessed by the Court, does not
rise to the standard of being as
equally likely to be true as the Court's findings; if their case did
rise to this standard, then
the Court's conclusion would be a mere
conjecture or surmise.
particular, the Court feels an actual persuasion of these findings, which
do not arise from a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities.
conjunction with the Court's credit findings regarding the husband and Mr
Gallo, the Court has taken into account the contemporary
materials, objectively
established facts and the apparent logic
this respect, the Court has considered the following questions:
would the husband transfer the Suburb A property for no consideration, given
that the contents of the Deed would make the prospect
of recovering the sum of
$140,000 from Mr Gallo practically impossible?
it plausible that Mr Gallo might be prepared to lend $70,000 on an unsecured
basis, but to ensure repayment then advance a further
sum to the husband to
receive an asset of at least similar (if not greater) value?
Notwithstanding
that the apparently clear answers to these questions mitigates against the
Court's findings, the content of the evidence
earlier referred to and the
presentation of the witnesses does not alter the Court's considered conclusion
that the Deed is a sham.
The Court is strongly satisfied that the true
relationship and the real arrangements between the husband and Mr Gallo were not
to the Court. The cross‑examination by each of the other,
even taking into account their self-represented status, was artificial,
and contrived.
Court's findings on this issue have been made by applying these principles.
in case the Court has erred in finding that the Deed is a sham, and that Mr
Gallo has advanced the funds to the husband
he deposed to advancing, the same
result obtains for the purpose of identifying the matrimonial asset pool: the
add back of the
sum of $140,000 as a premature distribution of property to
the husband is the proper outcome in any event. As will later appear,
will be made against Mr Gallo whether or not the Deed is found to be
husband has not explained to the Court's satisfaction how he disposed of the
funds that he allegedly received from Mr Gallo.
Even if the Court accepted
that the husband received the funds, the add back would be included in the asset
pool in any event.
And if the Court has erred in finding that the Deed is a
sham, the husband had an extra $76,500 in cash available to him on 30 April
respect of the asset pool identified earlier, the Court adds items 19 and 20 as
Description
Add back for disposal of the Suburb A property
Add back of the wife's legal costs from drawing down on the mortgage by the
Orders made on 21 March 2017
Court is satisfied that the wife's use of funds from the mortgage redraw
facility to pay her legal fees in these proceedings,
after separation, should be
accounted for and taken into account by way of
an addback.
The husband
paid these funds into her solicitor's
trust account.
(d) Other findings in respect of the asset pool
Court has made findings in relation to items 17 to 20,
as earlier discussed.
In considering items 1 to 16, earlier set out, which simply recount what each
party has recorded in that party's most recently filed
financial statement
relied upon for trial, the Court proposes not to include items 10, 11 and 16,
for the following reasons.
Item 10: Personal loan from
Financial Institution T (50 percent)
is no evidence as to why the wife is responsible for a personal loan from
Financial Institution T as to $26,000. The purpose
of the loan,
its reasonableness and the application of the loan funds has not been
explained in evidence. The Court is not satisfied
that this is liability in
which the husband should
Outstanding legal fees owed
Court does not accept that the wife's outstanding legal fees of $137,199 should
be included as a liability in the asset pool.
The Court is not satisfied
that this is a liability in which the husband should share at this stage of the
proceedings.
closing submissions, the wife's Counsel, who is also the principal of the law
firm representing her, told the Court that the wife
would not be required to pay
any outstanding legal fees unless the Court ordered the husband to pay the
wife a settlement sum, and
the wife actually received the settlement
sum. In that event, the quantum of the outstanding fees required to be paid
would depend
upon how much the wife actually received.
16: Personal loan owed to Mr C and Ms I
husband breaks down the alleged loan from his brother and sister‑in-law,
in the total sum of $228,307.30, in the attachment
to his financial statement
sworn for trial, which may be summarised
as follows:
for Hawaii holiday: $18,588.
Firm A] (legal fees): $60,123.
Firm B] (legal fees): $18,944.
settlement payment to wife: $100,000.
Firm C] (legal fees): $30,652.30.
husband has not proved the existence of the loan, given the absence of any
evidence led from Mr C or Ms I. The Court does not
accept the husband's
uncorroborated evidence.
is also no evidence that, even if all or any of these funds were advanced, such
advances are required to be repaid and whether
any repayment is likely to be
enforced. The terms of the loan are vague and uncertain. And the husband
has retained sufficient
funds from the mortgage redraw account and the sale of
the former matrimonial home (and the disposal of the Suburb A property) to
discharge all or part of the alleged loan, in any event.
from all of these considerations, to the extent that this purported debt, apart
from the Hawaii holiday, consists of a loan
to pay legal fees and a loan for the
payment of a capital sum to purge the husband's contempt (in total around
$210,000), the Court
would decline to include the same as a liability in which
the wife should share, in any
(e) Conclusion in respect of the asset pool
these reasons, the Court finds that the asset pool of the marital parties, for
the purposes of these proceedings, is as
Description
Cash at bank
200 shares in Financial Institution S
Motor vehicle
Household contents
Funds in the wife's lawyer's trust account
Superannuation interest
Unpaid tax due on 21 March 2024
Personal loan from Financial Institution T (50 percent)
Outstanding legal fees owed
Cash at bank
Cash at bank (frozen by the Court)
600 shares in Telecommunications Company U
Superannuation interest
Personal loan owed to Mr C and Ms I
Funds retained by the husband from the mortgage account and sale of the
former matrimonial home
Add back of the balance of funds from Item 17 which may have been
Add back for disposal of the Suburb A property
Add back of the wife's legal costs from drawing down on the mortgage by the
Orders made on 21 March 2017
Total property, notional property and superannuation interests
total property, notional property and superannuation interests retained by the
marital parties is worth $876,190, as to the wife
a total of $80,727 and as
to the husband a total of $795,463. Within each former spouse's total, the wife
retains notional property
in the sum of $30,000, and the husband retains
notional property in the sum of $385,650. Within each former spouse's
wife retains existing legal and equitable interests in property worth
$50,727, and the husband retains existing legal and equitable
interests in property worth $409,813.
Just and equitable orders ‑‑‑‑- whether
the Court should adjust property interests:
Section 79(2)
husband does not seek any relevant adjustment to the marital parties' existing
legal and equitable interests in property. The
husband deposes that he and the
wife kept separate finances and owned nothing jointly, as that is how the
wife wanted their financial
affairs arranged.
The husband deposes that in April 2005, the wife told the husband and his
brother, Mr C, that she wanted nothing to do with the
husband's company and
investments as she had her own affairs to look after, and because she had a bad
experience in her previous
marriage. Further, she did not want any of the
husband's assets as they were his, and he had worked very hard for them and
her and her son a roof over their
evidence was not put to the wife in cross-examination, and the Court attaches
limited weight to it.
wife does seek an adjustment of property interests. The wife deposes that the
husband told her during the relationship that
if ever they separated, she would
receive nothing, and that he would make sure of
The husband's conduct
before and after separation is entirely consistent with the wife's evidence in
this respect, in respect of
his initial reliance on the Option Agreement
executed in August 2004, and is dealings with the mortgage redraw account,
the proceeds
of sale of the former matrimonial home and the disposal
of the Suburb A property, all in 2020.
reason of the breakdown of the relationship and the wife's inability to remain
living in the former matrimonial home, now disposed
of with the fruits of
disposal retained by the husband, the Court finds that justice and equity
requires consideration of the factors
in Section 79(4) of the Act so that just
and equitable orders can be made adjusting the marital parties' existing legal
and equitable
in property.
Contributions: Section 79(4)(a), (b) and (c)
Court makes the following findings in respect of the contributions which the
husband and the wife made to property, within the
meaning of Section
79(4)(a) and (b).
and during the relationship, the husband worked in Trade BB and the wife
worked in Beauty Service Provider Z. Both marital
parties worked hard at their
respective jobs, however following the child's birth in April 2006,
the wife did not return to the paid
workforce until after separation.
The wife states that the husband was opposed to her returning to work after
the child was born.
during the relationship, the wife did engage in some hairdressing at home for
family and friends and used the funds received
to supplement expenses for her
son, in addition to child support she received from his
husband acquired land, on which the former matrimonial home was later built, in
May 1997. The evidence does not establish to
the Court's satisfaction how the
purchase was financed, but the Court accepts that the husband utilised some of
his savings to do
so. The husband refinanced the land by successive
mortgages being registered and discharged on a number of occasions, including
in June 1997, July 1998 and March
The wife did not
contribute any of her property or financial resources to the purchase.
husband constructed the former matrimonial home on the land over an extended
period from early 2000 until September
The mortgage last
registered over the title (before its sale in 2020) was registered in October
2009. The mortgage balance was
$250,758 at
2 December 2013.
the marital parties commenced cohabitation in around October 2004, the wife
owned a car, some chattels and had some cash at
September 2005, the husband was registered as the sole proprietor of the Suburb
A property. The evidence does not establish to
the Court's satisfaction how the
purchase was financed, but the Court accepts that the husband was solely
responsible for the purchase
and the wife did not contribute any of her
property and financial resources.
husband was the principal income earner during the relationship and was
primarily responsible for payment of household expenses,
including school
fees and expenses in respect of the child.
separation, the husband enjoyed the benefit of living in the former matrimonial
in circumstances earlier described.
After the sale of the former matrimonial home, the husband has lived rent-free
in the home of
his elderly
widowed mother.
separation, the husband has progressed from reducing work to ceasing work in
Trade BB. Conservation and improvement of the
former matrimonial home and the
Suburb A property ceased in 2020 when the husband disposed of them, in breach of
Court orders, in
circumstances earlier described.
husband made greater contributions to property than the wife, from
commencement of cohabitation until the date of trial.
Court makes the following findings in respect of the contributions which the
husband and the wife made to the welfare of the
family, including in each
party's capacity as a homemaker and parent, within the meaning of Section
79(4)(c) of the Act.
the relationship, the wife was primarily responsible for the care of the child.
The wife was responsible for cooking, cleaning,
food shopping, taking the child
to school and facilitating extracurricular activities. The wife also
performed these functions for
her son, Mr B, however this is not a relevant
consideration under Section 79(4)(c) of the
separation, in early May 2016, the wife and the child moved out of the former
matrimonial home and initially lived with
the maternal grandparents until August
2016. Mr B went to live with his father until September 2016.
wife significantly increased her employment commitments after separation,
working at different times [in] Beauty Service Provider
Z and also working at
[School A] in the canteen during school terms doing cooking. The wife has
been entitled to Commonwealth pensions,
allowances and benefits since
separation.
wife was required to pay for rented accommodation for herself and the child from
August 2016 until March or April
The child has been in the
wife's exclusive care and has not spent time with the father since he was
sentenced to an immediate 18-month
term of imprisonment for contempt of Court in
July 2020. From separation until the husband was incarcerated, the child lived
a week about basis with each parent.
husband continued to pay for the child's private school fees at School A after
separation, until the second half of 2019. The
portion requiring payment
is 25 percent of the normal fee level, due to the discount the wife is entitled
to by being employed at
the school. The child attended [School B] from the
start of the 2020 school year.
wife has made greater contributions to the welfare of the family, including
as homemaker and parent, from commencement of cohabitation
until the child
turned 18 years of age on 3 April 2024.
Conclusion on contributions
into account and balancing the disparate contributions of the marital parties to
property and to the welfare of the family,
from commencement of cohabitation
until the date of trial, the Court finds that each party has made equal
contributions pursuant
to Section 79(4)(a), (b) and (c).
Adjustment factors: Section 79(4)(d) to (g)
orders sought by the parties do not affect the earning capacity of the husband
or the wife, pursuant to Section 79(4)(d). The
considerations identified
in Section 79(4)(f) and (g) are addressed in the following evaluation of Section
79(4)(e) which comprises
the Section 75(2) factors, so far as they are
(a) the age and state of health of the [marital] parties [and
the physical and mental capacity of each of them for gainful employment,
identified in Section 75(2)(b)]
wife is 52 years of age and turns 53 years of age in December
this year. The husband turned 58 years of age in January this
The wife is in good health.
husband asserts that since his release from prison, he has been unable to work
due to ''[his]
physical and mental trauma of being in prison and not having
any contact with
The husband asserts that he has tried to do some casual work but remains on
[Government Benefit AA] benefits due to his physical
Court accepts that the husband may be distressed at the loss of his relationship
with the child, who is now 18 years of age.
The Court does not accept the
husband's uncorroborated evidence that he is unable to work due to his physical
and mental health.
The Court is satisfied that the husband is able to support
himself adequately, and has been able to do so since separation, and
either understating the amount of work he is performing or is not exercising his
existing earning capacity without reasonable
Court makes these findings because:
husband earned a taxable income of over $86,000 in the financial year ending 30
June 2015, the year before separation.
husband most recently disclosed four invoices charged to a private company
owned by his brother, Mr C, for [trade work] charged
$30 per hour. The total of the four invoices was $2,100 issued
for work completed between November 2022 and January
husband adduces no current medical evidence from his treating practitioners
unable to work. The husband
relies upon an unsworn statement from his general practitioner dated
25 June 2020. The statement refers
to the husband having chronic lower
back pain with bulging discs to lower lumbar spine since
The wife also gives
evidence of the husband reporting back pain during the
relationship.
The husband
continued to manage his back pain and earned a reasonable income from 1996 until
separation. There is no independent
evidence that the husband's back condition
has materially worsened since
husband is motivated to present himself in the worst possible financial light to
the Court, as part of his intention not to permit
the wife to receive a just and
equitable property settlement.
(b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the
[marital] parties [and the physical and mental capacity of each of
appropriate gainful employment; this aspect is discussed above with Section
her evidence in chief, the wife stated that she earns around $52,000 per
annum working casually [at] Beauty Service Provider Z.
The wife did
not update her weekly expenses during her evidence in chief.
In her financial statement filed in January 2024, the
wife deposed to
earning around $67,000 per annum on a full-time basis. Earlier in these
reasons, the wife's property and notional
property has been identified.
husband's evidence is that he receives a Government Benefit AA payment of
$345 per week.
Earlier in these
reasons, the husband's property and notional property has been identified.
Court is satisfied that the husband has an earning capacity of around $50,000
per annum. The husband has enjoyed the benefit
of living rent-free with his
mother since April 2020, save for a period of 18 months when he was
incarcerated. The husband was released
from custody in early 2022 and continues
to live with his mother.
(c) whether either [marital] party has the care or control of a
child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years
child turned 18 years of age in April 2024.
(d) commitments of each of the [marital] parties that are
necessary to enable the party to support: (i) himself or herself; and (ii)
a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain
husband's evidence is that his Government Benefit AA income of $345 per week
matches his weekly expenditure.
The Court is satisfied that the husband may supplement his weekly expenses from
the cash that he retained from the disposal of the
former matrimonial home and
the Suburb A property.
wife currently deposes to a material surplus of expenses over income of around
$1,900 per week.
cross-examination was directed to this issue. However, on its face such a
material surplus of expenses over income appears to
be both unreasonable
and unsustainable.
(f) the eligibility of either [marital] party for a pension,
allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the Commonwealth, of a State
Territory or of another country; or (ii) any superannuation fund or scheme,
whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates,
within or outside
Australia; and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to
either party
husband receives Government Benefit AA payments. The wife is not currently
receiving any Commonwealth benefits.
wife has modest superannuation entitlements, set out earlier in these
reasons. The husband asserts that he has NIL superannuation
entitlements.
The value of this entitlement has diminished from the value of $120,000, which
the husband attributed
in September
(m) if either [marital] party is cohabiting with another
person - the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation
wife lives with her partner, [Mr L], in a home which has been built since a
block of land was purchased in their joint names
in 2020. The wife
contributed $22,000 towards the purchase, and Mr L contributed $120,000 towards
the purchase. The wife and Mr
L share household expenses
to the husband, he has not re-partnered.
(n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under
Section 79 in relation to: (i) the property of the [marital]
upon the contributions-based entitlements of each party, and subject to any
adjustment to those entitlements, the asset pool
must be divided
(na) any child support under the
Child Support (Assessment)
that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be
liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage
the child turned 18 years of age in April 2024, the husband paid child support
on a sporadic basis. Since separation, the
husband has reported a progressively
decreasing taxable income and, on at least two occasions, provided significantly
lower estimates
of his income to the Child Support Agency, after assessments
were issued based upon a higher income.
husband made contributions to payment of the child's school fees, as
earlier described.
in 2024, the husband was assessed to pay the wife $41 per month by way of child
(o) any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the
Court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account
are four matters which invite discussion pursuant to
this consideration.
The husband's non-disclosure
husband's lack of full, frank and timely disclosure throughout these proceedings
has enabled the Court to earlier make robust
findings about the extent of his
current and notional property interests.
husband is not entitled to obtain a forensic advantage or otherwise benefit in
these proceedings by withholding documents and
information which he is under an
obligation to disclose.
The wife's receipt of the $100,000 settlement sum
to a Deed of Settlement and Release dated 17 August 2021 between
the husband, the wife and the husband's brother, Mr C,
the marital
parties agreed that the husband purged five counts of contempt of the
Orders made on 24 May 2016 (one breach),
2017 (three breaches) and 28 May 2019
(one breach) upon Mr C paying the sum of $100,000 to the trust account
of the wife's solicitors.
wife filed this contempt application on 20 October 2020, and the husband
pleaded guilty to all five counts of contempt on 4 March
The marital parties agreed that the wife was entitled to apply the proceeds as
she deemed appropriate, and such funds were
not to be characterised in these
proceedings.
wife was paid the sum of $100,000 in September 2021. The marital parties
agreed that the husband could transfer his [Motor Vehicle
marital parties agreed that the sum was not to be characterised in these
proceedings, however the Court does take into account
that the wife has
received this capital sum. The wife has not given any specific evidence as to
how she has disposed of these funds.
Outstanding family law legal fees and other liabilities of
the husband and the wife
Court takes into account that each party has outstanding family law legal
In the case of the
wife, the Court has earlier recounted the circumstances in which the wife's
solicitors would seek to recover
outstanding costs from the
the case of the husband, in light of the Court's earlier finding that the
husband has retained the capacity to support himself
since separation, the
family law legal fees to Law Firm A were able to be discharged from funds
retained by the husband at separation.
Court has earlier identified relevant aspects of the other unsecured liabilities
asserted by each party, which the Court declined
to include as liabilities in
the proceedings. The Court is not satisfied that any significant weight should
be attached to those
liabilities.
The husband looked after and treated the wife's son as his
husband should be given credit for financially contributing to the welfare of
the wife's son, Mr B, as well as de facto parenting
contributions, during the
relationship.
Conclusion on adjustment factors
Court takes into account and weighs up the considerations just discussed.
In all the circumstances, the Court does not consider
that justice and equity
requires any adjustment to be made to the contributions-based entitlements of
the marital parties.
Just and equitable orders - form and content:
Court is satisfied that orders should be made dividing the marital parties'
notional and actual asset pool equally.
in these reasons, the Court found that the total property, notional property and
superannuation interests retained by the
marital parties is worth $876,190.
Orders must be made for each party to retain $438,095. The wife currently
retains a total of
$80,727, comprising existing legal and equitable interests in
property worth $50,727, and notional property in the sum of $30,000.
The husband must pay the wife the sum of $357,368 for the wife to receive
her entitlement.
husband currently retains a total of $795,463, comprising notional property in
the sum of $385,650 and existing legal and equitable
interests in property worth
$409,813. After paying the wife the sum of $357,368, the husband will retain
around $43,000 in cash,
comprising the balance of the proceeds of sale of the
former matrimonial home and the funds drawn from the mortgage redraw
separation, together with his other existing property.
Court considers that such an outcome is just and equitable in all the
circumstances.
Court declines to make any order against Mr Gallo. The wife's entitlement
can be met from property in the possession or control
of the husband.
these reasons, there will be the following orders, subject to hearing from the
parties as to form:
30 days of the date of these orders, the First Respondent, [MR FOUST], must pay
to the Applicant, [MS MOLLOY], the sum of
First Respondent do indemnify and keep the Applicant indemnified in relation to
all liabilities of the Foust Family Trust, including
but not limited to any
beneficiary loan accounts in which a debit balance is recorded in the name of
the Applicant.
Applicant's application against the Fourth Respondent, [MR GALLO], is
party otherwise retain the property, liabilities and superannuation entitlements
in that party’s possession, custody or
parties have liberty to apply in relation to the implementation of these
parties have liberty to provide a copy of these orders to any bank, insurance
broker, settlement agent, mortgage broker or other
third party necessary to give
effect to these orders.
parties forthwith do all acts and sign all documents and give all consent
necessary to give force and effect to these orders.
documents produced by named persons pursuant to subpoena be returned or
destroyed in accordance with the request from the named
person upon the
expiration of 42 days from this order.
relation to material tendered as an exhibit into evidence in these
proceedings:
(a) all parties must collect their exhibits tendered by them (''their
exhibits'') from the Chambers of the Honourable Justice Berry
at least 42 days,
and no later than 56 days, from the date of this order;
(b) all parties must contact the Chambers of the Honourable Justice Berry to
arrange the collection of their exhibits; and
(c) in default of compliance with subparagraph (a), all material tendered as an
exhibit, save and except for material produced pursuant
to subpoena, will be
destroyed by the Court without notice to the parties.
material tendered as an exhibit and uploaded electronically by the Court will be
destroyed by the Court without notice to the
parties on the expiration of 42
days from this order.
the event of an appeal being lodged prior to the expiration of 42 days from
this order, paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 above do not apply.
application for costs (including costs reserved) must be consolidated in a Form
2 Application with a supporting affidavit and
filed and served within 28 days of
this order.
to the preceding orders, the Form 1 Initiating Application filed by the
Applicant on 18 May 2016 as amended on 10 February
2021 and the Form 1A Response
filed by the First Respondent on 2 September 2016 as amended on
8 February 2017, and all outstanding
interim proceedings,
be otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
17 OCTOBER 2024
Papers for the Judicial Officer
filed by the Applicant wife on 16 September 2024 (''Wife's Papers for the
Judicial Officer''), electronic
page 26 of 38; a typographical error refers to
the wife's primary trial affidavit being filed on 14 April 2018.
First Updating Trial Affidavit
of the Applicant wife affirmed on 4 May 2020 (''Wife's First Updating
Trial Affidavit''), Annexure
''A'' (Copy of Certificate of Title dated 4
October 2018), electronic
page 17 of 27.
Trial Affidavit of the Applicant wife affirmed on 10 April 2018 (''Wife's Trial
Affidavit''), [57].
Orders made on 22 March 2023.
Wife's Trial Affidavit,
Annexure ''A'' (''Copy of the Option Agreement''), electronic pages 37 to 48 of
Exhibit 6, ''Form 13 Financial
Statement of the First Respondent sworn on 2 September 2016'' (''Exhibit 6''),
Part O, electronic
Wife's Trial Affidavit,
Ibid [264].
Second Updating Trial Affidavit
of the Applicant wife affirmed on 16 March 2023 (''Wife's Second Updating Trial
Affidavit''), [75]
and Annexure ''K'' (Contract for Sale of Land by Offer and
Acceptance), electronic pages 75 to 77 of
Ibid Annexure ''A''
(''Documents obtained from the Settlement Agent''), electronic pages 27 to 34 of
Ibid electronic page 28 of
Ibid electronic page 27
Ibid electronic page
Ibid electronic
pages 29 to 34 of 108.
Annexure ''D'' (''Documents obtained from the Settlement Agent''), electronic
pages 50 to 51 of 108.
Affidavit of the First Respondent husband sworn on 6 July 2020,
Molloy and Foust
[2020] FCWAM 66.
[1] and [34] to [36].
Wife's Second Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''B'' (''Correspondence from the Settlement Agent''),
electronic page 35 of 108.
Ibid [31] and Annexure ''F''
(''Landgate Transfer and the Certificate of Title''), electronic pages 54 to 57
of 108; the undated
first page of the contract appears annexed to the trial
affidavit of the Fourth Respondent sworn on 27 May 2023 at Annexure ''JU-8'',
electronic page 38 of 38.
Wife's Second Updating Trial Affidavit, Annexure ''G'' (''ASIC Search''),
electronic pages 58 to 66 of
See the Orders made on
17 February 2021.
Affidavit of [Mr Davies]
affirmed on 27 August 2021, Annexure ''A'' (''[Real Estate Agent Q] Settlement
Analysis Sheet''), electronic
page 9 of 21.
Wife's Second Updating Trial
Affidavit, [128] and Annexure ''T'' (''Deed of Settlement and Release''),
electronic pages 103 to 108
Wife’s Second
Updating Trial Affidavit, [103] to [116] and Annexure ''Q'', (''Video
Footage'').
The propositions in this
paragraph are drawn from
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108
Stanford v Stanford
Boulton & Boulton
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
(2024) FLC 94-202
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 524, 533 to 534 and
[2020] FamCAFC 102
[2020] FamCAFC 303
(2020) FLC 93-998
Lovine & Connor and
[2012] FamCAFC 168
(2012) FLC 93-515
; see also at 86,604 [100] to [103];
Candle & Falkner
[2021] FedCFamC1A 102
(2021) FLC 94-069
at 81,086 to 81,088 [52]
Russell v Russell
[1999] FamCA 1875
(1999) FLC 92-877
Russell v Russell
Form 13 Financial Statement
of the Applicant wife affirmed on 17 January 2024 (''Wife's Form 13
Financial Statement''); Form 13 Financial
Statement of the First Respondent
husband sworn on 22 May 2023 (''Husband's Form 13 Financial
Statement'').
Exhibit 2, ''Transaction
statement for the First Respondent's [Financial Institution V] account ending
600111'' (''Exhibit 2''),
electronic page 3 of
Ibid electronic pages 3
Ibid electronic page 3
Ibid electronic pages
1 to 3 of 4.
Exhibit 4, ''Transcript of
the proceedings dated 10 July 2020'' (''Exhibit 4''), electronic pages 12 to 13,
15 to 16, 19, 21 to 23,
27, 45, 51 to 52, 59, 62, 66 to 67, 70, 72 and 76 of
In the sum of $4,000 by
online transfer to a [Financial Institution V] credit card; see Exhibit 2 at
electronic page 1 of 4.
Weir and Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
(1993) FLC 92-338
at 79,593 to
Townsend and
[1994] FamCA 144
(1995) FLC 92-569
at 81,654 (''
Townsend and
[2015] FamCAFC 51
(2015) 53 Fam LR 373
Wife's Second Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''A'' (''Documents obtained from the Settlement Agent'')
electronic pages 27 of
Sharrment Pty Ltd v
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[1988] FCA 179
(1988) 18 FCR 449
at 453 to 454.
Alexander v Manly
[2004] WASCA 140
(2004) 29 WAR 194.
Exhibit 7, ''Notebook of the First Respondent'' (''Exhibit
Exhibit 6, ''Form 13
Financial Statement of the First Respondent sworn on 2 September 2016''
(''Exhibit 6'').
Transcript of the
cross-examination of the First Respondent husband (18 September 2024), 60 lines
20 to 25 (''Transcript, Husband,
18 September 2024'').
Updating Trial Affidavit of
the First Respondent husband sworn on 22 May 2023, [65]
(''Husband's Updating Trial Affidavit'').
Exhibit 1, ''Bundle of home
loan statements for the former matrimonial home'' (''Exhibit 1'');
See Statements 28 and 29 contained
at electronic pages 1 to 5 of
Ibid electronic page
Exhibit 3, ''[Financial
Institution V] Loan Summary for the period 31 January 2020 to 15 April 2020
(page 2 of 3)'' (''Exhibit
Trial Affidavit of the
Fourth Respondent sworn on 27 May 2023, [3] to [5] (''Mr Gallo's Trial
Affidavit'').
Transcript of the
cross-examination of the Fourth Respondent (18 September 2024) 98 lines 10 to 15
(''Transcript, Mr Gallo, 18 September
Mr Gallo's Trial
Affidavit, [12] to [13].
Ibid Annexure ''JU-1''
(''Copy of Mr Gallo's recorded notes of how much he lent and how much the
First Respondent paid him''), electronic
page 7 of 38.
Wife's Second Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''A'' (''Documents obtained from the Settlement Agent'')
electronic pages 27 of
Transcript of the closing
submissions of the Fourth Respondent (19 September 2024), 40 lines 10 to 25
(''Transcript, Mr Gallo, 19
September 2024'').
Ibid 38 line 20 to 39
See paragraphs
[36] to [44] of these
Townsend and
Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd and Others
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
Bradshaw v McEwans
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361 to 362.
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
at 129 [31]
Trevi & Trevi
[2018] FamCAFC 173
(2018) FLC 93-858
at 78,454 to 78,456 [31] to
Wife's Trial
Affidavit, [194].
paragraphs [94] to [96] of these reasons.
Rodgers & Rodgers (No
(2016) FLC 93-712
at 81,487 to 81,491 [22] to [41]
Rodgers & Rodgers (No 2)
Chorn and Hopkins
[2004] FamCA 633
Husband's Form 13
Financial Statement, electronic page 14 of
Rodgers & Rodgers
Updating Trial Affidavit,
Ibid [71] to
Wife's Trial
Affidavit, [16].
Wife's Trial
Affidavit, [114].
Wife's First Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''B'' (''Certificate of Title and details''), electronic
page 21 of 27.
Trial Affidavit of the First
Respondent husband sworn on 10 August 2018, [55]
(''Husband's Trial Affidavit'').
Wife's First Updating Trial Affidavit,
Robb and Robb
[1994] FamCA 136
(1995) FLC 92-555
Robb and Robb
Third Updating Trial
Affidavit of the Applicant wife affirmed on 17 January 2024, [57]
(''Wife's Third Updating Trial
Affidavit'').
Updating Trial Affidavit,
Wife's Third Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''D'' (''Copies of invoices disclosed by the
First Respondent''), electronic pages
111 to 114 of 131.
Husband's Updating Trial
Affidavit, Annexure ''D'' (''To Whom It May Concern Letter from [Dr K] dated
25 June 2020''), electronic
pages 33 to 34 of
Wife's Trial Affidavit,
Husband's Form 13
Financial Statement, Part D, electronic page 3 of
Husband's Form 13
Financial Statement, Part B, electronic page 2 of
Wife's Form 13 Financial
Statement, Part B, electronic page 2 of
Exhibit 6, Part J,
electronic page 8 of 12.
Transcript of the
examination-in-chief of the Applicant wife (18 September 2024) 60 line 40 to 61
line 30 (''Transcript, Wife, 18
September 2024'').
Wife's Third Updating
Trial Affidavit, [60].
Wife's Second Updating
Trial Affidavit, [128] and Annexure ''T'' (''Deed of Settlement and Release''),
electronic pages 103 to 108
Hurst v Weber
[2009] FamCAFC 137
(2009) 233 FLR 337
See paragraph [122]
of these reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (843 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter