URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/225.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE and CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES & ORS [2025] FCWA 225 (12 September 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE and CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES & ORS
[2025] FCWA 225
12 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
5876 of 2025
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
WELFARE - Where the father opposes continuation of child's chemotherapy
treatment and seeks to remove child from hospital -
Where the father adheres to
beliefs as to the causes and treatment of cancer informed by his own research -
Where the evidence of
treating doctors is that cessation of chemotherapy will
almost certainly cause the child to die - Injunctions granted - Turns on
CHILD PROTECTION - Where proceedings on foot both in this court
and in the Children's Court - Orders made to continue protection once
proceedings in Children's Court
discontinued.
Legislation:
and Community Services Act 2004
Family Court Act 1997
Representation:
Ms J Buller
First Respondent
Ms J Abbott
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
Mr R Bannerman
Independent Children's Lawyer
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's Office
First Respondent
Department of Communities
Second Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Third Respondent
Bannerman Solicitors
Independent Children's Lawyer
Legal Aid Western Australia
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE
WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES' NAMES AND IDENTIFYING
DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Child and Adolescent Health Service and Chief Executive Officer of
Department of Communities & Ors
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Court Act 1997
This copy of the Court's Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Court Rules 2021
Family Court Act 1997
(WA) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
A], who was born [in] 2012, is the son of [Mr Edwards] ("the father") and
[Ms Torres] ("the mother"). He has been diagnosed
with [redacted] leukaemia and
is an inpatient at [Hospital A] ("[Hospital A]"), undergoing intensive
A is an inpatient because of steps taken by the Department of Communities ("the
Department") when it became aware of concerns
as to his access to treatment.
[In July] 2025 he was taken into provisional protection and care by a relevant
officer pursuant to
Children and Community Services Act 2004
(WA). The Department subsequently, and as required by the
and Community Services Act 2004
(WA), made a protection application in the
Children's Court of Western Australia and has subsequently made an application
Child and Adolescent Health Service ("CAHS") is responsible for the operations
of Hospital A. It commenced proceedings in this
court [in] July 2025, seeking
orders to secure Child A’s access to treatment in circumstances where the
father, in particular,
was resistant to it. Orders were made by the Chief
Judge that day to secure Child A's treatment in the short term and adjourning
the proceedings to [a date later in] July 2025, so that the mother and
father could respond to them.
issues arose, as detailed in my judgment published on 28 July
which I incorporate in these
Reasons. In short, the hospital staff reported that the father had removed
Child A's intravenous line
through which chemotherapy was being administered,
apparently having cut it, and taped the end of that line into a
urine bottle.
The treatment fluids which should have been entering
Child A's system were instead being discharged into that bottle.
had made it clear that he did not consent to Child A receiving
chemotherapy and police became involved. He has subsequently been
with a criminal offence of endangering Child A's life, health or safety as a
result of that action.
were made to secure Child A's ongoing treatment and to restrain the father from
interfering in it. The parties were given
liberty to seek a relisting to vary
or set aside those orders at short notice; they have not done so.
matter comes before the Court today for two reasons. Having commenced
proceedings in the Children's Court, the Department commenced
a protection and
care application in this court [in] August 2025. An interim order for Child A
to remain in provisional protection
and care was sought, pending a final order
in the form of a protection order limited to a period of two years.
The application was
listed to the hearing this morning for directions only,
because by orders made in the Children's Court [in] August 2025, an interim
hearing was listed in that court [in early] September 2025 to determine the
separate applications of Child A's parents for him to
be placed in their care.
application of CAHS in this court, having previously been adjourned, was
relisted urgently to this morning's hearing after an
application in a case was
lodged late yesterday. CAHS seeks further interim injunctive relief to secure
Child A's treatment in circumstances
outlined later in these Reasons. Those
circumstances came to a head on 8 September 2025. As will appear, they have
informed the
determination by the Department that it will not discontinue the
protection proceedings it has commenced but will seek to have them
continue in
this court.
father appeared at the hearing this morning. The mother was represented by
solicitors. I took steps at the commencement of
the hearing to ensure that
both had received the documents filed by CAHS yesterday. The matter was stood
down to afford the father
the opportunity to read the documents before making
any submission.
The evidence and submissions
The Child and Adolescent Health Service
relied on an affidavit sworn yesterday by [Dr C], a consultant paediatrician who
is currently [a Head of Department] at Hospital
C confirms that Child A commenced his first cycle of chemotherapy on 24 July
2025. That cycle was completed on 3 August 2025
and was followed by a
recovery period of supportive care. That supportive care involves
ongoing treatment, albeit not chemotherapy;
by way of example, daily
administration of antifungal medication and daily review are critical.
A is responding well to his treatment but will, on Dr C's evidence, require
three more cycles of consolidation chemotherapy.
He commenced his second
cycle of intravenous chemotherapy on 9 September 2025, and must remain an
inpatient in an isolated room,
with a high level of precautions against
infections and the like. He may continue to need analgesia, nutritional
support, intravenous
antifungal treatment and antibiotics, and blood products
support. It is possible that he will require admission to paediatric intensive
C says that the five-year overall survival for childhood [redacted] leukaemia is
around 65 to 70 percent with the completion of
four cycles of intensive
multiagent chemotherapy, but that the chances of event free and overall survival
depend on the completion
of the full chemotherapy protocol, which must be
delivered without undue delay. Without consolidation chemotherapy, the risk of
relapse is very high, and [redacted] leukaemia is "universally fatal without
standard multiagent chemotherapy."
C indicated her awareness that the mother had filed an application in the
Children's Court for an interim order placing Child
A in the care of his
parents; that is the matter that was before that court
[in early] September 2025. Dr C placed into evidence
a copy of a
letter dated 29 August 2025 setting out the concerns of the relevant staff
at Hospital A at the prospect of parental
responsibility for decision-making
regarding Child A returning to the parents. The letter confirmed that since
11 August 2025, Child
A's contact with the father has been fully
supervised by an officer of the Department, and that a safety plan had been put
to enable Child A to be temporarily discharged to stay at Ronald
McDonald house with his parents before resuming chemotherapy.
staff expressed their concern that the statements made by the parents to the
effect that they now agreed with Child A's treatment
plan had not been tested.
They pointed out that the father had previously made statements to the same
effect, before disconnecting
Child A's chemotherapy line. They expressed
concern at the dynamic between the parents, and the father influencing Child A
treatment and be demonstrative in his refusal of it.
staff expressed concern at a perceived risk that the parents may try to remove
Child A from the metropolitan area, from [the
State] or from the country, noting
that they both hold citizenship of other countries.
to Dr C's affidavit were various clinical notes, including notes recording the
concerns expressed by Child A's parents and
the strong opinions as to medical
matters expressed by the father based on his own views and research.
A had been discharged from Hospital A to the care of his parents for the period
[date redacted] September 2025 until [date
redacted] September 2025, a
respite period between courses of chemotherapy, on conditions set out in a
safety plan developed by the
Department. That plan required compliance
with all medical directions, and daily attendance with Child A at the hospital
administration of medication and for him to be reviewed.
It required Child A to be returned to hospital for his next round of
chemotherapy,
likely to commence on 9 September 2025, and for immediate return
to the hospital if he demonstrated any of a number of listed symptoms.
The parents and Child A were to stay at Ronald McDonald house and maintain
communication with the staff there. They were also to
maintain a daily health
log and share updates with the treating medical staff.
8 September 2025, the father attended with Child A at Hospital A as
scheduled. He refused to consent to Child A receiving required
treatment or any other procedure and presented staff with a "notice". The
mother attended part way through the conversation
and said that she wanted what
was best for Child A but could not express her true views as there would be
negative consequences for
their family. Both parents said words to the effect
that they did not consent to, but would not obstruct treatment steps. The
reiterated his strong objections to ongoing treatment, his concern as to
the presence of security staff, and emphasised his own research
and evolving
one point, the father expressed to Hospital staff his intention to leave the
hospital with Child A, return home and heal in accordance
with the precepts of
what is described as the "German New Medicine."
annexed to the affidavit of Dr C was a copy of the "notice" document produced by
the father, dated 30 August 2025, and presented
to hospital staff on 8 September
2025. That document is reproduced in full below:
date: 30 August 2025
woman: [name redacted]
[name redacted]; who at times acts as the CEO at
[hospital a] and to the woman: [name redacted]; who at times acts as doctor and
any of mankind acting under your authority;
i: a man; [mr edwards];
state that my consent must be given for any medical
and or procedure including but not limited to chemotherapy and or
vaccination and or medical test intended to be given to i, or the
property of i,
i, also write
this notice in relation to my son [child a] and daughter [child
; being the property of i, a man;
i, state that i, consider any medical treatment; vaccines or medical tests of
any kind to be a choice and believe they may cause
i, and those in the care of
i, state that any attempt to force and or
i, or those in the care of
i, to receive medical treatment, vaccination and or medical tests; against the
will of i, will be seen
as trespass by way of harm;
i, state that i, will require remedy
of 10 million australian dollars
for each such trespass
and 1 dollar per second that the medical
treatment; vaccination and or medical tests remains in the body of i, or the
body of a son
and daughter of i,
i, state that i,
will hold any man or woman who does trespass against i
or a son and daughter of i, accountable as a man or woman
at a court of law
before a trial by jury
if you have any questions or concerns regarding this notice please contact i, at
the address below;
i, state all herein be true and will verify at open court;
by: [mr edwards], a man.
[mobile number redacted]
[address redacted]
response, hospital staff consulted with the Department, and Child A was
immediately readmitted as an inpatient. It was agreed
that the mother could
stay with him and that the father would not be present at the commencement of
his next round of chemotherapy
the following day.
short, CAHS submits that the various injunctions sought in its application are
necessary to secure Child A's ongoing access to
the treatment he needs and to
protect him from interference in that treatment or from being encouraged by his
parents to decline
or resist it. The latter point is raised in the context of
Dr C's observation as to the potential detrimental impacts on Child A's
well-being arising from his exposure to misinformation and being instructed by
the father both to record his interactions
with staff, and to himself produce
the "notice" prepared by his father.
detailed orders sought still contemplate the possibility of the hospital
agreeing to Child A being discharged for defined periods
of time on stringent
conditions, including compliance with a safety plan, notwithstanding the events
of last week.
for CAHS appropriately acknowledged that procedural fairness requires that the
parents have the opportunity to respond and
put on evidence in relation to the
application presently brought. She accepted that in those circumstances,
only those orders necessary
to secure Child A's position, safety and treatment
pending a further hearing should be made. In that context, she acknowledged
subject to one modification the interim orders proposed by the Independent
Children's Lawyer ("ICL") would meet the immediate need.
The Department of Communities
Department is, for obvious reasons, the applicant in the pending protection
application brought under the
Children and Community Services Act 2004
It is a respondent to the separate application brought by CAHS
under the child welfare provisions of the
Family Court Act 1997
the Court has received no communication from the Department since its
application was filed [in] August 2025, helpfully the
ICL provided relevant
information late last night. Counsel appearing for the Department this
morning confirmed the accuracy of that
information.
proceedings in the Children's Court were last before that court [in early]
September 2025 for an interim hearing on the mother's
application for an interim
order that Child A be returned to the care of his parents. An oral application
was made in similar terms
by the father. The Department sought an
adjournment of those applications to [mid] September 2025, in order to
monitor what was
then Child A's brief period of discharge from hospital and, if
no issues arose, to withdraw that application. The learned Magistrate
to make the interim order sought by the mother and the father, and adjourned the
proceedings to a further hearing before
himself on the afternoon of
[mid] September 2025. He did so in the context of an indication by the
Department that if no issues
arose over that discharge period, interim orders
would not be sought in this court today.
the events of 8 September 2025, the Department has revised its position. It now
intends to pursue an interim order in this
court for Child A to remain in
provisional protection and care and a final time‑limited protection order.
It proposes for the
sake of certainty that orders be made today that Child A
remain in provisional protection and care; on that basis, it would then
discontinue the proceedings in the Children's Court, including what would very
briefly be a parallel order for that provisional protection
father and mother have not adduced any evidence in the proceedings in this court
to date. They have not sought any relisting
to set aside or vary the orders
previously made. I acknowledge, of course, that their personal and emotional
resources would understandably
be focused on Child A and his circumstances, and
on the care of each other and their daughter.
father attended the registry of this court yesterday and tendered a bundle of
documents. While those documents are not formally
in evidence, in the
circumstances just described and in fairness to the father, I have reviewed them
so as to inform myself as to
his position in the matter. At the hearing this
morning, I confirmed with the father that the documents reflected the matters he
would wish the Court to consider. While the documents had not been provided to
the other parties, I briefly summarised them for
their benefit and the father
confirmed his acceptance of the accuracy of that summary. He made submissions
by reference to those
first bundle of documents are notes provided to the parents by Hospital A
setting out possible side-effects of medications which
are being administered to
Child A. The second bundle of documents are what are described by the father as
character references.
They comprise some 55 letters and emails from
friends and associates of the family, primarily addressed to the relevant
in the Children's Court, attesting to the personal qualities of the
parents, and to the quality of their care of Child A and his
third bundle is a document headed "German New Medicine" and entitled "The Five
Biological Laws." It was apparently presented
at the First International
Congress on Complementary and Alternative Medical Cancer Treatment in Spain in
2005. In its introduction,
the presentation is self-described as "the greatest
gift the Gods have ever given to mankind" while acknowledging that the author
was at that time "detained in a French prison" for reasons associated with its
practice. The Five Biological Laws are said to be
"applicable in equal measure
to human beings, animals and plants, even to single celled creatures – in
fact they apply to the
entire cosmos." The "Iron Rule of Cancer" is described
as having three criteria, and biological laws are described. By way of example
only, the document asserts that "a most important criterion in the German New
Medicine is the handedness of the patient," as the
appropriate response to
medical conditions described (including cancer) will differ depending on whether
the patient is right-handed
or left-handed.
document expresses the author's opinion that radiation therapy is "totally
useless" and that "selling chemo treatment as a therapy
is most likely the
biggest fraud in the entire history of medicine", going on to say that
"whoever masterminded this chemical torture
as 'therapy' deserves a monument in
his submissions the father emphasised that German New Medicine postulates that
undiagnosed and untreated trauma can cause cancer.
He referred to the
trauma Child A suffered when injured in a fall from a considerable height, and
separate trauma from the bushfires
in the [Regional Town A] area which
threatened his home in [year redacted]. It may be inferred that he would hold
that those traumas
caused or at least contributed to Child A's leukemia.
Indeed, the father referred to German New Medicine describing leukaemia as
a "self-devaluation conflict."
fourth bundle of documents may be broadly described as purported peer
reviews of, and endorsements of, "German New Medicine".
father's earlier statements to the effect that he had only interfered with Child
A's chemotherapy treatment because he and the
mother had been given inadequate
time to consider the recommendations made by the hospital, and that on
reflection he was supportive
of chemotherapy continuing, may fairly be viewed
against the background of the documents just described having been submitted by
him to the Court yesterday. In submissions he acknowledged his earlier
statements while saying he has changed his mind having undertaken
asked the father to make clear to me his position in relation to the orders
sought by CAHS. As anticipated, his firm position
is that Child A should
be immediately returned to the care of his mother and father, and that they
should have sole decision-making
responsibility as to all aspects of his life.
In that sense, he says that the provisional protection order should be
and the application of the Department dismissed. Further, he
maintains that Child A should not receive chemotherapy and the associated
treatments currently recommended by the treating doctors at Hospital A, and that
he and the mother should be at liberty to remove
Child A from hospital and take
him home immediately, and without the delay expense and stress associated with
further court hearings.
Accordingly, his clear position is that the application
of CAHS should also be dismissed.
the mother has not placed any evidence or other materials before the Court, she
was represented at this morning's hearing by
counsel. Her position may be
shortly expressed for the purposes of today's hearing. She maintains that Child
A should be returned
to the care of both parents, and that they should be solely
responsible for decision-making about him. She shares many, but not
all, of the
father's views and her counsel made it clear that her position should be
considered independently. She sought the opportunity
to file responding
documents and evidence, saying that she could do so within a week.
mother supported the proposition that any proceedings should continue in this
court, rather than the parties having to navigate
parallel proceedings in two
resiling in any sense from her primary position, the mother accepted that the
Court would likely consider it appropriate
to maintain the provisional
protection arrangements, and make orders to ensure that Child A's treatment
continues, pending any adjourned
hearing. That said, she resisted the
proposition that any orders should be made restraining her in the same terms as
those proposed
to restrain the father. Her counsel drew a clear distinction
between her interactions with hospital staff and those of the father.
He submitted that there was no evidentiary basis upon which an injunction
should be granted, and that the mother's ongoing interactions
with hospital
staff could be adversely affected by the perception created by the making of an
raised with counsel the possibility that in those circumstances his client might
give an enforceable undertaking in the same or
similar terms to the proposed
orders. Upon instructions, and with one reasonable exception, that undertaking
was given. Counsel
confirmed that a formal written undertaking in those terms
will be prepared and will be filed after the mother meets with her lawyers
The Independent Children's Lawyer
ICL filed a Minute of Proposed Interim Orders overnight. She proposes a
continuation of Child A's provisional protection and
care in the short term.
She proposes a raft of injunctions broadly consistent with those set out in the
application filed yesterday
by CAHS. As already noted, after
conferral, counsel for CAHS accepted the proposition that pending a further
hearing, and with only
minor modifications, the orders proposed by the ICL were
appropriate and the further orders proposed by CAHS need not be made at
this stage.
Disposition
am comfortably persuaded that orders and injunctions necessary to secure Child
A's ongoing treatment should be made. Given the
difficulties associated with
the fact that there are concurrent proceedings in this court and the Children's
Court, and the short
notice with which the application of CAHS has come before
this court, the orders to be made today will be limited to those necessary
secure the position in the short-term. That will afford the father and mother
the opportunity to make any further application
they may wish to make, or to
submit proper evidence.
father's actions to date, the materials upon which he sought to rely today, and
his submissions make it very clear that absent
those protections he will remove
Child A from hospital, discontinue his chemotherapy treatment, and take him home
to Regional Town
A. He would then propose to nurture Child A with
biodynamic food, sunshine and fresh air, combined with the care of family. He
said that if Child A deteriorated, he and the mother would want the option to
reengage with the hospital. In short, the evidence
to date does not support any
confidence that they would do so. The evidence of Dr C that continuing
chemotherapy is essential to
Child A's sustained recovery, notwithstanding the
positive results so far, need not be repeated. The father's belief that
the pleasing
results of Child A's most recent lumbar puncture indicate that he
requires no further chemotherapy, and that the recommendations
of the hospital
are simply based in a mindless and strict adherence to a protocol rather than
individualised treatment, is not supported
by the evidence.
immediate purposes, any proper differentiation between the views and actions of
the father and the mother does not inform the
steps to be taken. That is
so, as the relationship between those parties remains intact, and they both
agree that the plan they
would advance is to return with Child A to their home
in Regional Town A, and care for him together.
propose to make orders in terms of the Minute filed by the ICL, with minor
exceptions.
accept the undertaking of the mother in terms of certain of the orders sought
and do not propose to make orders directed to her
in the same terms.
accept the submission of counsel for the mother that the proposed injunction
restraining the father and mother from discussing
the court proceedings with or
in Child A's presence or within the hearing of Child B is unrealistic in the
circumstances. Child
A is already aware of the conflict and is no doubt aware
at least in general terms that there are court proceedings on foot. He
expressed his own views, and will ask questions of the father and mother as to
why he is remaining in hospital and continuing
to receive chemotherapy.
I accept that, within reason, those questions should be
answered honestly.
difficulties associated with the concurrent proceedings need to be addressed,
primarily by the Department. I was assured by
counsel that the necessary steps
will be taken at the next hearing in the Children's Court [in mid] September
father and mother will now need to file appropriate documents in this court to
address the pending applications which they seek
to resist. They will each
need to file a formal response in the form available on the court's website, and
any affidavit upon which
they would intend to rely. I make it clear for the
benefit of the father that, notwithstanding the reference made by him and in
these Reasons to documents presented by him to the Court Registry yesterday,
those documents are not in evidence. He would do well
to seek legal advice,
including as to the requirements of proven expertise for opinion evidence to be
admissible or afforded any
pronounced.
These reasons are the reasons for decision delivered on 12 September 2025
edited in places but only as to correct grammatical errors
and some infelicity
of expression without variation to the substance thereof.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
15 SEPTEMBER 2025
The father has indicated that
both his surname and Child A's are spelled "[redacted]". No birth certificate
for Child A is presently
filed. I adopt the spelling used in the documents
filed and orders made to date both in this court and in the Children's Court,
and mean no disrespect to the father and Child A in doing
During the proceedings the
father has expressed strong views as to terminology and references used for
individuals. He does not
recognise the appellation "Mr" or any similar title.
He rejects any reference to himself or the mother as a "parent", explaining
[Child A] is their property and they do not "pay rent"
Adolescent Health Service and Chief Executive Officer of Department of
Communities & Ors
[2025] FCWA
This word is circled in
the original.
It appears from
the document that the author's entitlement to practice medicine has long been
revoked by the relevant authorities.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (238 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter