URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/213.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TAGGART and TAGGART & ORS (SUBPOENA COSTS) [2024] FCWA 213 (20 September 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
TAGGART and TAGGART & ORS (SUBPOENA COSTS)
[2024] FCWA
DELIVERED :
20 SEPTEMBER 2024
FILE NO/S :
5100 of 2020
First Respondent
MR TAGGART JNR
Second Respondent
Subpoena Objector
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE -
Reimbursement of subpoena compliance costs - Where named party seeks the issuing
party pay external legal
costs following subpoena objection - Where head of
power not identified - Where named party challenged subpoena after production
date, produced redacted documents without leave, withdrew objection, then raised
further objections without standing after objection
dismissed - Where only
objection properly before the Court was devoid of merit - Where named party was
in default of the subpoena
for over 5 months - Where only reasonable and
substantial expense incurred is a partial charge for collating documents - Order
for unredacted documents to be produced within 24 hours
Subpoena proceedings - Where issuing party seeks a costs order against the named
party - Where Court significantly concerned
named party has sought to obfuscate
the substantive proceedings - Where subpoena issues have dominated numerous
hearings - Where
named party’s conduct as a participant in judicial
process justifies costs order - Consideration of appropriate quantum of
order - Where itemised bill not filed - Where costs schedule produced pursuant
Family Court Rules 2021
(WA) sch 2 - Where Court fixes a specified amount of
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Representation:
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Subpoena Objector
Solicitors:
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Subpoena Objector
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES' NAMES
AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Taggart and Taggart
has been approved by the
Family Court of Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family
law proceedings.
Court is called upon to determine a Form 2 Application filed on behalf of
[Company A] [in] August 2024 ("the Form 2") in which
seeks reimbursement for the reasonable expenses of complying with a subpoena
issued to it by the first respondent
, [Ms Taggart],
on 2 February 2024.
wife strongly opposes [Company A's] application. Although not an order formally
sought by her, it is implied from her affidavit
in support that she seeks the
Form 2 be dismissed. She seeks that a costs order be made against Company A
for the legal fees she
has incurred.
other parties to the proceedings are the applicant
[Mr Taggart], and the second respondent, [Mr Taggart Jnr] (age 22),
who is the parties' adult son.
A is registered in Mr Taggart Jnr's name; he is the sole director and member of
the company, and has, on the husband's evidence,
unfettered control of it.
According to the husband, he is purportedly an employee of Mr Taggart
Relevant law
head of power relied on by Company A was not clarified.
that reason, I have contemplated both the power found in the
Family Court Rules
") to reimburse a named party and the costs power pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
wife's application can only be founded on the Court's power to make
costs orders.
Conduct money and reimbursement
Company A foreshadowed its application, its counsel referred to the Court's
powers set out in r 250, which provides as follows:
money and witness fees
(1) A named person is entitled
to be paid conduct money by the issuing party at the time of service of the
subpoena, of an amount
(a) sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of complying with the subpoena;
(b) at least equal to the minimum amount mentioned in Schedule 3
Division 1.
(3) A named person may apply to be reimbursed if the named person incurs a
substantial loss or expense that is greater than the amount
of the conduct money
or witness fee payable under this rule.
A's case at that time was that the conduct money paid by the wife was
insufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of complying
with the subpoena, and
therefore it does not have an obligation to comply. For reasons which will
become apparent, I reject that
submission. For these purposes, I have considered
the Form 2 as an application pursuant to sub‑r (3), being an
application
for reimbursement if it has incurred a substantial loss or
Historically
conduct money was paid to meet the named party's costs of getting the subpoenaed
documents to the Court, which is less
of an issue in a digital world where
documents are uploaded to the e-file. It may also reasonably extend to the
expenses associated
with finding and collating the documents, particularly if
the subpoena has complexity to it, and in certain circumstances, legal
use of the phrase "reasonable expenses" requires an issuing party attempt to
estimate what the expenses may be. Where the material
called for is such that it
is likely to be readily available, such as records likely to be kept in an
organised filing system, there
is no reason to estimate the costs of compliance
will be anything other than
is the general practice of this Court that, provided named persons have been
paid the minimum amount of conduct money under the
, and the process of
collating the documents is not overly complex or taxing, the named party is
required to produce all the documents
set out in the schedule to the subpoena
that they have in their possession or control in an unredacted form. This
applies regardless
of whether an objection to the subpoena is lodged or
otherwise observe that if every named party refused to comply with a subpoena
until it was satisfied it had received reasonable
remuneration
documents being produced, many proceedings would grind to a halt, which would do
little for the administration of justice, which
subpoenaed parties are called to
is open to the named person to bring an application under sub‑r (3)
to be reimbursed. This is a more widely based sum owing
to the "loss" component
and is far more likely to encompass external costs, such as legal advice and
representation, as distinct
from the internal cost of identifying and collating
the documents.
considering whether a particular claimed loss is a "reasonable expense" of
complying with the subpoena such that it constitutes
a "substantial loss or
expense, I have had regard to Cronin J's comments in
and Murphy J
Lavell & Lavell
[2012] FamCA
They can be summarised as
determination of
what is "substantial" is very subjective and involves the exercise of
discretionary judgment;
either an unusual activity or cause an unfair inconvenience having regard to the
fact the recipient has nothing to do with
the litigation;
although the
Rules are not intended to cause a loss of income or capital, the Rules refer to
a "substantial expense" which must be
determined in each case;
if the subpoena
is simple and clear requiring the production of the recipient's own documents,
the inconvenience is intended and expected
to be minimal;
the ordinary
charge rate for the named party is not envisaged; and
reimbursement claimed must be for a loss or expense other than the minimal or
ordinary and is to be a partial compensation for
being drawn into the process of
administration of justice.
any event, the costs power in
can be used to cure any
potential injustice worked by the operation of the subpoena rules.
Court has a broad discretion in costs matters, however there are two primary
matters for determination:
(a) whether there are circumstances which justify departing from the ordinary
rule that each party shall bear their own costs; and
(b) what order for costs is just.
is not the law that a costs order can only be made in what has been described as
"a clear case". Although a finding of justifying
circumstances is an essential
preliminary consideration to the making of a costs order, there is no additional
or "special" onus
on an applicant for an order for costs. An order for costs is
made to compensate a party against expenses incurred in litigation
punitive in nature.
matters I am required to turn my mind to when considering a costs order are set
weight to be given to the various factors referred to in
is a matter for the Court. All the factors, however, must be considered and
balanced when considering whether the overall circumstances
justify the making
of a costs order.
On the other
hand, there is nothing to prevent any one of the factors being the sole
foundation for an order for costs.
disparity in financial resources between parties to family law litigation can
sometimes justify an order for costs in favour of
the party with fewer financial
At the same time, the
apparent inability of a party to pay costs is not a bar to a costs order being
made in circumstances where,
for example, that party's conduct as a litigant
warrant such an order.
is well settled that
s 117(2A)(e)
refers to a situation where
proceedings as a whole have been unsuccessful, for example, where an application
without merit has been
An application is not wholly unsuccessful simply because a notice of
discontinuance is filed; without being heard and determined,
there has not been
a full assessment of the application's
sets out the options available to the Court in calculating costs, in particular
fixing costs at a specific amount, or to
be assessed or calculated on a
particular basis. The purpose in all rules of court enabling an order for costs
in a specific amount
without formal assessment or taxation is to "avoid the
expense, delay and aggravation involved in protracted litigation arising out
is within this framework I am required to determine the competing applications.
is convenient to deal with the submissions made by both parties having regard to
the chronology, as the sequence of events has
informed my determination about
both issues.
The Objection
the time of service of the subpoena, the wife paid Company A conduct money
of $25, being the minimum amount to be paid pursuant
. There was no
reason for the wife to estimate that the reasonable costs of compliance would
exceed this amount, as the documents
sought were ordinary business records.
did not produce documents prior to the date of production of
6 March 2024. The limitation period under the Rules to set
subpoena or apply for any other relief in relation to the subpoena expired
on 6 March 2024.
Notwithstanding
this, and in the absence of a request for an extension of time, the Court
accepted an incomplete Part F Objection
to the subpoena filed on
19 March 2024 by Mr Taggart Jnr on behalf of Company A
("the Objection"). Mr Taggart Jnr failed to mark
a checkbox indicating the
relief he sought. However, as the stated grounds for resisting the subpoena were
relevance and fishing,
the Court treated it as an application to set aside the
subpoena. The objection was listed to [late] April 2024 for determination
("the First Objection Hearing").
objection to production does not operate as a stay on subpoena obligation, which
remains in force.
To the extent
counsel for Company A suggested this was not apparent on the face of the
subpoena to a self‑represented litigant,
I reject the submission. The note
immediately under the checkboxes for relief sought indicates what obligation is
stayed: the right
of inspection. Further, upon Company A instructing a
solicitor, it was incumbent on its solicitors to advise the company it was in
breach of the subpoena, assist it in rectifying that breach, and draw Mr Taggart
Jnr's attention to the consequences for non-compliance
which are also clearly
set out on the face of the subpoena.
of the significant issues to be resolved in the financial proceedings is the
true ownership of Company A. It is the wife's case
that it is in fact the
husband, not Mr Taggart Jnr, who is the legitimate owner of the company. She
says the husband has full control
of the company and makes all decisions about
the running of it, including about the company's finances, which includes
distribution
adopt and incorporate the relevant section of my judgment in the parenting
proceedings
into these, as it
sets out the factual background relevant to the husband and Mr Taggart Jnr's
interest in Company A; in particular
findings made by the Child Support
Agency and AAT, which were adopted by
In short, I was satisfied
the husband had engaged in the exercise of alienating a business that once
belonged to him by putting it
through a different corporate structure held by Mr
Taggart Jnr in order to seem as if his income and assets were less than what
actually were. My findings of financial abuse, supported by the
Child Support Agency and AAT's findings about the true ownership
Company A, are highly relevant to the wife's case in the financial
proceedings.
those reasons, it should be clear the Court is of the view that the documents
sought by the wife had apparent
and there was a
legitimate forensic purpose for the
The Objection had no
The First Objection Hearing
the First Objection Hearing, the Court permitted an adjournment as sought by
counsel for Company A, [Counsel C] of [Law Firm C],
on the basis
that he had only recently obtained instructions. At his request, the Court
directed the wife's lawyers, [Law Firm B],
to provide Law Firm C a
copy of my parenting judgment and her application for final orders.
Mr Taggart Jnr was also given leave to
file an affidavit in response, and
the solicitors for Company A and the wife were to confer about the documents
sought. No extension
of time or suspension of the subpoena obligation was sought
on behalf of Company A, and so it remained in default without reasonable
Taggart Jnr filed no affidavit in response and the parties' solicitors did not
meaningfully confer, notwithstanding the documents
having been provided to Law
Firm C, and the wife clarifying her position about how the Court should deal
with the company, around
one month prior to the
23 May 2024, Counsel C again raised the issue of forensic relevance in
a letter to [Counsel B] but advised Law Firm C would take
instructions from
their client about whether an approach could be adopted which could see the
matter resolved without the need to
proceed with the second subpoena objection
B provided a reply the following day; in summary, he asked Law Firm C to confirm
their client had the appropriate business
records covered by the terms of the
subpoena and whether they would be produced. Counsel B rightly, in my view,
highlighted Company
A's obligations to produce the documents and argue
relevance later.
not received a reply from Law Firm C, Counsel B sent a further letter to Law
Firm C on 5 June 2024 enquiring whether Company
A intended to
produce the documents sought under the subpoena or if the objection was
maintained, and if so, he requested an explanation
be provided as to the grounds
of the objection.
Firm C wrote to Law Firm B two days prior to the adjourned hearing advising
they had produced documents, made some redactions
and sought the hearing be
vacated by consent. Law Firm B indicated the wife was not prepared to do so
without seeing an itemised
schedule of what had been produced and indicated the
redaction issue may need to be dealt with separately.
The Second Objection Hearing
Objection was dismissed with Company A's consent at the second objection hearing
[in mid] June 2024 ("the Second Objection Hearing").
[Solicitor A] of Law
Firm C appeared for Company A and confirmed documents had been produced with
some redactions, the extent of
which I was led to believe was minor and related
to some third-party names and contact details, to which I expressed concern.
is important for me to stress that at no stage was any application ever made on
behalf of Company A for leave to redact the documents
produced pursuant to the
subpoena, either in part or full. Nor did I make any order or direction that
permitted Mr Taggart Jnr, his
lawyers, or either of their agents to do so.
comment to Solicitor A about it being unusual for redaction to take place prior
to the Court giving leave should not have been
taken as the Court's approval for
such action to have been undertaken. It was, having been given the impression
that only minor redaction
had taken place, a simple observation that I hoped
would convey a pointed and serious message.
Court expects legal practitioners, as officers of the Court, not to authorise,
permit or cause any redaction of subpoenaed documents
prior to the Court
granting leave to do so.
fact redacted documents were produced to the Court at all, without said leave,
is troubling. I was also concerned when I was
advised a legal practice director
had accepted instructions from their client to do so and directed another member
of the practice
to perform the redactions.
Irrespectively,
with the dismissal of the Objection, Company A no longer had standing to be
heard in respect of production and inspection.
The Court, without
objection, made an unqualified order for inspection by the parties, their
lawyers, and any single expert witness.
seriousness of the redaction conduct, which only came to light approximately
six weeks later, was magnified by the degree of
redaction that had actually
taken place and the nature of the documents redacted.
5 August 2024, the wife's solicitors wrote to the Court seeking a
relisting of the proceedings on the basis that approximately
145 pages of
bank statements produced by Company A had the details of every transaction
redacted. According to Counsel B, his office
had attempted to confer with Law
Firm C on five separate occasions about the issue without receipt of any
substantive reply.
C and Law Firm C should have known that the degree of redaction undertaken on
the instruction of Company A rendered those
documents entirely useless to the
parties, their solicitors and, if not remedied, quite possibly the Court. It was
incumbent on the
company's legal representatives to advise against those
instructions.
The Compliance Hearing
matter was listed on an urgent basis into an already busy court list [in mid]
August 2024 ("the Compliance Hearing"), as the
Court had set down the
interim hearing in the financial proceedings for [mid] September 2024, and
the husband and wife, who agree
essential for:
Company A to
have fully complied with the subpoena;
the husband and
wife to have had the opportunity to review the same before the interim hearing;
the documents
were likely to be highly relevant to any single expert witness appointed to
value Company A, which was an important
step in advancing the substantive
proceedings.
Court did not have the capacity to deal with the various issues being agitated
by Counsel C on behalf of Company C. From the
Court's perspective, Counsel C's
lack of concern about the following matters was, frankly, extraordinary:
his client's
default in complying with the subpoena, then for some five months;
the redaction
without leave of the Court;
the manner in
which the Court had been led to believe all outstanding issues had been
resolved; and
introducing not
one, but two new issues about why his client would not comply, which he
seemingly asserted ought to have been raised
by Counsel B.
stood the matter down so the solicitors could confer, noting it was a busy list.
They subsequently returned with a minute of consent
orders ("the Consent
Minute"), which I incorporated into the following order:
With the consent of the Applicant, [MR TAGGART], the First Respondent, [MS
TAGGART], and the Subpoena Objector, [COMPANY A], and
not with the consent but
not opposed by the Second Respondent, [MR TAGGART JNR]:
(a) Without admission as to need, the Applicant, Second Respondent and First
Respondent shall be restrained by injunction and an
injunction is hereby granted
retraining them from disclosing any information that they may become aware of
during these proceedings
to any third party other than for the purposes of legal
or financial advice.
(b) Without admission as to need, the First Respondent shall be restrained from
other than by a legal
practitioner.
(c) Without admission as to need, the Applicant, First Respondent and Second
Respondent be restrained from communicating with any
of the other parties'
business contacts other than:
(i) in the course of their business; or
(ii) through a legal practitioner
parties were otherwise given orders programming the matter to the interim
hearing, anticipating Company A and the wife's
applications.
Company A's case
now turn to the specific arguments advanced on behalf of Company A.
Reasonable expenses, confidentiality and commercial
sensitivity
adopted a position at the Compliance Hearing that his client was not required to
produce unredacted documents until its
"reasonable expenses" were met. I reject
the submission. The caveat to the obligation to comply with a subpoena only
applies if conduct
money is not paid at the time of service, or prior to the
date of production. If Company A had incurred a substantial loss or
greater than the conduct money, it was open to apply to be
reimbursed,
not refuse to comply
with the subpoena.
Taggart Jnr's evidence about this issue is limited to a letter sent by Law Firm
C to Law Firm B on 16 August 2024. The minute
was accepted into
evidence at the costs hearing, with an express waiver of legal professional
In essence, the
minute proposed to extend the date of production for the unredacted bank
statements for a further seven days and
no order as to costs. I am not
satisfied this was a reasonable offer to settle any extant issues, as Company A
was required to produce
these documents in any event and had been in default for
some five months; it was Company A and its solicitors' conduct that
necessitated
a further hearing.
A also introduced a confidentiality and commercial sensitivity argument, which
had not been raised before the Court. The
context for the same is set out
at [15]-[26] of Mr Taggart Jnr's affidavit.
is not sufficient that these grounds were being pursued outside the Court prior
to and following the Objection being withdrawn;
in the absence of amending or
refiling Company A's Part F Objection in the Court prior to the Objection
being dismissed, the company
had waived its right to argue the issue at a later
date. This "back channel" discussion, if any, appears to have been resolved by
Company A or Law Firm C making a "captain's call" about what objections the
Court would have notice of and be in a position to determine.
As part of that
process, Law Firm C or Company A arbitrarily decided what information the wife
should have access to, based on a
ground of objection that was not before
now to the substantive merits of the argument. In short, Mr Taggart Jnr was
witness to a phone call in or around May 2020
between the husband and a
client of the husband's now-wound-up company, Company B. The client indicated he
would not continue working
with that company because the wife had allegedly
the evidence is contested, I am not satisfied this event gave rise to an
objectively reasonable concern which ought to be
protected by the Court.
It relates to one phone call four years ago during a particularly caustic
time in Mr Taggart Jnr's parents'
bitter separation. Further, it was not Company
A that lost its client, and there is no evidence suggesting the wife has
any of its clients nor interfered with the proper running of the
would not have relieved Company A from complying with the subpoena, nor
permitted any redaction on this basis. The very real prejudice
to the husband
and wife's respective cases and the Court's capacity to do justice as and
between the parties would have outweighed
any potential prejudice to the
the issue been properly ventilated before the Court, it could have made various
orders, if it deemed it necessary to do so, to
ameliorate those concerns.
However, the failure to properly bring the confidentiality and commercial
sensitivity concern to the Court's
attention at the Second Objection
Hearing, which was when the issue ought to have been raised and dealt with, may
amount to a breach
of Law Firm C's professional obligation to ensure cases are
resolved in a just and timely manner at a cost which is reasonable in
circumstances. The Court cannot fulfil its obligations under the Rules to deal
with as many aspects of a case as possible if
the issue in dispute have not been
brought to the attention of the Court.
concerns were raised by Law Firm C at the Second Objection Hearing about conduct
money, substantial loss or expense, or
Nor were concerns raised
on behalf of the company, in particular about confidentiality or commercial
sensitivity. These arguments,
though dealt with in the Court only by way of the
Consent Minute, were unreasonable. The fact the husband and wife's solicitors
prepared to confer with Law Firm C about this when they had no obligation
to do so speaks to their pragmatism more than anything.
issues were only introduced after the Objection had been withdrawn, and only
served to necessitate Company A and the parties
having to deal with the
subpoena issues on a further two occasions.
they are argued in support of costs against the wife, the material before the
Court suggest it was Company A and its solicitors
who drove up the costs
associated with the exercise.
Failure to argue non-compliance
was submitted on behalf of Company A, in essence, that because the wife's
solicitors did not inspect the documents in the two
days between production and
to the Objection being withdrawn, it was her failure to argue non-compliance at
the Second Objection
Hearing that drove up costs and that she ought to be
estopped from agitating the issue.
seemed there may have been some confusion about how electronically produced
subpoena items are handled via the
eCourts Portal.
material may be lodged through the "Upload Requested Items" portal as per the
Court's directions on the subpoena instruction
notice. These documents are not
placed on the court file, nor is any party to the proceedings or the presiding
judicial officer notified
of their lodgement. The documents are automatically
hidden from inspection on the eCourts Portal and are manually made available
electronic inspection by the Subpoena Office. In the case where there is no
objection, the relevant officers will grant access
no less than three days
after the issuing party files a Notice of Request to Inspect. If a
Part F Objection is filed however, the
Subpoena Office will not assign
inspection permissions until the Court determines the objection and provides a
direction. For the
avoidance of doubt, covering letters to produced documents
are not passed on to the presiding judicial officer.
Company A withdrew the Objection and the Court made directions to the Subpoena
Office, no party or solicitor could inspect
any of the documents produced by the
company, including the covering letter. Any argument that Law Firm B drove
up costs, or that
the wife should be estopped from arguing non-compliance, on
this basis is strongly rejected.
fact this argument was repeated at the costs hearing, notwithstanding it was
already dealt with at the Compliance Hearing, was
inappropriate to say
it conflates the issue of an objection to production with the monitoring of
compliance. I raised this with Counsel C at
the hearing and put to him that
this cannot be correct as it would have the consequence that the issuing party
and the Court would
lose the ability to enforce its subpoena. His response was
convoluted and with respect, I did not understand the submission.
Specific costs incurred
A has incurred legal costs totalling $16,867.40, which it seeks be paid by the
wife on an indemnity basis. In the alternative,
it claims the amount should be
calculated in accordance with schedule 2 of the
, being $12,180.43 and
provides a schedule calculating the same. These charges do not include
preparing the costs application but
do include attending the costs hearing.
convenience, I refer to the charges at the scale rate, noting there is no
itemised bill.
to the Second Objection Hearing and incorporating a charge of $75.65 for reading
the extracted orders from that hearing (the
sole relevance to Company A
being the order discharging the subpoena by consent), the total costs incurred
by Company A was $10,251.85.
Parenting judgment
that amount, $7,448.57 relates to reading the parenting judgment, of which only
approximately 40 paragraphs relate to the husband's
circumstances with Mr
Taggart Jnr and Company A. Whilst I appreciate Counsel C was required to
familiarise himself with the matter
in order to provide Company A with legal
advice, the extent to which he considered the balance of the parenting reasons
to the subpoena issue was ultimately an issue for him, presumably in
consultation with his client. My parenting judgment should only
have served to
reinforce to Counsel C why the subpoena was entirely appropriate in the
circumstances, and further, why any objection
on the grounds of relevance and
fishing were devoid of merit.
Counsel C submitted the charge was at the scale rate, I cannot accept this was a
reasonable amount. There is absolutely no
reason for the wife to be responsible
for this particular charge, in part or in full, and Counsel C's client may wish
to query the
reasonableness of it.
deducting that charge, the legal costs incurred by Company A up to and including
the Second Objection Hearing, were approximately
Follow-up and conferral
noted above at [34], there was no meaningful conferral between Law Firm C and
Law Firm B in the two months between the First and
Second Objection
hearing. Counsel C asserts this was because of the wife's failure to promptly
provide the documents required. I
do not accept this to be the case.
Firm B provided the parenting reasons, the Form 1A Response, and latest
minute of final property orders sought on 2 May 2024,
less than a week
after the hearing. At an initial conferral on 8 May, Counsel C had not read
the parenting reasons and no agreement
was reached. Law Firm C then followed up
an Amended Form 1A Response, which was provided less than a week later and
a month prior
to the subpoena hearing. On 24 May and 5 June 2024,
Law Firm B wrote to Law Firm C inviting them to confer. I note the next
correspondence
adduced by Mr Taggart Jnr is the covering letter to the subpoena
lodgement on 13 June 2024.
consider it was Law Firm C who drove up the costs between 3 May and
13 June 2024, as the parenting reasons ought to have been sufficient
to understand the wife's financial case. Had the reasons, which had been
requested and provided, been read prior to the conferral,
no costs may have
needed to be incurred.
total cost for the bundle of communications in that period is $382.61; the wife
should not be responsible for Company A's solicitors
not being prepared to
meaningfully engage in the conferral process.
Letter to the Court
is a charge of $168.51 for drafting and producing a letter to the Court raised
on 23 May 2024. I could not identify this letter
on the Court file,
nor could my Associate identify an email to Chambers, nor is it annexed to Mr
Taggart Jnr's affidavit.
the circumstances where the Court cannot identify the actual work charged for, I
would not consider it appropriate for the wife
to be responsible for the
Review and collation of documents
only charge relating to reviewing and compiling the documents was $440.21 on
5 June 2024. I cannot identify a charge for redaction,
actually producing the documents to the Court, so I consider this charge must
necessarily include to those matters.
Charges incurred after [Second Objection Hearing]
[late] June and [mid] September 2024, being the "compliance and
costs phase" of the subpoena dispute, Law Firm C charged
$1,997.95, including
attending at the costs hearing.
Conclusion as to Company A's application
will first consider the Form 2 as an application under r 250(3) to be
reimbursed for a substantial loss or expense greater than
the amount of conduct
money payable.
Taggart Jnr provides no evidence about any internal costs of compliance incurred
by Company A associated with him, or another
employee of the company, or even an
accountant being called on, to assist in the identification, collation, and
production of the
documents to Law Firm C.
only evidence about this cost is contained in the schedule for which Company A
was billed $440.21 for "reviewing and collating
the documents for the purpose of
producing them to the Court", which according to Solicitor A would also have
included redaction.
to the schedule, it took a lawyer (or clerk of a lawyer) approximately 2.7 hours
to undertake this work. Having regard
to the scope of the documents to be
produced, I do not consider this to be an unreasonable expense. However, I do
not accept that
Company A should be entitled to this full amount, as it should
not be reimbursed for any time spent in the redaction of documents
where it was
not permitted to do so. I would exercise my discretion to reduce this
charge to two hours of work, which at the scale
rate recorded, would equal
approximately $326 and consider that a reasonable and substantial expense
which should be payable by the
noted above, I have rejected charges for:
reading the
parenting judgment;
communications between 3 May and 13 June 2024; and
the seemingly
unfiled letter to the Court.
turn now to the balance of the expenses incurred by Company A in complying with
the subpoena, which relate to legal advice, negotiations
and court attendances.
The question is whether the amount claimed is reasonable in the circumstances of
the case. In answering this
question, I have also turned my mind to the
underlying principles which guide the Court in determining an application for
costs pursuant
, which are set out in my
consideration of the wife's application for costs.
the legal principles and legislative considerations set out above, I am not
satisfied that any additional legal costs claimed
by Company A should borne by
have reached this conclusion for various
of the matters noted by Cronin J in
and Murphy J in
was that the purpose of the Rules was to balance the unfair
inconvenience of, or compensation for, a subpoena recipient, being a
stranger to
the proceedings and drawn into the process of the administration of
A cannot claim to be an unfortunate unrelated entity drawn into a litigation
that has nothing to do with it. It is alleged
to be a willing accomplice to the
husband in escaping his obligations and a vehicle for hiding assets, income, and
expenses. Both
Mr Taggart Jnr and Company A are implicated in
this allegation.
A went to great lengths to stress Mr Taggart Jnr, in his capacity as proper
officer of Company A, was distinct from Mr Taggart
Jnr, in his
personal capacity as Second Respondent. I accept the distinction in legal
persona. However, he is a party to a financial
case, and his financial
circumstances insofar as they relate to Company A (as a company under his sole
control) are relevant to the
issues in dispute. Pursuant to his obligation to
provide full and frank disclosure he was and remains required to disclose all
in his possession and control that relate to him or any entity that is
fully or partially controlled by him.
the absence of Mr Taggart Jnr's compliance with his disclosures obligations and
having regard to the issues in dispute, the wife
had little choice but to issue
the subpoena. It cannot be an abuse of process to seek that a third-party entity
provide documents
by subpoena when the person in control of that entity refuses
to voluntarily comply with his disclosure obligations.
was Mr Taggart Jnr's right and his choice to obtain legal advice about the
subpoena to Company A. However, the only actual objection
lodged by him on
behalf of Company A was entirely devoid of merit and would have been dismissed
by me in any event, had the documents
not been produced prior to the
Second Objection Hearing. In fact, the Objection was for all intents and
purposes withdrawn and the
documents were voluntarily
expense incurred by Company A in advancing the confidentiality issue after Law
Firm C withdrew the Objection are costs the company
should be responsible for.
The husband and wife had no obligation to entertain those concerns after Law
Firm C asserted substantial
compliance and withdrew the Objection; it is a
credit to their pragmatism that the parties' solicitors did so. Further,
Company C's
confidentiality argument, at least as advanced in these costs
proceedings, had no merit.
regard to the facts of this case, I am not satisfied there was any reasonable
grounds upon which Company A could have objected
to the production or inspection
of the documents.
was no justifiable ground argued which warranted the documents being redacted,
in any manner, particularly without leave of
the Court. Whilst names and phone
numbers were redacted from tender documents, to which the wife did not object,
it was entirely
inappropriate for 145 pages of bank statements to be redacted in
the manner that they were. The Court is concerned it was an attempt
to withhold
crucial information for the wife's case and contrary to the interests
of justice.
entire exercise of the subpoena proceedings has been a complete waste of the
Court's limited resources, unnecessarily increased
the husband and wife's legal
costs, and arguably of most importance in a high conflict case such as this,
caused a significant delay
in the parties being in a position to advance the
litigation they both want to see finalised.
am very concerned steps were taken to obfuscate and delay Company A's obligation
to produce the documents in compliance with the
subpoena and question the
competence of the advice provided to the company, particularly in respect to the
redaction issue.
I am satisfied Company A did incur a substantial and reasonable expense above
the conduct money paid to it, being the $326
incurred to collate and review the
documents for production to the Court, minus any conduct money already
the event it has not already done so, Company A will be required to produce all
of the documents previously uploaded to the Court
file in an unredacted form
within 24 hours from the date of publication of this order.
otherwise intend to dismiss the Form 2 application filed
[in]August 2024.
Wife's application for costs
now turn to the wife's costs application against Company A.
to my orders [in mid] August 2024, the wife filed her Form 2A
response [in early] September 2024. She seeks an order that
Company A pay her costs fixed in the amount of $11,677.43, with said
payment to be made in seven days.
support of her application, the wife relies on an affidavit of herself filed on
the same date.
wife has not provided the Court with a copy of the costs agreement she has
entered into with her solicitors. She filed a schedule
of costs pursuant to
schedule 2 of the Rules on the morning of the costs hearing, which were
calculated to $5,522.
I understand it, she is seeking her costs be paid on a
party‑party basis.
have canvassed many of the issues raised by the wife in her affidavit in my
consideration of Company A's costs application, which
will not be repeated
The financial circumstances of each of the parties to the
proceedings
wife has not filed a Form 13 Financial Statement since
16 May 2022. However, I am aware from my fairly longstanding
involvement
with the proceedings that she is unable to work for medical reasons
and is reliant on Centrelink benefits, child support paid by
the husband, some
minor share dividends and ad-hoc interim property payments she has received
along the way to support herself and
the children.
only financial information the Court has about Company A is as set out in the
parenting reasons, in particular the findings made
by the Child Support Agency
and AAT that Mr Taggart Jnr is running a company that generated a gross income
of approximately $465,151.80.
The financial strength of the company was further
highlighted during the trial when the father gave evidence about Mr Taggart Jnr
giving him an undisclosed bonus just prior to the trial commencing of
$30,000 (net) and the various international holidays Mr Taggart
taken that year. I infer Mr Taggart Jnr would not have authorised the
bonus payment to his father, or spent money on travel,
if it were not
financially viable for the company or himself to do so.
I do not have any updating information about the financial circumstances of
Company A, there is no evidence to suggest the
company has suffered a downturn
or is no longer performing as it has in previous years. I otherwise observe Mr
Taggart Jnr felt comfortable
enough about the company's finances to instruct a
law firm to represent it, which he would not have done if he had not felt
am satisfied the company has funds to draw on to meet a cost order if made
against it.
Whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of
assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that
to that party
is not a relevant consideration.
The conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to
the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery,
inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions
of facts, production of
documents and similar matters
is important to bear in mind that the terms of
s 117(2A)(c)
refers to the
conduct of parties within the litigation, rather than their personal conduct
more broadly.
should be apparent from my earlier comments that I consider Company A has acted
in a manner which warrant a costs order being
made against it.
company should have produced the documents on or before the production date and
the Objection should have been withdrawn promptly
once Company A had obtained
legal advice. Instead, what followed was a trickle feed of objections with the
company having wonton
disregard for its standing to be further heard about the
subpoena after the Objection was withdrawn.
is unacceptable that the substantive issues in dispute were unable to be
advanced because five months of time was committed to
dealing with a simple
subpoena objection, which was first listed for determination [in]
April 2024.
do not consider the Consent Minute a "win" for Company A but a pragmatic
position adopted by the wife and husband in an attempt
to move matters along in
order to avoid further delay. If the confidentiality issue was as important to
the company as it purported
it to be, the Objection should have been amended or
a Further Part F - Notice of Objection filed. In the absence of doing so, and
upon the Objection being dismissed, the company may view the money spent on
legal fees securing the Consent Minute money well spent.
also have regard to the unauthorised redaction of subpoenaed material, which was
done by Law Firm C on instructions from its client
and to this date has not been
have real concern that the approach adopted by the company was designed to
obfuscate and delay its compliance with a properly issued
subpoena for the
production of documents that were highly relevant to the proceedings, and where
many of the documents being sought
should have been produced by Mr Taggart Jnr
in any event, in compliance with his disclosure obligations.
am also troubled by the wife's assertion that Company A purported not to have
documents in its possession, which when cross-referenced
with other material,
appears to be incorrect. This will no doubt be explored further at the trial,
and if the wife's allegation can
be established, significant consequences may
follow for Mr Taggart Jnr, in his capacity as director of the company.
Whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of
a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of a court
Company A is a distinct legal entity in its own right, Mr Taggart Jnr, as
the sole director and the Second Respondent, had
an obligation to provide full
and frank disclosure of all documents in his position relevant to the
proceedings, which extended to
any entity owned or controlled by him. In
addition to this general duty of disclosure, Mr Taggart Jnr has failed to
comply with a
single order made for him to file documents or provide
disclosure.
of the documents sought pursuant to the subpoena should have been disclosed by
Mr Taggart Jnr in any event. Had he complied
with his disclosure obligations,
the subpoena may not have been necessary, or at least the scope of it would have
been significantly
Ultimately,
I place limited weight on this consideration because of the separate legal
Whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly
unsuccessful in the proceedings
is well settled that
s 117(2A)(e)
refers to a situation where proceedings
as a whole have been unsuccessful. For example, where an application without
merit has been
dismissed. In the oft-cited authority in this area of
Robinson and Higginbotham
(1991) FLC 92-209
(with whom Simpson & Smithers JJ agreed)
Her Honour then makes a reference to the question of which party was wholly
successful but, of course, as counsel for the wife rightly
submitted, paragraph
(e) deals with a situation in which the proceedings as a whole have been
unsuccessful. In other words, in which
an application which was without merit
has been dismissed.
I have views about the merit of the various objections, formally or informally
advanced by Company A, and the manner with
which the company and Law Firm C
dealt with them before the Court (or not before it as was the case in respect to
the confidentiality
concern) those matters were ultimately resolved without the
need for a judicial determination. Therefore, I cannot comfortably conclude
company was wholly unsuccessful.
Whether a party to the proceedings has made an offer in
writing to another party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and
terms of any such offer
have recorded at [54] that I do not accept the offer Company A made to be a
reasonable offer to the wife in an attempt to settle
the issues remaining in
regard to my determination in respect to that issue, the wife's refusal to pay
anything over and above the costs associated
with Law Firm C collating and
reviewing the documents prior to production to the Court was an entirely
reasonable position for her
does not appear from the wife's affidavit that she similarly made an offer to
Company A in an attempt to settle her costs application,
although having regard
to the parties' fairly polarised views on the issue of costs, and who was to
blame for unnecessarily incurring
them, I am not persuaded any offer put forward
by her would have been given any due regard.
Such other matters as the court considers
are no other matters I consider relevant.
Disposition
have considered all the matters referred to above and balanced them. I am
satisfied there are circumstances which justify the making
of an order for
Company A to pay the wife's costs in responding to its objection to the subpoena
(inclusive of the Form 2).
wife argues that she has incurred substantial costs arising from Mr Taggart
Jnr's failure to comply with his disclosure obligations.
Whilst she may
very well have a case to argue in this respect, her application appropriately
seeks costs against Company A and not
Mr Taggart Jnr personally and it
is that application I am required to determine.
question is whether I ought to make a fixed sum order or leave it to be
determined by agreement between the parties or by assessment
of costs under the
. In determining the quantum of costs, I refer to the remarks of
Strickland, Kent and Watts JJ in the decision of
[2020] FamCAFC 91
(2020) FLC 93-959
in which their Honours said
It is the policy of this Court to attempt to fix costs at the conclusion of the
hearing in order to save the parties the cost, time
and resources of a taxation,
as well as to save the time of a Registrar in taxing the costs.
their Honours were considering this issue from the perspective of a decision
made by the Full Court of the Family Court, the
underlying reasoning must be
equally relevant to determining costs at first instance.
determination of the quantum of costs is a process of assessment not taxation.
The Rules enable the Court to make an order for
a specific amount.
Rule 335(3)
provides that in making an order for costs of a specific amount, as is presently
sought, the Court may consider:
(a) the importance, complexity or difficulty of the issues; and
(b) the reasonableness of each party's behaviour in the case; and
(c) the rates ordinarily payable to lawyers in comparable cases; and
(d) whether a lawyer's conduct has been improper or unreasonable; and
(e) the time properly spent on the case, or in complying with preaction
procedures; and
(f) expenses properly paid or payable.
was nothing novel about the circumstances of the subpoena issued to Company A.
It was entirely appropriate in the circumstances
of this case, particularly
where Mr Taggart Jnr had failed to engage in the proceedings and comply with his
disclosure obligations.
Whilst it is true the wife arguably should have filed an
application seeking orders for specific disclosure from Mr Taggart Jnr prior
issuing the subpoena to Company A, context is important. The history of the
proceedings lends me to believe it would have been
futile and a waste of time.
Even the production of documents pursuant to a subpoena has been an
unnecessarily long and drawn-out
Ultimately,
I do not know what documents to the schedule were produced and what was not.
Counsel for the wife conceded they had exhausted
disclosure requests and
attempts to obtain documents pursuant to subpoena and the issue of compliance
will now be an issue for trial.
the parties' poor relationship, I have no confidence they could reach agreement
requiring the parties to
undertake an assessment pursuant to the Rules will only increase costs in a
proceeding where proportionality
is arguably an issue.
assessment of legal costs must involve a careful consideration of the scope and
nature of the work undertaken by a legal practitioner.
to a costs schedule filed on 12 September 2024, the wife seeks Company
A pay her costs fixed in the amount of $5,522. There
are some observations I
wish to make about the Schedule.
it includes charges for seeking disclosure from Mr Taggart Jnr, which
is not a cost the company should be required to meet (having
regard to the
separate legal personas).
it includes costs associated with the drafting, amending, serving and filing of
the subpoena, which were all costs the wife would
have reasonably incurred.
Those costs can be dealt with as part of any further costs application the wife
may bringing following
the trial in the substantive proceedings, after which the
Court will have the benefit of any findings made about the conduct of the
parties, including Mr Taggart Jnr.
there is a charge on 30 April 2024 in the amount of $648 with the
notation "call to client". There is no further information about
the nature of
the call, which may have been about multiple matters given the degree of ongoing
dispute between the parties. I cannot
be satisfied this wholly relates to the
subpoena issue.
there are no charges associated with reviewing the Objection, preparing for or
attending the First Objection Hearing, which the
Court can only assume is
because the wife was not charged for the same.
have also considered the legal and factual issues that arose during the
proceedings and the parties' personal circumstances.
Ultimately,
a costs order must be assessed as being fair, reasonable, and proportionate to
the issues involved. I have applied these
principles.
am satisfied in all the circumstances, that it would be both fair, reasonable,
and proportionate for Company A to pay the wife's
costs fixed in the amount
of $4,100. I observe this is not too dissimilar to Company A's costs once
various items were deducted from
Law Firm C's cost schedule as
previously commented on by me.
these Reasons, I make the following orders:
IT IS ORDERED
of the date of publication of these Orders, in the event he
has not already done so, the Second Respondent,
MR TAGGART JNR
his capacity as director of Company A is to upload or cause to be uploaded
to the Court file, unredacted copies of all documents
previously provided to the
Court in compliance with the subpoena issued to it on
2 February 2024.
First Respondent,
, shall pay Company A's reasonable costs
of compliance with the subpoena issued at the First Respondent's request, fixed
in the amount
of $301, with said money to be deducted from costs to be paid by
Company A to the First Respondent pursuant to paragraph 3 of these
of the date of publication of these Orders, Company A shall
pay the First Respondent's costs of the subpoena objection filed by it
19 March 2024, and the Form 2 application filed on behalf of
Company A on [redacted] August 2024, fixed in the sum of $4,100.
Form 2 application filed on behalf of Company A on
[redacted] August 2024 and the Form 2A response filed by the
First Respondent
on [redacted] September 2024 be otherwise
I certify that the
preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of
Western Australia.
20 SEPTEMBER 2024
[2009] FamCA 369
(2009) 41 Fam LR 336
[47]–[49] (Cronin
Foyster v Foyster
Holdings Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC 881 (Campbell
[2024] WASC 336.
Acting Chief Justice Tottle considered the named
party justified in obtaining legal advice, engaging counsel, preparing
affidavits,
and both internal and external IT costs for a focused search in
circumstances where the records sought may have been captured under
a statutory
privilege of which his Honour and the parties were not otherwise
[251]–[253], [259].
[1995] FamCA 80
Kelly and Kelly
[1981] FamCA 78
(1981) FLC 91-108
, 76,811 (Evatt CJ, Emery SJ and Nygh
Braithwaite &
Braithwaite
[2007] FamCA 468
[106]–[107] (Kay, Warnick and Boland
[2019] FamCAFC 108
(2019) FLC 93-908
Parke & The
Estate of the Late A Parke
[2016] FamCAFC 248
(2016) FLC 93-748
[18] (May and Ryan
Idoport Pty Ltd v
National Australia Bank Ltd & Ors
[2007] NSWSC 23
[9] (Einstein
Family Court Rules 2021
(WA) r 253(2) ("FCR").
[2024] FCWA 66
[124]–[164].
permitted by
s 69ZX(3)(b)
Family Law Act
The wife has set out in
detail why the documents set out in each paragraph of the schedule to the
subpoena are relevant: Affidavit,
Wife (filed 9 September 2024)
[15]–[19] ("WA").
Hatton v Attorney-General of Commonwealth of Australia & Ors
[2000] FamCA 892
(2000) FLC 93-038
National Employers' Mutual General Association Ltd v
Waind & Anor
[1978] 1 NSWLR 372
Mandic v Phillis
[2005] FCA 1279
(2005) 225 ALR 760
Seemingly the delay arose because Law Firm C sought an updated or particularised
minute of final property orders sought before giving
advice on the forensic
purpose. From what I can tell, the delay only related to an Amended Form 1A
Response, but a minute had already
been provided on 2 May 2024:
Affidavit, Mr Taggart Jnr (filed 27 August 2024) 41. See also Law Firm B letter
to Law Firm C dated
16 May 2024 in which he advised the wife was in
the process of preparing an Amended Minute of Final Orders Sought, and that she
seeking for the company to be incorporated into the asset pool with the
value of the company being taken into
Counsel B advised
the Court two attempts were made at telephone conferral and three letters were
Exhibit SR1 "Letter from Law Firm C to Law Firm B dated
16 August 2024 attaching a Minute of Consent
In a letter from
Law Firm C to Law Firm B dated 30 April 2024, Counsel C advised amongst other
things that Company A were "willing
to consider a resolution that involves the
reasonable production of documents within a reasonable period of time to
comply". There
is nothing in Law Firm C's letter which raises concern about the
issue of conduct money.
extend my thanks to the Subpoena Office for their assistance in preparing this
Incurred on
5 June 2024.
Prantage & Prantage
[2013] FamCAFC 105
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (442 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter