URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2020/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MOLLOY and FOUST [2020] FCWAM 66 (17 July 2020)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA AT 150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
MOLLOY and FOUST
[2020] FCWAM 66
10 JULY 2020
DELIVERED :
17 JULY 2020
FILE NO/S :
PTW 2835 of 2016
CONTEMPT - Where
allegations are admitted - Where sentence of imprisonment is
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Representation:
Mr Urquhart
Solicitors:
Bannerman Solicitors
Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT –
PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court
under the pseudonym Molloy & Foust has been approved by the Magistrates
Court at 150 Terrace Road, Perth pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
Foust] admits that he has committed two contempts of this Court. Both constitute
a contravention of Orders under the
Family Law Act 1975
Act”) and involved a flagrant challenge to the Court’s
question arising for determination is what punishment is appropriate. I may
punish the contempts by committal to prison or fine
I have a discretion to order
punishment on terms, suspension of punishment, or the giving of security for
good behaviour.
Sentencing Principles
of the Act is a complete
and state and federal
sentencing law has no application.
It affords the Court the “widest possible discretion to mould the sanction
to the circumstances of the individual situation
within the overall principles
and philosophy of the
Abduramanoski &
Abduramanoska
the Full Court
considered that the following criteria identified by Justice Palmer in
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Michalik
potential relevance in determining punishment for contempt of an order involving
property or fiscal provisions:
seriousness of the contempt proved;
the contemnor was aware of the consequences to himself of what he proposed to
actual or potential consequences of the contempt on the proceedings in which the
contempt was committed;
the contempt was committed in the context of a proceeding alleging crime or
conduct seriously prejudicial to the public interest:
see, for example, Von
Doussa v Owens (No 3)
(1982) 31 SASR 116
reason or motive for the contempt;
the contemnor has received, or sought to receive, a benefit or gain from the
there has been any expression of genuine contrition by the contemnor;
character and antecedents of the contemnor;
punishment is required to deter the contemnor and others of like mind from
similar disobedience to the orders of the Court;
punishment is required to express the Court's denunciation of the
The Contempts
24 May 2016, the Court made an Order restraining Mr Foust from alienating,
encumbering or otherwise disposing of the property
at [Suburb A] in the State of
Western Australia (“the Property”). On 8 March 2020, Mr Foust
entered into a contract
for the sale of the Property. The Property was
subsequently transferred to an unrelated third party in accordance with the
1 May 2020, the Court ordered Mr Foust to immediately deposit the sale proceeds
from the Property into the trust account of Ms
Molloy’s solicitors. Mr
Foust has not done so.
The Consequence of the Contempts
Foust is the Respondent to ongoing proceedings initiated by Ms Molloy for
alteration of the parties’ interests in property
following the dissolution
of their marriage. Those proceedings have a lengthy history involving a
significant number of Court appearances.
A final hearing scheduled to commence
on 11 May 2020 was adjourned as a result of Mr Foust’s contempts.
Molloy seeks final Orders that she retain the proceeds of sale of the Property.
After repayment of a mortgage and sales costs,
Mr Foust received proceeds of
$625,727.65 following the Property’s sale. Ms Molloy’s filed
schedule of Assets and Liabilities
contends that she has liabilities exceeding her assets of $73,408 and that Mr
Foust otherwise has property interests worth $202,705,
including land [in Suburb
B] worth $165,000, held through a family trust. Although that document contends
that Mr Foust has superannuation
interests worth $227,965, Mr Foust gave
evidence in the contempt hearing that his superannuation interests of $140,000
had been seized
by the Australian Securities and Investment Commission. Ms
Molloy asserts that her superannuation interests are worth $7,069.
is readily apparent that Ms Molloy’s claim for property relief has been
substantially defeated by Mr Foust’s contempts.
Were she to retain all of
the parties’ non-superannuation assets aside from the proceeds of sale of
the Property, she could
only retain assets with a value of approximately
$129,000 rather than the approximate value of $552,000 she claims.
Orders of which Mr Foust is in contempt sought to preserve the subject matter of
the dispute. Punishment is called for not so
much for the purpose of upholding
the Court’s authority as an end in itself, but in fulfilling Ms
Molloy’s expectations
that Court orders will be obeyed and sanctions will
be imposed if
Misleading the Court
12 March 2020, Ms Molloy filed an Application in a Case seeking that any
proceeds of sale of the Property be deposited into a
controlled monies account.
That Application was supported by an Affidavit in which Ms Molloy deposed to an
unnamed friend having
told her the Property had been sold. She attached some
online searches which did not identify the Property with particularity.
Molloy’s Application was returned on 20 March 2020. Mr Foust attended
Court and represented himself. He advised the Court
that the Property was not on
the market. He then said the following:
From 6 March up to
probably last week I’ve had 11 real estate people ring me up. 11. And made
appointments. I said, “Well,
I didn’t make any appointments with
anyone.” So something is going on. Right. And two of the people came to my
door saying,
“We’re – you’re not the person. You
don’t sound like the person we spoke to.” So I never called
don’t need to sell my house, your Honour. Right. I’ve got a real
estate agent – [an acquaintance]
estate agency. Right.
Foust also said: “
I’ve got no intentions of selling my house. My
daughter was born in the
I raised with Counsel then appearing for Ms Molloy the injunction that was in
place in relation to the sale of the Property,
Mr Foust interjected and
Yes, there’s orders in place. I can’t do
nothing with the house anyway. So why would I bother with a real estate agent?
But these agents have been coming to my house and ringing me up. Who is ringing
them up? The same thing happened - -
I had indicated that I was proposing to adjourn Ms Molloy’s Application in
a Case, Mr Foust stated that real estate
agents started contacting him in 2018
before a scheduled trial and said:
Well, I think it – the
– it must be coming from either my ex-wife or Bannermans – lawyers
because I’m not
– what – what – why should I sell the
Foust also said, “
Well – well, if you’re going to adjourn
it that’s good. That’s
Foust’s representations to the Court on that day were intended to mislead.
He had already by the time of that hearing accepted
an offer for the purchase of
the property. He gave evidence in the contempt proceedings that it was he who
agent he engaged to sell the property and insisted
that it remain a private listing.
Foust gave evidence in the contempt proceedings that he was “in a very
emotional and stressful state at the
He deposes to
having remained in hospital with his critically ill father the night before for
the entire night. He deposes to having
had little or no sleep the night before.
My observations of Mr Foust’s demeanour on that occasion do not accord
with his evidence
in that respect. Consistent with his demeanour before me on
other occasions, he was argumentative and cantankerous.
Cash withdrawals and diamond purchase
14 April 2020, Mr Foust completed the sale of the Property. This was despite
having had his attention drawn to the injunction
restraining him from selling
the Property during Court proceedings on 20 March 2020. Further, despite being
aware of the Application
for the proceeds to be held in a controlled monies
account, he directed the funds to be transferred to his personal account.
Foust has withdrawn approximately $425,000 of the proceeds of sale of the
Property in cash. He set up three bank accounts with
different banking
institutions to expedite its withdrawal given daily limits. Those withdrawals
took place almost daily from 14 April
2020 until early May 2020.
27 April 2020, Mr Foust applied $200,000 from the proceeds of sale of the
Property to the purchase of diamonds.
Mr Foust’s evidence as to the disposal of the cash and
having no apparent background with problem gambling, Mr Foust gives evidence
that he commenced gambling with an underground
syndicate in November 2019
resulting in him owing the syndicate over $500,000 by January or February 2020.
He gives evidence that
he was charged interest of $100,000.
Foust’s evidence was vague and imprecise. He claims to have been offered a
line of credit by the syndicate. He was unable
to answer how much credit he was
thereby offered. He denied that there had been any discussion of any interest
rate with the syndicate,
yet claimed he was required to pay $100,000 in
interest. Although he gave evidence that he had kept a notebook of the
he made on his debt, he did not give evidence of any precise sums
owed or paid. Despite asserting there was a deadline by which the
debt had to be
paid, he was unable to identify the deadline. He said variously it was
“hopefully by the end of May”,
“the beginning of May” or
“the end of May”.
Foust’s evidence contained internal inconsistencies that were unexplained
by him. He asserted that he met with members
of the syndicate in February 2020
who were by then insisting on payments, and that he feared for his life. Despite
the apparent urgency
of the situation, he gave evidence of subsequently seeking
to delay the sale of the property because he needed to “clear his
head” and was dealing with his father’s health crises.
his evidence that he told members of the syndicate in February he would make
arrangements with the bank to make payments
to them, he waited until 24 March
2020 to seek to draw on his existing line of credit secured by mortgage against
the property. When
asked about the delay, he answered that he didn’t
understand the question.
10:05am on 27 April 2020, Mr Foust emailed Ms Molloy’s solicitors in the
following terms:
Please provide me with your trust account details so I will transfer 50%
of the proceeds to you on Thursday as I have an appointment
at the bank, please
send me a signed assurance that those funds will not be touched and remain in
the trust account until an agreement
Foust was asked why he sent the email in cross-examination. He answered that he
sent the email because he was going to put 50%
of the proceeds into
”. When he was asked why he didn’t, he said:
I didn’t have the money did I?
” That evidence was
false. He had sufficient funds at that time. He also gave evidence that he was
going to put something in,
but then claimed that he couldn’t.
asked by the Court about the inconsistency between his email proposal and his
claim that he then owed an underground gambling
syndicate in excess of $500,000,
he claimed not to understand the question. In re-examination, he gave evidence
that he was just
trying to keep the solicitors at bay and that he was going to
try and put money into their trust account.
Foust’s evidence on this issue lacked credibility. If on
27 April 2020 he owed in excess of $500,000 to a gambling syndicate
who he considered would physically harm his children and himself, there is no
reason he would have intended to put 50% of the proceeds
of sale into the
solicitors trust account. He was unable to explain why he would try to pay any
money to Ms Molloy’s solicitors
rather than pay all of his debt to ensure
the safety both of himself and his children. The very same day he sent the
email, Mr Foust
purchased $200,000 worth of diamonds.
Mr Foust paid his credit card balance on 30 April 2020. This is also
inconsistent with his evidence that he feared for
his life if his underground
gambling debt was not paid. When asked in cross-examination whether paying his
credit card was more important
than paying the standover men who would break his
legs, he initially claimed not to understand the question. When the question was
repeated, he gave evidence that he always pays his credit card on time. That
evidence is unable to be reconciled with his evidence
that both his and his
children’s safety was at risk.
Mr Foust’s evidence that he considered his children’s safety to be
at risk and that the threats to them were
he did nothing
to advise the children’s caregivers of any risk to their welfare.
way through his cross-examination, the Court was closed on the application of Mr
Foust’s counsel. Nevertheless, Mr Foust
gave no evidence to identify any
of the individuals to whom he handed over $450,000 in cash and $200,000 in
diamonds other than by
their first names and by reference to generic motor
vehicles. His affidavit failed to identify the person he alleges introduced him
to the gambling syndicate. When pressed in cross-examination, he disclosed a
name, although denied having the person’s phone
number despite having
known him for 10 or 15 years.
claims that the gambling syndicate he became involved in involves lawyers,
politicians, Magistrates and Judges. He identified
no individuals involved other
than to give the first names of the two members of the syndicate he alleges he
was involved with.
Foust produced no documents to corroborate any of his evidence. It was his
evidence that he had kept a diary setting out the
payments he had made to the
syndicate which he disposed of after 18 May 2020. By then, he had been
made aware from his attendances
at Court on 11 and 12 May 2020 that he faced a
possible term of imprisonment in relation to the foreshadowed contempt
proceedings.
Nevertheless, he destroyed the only document that corroborated his
evidence. At the time of those Court hearings, on his evidence,
possession of a mobile phone which had been provided by the syndicate through
which he could conduct his gambling. He failed
to adduce any evidence in
relation to the phone, for example, its phone number, the phone numbers of
anyone who called him or whom
he called on the phone, or even a photograph of
its existence.
Foust called no other witnesses to corroborate his evidence. He gave evidence
that he told his brother [X] about his gambling
debts. X was available but was
not called to give evidence.
do not accept Mr Foust’s account of the disposition of the cash and
diamonds. It lacked consistency. To the extent he offered
explanations for those
inconsistencies, they also lacked credibility. I reject his Counsel’s
submission that the inconsistencies
were subtle.
rejecting Mr Foust’s evidence of the disposal of assets, I do not accept
his purported motive for the contempt. I accept
Ms Molloy’s submission
that it is more likely his course of contemptuous conduct was intended to defeat
Ms Molloy’s claim.
At all times his position to the Court is that she
should receive no interest in any portion of the Property.
Is a Term of Imprisonment Appropriate?
the purpose of contempt proceedings is to coerce
compliance.
Imprisonment, even
for proven contempt, is a sanction of last
Full Court in
Tate & Tate (No 3)
held that another purpose of
contempt proceedings is punishment and held:
The purposes of
imposing punishment would appear to reflect the need for individual and general
deterrence and retribution for the
party's failure to comply with the order.
Retribution is called for because it is essential to the proper working of the
court system
that court orders are obeyed. If they are defied or ignored, the
whole system of dispute resolution by litigation breaks down. While
other means of dispute resolution available, in the final analysis a citizen has
the right to approach a court to determine
a dispute and the court has a duty to
Borrie and Lowe
The Law of Contempt
Ed at 629), the
following principle is stated:
Blatant and aggravated contempts
particularly when repeated by a person who has clearly been warned as to the
possible consequences
of defying an order, will quite properly attract an
immediate custodial sentence as a mark both of the gravity of the contempt and
the court's disapproval and to deter contemnors and others who might be tempted
to breach such an order.
Foust has engaged in a course of conduct both in defiance of Court orders and
comprising a flagrant challenge to the Court’s
authority. That course of
conduct involved multiple transactions over a period of several months. I have
rejected his evidence of
the purported reason for doing so. He was made aware at
Court appearances in May and June 2020 of the possibility of imprisonment
he be found to be in contempt. Those warnings did nothing to modify his
contemptuous behaviour and did not result in the desired
consider that neither a fine, nor a suspended term of imprisonment,
appropriately reflects the objects of coercion and punishment.
sanction of last resort, I consider there to be no alternative but to sentence
Mr Foust to a period of immediate imprisonment.
Is an Indefinite Period of Imprisonment Available?
Molloy moves the Court to sentence Mr Foust to a period of imprisonment until he
purges his contempt. No maximum penalty is prescribed
appropriateness of a fixed term [or] an indefinite period of imprisonment, Lord
Denning has held:
It seems to me that when the object of the committal is punishment for a
past offence, then, if he is to be imprisoned at all, the
appropriate order is a
fixed term. When it is a matter of getting a person to do something in the
future and there is a reasonable
prospect of him doing it then it may be quite
appropriate to have an indefinite order against him and to commit him until he
do it. But if there is no such prospect – as here – there
should not be an indefinite
I have rejected Mr Foust’s evidence as to the disposal of the cash and
diamonds, I am unable to conclude that there
is no prospect of Mr Foust paying
the proceeds of sale of the Property into a trust account.
question of whether there is a reasonable prospect of Mr Foust complying in full
or at least to a significant
is less straightforward.
The forensic difficulty Ms Molloy faces is that the only identified witness who
can definitively answer
the question is Mr Foust who has a vested interest in
misleading the Court in its proper resolution.
possibility of Mr Foust purging his contempt is a prediction about the future,
which by its very nature cannot be
In determining the
prospect of a future possibility, I am called upon to estimate the likelihood of
the occurrence of that
possibility.
in the context of assessing the future risk of harm to children, Baroness Hale
has held that:
... the law has drawn a clear distinction between probability as it
applies to past facts and probability as it applies to future
predictions. Past
facts must be proved to have happened on the balance of probabilities, that is,
that it is more likely than not
that they did happen. Predictions about future
facts need only be based upon a degree of likelihood that they will happen which
sufficient to justify preventive
balance, I conclude that there is a reasonable prospect of Mr Foust purging his
contempt. Mr Foust recently had control of the
cash and diamonds. I have
rejected his evidence as to their disposal. I infer that he retains some
capacity to recover them.
am satisfied that an indefinite period of imprisonment is available. It would
carry the maximum incentive for Mr Foust to comply
with the order for the
repayment of the proceeds of
reject Mr Foust’s submission that the case is most similar to the
circumstances of
where the Court
apparently accepted the contemnor’s evidence that he suffered from an
addiction to methamphetamine and there
appeared to be no prospect of proceeds of
sale of assets being retrieved. I have rejected Mr Foust’s evidence in
relation to
the disposal of assets.
Contrition, Mr Foust’s character and antecedents
Foust’s demeanour in giving oral evidence in the contempt hearing was not
consistent with his professions of regret. He
was argumentative with counsel. He
needed to be directed to answer questions on a number of occasions.
told Ms Molloy’s counsel she was “
asking a really stupid
”, despite no objection having been taken by his counsel to
it. Despite his Counsel interjecting to permit Mr Foust to answer
his question,
he then took it upon himself to object to the question he was in the process of
answering. He said the question was
ridiculous and he wouldn’t answer it.
He again required direction to answer a question that had properly been put to
Mr Foust gave evidence that he has ruined his whole life as a result of his
conduct over recent months, he has made no
apology for, nor expressed any
remorse, for the consequence of his actions, namely that he has largely defeated
Ms Molloy’s
claim in this Court. That is particularly surprising in
circumstances where the parties share the care of their 14 year old daughter.
am not satisfied that he has expressed any genuine contrition for his
Foust deposes to having the care of his mother, after moving in to live with her
after the sale of the Property. He gives evidence
that she is 80 years old and
suffers from [various health issues] which followed the death of Mr
Foust’s father [earlier] this
year. Mr Foust deposes to being her primary
carer, which includes looking after her house, completing maintenance,
gardening, cleaning
and cooking. He also deposes to her becoming forgetful and
needing someone to keep an eye on her.
has not disclosed to the Court that he receives any payments as his
mother’s carer.
siblings. Although his brother is mourning the death of his son late last year,
the evidence does not suggest that Mr
Foust’s siblings are unable to
provide any necessary assistance to their mother.
Foust has no criminal record. I accept that he has been affected by the loss of
his nephew and father in recent months.
place little weight on the character reference from Mr Foust’s brother X,
who says that Mr Foust “may have had a lapse
in an apparent
description of Mr Foust’s sustained contemptuous conduct. I have regard to
other character references relied
on by Mr Foust which appear to suggest that
his character is otherwise unblemished.
Foust’s contempts have had the effect of depriving Ms Molloy of her claim
for property settlement by approximately $423,000
with the result that she can
retain assets worth only approximately $129,000. His contemptuous course of
conduct included actively
misleading the Court and persisted despite warnings of
its consequences. Mr Foust has done nothing to attempt to purge his contempt.
paid his credit card bill rather than making any attempt to comply with Orders
of this Court. He has shown no remorse for the
consequences of his conduct on Ms
punishment is required not only to deter Mr Foust but others of like mind from
similar disobedience of the Court’s
orders. It must also express the
Court’s denunciation of the contempt.
Nevertheless,
I accept the submission made on his behalf that he is likely to find
incarceration extremely stressful and I accept
that an indefinite period of
imprisonment would be too severe a sentence. In reaching that conclusion I have
particular regard to
Mr Foust’s family commitments including both to his
aging mother and his daughter.
review of punishment in other cases is of limited assistance, as each case
depends on the Court’s assessment of the
I have had regard in
particular to two decisions in determining that an appropriate term of
imprisonment is 18 months.
Court retains a discretion to discharge that
including in
circumstances where Mr Foust purges his
It is open to Mr Foust
to apply to make such an application to this Court.
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Magistrates Court of
Western Australia at 150 Terrace
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Faukland & Shikia
[2016] FamCAFC 83
(2016) FLC 93-706
Abduramanoski
Abudramanosk
[2005] FamCA 88
(2005) FLC 93-215
Schwarzkopff &
Schwarzkopff
[1992] FamCA 30
(1992) FLC 92-303
Abduramanoski &
Abudramanoska
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Michalik
[2004] NSWSC 1259
Filed 6 May 2020.
Tate & Tate (No
(supra) at [62].
Transcript of Proceedings of
20 March 2020 page 3.
Ibid, page 4.
Ibid, pages 4-5.
Ibid, page 6.
Ibid, page 6.
Mr Foust’s Affidavit
filed 3 July 2020, paragraph 31.
Exhibit A3.
Mr Foust’s Affidavit
filed 3 July 2020, paragraph 13.
Tate & Tate (No
(2003) FLC 93-138
Stradford &
[2019] FamCAFC 25
(2019) FLC 93-888
Kendling & Anor & Kendling
(2008) FLC 93-384;
Tate & Tate (No 3)
[1998] FamCA 95
(1998) FLC 92-819.
Tate & Tate
Family Law Act 1975
[1975] Fam 17
Ascot Investments v
Harper (No 3)
[1982] FamCA 43
(1982) FLC 91-253
Farnell & Anor &
[2016] FCWA 17
(2016) FLC 93-700
Malec & JC Hutton Pty
(1990) 169 CLR 638
per Brennan and Dawson JJ at
In re S-B (Children)
(Care Proceedings: Standard of Proof)
[2009] UKSC 17
[2010] 1 AC 678
Miller on Contempt of
ed), page 40.
[2016] FamCAFC 83
(2016) FLC 93-706.
As required by
Family Law Rules 2004
Annexure ‘F’ to
Mr Foust’s Affidavit filed 3 July
Securities and Investments Commission v Michalik
Myers and Myers
[2006] FamCA 1182
(2006) FLC 93-291
[2007] FCWA 85
Abduramanoski &
Abudramanoska
Family Law Act 1975
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 91
per Fry LJ at 557.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter