URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2024/264.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KAREFA and KAREFA [2024] FCWA 264 (18 November 2024)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
KAREFA and KAREFA
[2024] FCWA 264
18 NOVEMBER 2024
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
5772 of 2023
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE -
Application for leave to proceed undefended when trial documents were filed late
by both parties - Turns
Legislation:
Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
Representation:
Solicitors:
O'Sullivan Davies Lawyers
Peter J Griffin & Co
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES' NAMES
AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Karefa and Karefa
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
financial proceedings between [Ms Karefa] ("the wife") and [Mr Karefa]
("the husband") were listed to a Readiness Hearing today
in order to progress
them to trial. The parties, who have both been represented at all relevant
times, were notified of the Readiness
Hearing listing by letter dated 22 March
Accordingly,
the parties had ample time to comply with various procedural orders pivoting
around today's hearing. The consent orders
made by a magistrate on 18 March
2024 required:
(a) Each party to file and serve a minute of proposed final orders they would
seek at trial by 23 September 2024. The wife filed
her minute within time.
The husband filed his minute on 14 November 2024.
(b) Each party to file and serve their affidavits (including witness affidavits)
and an up-to-date Form 13 Financial Statement by
18 October 2024. The wife
filed her documents on 28 October
and seeks the required
extension of time to reflect that. The husband filed his documents on 14
November 2024.
(c) Each party to file and serve an undertaking as to disclosure annexing their
list of disclosed documents by 18 October 2024.
Again, the wife filed her
undertaking on 28 October 2024 and seeks the required extension of time to
reflect that. The husband filed
his undertaking on 14 November 2024.
wife says that the delay in filing her documents was largely occasioned by the
tardiness of the husband's response to her persistent
and detailed requests for
specific disclosure, which culminated in the provision to her lawyers of 236
pages of uncollated disclosure
late on the afternoon of 11 October 2024.
am not able to discern how the late provision of the husband's disclosure
documents can be said to explain the late filing of the
wife's own undertaking
as to disclosure, or for that matter her Form 13 Financial Statement. I
acknowledge the possibility that
it may properly have affected her capacity to
complete her trial affidavit.
his affidavit lodged on 14 November 2024 the husband explained his delay by
saying that he received a bundle of disclosure documents
of some 1,102 pages
from the wife's lawyer on 25 October 2024. He says further that on
14 June 2024 he signed an agreement to sell
a particular property in [City
A], that settlement was due on 1 October 2024 but was delayed, and that "by
waiting for the settlement
of the sale to be completed has effected [his]
preparation for trial of the case" (sic). Again, there appears to be no logical
between the late provision of disclosure by the wife and the delay by
the husband in providing his own disclosure. As with the wife,
I acknowledge
the possibility that the late provision of disclosure might have affected the
husband's capacity to complete his trial
the materials presently available, neither explanation is satisfactory. In
making that observation, I acknowledge that I am not
presently able to discern
just how much of the content of either party's trial affidavit material was
informed by the late provided
disclosure to which each refer.
orders are just that. They are not mere invitations to comply if the parties to
whom they are directed, or their lawyers,
do not consider themselves too busy to
main purpose of the
Family Court Rules 2021
") is to ensure
that each case is resolved in a just and timely manner at a cost to the parties
and the Court that is reasonable in
the circumstances of the case. The parties
and their lawyers have a clear responsibility to promote and achieve the main
as set out in r 8. That responsibility includes (relevantly for
today's purposes) complying with the duty of disclosure, ensuring
readiness for
court events, complying with time limits, and complying with the rules and any
of those are new or revolutionary concepts. Nevertheless, regrettably
compliance with those responsibilities by parties and
their lawyers remains
problematic. The Court's statistics indicate that, of the matters which proceed
to a first readiness hearing
because they have not been finalised by an agreed
settlement, only 52 per cent are actually ready. That causes additional delay
and expense for the individual parties in the particular case, and contributes
to the inability of the Court to reach and complete
other proceedings.
Court has an obligation to apply the Rules in a way which promotes the main
purpose. That includes setting realistic timetables,
and monitoring and
controlling the progress of each
The Court also has an
overarching obligation to afford all parties procedural fairness; it must be
remembered, though, that procedural
fairness requires that parties be given
proper opportunity to prosecute and present their cases – not that they be
given indulgences
which extend beyond that proper opportunity.
that background, the matter requiring determination is the Form 2 interlocutory
application of the wife filed on 28 October
2024 in which she seeks the
extension of time to file her own documents referred to above, an order granting
her leave to proceed
on an undefended basis with her substantive application
(which, by implication, would involve the dismissal of the husband's substantive
response), and costs fixed in the sum of $2,000. In support of that application
the wife relied on an affidavit filed contemporaneously
with it. That affidavit
set out the matters briefly summarised above, but also set out what the wife
would assert to be the husband's
consistent failure to meet his duty of
disclosure over the course of the proceedings, and otherwise to comply with
husband filed a response to that application on 14 November 2024.
Sensibly, he consented to the order sought by the wife extending
the time for
filing of her documents to the date on which they were filed. He otherwise
sought that the time for him to file his
own trial documents be extended,
without specifying a date. He did not specifically respond to the wife's
application for costs.
wife filed written submissions on 15 November 2024, after the husband had
filed his trial documents, confirming that notwithstanding
that filing she still
pressed for the orders sought in her Form 2 Application. While her evidence, if
accepted in due course, would
explain her frustration it was nevertheless
surprising that the application was pursued in the present circumstances.
the wife makes the obvious point that the husband says he was delayed by the
provision of disclosure documents after the date
on which his trial affidavit
was due in any event, the observations already made still stand. On the basis
of the evidence available
to me, I am not able to understand the logic of the
submission where on the one hand the wife says the preparation of her trial
had to await the provision of the husband's disclosure, but asserts
that it is unreasonable for the husband to maintain the mirror
proposition. I
acknowledge that it may well be that at trial the logic in that argument will
become clear, when the evidence is
able to be tested.
Disposition
both parties were in default of the relevant procedural orders, but both have
now belatedly complied, the proposition that the
wife should be able to proceed
undefended simply because her default was less than the husband's obviously
cannot be sustained.
Had the wife herself strictly complied with the relevant
orders, the argument may have had more attraction. That said, I acknowledge
that that is not the only default on the part of the husband about which the
wife properly complains.
in the written submissions filed on behalf of the wife changes that. While some
of the matters raised about the husband's
conduct of the proceedings to date and
non-compliance with both procedural and substantive orders, if borne out in due
course, may
well inform the making of a costs order against the husband, they
cannot justify the orders sought by the wife in her Form 2 application.
wife also makes submissions directed to the proposition that parties should not,
by their inactivity or non-compliance, be permitted
to delay the progress of the
case towards trial to the detriment of the other party; while I could not agree
more, that is not what
has happened in this case. The readiness hearing has
proceeded to completion as scheduled. The parties will find their case in
exactly the same Callover as would have been the case had they both strictly
complied with the procedural orders, as they should
Notwithstanding
the matters just set out, the wife perhaps understandably pressed for an order
already noted, both parties were in default. In that sense, both the wife's
application and the husband's response were made
necessary by their own failure
to comply with previous orders. Both are critical of the conduct of the
proceedings by the other,
particularly in relation to discovery, inspection and
production of documents. While on their face the wife's complaints in that
regard may well in due course be shown to have more merit than the husband's, no
clear conclusion in that regard can be reached until
the evidence is
appropriate course, therefore, is to reserve both parties' costs.
will be the following orders:
time within which the Applicant wife, MS KAREFA was to comply with
paragraph 11 of the minute comprising the orders made on 18
March 2024 is
extended to 4.00 pm on 28 October 2024.
time within which the Respondent husband, MR KAREFA is to comply with
paragraph 11 of the minute comprising the orders made on
18 March 2024 is
extended to 4.00 pm on 14 November 2024.
costs of both parties are reserved.
Form 2 Application of the wife filed on 28 October 2024, and the husband's
response to that application, are otherwise
proceedings are included in the Callover at 9.00am on 21 March 2025 for the
allocation of a trial date, with an estimated hearing
time of three days and
noting that the matter is not suitable for determination by a Magistrate.
parties must each file Callover certificates by no later than 4.00 pm on
14 March 2025.
the allocation of a trial date, the file is to be referred in Chambers to the
Judge to whom the trial is allocated, for consideration
to be given to the
making of any further procedural orders in chambers to ensure the readiness of
the matter for trial.
These reasons are the reasons for decision delivered [in] November 2024, edited
in places but only as to correct grammatical errors
and some infelicity of
expression without variation to the substance thereof.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Family Court of Western Australia.
[IN] NOVEMBER
The wife's documents are said
by her to have been uploaded on Friday 25 October 2024. The court portal notes
the documents as having
been lodged at 12:47 pm on Monday 28 October 2024.
Nothing turns on that
discrepancy.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter