URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2016/174.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WILSON and WILSON [2016] FCWAM 174 (17 August 2016)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA - 150 TERRACE
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
WILSON and WILSON
[2016] FCWAM 174
SUTHERLAND M
29 & 30 JUNE 2016 AND 1 JULY 2016
DELIVERED :
17 AUGUST 2016
FILE NO/S :
PTW 5378 of 2013
Catchwords:
CHILDREN - Equal time
PROPERTY SETTLEMENT -
Contributions - Future needs
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Ms Farmer
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Applicant : Lewis Blyth & Hooper
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE
BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES’
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
CHANGED IT IS NOTED that publication of
this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Wilson and Wilson
has been approved by the Magistrates Court of Western Australia sitting at
150 Terrace Road, Perth pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
INTRODUCTION:
1 [Mr Wilson] and [Ms Wilson] were unable to reach
complete agreement in relation to parenting issues concerning their two
[Child A] aged 14 and [Child B] aged 11 ½. Mr Wilson and Ms
Wilson were largely in agreement about the arrangements for the
children during
the term school holidays and most special occasion days. They also agreed the
issue of parental responsibility during
the trial. However, Mr Wilson and Ms
Wilson were unable to reach agreement about a number of other matters, including
the children’s
living arrangements during the school terms and the
Christmas school holidays.
2 Mr Wilson sought that the children live equally with the parties during
the school terms and Christmas school holidays (in particular,
for half of each
Christmas school holiday in a continuous block of time, rather than a week about
arrangement). Mr Wilson also sought
a number of other orders in relation to the
children, including arrangements when the children travelled overseas on
holidays. On
the other hand, Ms Wilson initially sought that the children live
with her and spend time with Mr Wilson each alternate weekend during
terms. However, in her closing submissions, Ms Wilson conceded that the
children should spend increased time with Mr Wilson
and proposed that they do so
for five nights each fortnight. Ms Wilson otherwise agreed that the parties
should equally share the
children’s time during the Christmas school
holidays, but proposed that it be on a week about basis. Ms Wilson also sought
a number of other detailed orders, including in relation to telephone
communications, the payment of costs relating to the children’s
at private school, exchange of relevant information, arrangements for interstate
and overseas holidays and changing the
children’s names.
3 In relation to financial issues, both Mr Wilson and Ms Wilson agreed that
they should each retain their respective assets, liabilities
and superannuation
entitlements. However, Mr Wilson sought that Ms Wilson pay him such sum
necessary to effect a 50/50 division;
whereas Ms Wilson sought that Mr Wilson
pay her such sum necessary to effect a 60/40 division in her favour. The
financial proceedings
were complicated by Ms Wilson’s failure to make a
full and frank disclosure of some relevant financial events after the
separation.
THE EVIDENCE:
4 Mr Wilson was represented by solicitors throughout
the proceedings, including at trial. Ms Wilson was represented by solicitors
until mid-May 2015. Thereafter, Ms Wilson represented herself in the
proceedings, including at trial. However, Ms Wilson sought
and was granted
leave to have her father act as her McKenzie friend during the trial. Mr Wilson
relied upon his trial affidavit
and amended financial statement, together with
the affidavits of his partner [Ms Robertson], his brother [Mr C] and his cousin
D]. Ms Wilson relied upon her trial affidavit and financial statement,
together with the affidavits of Child A’s psychologist
[Mr E] and her
friends [Ms F] and [Ms G]. In addition, both parties relied upon the report of
[Dr H], who was appointed by the court
as the single expert in relation to the
parenting issues.
5 Ms Wilson cross-examined both Mr Wilson and Ms Robertson. Mr
Wilson’s counsel cross-examined Ms Wilson. I considered that
was open and frank in giving his evidence. At times Mr Wilson was somewhat
vague about the dates that different events
occurred, but generally his
recollection of events was consistent, logical and ultimately persuasive. I was
also satisfied that
Mr Wilson attempted to give his evidence in a balanced
manner and was prepared to make appropriate concessions against his interests.
On the other hand, I considered that Ms Wilson was an unimpressive witness.
Firstly I am satisfied that Ms Wilson was not prepared
to be open and frank
to Mr Wilson about her holiday
to [Country A] with the children in 2015; and (2)
her redundancy payment. Secondly, I considered that Ms Wilson’s highly
attitude towards Mr Wilson and Ms Robertson overwhelmed her ability to
give her evidence in a balanced manner. In conclusion, where
the evidence of Mr
Wilson and Ms Wilson were in dispute, I preferred Mr Wilson’s
6 I considered that Ms Robertson was open, clear, forthright, balanced and
largely unchallenged in giving her evidence. I had no
hesitation in accepting
her evidence. The remaining witnesses were not required for cross-examination.
Accordingly, I accept their
FACTUAL BACKGROUND – PARENTING MATTERS:
7 Mr Wilson was born in July 1969. He is a
self-employed [contractor]. Ms Wilson was born in February 1974. She works
as a [professional]. The parties commenced living together in March
1994 and were married in March 1995.
8 Child A was born in June 2002, followed by Child B in December 2004. I am
satisfied that both parties were substantially involved
in the care of the
children. After Child A’s birth, Ms Wilson ceased full time work and
was thereafter primarily engaged as
a home maker and parent. Mr Wilson worked
in his [contracting] business on a part time / casual basis, which also afforded
him considerable
flexibility in being able to assist with the boys. In 2006 Ms
Wilson returned to part time employment. Both parties arranged their
schedules to fit in around the boys. For example, Mr Wilson would take the days
off that Ms Wilson was working so that he could
care for the boys.
9 In or about 2009 Child A started having epilepsy related seizures and was
prescribed various medications. Child A suffered various
side effects from the
medications, including increased anger, depression and negativity.
Unfortunately this had a detrimental impact
not only on his physical and
emotional wellbeing, but also on his educational performance and social
relations in and out of school.
10 The parties separated under the one roof in November 2011. The parties
physically separated in October 2012, upon the sale and
settlement of their home
in [Suburb A]. The boys then lived in a shared care arrangement: with Ms Wilson
for eight nights per fortnight
and with Mr Wilson for six nights per fortnight.
Mr Wilson was assisted by his mother who also lived with him. The parties lived
in relatively close proximity to each other and for the most part were able to
cooperatively co-parent the boys.
11 In or about February 2013, Mr Wilson commenced a relationship with Ms
Robertson, who had three young daughters. Unfortunately,
relations between Mr
Wilson and Ms Wilson soon soured and the boys (particularly Child A) also took
some time to adjust to Ms Robertson
and her three daughters being a regular part
of Mr Wilson’s life. In June 2013, Mr Wilson told Ms Wilson that he was
able to have the boys in his care for six nights a fortnight and that
in future, he would simply spend time with the boys each alternate
accept Mr Wilson’s evidence that at the time, he was having some
difficulties in managing the boys’ behaviour
in his home. The position
was made considerably worse by Ms Wilson’s actions in continually
undermining his disciplinary strategies,
including by giving the boys a mobile
phone and continually maintaining contact with them when they were at Mr
Wilson’s home;
and encouraging the boys to leave Mr Wilson’s home at
times to go to her friend’s home.
12 I also accept Mr Wilson’s evidence that within a very short time he
regretted his actions and then sought to spend increased
time with the boys. Ms
Wilson would not agree. The parties attended family dispute resolution
counselling, but were still unable
to reach an agreement. Mr Wilson then
commenced these proceedings in September 2013.
13 In November 2013, Ms Wilson arranged for Child A’s general medical
practitioner to refer Child A to Mr E for psychological
support in relation to
“anxiety, low mood, social skills deficits and self-harm in the context of
his parent’s separation,
Child A’s epilepsy diagnosis, Child A
feeling bullied at his primary school and troubles adjusting to his
father’s new
partner and her children”. Child A and Ms Wilson
commenced attending sessions with Mr E on a regular basis. Although Mr Wilson
was aware that Child A had a counsellor through his school, I am satisfied that
Ms Wilson did not tell Mr Wilson that Child A was
seeing Mr E or give Mr Wilson
the opportunity to participate in the sessions.
14 On 2 December 2013, the court made interim orders for the boys to spend
time with each parent on a week about basis during the
school holidays, and in
addition, at specific times during the Christmas festive period. The parties
and their counsel attended
an interim hearing in relation to parenting issues on
14 April 2014. Acting Magistrate De Maio delivered her judgment on 30 April
and made interim orders that the boys live with Ms Wilson and continue to spend
time with Mr Wilson each alternate weekend during
school terms from the
conclusion of school on Friday to the start of school on Monday, extending to
the start of school on Tuesday
in the event of a long weekend.
15 On Monday 22 September 2014, Child A became upset at school and
self-harmed again by [redacted]. Ms Wilson made urgent arrangements
for Child A
to speak to his school counsellor and Mr E, but made no attempt to notify Mr
Wilson of the situation until she sent him
an email at 9:59pm on Wednesday 24
September 2014. I accept Mr Wilson’s evidence that: (1) he only saw the
email the following
morning; (2) this was the first time Mr Wilson became aware
that Child A was seeing a psychologist (as distinct from his school counsellor);
(3) Mr Wilson requested to see Child A urgently to speak to him but Ms Wilson
refused and instead directed him to talk to Mr E; and
(4) Mr Wilson immediately
followed up with Mr E.
16 Fortunately, Child A’s emotional issues gradually improved. In
particular, Child A told Mr E in February 2015 that his
relationships with Ms
Robertson and her daughters had improved following a family holiday during the
Christmas 2014 school holidays,
that things were going better at school, he had
a group of preferred friends and no further issues around bullying, was feeling
cutting himself.
17 I am satisfied that on 7 May 2015, without Mr Wilson’s prior
consent, Ms Wilson took Child A and Child B to Country A for
a holiday for
approximately one week. I considered that Ms Wilson’s evidence in
relation to the actions she took to notify
Mr Wilson of the trip to be
inconsistent, evasive and unpersuasive. I am satisfied that Ms Wilson only gave
Mr Wilson notice by
email that she and the boys were travelling to Country A
just prior to their departure at the airport. Mr Wilson immediately tried
phone, text and email Ms Wilson to confirm that he did not consent to the boys
being removed from Australia, but did not receive
any reply. On 8 May 2015 Mr
Wilson’s solicitors wrote to Ms Wilson’s solicitors informing them
of Ms Wilson’s
notification, confirming that Mr Wilson did not consent to
the travel and seeking that the children be returned to Australia. Ms
Wilson’s solicitors did not respond and shortly afterwards filed a notice
of ceasing to act. Ms Wilson eventually conceded
in cross-examination that she
made a deliberate decision not to tell Mr Wilson about the trip until the day of
their departure, that
her actions were wrong and in breach of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
18 Child A continued to experience ongoing issues with epilepsy, including
absence seizures four or five times a week and ongoing
side effects from the
medications.
In mid-2015 Child A underwent assessments with a clinical
neuropsychologist and a paediatrician in relation to his ongoing epilepsy
and was recommended for surgery. In November 2015 Child A then underwent brain
surgery. To date the surgery appears to have
been successful in stopping Child
A’s seizures.
19 Dr H published his report on 5 May 2016. In summary, Dr H reported that
Child A wished to live with each of his parents on a week
Child B also wished to spend substantially more time with Mr Wilson. The boys
also reported that although they
initially had difficulties adjusting to Ms
Robertson and her daughters, they now enjoyed spending time with them and wanted
them more often.
PARENTING PROCEEDINGS – APPLICABLE LAW:
20 These proceedings are determined under
of the Act. In reaching my decision I will be guided by the objects of that
Part and the principles underlining those objects.
Section 60B
sets out the
objects and the principles underlying them. The starting point is the
application of a presumption pursuant to
of the Act that it is in the
best interests of the children that the children’s parents have equal
shared parental responsibility,
subject to the qualifications set out in the
relevant section.
In this case Mr
Wilson and Ms Wilson agree and I am satisfied that it is in the children’s
best interests and reasonably practicable
that they have equal shared parental
responsibility for the children.
21 I must also consider the obligations placed upon me by
which requires me to then consider whether the children should spend equal time
or substantial and significant time with
each parent. In MRR v
the High Court of Australia
considered the meaning of “reasonably practicable” in
confirmed that the section “is concerned with the reality of the situation
of the parents and the child, not whether it
is desirable that there be equal
time spent by the child with each parent...[The section] requires a practical
assessment of whether
equal time parenting is feasible.” In determining
the outcome of parenting matters, I must, pursuant to
of the Act,
consider the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration. In
determining what is in a child’s
best interests I must consider the
matters set out in
of the Act. I now turn to the relevant
considerations. If I have not referred to a particular consideration, it is
because I consider
it is not relevant in this matter.
PRIMARY CONSIDERATIONS:
The benefit to the children of
having a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents.
22 Mr Wilson and Ms Wilson
both maintained and I am satisfied that there is a real benefit to Child A and
Child B in having and maintaining
a meaningful relationship with each of their
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS:
Any views expressed by the
children and any factors (such as the children’s maturity or level of
understanding) that the court
thinks are relevant to the weight it should give
to children’s views:
23 I accept Mr
Wilson’s evidence that both boys have consistently told him that they want
to spend more time in his care.
24 I also accept Dr H’s evidence that Child A told him he wanted to
live with each of his parents for 50 per cent of the time.
Child B also wanted
to spend increased time with Mr Wilson and at one point told Dr H about “3
days a week [with Mr Wilson]
and then back to mum’s again”. In his
discussions with Dr H, Child B spoke about having more friends around his
his father’s home in Suburb D. Both boys also told Dr H that
the equal shared arrangement for school holiday periods and wanted to share that
time with Ms Robertson and her daughters.
25 I accept Dr H’s evidence that Child A and Child B were nice-natured
lads who presented as relatively uninfluenced and as
sensible, mature children
who were showing good development. In particular, while Child B was younger
than Child A, he was probably
more similar to the maturity of his older brother.
Child A is currently 14 years old and Child B is 11 ½ years old. I accept
Dr H’s evidence that by the time each of the boys were 15 years old, they
would be mature enough to choose their own living
arrangements. Ms Wilson
acknowledged in cross-examination that she also accepted that this was the case.
Whilst I do not regard
either Child A’s or Child B’s views as
determinative, I am satisfied that I should give significant weight to the
views in my decision.
The nature of the relationship of the children with each of the
children’s parents and other persons (including any grandparent
relative of the children):
26 It was not in dispute and I am satisfied that
Child A and Child B both have very close and loving relationships with their
It was also not in dispute and I accept that Child A and Child B both
have close and loving relationships with their extended paternal
and maternal
27 I accept Dr H’s evidence that the boys described getting on well
with Ms Robertson, although Child A acknowledged that he
struggled to get used to his father having a new partner. Both boys also
reported that they initially found it difficult
to relate to Ms
Robertson’s daughters but have since formed friendships with them and miss
them (albeit they still regarded
one of the daughters as being
‘annoying’). When Dr H gave the boys the choice of having all
school holidays with either
just their father or as a group with Ms Robertson
and her daughters, both Child A and Child B preferred to spend holidays together
as a group.
28 It was not in dispute and I am satisfied that Child A and Child B also
have a close and loving relationship with each other.
Interestingly, in
“rating” the relationships with Dr H, Child A gave Child B the same
or similar ranking as Ms Robertson’s
three daughters. Child B ranked
Child A the same as two of Ms Robertson’s daughters, and gave the third
daughter a marginally
higher ranking.
The extent to which each of the children’s parents has
taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions
children and to communicate with the children:
29 I am satisfied that both Mr Wilson and Ms Wilson
have taken every opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long
term issues relating to the boys, spending time with the boys and communicating
with them. Although Mr Wilson told Ms Wilson in
June 2013 that he wanted to
reduce his time with Child A and Child B, I am satisfied that Mr Wilson acted
out of frustration with
Ms Wilson’s interference with his parenting of the
boys, quickly regretted his decision and then sought Ms Wilson’s consent
to revert to the prior arrangements, without success.
30 I am also satisfied that at times, Ms Wilson’s very negative
attitude towards Mr Wilson after he re-partnered with Ms Robertson
Wilson limiting Mr Wilson’s ability to participate in decision making
this were Ms Wilson’s failure
to consult with Mr Wilson about Child A’s referral to Mr E in November
2013 and her decision
not to seek Mr Wilson’s consent in taking the
children out of Australia for a holiday in May 2015. As a final example, I am
satisfied that Ms Wilson continually made arrangements for the children to
attend extra-curricular activities, including during Mr
Wilson’s time with
the children, without consulting Mr Wilson first. I considered that Ms
Wilson’s actions in this regard
reflect very poorly upon her.
The extent to which each of the children’s parents has
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain
31 In October 2012, the parties set aside the
amount of $60,000 from the sale of their Suburb A home in order to pay the
future school fees. I deal with this issue more fully later in
these reasons.
32 In March 2013, Mr Wilson suffered a serious injury to his knee and for
approximately the next two years was only able to work
minimal hours. He was
assessed by the Child Support Agency as having little or no liability to pay
child support. Accordingly,
the major responsibility for financially supporting
the children fell on Ms Wilson. Although Ms Wilson was very critical of Mr
failure to financially maintain the children, I am satisfied that
both parties fulfilled their obligations in accordance with their
financial means.
The likely effect of any changes in the children’s
circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation
from either of their parents, or any other child or other person (including any
grandparent or other relative of the child), with
whom they have been
33 I accept Dr H’s evidence that Child A
wishes to live with both his parents in a week about arrangement but that Child
appeared to have a more mixed view. Although Dr H did not support both
children living in a 50/50 arrangement, primarily because
he considered Child B
had a somewhat stronger attachment to Ms Wilson, I am not satisfied that Child B
would not cope with moving
to a 50/50 arrangement, particularly as his primary
concerns appeared to revolve around having more friends near his mother’s
34 Dr H proposed that the children live primarily with Ms Wilson and for
five nights per fortnight with Mr Wilson (being four nights
in week one and one
night in week two). Ms Wilson was unsupportive of splitting the five nights
across the two week period as proposed
by Dr H, and maintained that it was in
the children’s best interests to spend the time with Mr Wilson in one
consecutive block.
Dr H also stressed that it was important that there be some
flexibility in allowing Child A to have extra time with Mr Wilson on
and later the same for Child B. However, if I made the orders in the terms
recommended by Dr H, I have no confidence that
Ms Wilson would be flexible in
permitting the boys to spend additional time with Mr Wilson if they requested.
In my view, since
June 2013 Ms Wilson continually demonstrated a rigid and
inflexible approach to the boys spending additional time with Mr Wilson.
example, Ms Wilson conceded that in the past she had refused Mr Wilson’s
reasonable requests to spend additional time
with the boys and/or simply ignored
his communications in this regard. As a further example, Ms Wilson also
conceded in cross-examination
that she was not prepared to consider increasing
the children’s time with Mr Wilson even after the publication of Dr
report, notwithstanding both children clearly told Dr H that they
wanted to spend more time with their father. Ms Wilson only
conceded in her
closing submissions that the boys’ time with their father should increase
to a consecutive block of five nights
per fortnight.
The practical difficulty and expense of the children spending
time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty
expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain
personal relations and direct contact with both parents
on a regular
35 The parties live in close proximity to each
other. I am satisfied that there are no practical difficulties or expense in
boys spending time with and communicating with their parents.
The capacity of each of the children’s parents and any
other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional
intellectual needs:
36 I am satisfied that both parties have the
capacity to provide for the boys’ needs. Although Ms Wilson maintained
Mr Wilson did not support a “proactive approach to parenting nor is
he intuitive when it comes to the emotional and intellectual
needs of the
children”, I am not satisfied that these were genuine concerns. Rather I
considered that Ms Wilson’s alleged
concerns were more a reflection of her
own very negative attitude towards Mr Wilson since he has re-partnered with Ms
and Ms Wilson’s rigid and inflexible approach to parenting
The attitude to the children, and to the responsibilities of
parenthood, demonstrated by each of the parents:
37 I accept Dr H’s evidence that both
parties, but particularly Ms Wilson, tended to have a degree of rigidity and
flexibility in how they dealt with various issues.
I also accept Dr
H’s evidence that the parties’ ongoing “black and white’
views of parenting issues has at
times detrimentally impacted on the children.
For example, the children have missed out on planned interstate and overseas
due to the ongoing conflict and poor working parenting relationship
between the parties.
38 I am satisfied that Ms Wilson’s negative attitude towards Mr Wilson
and Ms Robertson also detrimentally impacted on her
ability to communicate
effectively with Mr Wilson. To her credit Ms Wilson acknowledged that she could
improve her communications
with Mr Wilson, including by: (1) responding to his
emails and text messages, instead of simply ignoring them; and (2) immediately
calling Mr Wilson in the event of emergencies, such as when Child A self-harmed
at school in September 2014.
39 I am also satisfied that Ms Wilson’s ability to make positive child
focused decisions was also detrimentally impacted to
some extent by financial
considerations. In particular, it appeared at times that Ms Wilson was under
the mistaken belief that an
order for equal shared parental responsibility meant
that the parties were required to equally share financial responsibility for
children. A number of times, Ms Wilson also raised her concern that in the
event that Mr Wilson’s time with the children
increased, then she may
become liable to pay child support to Mr Wilson.
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be
least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation
the children:
40 If I made an order in the terms proposed by Dr
H, I have considerable concerns that Ms Wilson will take a rigid and inflexible
approach to any requests by Child A and Child B to spend additional time with Mr
Wilson, which will eventually lead to the institution
of further proceedings.
In addition, I accept Dr H’s evidence that as Child A matures, he may
eventually respond to Ms Wilson’s
inflexibility by “voting with his
feet” and moving in with Mr Wilson, again potentially triggering further
proceedings.
CONCLUSIONS IN RELATION TO PARENTING ISSUES:
41 The parties maintained and I accept that the
parties should have equal shared parental responsibility for the children.
Accordingly,
I must also consider whether the children should spend equal time
or substantial and significant time with each parent. I am satisfied
in the children’s best interests to spend equal time with each parent. I
am also satisfied that an equal time arrangement
is reasonably practicable.
I make these findings, in summary, for the following reasons:
42 Child A and Child B have close and loving relationships with each of
their parents and both parents are well able to provide for
the children’
needs. The parties live in close proximity to each other and accordingly equal
time is clearly practicable.
Child A wishes to live equally with each of his
parents. Although Child B’s view was mixed, I am not satisfied that Child
B would not cope with moving to an equal arrangement, particularly as his
primary concerns appeared to revolve around having more
friends in Suburb E,
rather than any concerns about being separated from Ms Wilson.
If I made an
order in the terms proposed by Ms Wilson for the children to live with her and
spend five nights a fortnight with Mr
Wilson, then I have considerable concerns
that she will take a rigid and inflexible approach to any requests by Child A
B to spend additional time with Mr Wilson. Not only may this lead to
the institution of further proceedings, but it may eventually
relationship between Ms Wilson and Child A in particular, by Child A deciding to
vote with his feet and move in with Mr
43 In relation to the Christmas school holidays I am satisfied that extended
blocks of time, rather than the week about arrangement,
will better facilitate
both parties making arrangements to take extended holidays with the children,
including to overseas destinations.
I am satisfied that the parties should
alternate the first and second halves of the holidays, if they cannot otherwise
agree. However,
I considered that Mr Wilson’s proposal that the holidays
be deemed to commence on the last day of school of whichever child
school holidays first is confusing and likely to lead the parties into further
disputes in the future, particularly as
Child A is likely to finish the school
year much earlier than Child B as he moves through high school. In my
view, the Christmas
school holidays should be deemed to commence on the last day
of school of which ever child finishes school last.
44 In relation to the Christmas festive period, Ms Wilson sought a
continuation of the interim orders made in December 2013, that
is that Mr Wilson
spend time with the children from 2pm Christmas Eve until 2pm Christmas Day in
even numbered years and from 2pm
Christmas Day until 2pm Boxing Day in odd
numbered years (and that she spend time with the children during the alternating
On the other hand, Mr Wilson sought a reversal of the current
arrangements, and also proposed that Ms Wilson should spend three
less with the children on Christmas Day than he did. Neither Mr Wilson nor Ms
Wilson addressed the issue to any great extent
during the trial and in
particular, Mr Wilson did not provide any explanation as to why the years should
be “flipped”
or why Ms Wilson should have less time on Christmas Day
with the children than he proposed for himself. I prefer the arrangements
proposed by Ms Wilson as they are equitable and give the children the
opportunity to equally share the Christmas festive period with
both parents.
45 Ms Wilson sought specific orders in relation to Easter, whereas Mr Wilson
did not. Again, neither party addressed the issue to
any great extent during
the trial. Given the week about arrangements, I am not persuaded that specific
orders should be made dealing
with Easter, particularly as Easter coincides with
the end of term one school holidays in most years.
46 Ms Wilson sought specific orders in relation to telephone communications,
and in particular, that the children be permitted to
have access to their own
mobile phone for that purpose. I am satisfied that orders should be made to
facilitate the children having
reasonable telephone communications with the
parties. However, given that Ms Wilson has previously used the children’s
to a mobile phone as a means of undermining Mr Wilson’s parenting
of the children, I am not satisfied that orders should be
made prescribing that
the children must have access to a mobile phone at all times.
47 Ms Wilson sought an order that Mr Wilson “commence financial
support of the children”. Ms Wilson appeared to be under
the mistaken
belief that an order for equal shared parental responsibility included an
obligation that the parties equally bear the
financial costs of the children.
The issue of each party’s obligation to financially maintain the children
falls under the
ambit of the child support legislation. There was no evidence
that either Mr Wilson or Ms Wilson had sought an administrative review
existing child support assessment and there was no child support departure
application before the court. In the circumstances,
I am not satisfied that I
had the ability to make the order as sought by Ms Wilson. Ms Wilson also sought
specific orders in relation
to the children’s attendance at Kennedy
Baptist College from year 7, on the basis that each party be equally responsible
the costs thereof. Neither Mr Wilson nor Ms Wilson addressed the issue of
the choice of school to any great extent during the trial,
albeit it appeared to
be common ground that Child A currently attends the school. I am not persuaded
that specific orders in relation
to the choice of school are even necessary at
this point in time. In 2012 the parties set aside funds to meet the
future school fees (which I deal with again later in these
reasons). I am not satisfied that it is either just and equitable or proper
make an order requiring the parties to equally pay the children’s
educational costs for the following reasons:
a) There was no evidence before the court as to the quantum of the
children’s current and future school fees, uniforms, books
related educational expenses; and
b) There was no evidence as to when the funds set aside by the parties will run
c) In any event, on the basis of the parties’ respective updated financial
statements, I was not satisfied that either Mr Wilson
or Ms Wilson has the
capacity to pay the school fees and other related educational expenses from
their respective incomes and/or
capital, once the funds that have been set aside
48 Ms Wilson sought specific orders in relation to the parties keeping each
other informed in relation to relevant medical issues
concerning the children.
The parties have experienced considerable issues with their communications about
the children since 2013.
Nevertheless, they maintained that an order for equal
shared parental responsibility was in the children’s best interests
reasonably practicable. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make orders to
facilitate the exchange of relevant information,
and in addition, for both
parties to be able to access information directly from the children’s
medical and educational providers.
Subject to both parties having liberty to
make further submissions in this regard
, I propose to make standard orders
in relation to the provision of medical and educational information.
49 Both parties sought orders in relation to the children’s passports
and/or interstate and overseas travel arrangements.
I am satisfied that both
parties should have the opportunity to take the children on interstate and
overseas holidays during their
usual time with the children, provided that they
give prior written notice to the parties.
Subject to both parties have
liberty to make further submissions in this regard
, I propose to make
standard orders in relation to interstate and overseas travel. Both parties
sought that they hold the children’s
passports. Given Ms Wilson’s
actions in May 2015, I am not satisfied that she should hold the
children’s passports.
It was common ground that Mr Wilson had consented
to the children travelling overseas with Ms Wilson on another occasion after
and did not attempt to disrupt or hinder the travel. I am satisfied
that Mr Wilson should hold the children’s passports.
50 Ms Wilson sought an order that the children’s middle names be
changed by adding her maiden name of “[redacted]”.
Wilson nor Ms Wilson addressed the issue at all during the trial. There was
little or no evidence as to the children’s
views in relation to the
proposed change of name, the short and long term effects of the proposed change
on the children, including
any embarrassment likely to be caused to the
children, the impact of the change on the children’s relationship with Mr
and any confusion of identity that might arise to the children if their
names were changed or not changed. At the end of the day
I was not satisfied
that Ms Wilson established to the requisite standard that the change of name was
in the children’s best
interests. I decline to make such an order.
51 Mr Wilson sought an order that Ms Wilson provide him with copies of
photographs of the children, previous holidays and their previous
the parties gave little, if any, attention to this issue during the trial. I am
satisfied that both parties be able
to retain copies of family photographs
involving the children, their holidays and homes during their relationship.
However, I am
not satisfied that Ms Wilson should necessarily be put to the sole
expense of having to identify and then provide copies of the photographs
I propose to give the parties liberty to make further
submissions
as to how Mr Wilson should select the photographs he seeks to
copy, and the mechanism for making the copies.
PROPERTY PROCEEDINGS - LEGAL PRINCIPLES:
52 These proceedings are determined pursuant to
of the Act. I must firstly determine whether it is just and equitable
to make an order
, having regard to
the parties’ rights and interests in their existing
If I so determine, then
I must consider the factors set out in the
legislation.
In this case the
parties separated on a final basis in November 2011 and were divorced in May
2016. The parties both sought to
sever their financial relationship with each
other and both sought finality in relation to the property proceedings. Having
to the existing interests in property referred to later in these reasons,
I am satisfied that it would be just and equitable to make
an order by way of
alteration of property interests.
53 Parties have a clear obligation to make full and frank disclosure of
their financial circumstances in a timely manner and present
evidence of their
financial position in a clear and understandable form. Failure to do so may
entitle the judicial officer to take
a “robust view” in relation to
findings regarding a party’s financial position (including a party’s
to meet any proposed order) where that party has failed to make full
and frank disclosure of his/her financial
In this case I consider
that Ms Wilson failed to make a full and frank disclosure of her financial
position and failed to present
evidence of her financial position in a clear and
understandable form. For example:
a) Ms Wilson did not disclose her redundancy payment in December 2015 to Mr
Wilson. When Mr Wilson’s solicitors specifically
asked Ms Wilson to
disclose details but mistakenly referred to the wrong company, Ms Wilson used
the error to avoid disclosing the
information by responding that she had not
received a redundancy from the company. However, in my view, Ms Wilson’s
duty required
her to proactively take steps to provide disclosure of all
documents relevant to the issues in the case, not simply to sit back and
until specific documents were correctly identified and requested. Although Mr
Wilson subsequently obtained documents via subpoena
evidencing the amount of the
redundancy payment, there was little or no disclosure to evidence how Ms Wilson
dealt with all the funds.
b) Ms Wilson did not disclose all the statements in relation to the
children’s Education Savings Plans, in particular, the
statements for the
period from 13 January 2014 until 30 June 2014 when substantial withdrawals
appeared to have been made from Child
A’s account. There was also little
or no disclosure to evidence how Ms Wilson dealt with the funds that were
PROPERTY PROCEEDINGS - FACTUAL BACKGROUND:
54 In order to give some context to the
parties’ existing property pool, I firstly set out the relevant factual
background.
55 At the commencement of their cohabitation, Mr Wilson owned a motor
vehicle and had a half interest in a [redacted]. Ms Wilson
owned a motor
vehicle. Neither Mr Wilson nor Ms Wilson had any other assets or liabilities of
any significance. Initially, Mr Wilson
and Ms Wilson both worked full time, Mr
Wilson as a [maintenance worker] and Ms Wilson as a [financial worker]. In
August 1996,
the parties then commenced their own contracting business. Mr
Wilson worked in the business on a part time / casual basis, which
enabled him
to also do considerable work on the parties’ various properties (and
later, to assist in the care of the children).
Ms Wilson continued to work on a
full time basis as a financial worker, but also assisted in the contracting
business by doing the
bookwork. After Child A’s birth, Ms Wilson ceased
full-time work and was primarily engaged as a homemaker and parent, but
continued to do the books for the business.
56 In 1994, the parties purchased a block of land in [Suburb B] and later
built a home on the block. The parties borrowed from Westpac
Bank in order to
fund the purchase and building costs. In 1995, Ms Wilson’s parents gifted
the parties the sum of $7,500 which
was used to reduce the mortgage. Mr Wilson
made significant improvements to the Suburb B property, including but not
clearing and levelling the land, establishing lawns, gardens, putting
in a fish pond with a water feature, erecting fences, and building
walls, a brick barbeque and a letterbox.
57 In 1997, the parties sold the Suburb B property and applied the net
proceeds towards the purchase of a block of land in [Suburb
C]. They later
built a home on the block. Again the parties borrowed from Westpac Bank in
order to fund the purchase and building
costs. Mr Wilson made significant
improvements to the Suburb C property, including but not limited to clearing and
levelling the
land, establishing lawns, gardens, laying brick paving, putting in
a fish pond with a water feature, erecting fences and constructing
58 In 2003, the parties sold the Suburb C property for $360,000 and applied
the net proceeds towards the purchase of a 5 acre block
of land in Suburb A for
$228,000. The parties initially constructed a temporary dwelling (“the
Shed”) and moved onto
the property in January 2004. Thereafter, they
commenced construction of their new home on the property. The parties borrowed
the Commonwealth Bank to fund the purchase and building costs. Mr Wilson
also made significant improvements to the Suburb A property,
including but not
limited to extensive contracting work, assisting in the laying of concrete pads
and construction of the Shed, fitting
out the Shed with a kitchen, bathroom,
bedrooms and a living area as the temporary dwelling for the family, creating an
the boys on which to play [sports], creating a
[recreational play
59 In 2006, Ms Wilson returned to part-time work as an [administrative
professional]. In 2006, Ms Wilson’s parents gifted
the parties the sum of
$4,800 which they applied towards the building costs for the new home and to
purchase household contents.
The parties eventually moved into the new home in
April 2007.
60 In 2007, Mr Wilson received an inheritance in the amount of $94,758,
which was used to reduce the mortgage on the Suburb A property,
to pay off debt
from Mr Wilson’s contracting business and take the family on a holiday to
61 In April 2009, the parties closed down the contracting business and
purchased a [recreation] business. The parties borrowed $170,000
to fund the
purchase of the business and a [redacted]. Mr Wilson worked in the business on
a part time / casual basis. Ms Wilson
continued to assist in the business by
doing the bookwork. In 2010, an employee of the recreation business was injured
As a result, the business incurred a Work Cover debt of approximately
$23,000. In or about 2011, Mr Wilson obtained full time employment
[vehicle maintenance worker]. In addition, the parties continued to operate the
recreation business on a part time / casual
62 During the parties’ relationship, Ms Wilson’s father started
a share portfolio to be held in trust for his grandchildren,
including Child A
and Child B, until they each became adults. The parties contributed $6,000
towards the share portfolio. Over
the years, the children’s birthday
monies from various maternal family members were also contributed to the share
Neither Mr Wilson nor Ms Wilson maintained that they owned or
controlled the funds invested by Ms Wilson’s father on behalf
Child A and Child B.
63 The parties separated under the one roof in November 2011. In June 2012,
Mr Wilson moved from the main residence into the Shed.
In October 2012, the
parties sold the Suburb A property for $1,257,000. After paying the sale costs,
discharging the home loan,
and the recreation business loan, the parties
disbursed the proceeds
as follows:
a) $60,000 was set aside to meet the children’s future school
b) The remaining proceeds were divided equally between the parties. Each party
used their share of the net proceeds to purchase
a new home: Mr Wilson in
[Suburb D] and Ms Wilson
in [Suburb E].
64 I accept Mr Wilson’s evidence that he agreed to the $60,000 being
set aside to meet the children’s future school fees
on the basis that the
funds were paid into an account under the joint control of the parties. In
addition, both parties agreed to
continue making regular deposits into the
children’s bank accounts to help meet their future education costs.
However, I am
satisfied that instead of holding the funds in a joint account, Ms
Wilson unilaterally dealt with the $60,000 and the additional
deposits by: (1)
transferring $20,000 to her father to invest; and (2) transferring approximately
$47,000 into two Education Savings
Plans which she alone controlled. Ms Wilson
conceded in cross examination that she did not consult Mr Wilson or seek his
prior to dealing with the funds. Ms Wilson’s explanation as to
how she and her father dealt with the funds was confused and
unsatisfactory for
the following reasons:
a) In her opening address, Ms Wilson maintained that only approximately $21,000
remained in the Education Savings Plans as at trial.
The statements disclosed
by Ms Wilson confirmed that this was the case. In particular, the statements
revealed that by January
2016, Child A’s account had been completely
depleted. However, in my view, Ms Wilson was unable to account for how she
the funds from Child A’s account. In particular, the statements
for Child A’s plan revealed that at 13 January 2014
the investment balance
was $22,662. Ms Wilson conceded that she did not disclose any statements for
the period from 13 January 2014
to 30 June 2014. However, she did disclose a
statement for the period commencing 1 July 2014 which showed an opening balance
$6,034. Ms Wilson did not disclose any documents that would explain the
reduction in the account balance of over $16,500. Although
maintained that the funds in Child A’s plan had been used to pay his
school fees, at the end of the day, I was left
in considerable doubt as to
whether this was in fact the case.
b) Ms Wilson also maintained that the $20,000 she had transferred to her father
to invest was now worth $47,000. Ms Wilson insisted
in cross-examination that
she did not know how her father had invested the $20,000 and maintained she had
never seen any documents
evidencing the investments. However, later in her
cross-examination, Ms Wilson maintained that the increase in the value of the
was largely due to her adding approximately $26,000 to the investment
from her redundancy payment. In my view, Ms Wilson could have
clarified the
issue by having her father file an affidavit in the proceedings or asking him to
provide her with the relevant documents
so that she could disclose them, but she
chose not to. Mr Wilson’s attempts to clarify the situation by issuing a
to produce documents to Ms Wilson’s father also proved fruitless.
65 In or about March 2013, Mr Wilson injured his knee whilst at Ms
Robertson’s [rural lot]. He was unable to work to any significant
for the next two years.
In October 2014 Mr Wilson had an operation on his
knee. In November 2014, Mr Wilson sold the recreation business, including the
and all the business equipment, for $40,000. I accept Mr
Wilson’s evidence that he used all the proceeds of sale to pay off
Work Cover debt and other business debts and that he kept Ms Wilson informed in
writing of his actions. In or about March 2015
Mr Wilson had sufficiently
recovered from his surgery to return to his full time employment as a vehicle
maintenance worker. However,
in March 2015, Mr Wilson’s employer then
terminated his employment. Subsequently, Mr Wilson started work as a
self-employed
contractor.
66 In December 2015, Ms Wilson was made redundant from her employment.
She commenced employment with her current employer in or about February
In April 2016, Mr Wilson’s solicitors wrote to Ms Wilson
seeking disclosure in relation to her redundancy payment from [Company
Wilson responded in writing that she did not receive a redundancy payment from
the company.
Whilst technically correct (as the company had recently been
taken over by another entity which continued Ms Wilson’s employment),
Wilson failed to disclose any details of the redundancy that she did receive and
failed to disclose relevant documents evidencing
the redundancy payment. The
information only came to light when Mr Wilson issued a subpoena to Ms
Wilson’s former employer
to produce the relevant documents. The
subpoenaed documents revealed that Ms Wilson received a redundancy payment of
$48,595, net
of tax. Ms Wilson’s final pay slip and redundancy
calculation document revealed that Ms Wilson’s redundancy payment
up of salary owing on termination, unused leave entitlements and a redundancy
payment of 16 weeks, based on Ms Wilson having
commenced employment on 5 July
2006 and having completed nine years of service.
67 Ms Wilson’s evidence in cross-examination about how she dealt with
the redundancy payment was confused and unclear. She
conceded that she arranged
for her redundancy payment to be paid directly into her father’s bank
account and that he then made
monthly payments back to her. Ms Wilson’s
bank statements revealed that her father transferred the amount of $5,138 into
account in each of December 2015,
January 2016 and February 2016. Ms
Wilson conceded that the February 2016 transaction record that the payment was a
from her father was not correct and that the funds in fact
came from her redundancy payment. Although Ms Wilson initially maintained
her father also transferred a further amount to her in March 2016, there was no
such deposit recorded in her bank statements.
Ms Wilson also maintained that she
spent $10,000 to $12,000 on renovations to her kitchen. However, Ms Wilson
conceded that she
had not disclosed any documents in relation to the renovations
and that she gave all the invoices to her father for him to pay direct.
Wilson maintained that the remainder of the redundancy payment was being held by
her father to meet the children’s future
school fees. Initially she
maintained that this was $26,000 but then later maintained that the amount was
in the “low twenties”.
Again, Ms Wilson did not disclose any
documents evidencing what precise amounts her father held on her behalf or how
the funds had
been invested.
EXISTING INTERESTS IN PROPERTY:
68 I am satisfied that the property pool of the
parties is as follows:
Ms Wilson’s assets and superannuation
Suburb E property
$540,000.00
CBA account [redacted]
CBA account [redacted]
2009 Mazda motor vehicle
Commodore motor vehicle
Household contents
Children’s education fund and investment fund
Redundancy payment
Paid legal fees
Ms Wilson's superannuation
$106,345.00
Ms Wilson's liabilities
Suburb E mortgage
-$245,891.00
Credit card debts
Debt to Ms Wilson's father
Mr Wilson's assets and superannuation
Suburb D property
$550,000.00
CBA account [redacted]
Toyota motor vehicle
Boxtop trailer
Household contents
Tools of trade
[redacted] and recreation equipment
Paid legal fees
Mr Wilson's superannuation
Mr Wilson's liabilities
Suburb D mortgage
-$282,949.00
Loan from Ms Robertson
Credit card debts
Centrelink debt
$784,536.00
69 I make the following comments in relation to the table:
Items 1, 5, 14 and 19
: The parties agreed these items.
Items 2, 3, 11, 15 and 23
: The parties did not agree the current
balances of their respective bank accounts and mortgages over their respective
Mr Wilson nor Ms Wilson sought to specifically cross-examine the
other about the issue or tendered statements to verify the current
balances. I
have proceeded on the basis of accepting each party’s admission as to the
current balance of their respective
mortgage and savings accounts.
: Mr Wilson maintained that the Mazda motor vehicle should be
included in the property pool at a value of $22,000. I do not agree
following reasons: Firstly, Ms Wilson only disclosed that she sold the Mazda
motor vehicle to her father during her cross-examination.
She did not disclose
any documents in relation to the transaction, including documents that may have
validated the amount she claimed
she was paid by her father. However, I am
satisfied that Ms Wilson most likely used the sale proceeds towards purchase her
motor vehicle (which was included in the property pool). To also
include the Mazda in the property pool would, in effect, double
count its value.
Secondly, there was no evidence to suggest that the Mazda was worth $22,000 at
the time of its disposal.
Items 6, 16, 17 and 18
: The parties did not agree the current values
of their respective household contents or Mr Wilson’s motor vehicle and
There was no suggestion that either party had sought a valuation of
the items and little attention was given to the issue during
the course of the
trial. I have proceeded on the basis of accepting Ms Wilson’s admission
in relation to the value of her
household contents and accepting Mr
Wilson’s admissions in relation to the value of his household contents,
motor vehicle and
: In her closing submissions Ms Wilson conceded that the total
current value of the funds set aside for the children’s future
was $67,000. Ms Wilson also conceded in cross-examination that although most of
the funds were held by her father, he
would return them to her if she requested.
Mr Wilson’s counsel maintained in closing submissions that either: (1) the
should be added back into the property pool and credited as a distribution
to Ms Wilson; or (2) the funds should not be included
in the property pool, but
that Ms Wilson should pay the funds into a joint account under the control of
both parties to meet the
children’s future school fees (as originally
intended by them). I am satisfied that the parties originally agreed to set
funds for the boys’ future education. I am satisfied that Ms Wilson
should be required to pay the sum of $67,000 into a joint
account, under the
control of both parties, for the purposes of meeting the children’s future
school fees. Accordingly, I
am satisfied that the funds should be excluded from
the property pool on this basis.
f) During the trial, Mr Wilson appeared to maintain that the funds invested by
Ms Wilson’s father in shares for the benefit
of Child A and Child B should
also be included in the property pool. However, it was not a matter which was
pursued during closing
submissions. Ms Wilson conceded during the trial that
the total current value of the boys’ interest in this investment was
approximately $21,000. Aside from the amount of $6,000 directly contributed by
the parties during their relationship, various extended
maternal family members
also contributed substantial funds to the investment. There was no evidence to
suggest that the parties
owned or controlled the investment, or treated the
investment as being their property. At the end of the day, I am not satisfied
that Mr Wilson established to the requisite standard that the investment forms
part of the property pool of the parties.
Mr Wilson maintained that the full amount of Ms
Wilson’s redundancy payment should be added back into the property pool.
do not agree. Leaving aside Ms Wilson’s confused evidence that part of
the redundancy payment was now represented in the children’s
education fund held by her father, there was no evidence to suggest that the
remaining funds still existed. I am not satisfied
it is just and equitable to
add back the redundancy into the property pool.
Items 9 and 21
: Both parties spent considerable amounts on litigation
costs. Mr Wilson’s costs were nearly double that of Ms Wilson’s.
Mr Wilson maintained that both parties’ litigation costs should be added
back into the property pool. I do not agree. There
was no suggestion that the
parties paid their litigation from assets or savings existing at the time of
separation. Mr Wilson’s
position was that he had borrowed money from Ms
Robertson to pay his litigation costs. Ms Wilson’s position was that she
paid her litigation costs partially from drawing down on her mortgage and
borrowings from her father and partially from the funds
deposited into her bank
account, including from her earnings after separation. If I was to add back
both parties’ litigation
costs, then the effect of doing so would in
reality mean that Ms Wilson was partially subsidizing Mr Wilson’s costs.
are in issue, then they can be more appropriately dealt with by way of
a separate application for costs.
: The parties did not agree the current values of their respective
superannuation entitlements. I accept Mr Wilson’s evidence
superannuation entitlements were valued at $56,405. Although Ms Wilson
maintained that the value was $50 greater, she did
not cross-examine Mr Wilson
on the issue. Ms Wilson did not provide an up to date statement of her
superannuation entitlements and
at the conclusion of the trial, I made an order
requiring Ms Wilson to do so. Ms Wilson subsequently filed a printout of an
statement for her account as at 3 July 2016 showing that her account
balance was $106,344.96. I have accordingly adopted the amount
of $106,345 for
the purposes of the table.
Items 11, 25 and 26
: Both parties had credit card liabilities at the
time of the trial. Mr Wilson conceded that he had no significant credit card
at separation and the current liabilities were all incurred post
separation. Mr Wilson also conceded that his Centrelink debt arose
as a result
of an overpayment after he injured his knee. There was little or no evidence as
to Ms Wilson’s position at separation,
when she incurred the existing
credit card liabilities or for what purposes. Given that the parties have been
separated since November
2011 and informally disentangled much of their joint
finances in October 2012, I am not satisfied that it is just and equitable to
include these liabilities in the parties’ property pool.
: In her closing submissions Ms Wilson raised for the first
time that she owed her father $16,000. She did not disclose the existence
the alleged liability in her affidavits, financial statements or her schedule of
assets and liabilities filed with her Papers
for the Judicial Officer. She did
not disclose any documents evidencing the alleged loan and chose not to have her
father file an
affidavit himself. In the circumstances, I was not satisfied
that Ms Wilson established to the requisite standard that the liability
or that it was just and equitable to include the liability in the property pool.
: Ms Wilson sought that the proceeds of sale of the recreation business,
[redacted] and related equipment be added back into the
property pool. I do not
agree. I am satisfied that Mr Wilson fully disbursed the proceeds to pay joint
liabilities, in particular,
the remaining business debts.
: Mr Wilson sought that his debt to Ms Robertson should be
included in the property pool. I do not agree. Mr Wilson readily acknowledged
that the liability was incurred by him after separation to enable him to pay his
litigation costs and assist him to meet his living
costs, particularly after he
injured his knee and was unable to work. I am not satisfied that it is just and
equitable that Ms Wilson
should be expected to bear a proportion of
SECTION 79(4)
(a), (b) (c):
70 Ms Wilson submitted that contributions should be
assessed as to 60% to her and 40% to Mr Wilson. In particular, Ms Wilson
that she should be given additional credit for being the main income
earner and the primary home maker and parent to the family.
I accept that Ms
Wilson made a substantial contribution during the marriage including in these
areas. I also accept that Ms Wilson
made a substantial contribution after
separation, in particular by assuming the major financial responsibility for the
children after
Mr Wilson injured his knee and the primary care of the children
after June 2013. Ms Wilson also received a substantial redundancy
payment after
separation. However, given Ms Wilson’s lack of frankness about the
payment and the paucity of reliable evidence
as to how she dealt with all the
proceeds, I am not satisfied that Ms Wilson established to the requisite
standard that she should
be given any additional credit in this regard in my
assessment of contributions.
71 In my view, Ms Wilson’s submission failed to adequately take into
account that Mr Wilson also made substantial contributions,
including but not
limited to:
a) Working throughout the parties’ relationship and contributing his
earnings to the acquisition, conservation and improvement
of the parties’
property and to the welfare of the family generally;
b) Late in the parties’ marriage, receiving an inheritance of $94,758,
which was used to reduce the mortgage on the Suburb
A property, to pay off debt
from the contracting business and take the family on a holiday to State A;
c) Doing significant amounts of landscaping and building work that substantially
improved the Suburb B, Suburb C and
Suburb A properties;
d) Substantially assisting in the homemaking duties, in particular by assuming
the major responsibility for the “outside”
chores, such as gardening
and general maintenance, as well as assisting to some extent with the
“inside” chores;
e) Substantially assisting in the care of the children, in particular by
rearranging his work hours to accommodate Ms Wilson’s
work hours so that
he could care for the children.
72 In balancing the various contributions of the parties in their respective
spheres I am satisfied that the parties’ contributions
should be assessed
as being equal.
SECTION 79(4)(e)
(2) FACTORS):
73 I will now consider the relevant factors as
required by the legislation. If I have not referred to factor, it is because I
the view it is not relevant in this case.
Ms Wilson maintained that
the court should make whatever adjustment to her was necessary to enable her to
receive 60% of the net property
of the parties. On the other hand, Mr Wilson
maintained and I agree that no further adjustment for
74 Mr Wilson is 47 years old and Ms Wilson is 42 years old. Both parties
are in good health. I have already dealt with the property
and financial
resources of the parties earlier in these reasons. In the past Mr Wilson has
worked in various fields, including as
a maintenance worker, contractor and
vehicle maintenance worker. Since recuperating from his knee injury, Mr Wilson
has commenced
his own business as a contractor and currently earns a modest
income. Mr Wilson maintained that his business is slowly starting
to build up.
In my view, Mr Wilson has the capacity over time to build up his business and/or
seek other employment in his fields
of experience that will enable him to earn a
reasonable income. Ms Wilson has work qualifications and experience as a
professional.
Historically she earned a reasonable income in excess of $80,000
per annum. She currently works between 24 and 26 hours per week,
approximately $50,500 per annum. In addition, Ms Wilson maintained that she
does some professional services for other
third party friends and clients for
little or no remuneration. In my view, Ms Wilson has the option to cease doing
this “free”
work and instead obtain additional paid employment
and/or clients in order generate a reasonable income.
75 Pursuant to the orders I intend to make the boys will live equally with
the parties. The parties’ commitments are as set
out in their respective
financial statements. Both parties have an obligation to support Child A and
Child B. Ms Wilson receives
some Centrelink benefits in relation to the
children. These entitlements are likely to change somewhat with the
changed living arrangements. Mr Wilson conceded that pursuant
to child support assessments, he does not currently pay child support
consequence of his knee injury and very modest income since he commenced his new
business as a contractor. There was no evidence
before the court as to each
party’s future liability for child support given that the children will
live equally with both
76 Mr Wilson’s mother resides with Mr Wilson. Although she receives a
Centrelink payment and contributes to her living costs,
I accept Mr
Wilson’s evidence that he subsidises her living costs to a minor extent.
Neither Mr Wilson nor Ms Wilson has any
obligation to financially support any
other person. Ms Wilson has not re-partnered since separation. Mr Wilson has
re-partnered
with Ms Robertson since separation, however they do not live
together and maintain separate residences. Ms Robertson has provided
with some financial assistance, in particular by lending him significant amounts
in order to pay his litigation costs and
to meet living expenses, particularly
during the period when he was unable to work due to his knee injury. Ms Wilson
maintained that
Mr Wilson received “non-taxable income” from Ms
Robertson and that Ms Robertson would be a significant financial resource
Wilson in the future. However, there was simply no cogent evidence that either
was the case.
77 The parties lived together from approximately March 1994 until June 2012.
I am satisfied that the duration of the relationship had no significant
impact on the earning capacity of either party.
SECTION 79(4)(d)
,(f) & (g) FACTORS:
78 The orders proposed by Mr Wilson and Ms Wilson
have no impact on the earning capacity of either party. I have already dealt
the remaining factors, in so far as they are relevant.
PROPERTY PROCEEDINGS – DISCUSSION AND
CONCLUSIONS:
79 I intend to order that the property of the
parties be divided equally. The parties agree that they will each retain their
assets, liabilities and superannuation entitlements. In order to
effect a 50/50 division, Ms Wilson will be required to pay Mr Wilson
$40,607, which I intend to round down to $40,600. In addition, Ms Wilson will
be required to re-pay the sum of $67,000
into a joint account in the names of
her-self and Mr Wilson, in order to meet the children’s ongoing school
80 Pursuant to the orders I intend to make, Ms Wilson will continue to own
her home in Suburb E, subject to the mortgage, her motor
vehicle, savings,
household contents and superannuation entitlements. She will have an additional
liability to pay $40,600 to Mr
Wilson, and in addition, will have some credit
card liabilities. Mr Wilson will also continue to own his own home in Suburb D,
to the mortgage, his savings, motor vehicle, household contents,
trailer, tools and superannuation entitlements. He will receive
the cash amount
of $40,600 from Ms Wilson, but will still have a significant debt to Ms
Robertson, as well as some other minor liabilities.
In the circumstances, I am
satisfied that the proposed financial division is just and equitable and
otherwise proper.
81 I propose to issue these reasons from chambers
in order to give the parties an opportunity to consider them and my proposed
I propose to make the following orders:
previous parenting orders in relation to the children, CHILD A born 26 June 2002
and CHILD B born 23 December 2004 (“the
children”) be
discharged.
applicant father, MR WILSON, and the respondent mother, MS WILSON, have equal
shared parental responsibility for the children.
children live equally with each of the parties on a week about basis with
changeover to occur at the children’s school(s)
at the commencement of
school on Mondays, and in the event that the Monday is a non-school day, then at
the children are not already in the care of the father pursuant to paragraph 3,
then the mother’s time with the children
pursuant to paragraph 3 be
suspended and the children spend time with the father as follows:
a) For one half of the Christmas school holidays each year as agreed between the
parties in writing and failing agreement, for the
first half of the Christmas
school holidays in even numbered years and for the second half of the Christmas
school holidays in odd
numbered years.
b) From 2pm Christmas Eve until 2pm Christmas Day in even numbered years; and
from 2pm Christmas Day until 2pm Boxing Day in odd
numbered years.
c) On Father’s Day each year from 5pm on the day before Father’s Day
until the commencement of school the Monday after
Father’s Day.
d) On the each of the children’s birthdays each year from the conclusion
of school until 8pm if a school day; and if a non-school
day, then from 2pm
until the commencement of school the following day, or 10am if a non-school
e) On the father’s birthday each year from the conclusion of school until
8pm if a school day; and if a non-school day, then
from 2pm until the
commencement of school the following day, or 10am if a non-school day.
the children are not already in the care of the mother pursuant to paragraph 3,
then the father’s time with the children
pursuant to paragraph 3 be
suspended and the children spend time with the mother as follows:
a) For one half of the Christmas school holidays each year as agreed between the
parties in writing and failing agreement, for the
first half of the Christmas
school holidays in odd numbered years and for the second half of the Christmas
school holidays in even
numbered years.
b) From 2pm Christmas Eve until 2pm Christmas Day in odd numbered years; and
from 2pm Christmas Day until 2pm Boxing Day in even
numbered years.
c) On Mother’s Day each year from 5pm on the day before Mother’s Day
until the commencement of school the Monday after
Mother’s Day.
d) On the each of the children’s birthdays each year from the conclusion
of school until 8pm if a school day; and if a non-school
day, then from 2pm
until the commencement of school the following day, or 10am if a non-school
e) On the mother’s birthday each year from the conclusion of school until
8pm if a school day; and if a non-school day, then
from 2pm until the
commencement of school the following day, or 10am if a non-school day.
the purposes of these orders “the Christmas school holidays” shall
be deemed to commence on the conclusion of school
on the last day of school of
which ever child finishes school last in the relevant year.
that do not take place at the children’s school(s) in accordance with
these orders shall take place as agreed between
the parties in writing and
failing agreement the party who is taking the children into his/her care do
collect the children from
the other party’s residence.
party have reasonable telephone and/or other electronic communications with the
children when the children are in the care of
the other party.
party shall provide the other party with notice of any significant medical
issues concerning the children including details of
any treating practitioner
and if requested to do so by the other party, shall authorise any treating
practitioner to discuss the
children’s medical issues with that
party be permitted to attend any school events or activities that parents would
ordinarily be expected and invited to attend
including but not limited to school
assemblies, parent / teacher evenings and school carnivals.
party be permitted to contact the school that the children attend to provide
them with copies of any school reports, reports
on behavioural issues, school
circulars or notices concerning functions, parent / teacher nights and other
school activities to which
parents would ordinarily be expected and invited to
Applicant and the Respondent have liberty to travel with the said children
interstate and outside the Commonwealth of Australia
for the purpose of holidays
provided that:
a) the travelling party give the non-travelling party not less than one
month’s written notice of his or her intention to travel;
b) not later than 14 days prior to departure, the travelling party provide the
non-travelling party with a copy of:
i) the proposed travel itinerary; and
details for the said children being the address where they will be primarily
staying for the duration of the said holiday
together with a telephone contact
and the travelling party keep the non-travelling party informed of any changes
to these arrangements; and
is not a current “
Do not Travel
warning issued
by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade at the time of departure in
relation to the proposed destination.
Applicant hold the children’s passports and cause the said passports to be
released to the Respondent 14 days prior to her
travelling with the children,
and the Respondent return the passports to the Applicant within 7 days of the
children’s return.
60 days of these orders being made the mother do pay the sum of $67,000 into an
account in the joint names of the parties (and
on the basis that both
parties’ consent is required to conduct transactions on the account).
the right, title and interest of the Respondent in the following vest in the
Applicant absolutely:
a) Any real estate registered in the name of the Respondent;
b) Any motor vehicle registered in the Applicant’s name and in his
possession;
c) All household furniture, chattels and personal items in the possession of the
d) Any funds held by the Applicant in any bank, building society, credit union
or other financial institution; and
e) Any superannuation or employment entitlements.
all right, title and interest of the Applicant in the following rest in the
Respondent absolutely:
a) Any real estate registered in the Respondent’s name;
b) Any motor vehicle registered in the Respondent’s name and in her
possession;
c) All household furniture, chattels and personal items in the possession of the
Respondent;
d) Any funds held by the Respondent in any bank, building society, credit union
or other financial institution; and
e) Any superannuation or employment entitlements.
Applicant indemnify the Respondent in respect of and assume sole liability for
any liability in the Applicant’s name.
Respondent indemnify the Applicant in respect of and assume sole liability for
any liability in the Respondent’s name.
60 days of these orders being made, the Respondent pay the Applicant the sum of
unless otherwise specified in these orders:
a) Each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other
property and chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in
the possession of such
party as at the date of these orders and that for this purpose bank accounts are
deemed to be in the possession
of the person whose name appears on the
bank’s record thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the
possession of the
beneficiary thereof, superannuation entitlements are deemed to
be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker whose
working future provides the condition for payment out of such entitlements;
b) Each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability
encumbering any item of property to which that party
is entitled pursuant to
these orders.
documents produced by named persons pursuant to subpoena be returned or
destroyed in accordance with the request from the named
person on the expiration
of 42 days from this order.
relation to material tendered as an exhibit into evidence in these proceedings:
a) all parties must collect the exhibits tendered by them (“their
exhibits”), from the Chambers Magistrate Sutherland,
at least 28 days,
and no later than 42 days, from today’s date;
b) all parties must contact the Chambers of Magistrate Sutherland to arrange the
collection of their exhibits;
c) in default of compliance with subparagraph (a), all material tendered as an
exhibit, save and except for material produced pursuant
to subpoena, will be
destroyed by the court without notice to the parties.
the event of an appeal being lodged prior to the expiration period of 42 days,
the above paragraphs do not apply.
matter be removed from the Judge’s Defended List.
outstanding proceedings otherwise be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [81] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
17 August 2016
Goode & Goode
FLC 93-286 at [56].
(2010) FLC 93-424
section 79(2)
Stanford v Stanford
FLC 93‑518.
section 79(4)
of the Act.
Fotia & Welsh
[2013] FCWA 112
Reichstein &
(2006) FamCA 1422
[2002] FamCA 156
(2002) FLC 93-117
Towards the
end of the trial, Ms Wilson sought to rely on a document prepared by her father
setting out details of the funds he held
on her behalf. I was satisfied that I
should not accept the document, given that Ms Wilson had elected at the
commencement of the
trial not to call her father as a witness and instead sought
that he be her McKenzie friend.
Khademollah &
Khademollah
[2000] FamCA 1045
(2000) FLC 93-050
Yeates (as executor for Mr Yeates)
[2013] FCWA 117
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (533 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter