URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2016/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MELVIN and MELVIN [2016] FCWAM 10 (14 January 2016)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
MELVIN and MELVIN
[2016] FCWAM 10
10 SEPTEMBER 2015
DELIVERED :
14 JANUARY 2016
FILE NO/S :
PTW 6460 of 2012
Catchwords:
Leave to institute property settlement proceedings out of time; hardship to
wife established; adequate explanation for delay; leave
granted pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Mr S Jones
Respondent : Ms I Milne
Solicitors:
Applicant : Slater & Gordon
Respondent : Avon Legal
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS
REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND
IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
1 [Ms Melvin] and [Mr Melvin] lived together for 18 years (and the marriage
lasted for 15 years). They have one child, [C], who
was aged 15 at the date of
the hearing before me and predominantly lives with the wife and has done so
since separation.
2 The wife filed her Form 1 application commencing these proceedings on 19
Issues for determination
3 The wife seeks leave under
Family Law Act
to institute property settlement proceedings against
the husband. Leave is required as the application is out of time.
Where, whether before or after the commencement of
Family Law Amendment Act 1983
(a) a divorce order has taken effect; or
(b) a decree of nullity of marriage has been made;
proceedings of a kind referred to in paragraph (c), (caa), (ca) or (cb) of
the definition of
matrimonial cause
subsection 4(1)
being proceedings under section 78 or 79A or proceedings seeking the
discharge, suspension, revival or variation of an order
previously made in
proceedings with respect to the maintenance of a party) shall not be instituted,
except by leave of the court
in which the proceedings are to be instituted or
with the consent of both of the parties to the marriage, after the expiration of
12 months after:
(c) in a case referred to in
paragraph (a)—the date on which the divorce order took effect; or
(d) in a case referred to in paragraph (b)—the date of the making of
the decree.
The court may grant such leave at any time, even if the proceedings have already
been instituted.
4 The parties were divorced in this matter on
1 March 2013 and therefore the time to commence property settlement proceedings
on 1 March 2014. The application is therefore approximately 14
months out of time.
Section 44(4)
provides that:
The court shall not grant leave under subsection (3) or (3A) unless it is
(a) that hardship would be caused to a party to the
relevant marriage or a child if leave were not granted; or
(b) in the case of proceedings in relation to the maintenance of a party to a
marriage...
5 The parties concede that the Court should determine the leave issue
“on the papers” based on the affidavit evidence
filed by the parties
and taking into account submissions made at the hearing before me and the
relevant principles of law.
Principles of law
6 The preliminary hurdle for the granting of leave
is that hardship must be proved. Proof of hardship is necessary for an
application
for leave to succeed, but upon proof of hardship the Court must then
consider whether leave should or should not be granted. The
Full Court of the
Family Court of Australia dealt with this issue in
Whitford & Whitford
[1979] FamCA 3
(1979) FLC 90-612
[O]n an application for leave under
, two broad questions may arise
for determination. The first of these is whether the Court is satisfied that
hardship would be caused
to the applicant or a child of the marriage
if leave were not granted. If the Court is not so satisfied, that is the
matter. If the Court is so satisfied, the second question arises.
That is whether in the exercise of its discretion the Court should
refuse leave to institute proceedings....
7 The Full Court in
McDonald & McDonald
[1977] FamCA 93
(1977) FLC 90-317
grouped the various factors to
be considered in such an application as follows:
(a) that to deny the right to litigate that claim would cause hardship to a
party or a child of the marriage;
(b) that a prima facie case which is reasonable would have to be shown;
(c) that there is an adequate explanation as to delay;
(d) that consideration should be given to the question of prejudice to the
respondent. The period of the delay may be particularly
relevant here.
8 A number of decisions have provided that the generally
accepted interpretation of “hardship” in this context is
“substantial
detriment” (see
Hall & Hall
(1979) FLC 90679
Whitford & Whitford
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
(1978) FLC 90-496 at 77,581;
Frost & Nicholson
[1981] FamCA 45
(1981) FLC 91-051
at 76,423; and
Walker & Walker
(1984) FLC 91564). It is clear that
the loss of a mere right to institute proceedings itself is not a
“hardship”: (see
Whitford & Whitford
(supra) at 78,144
Frost & Nicholson
(supra) at 76,423).
9 The determination of an application for leave under
intended to be a detailed hearing of the merits of the proposed claim itself.
The Full Court considered the procedure involved
Whitford & Whitford
(supra) where it said at 78,143:
We do not consider it necessary or desirable to lay down any definitive
procedural rules for the conduct of such an application.
Generally, the
applicant should file adequate affidavit evidence from which the facts
appertaining to the relevant issues appear.
The respondent should have an
opportunity to file an affidavit to answer the applicant's allegations and to
adduce material showing
why leave to institute the proceedings should not be
granted. In appropriate cases, the applicant should have an opportunity to
an affidavit in reply. Cross-examination of either party on his or her
affidavit material should be permitted, and there may
be occasions, when some
oral evidence supplementing the affidavit evidence might be received. If the
Court considers it necessary,
it may allow an applicant to conduct some
investigation into the financial position of the respondent. The parties and
hearing the matter will no doubt bear in mind that the only question
to be determined is, whether leave should be granted enabling
the applicant to
institute proceedings, and the extent of the proceedings and any investigation
should be regulated accordingly.
10 Nygh J took a different
Frost & Nicholson
(supra) at 76,42276,423:
I take the view that the existence of a prima facie case should be judged on the
evidence put forward by the applicant in her affidavit
evidence available at the
time of the hearing of the application for leave. The respondent may demur
that the evidence which the
applicant seeks to rely upon is not sufficient to
justify the costs involved. I did not permit the respondent to test the
on the veracity of her evidence as to the merits of the case, and I
stopped any cross-examination on that issue.
11 Nygh J went
Jacenko and Jacenko
[1986] FamCA 25
(1986) FLC 91-776
where his Honour said at
75,643 that:
The general principle is that on the issue of the establishment of a prima facie
case the Court proceeds on the basis that the evidence
of the applicant, unless
it is inherently unbelievable or contradictory, should be accepted, and the
Court should therefore decide
whether or not on that basis a prima facie case
has been made out. If leave is granted, then it is for the Court conducting the
ultimate hearing to determine whether that prima facie case can be established.
12 These views were consistent with those of the Full Court in
Althaus and Althaus
(1982) FLC 91-233
where Evatt CJ (with whom
Marshall SJ agreed) said at 77,267:
In my opinion,
and (4) are not intended to require a detailed hearing
on the merits to determine whether the applicant's claim will succeed. The
exercise is to determine whether there is a reasonable claim to be heard. That
is the essence of the inquiry into whether hardship
will be suffered by denying
the applicant the right to litigate that claim.
13 In a number
of the authorities referred to above, the reason for delay in commencing
proceedings is consistently held to be a
factor to be considered when deciding
whether to grant leave. Once the Court has found that hardship is proved and
has found that
the applicant has a prima facie case and has provided a
satisfactory explanation of delay, the final exercise of discretion is dependent
upon the consideration of the hardship to be suffered by the respondent and
balancing that with the hardship to be suffered by the
applicant if leave were
not granted.
14 Counsel for the wife referred to the further decision of
O’Ryan J in
Oxenham & Oxenham
[2009] FamCAFC 167.
O’Ryan J referred to many of the above authorities (see [97] to
[101]). His Honour’s conclusions were summarised at
[102] and [103]:
[102] In summary, in order to establish hardship in the relevant sense the
applicant for leave must have a prima facie case to be
heard by the court on the
merits. This does not require a detailed hearing of the merits of the
substantive application, but a consideration
of whether there exists a
prima facie case on the strength of the applicant's material.
[103] As to the second part of the exercise the fundamental issue in any
application for extension of time is whether this will
enable the court to do
justice between the parties:
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 93 ALR 479.
Dawson McHugh J referred to the need to have regard to the history of the
proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature
of the litigation and the
consequences to the parties of the grant or the refusal of the extension of
. The authorities and principles were discussed in Tormsen and Tormsen
[1993] FamCA 151
(1993) FLC 92-392:
see also McMahon and McMahon
[1976] FamCA 22
(1976) FLC 90-038
; Van der Kreek
and Van der Kreek
[1978] FamCA 92
(1978) FLC 90-421
, and Coombs and More
[1990] FamCA 175
(1990) FLC 92-175.
In summary in considering the second question the court may have regard to
a number of factors that include whether the applicant
has an adequate
explanation for the delay in bringing the proceedings and whether to grant leave
would prejudice or impose hardship
on the respondent to the application for
leave or other persons.
Wife’s case
15 In her initial affidavit the wife stated:
(a) that after separation the parties informally agreed to a division of
(b) that division of property did not include “either my own or the
respondent’s superannuation”;
(c) she did not seek independent legal advice at the time of the informal
(d) she was not aware of the 12-month time limit following the parties’
divorce in March 2013;
(e) she first sought legal advice in May 2014 (after the period had expired;
(f) at the time of the informal agreement, the husband did not disclose his
superannuation to her;
(g) negotiations commenced in November 2014;
(h) she asserts hardship [but it is not clear what hardship is asserted because
at that stage she had no knowledge of the value of
the husband’s
superannuation and therefore including it may have made a minimal difference to
the overall outcome].
16 In her further affidavit filed 19
August 2015 the wife acknowledged that she had asked the husband about his
superannuation (not
that she knew of its value) and that the husband told her:
You’re not getting your fucking hands on my money.
17 The wife provided calculations that showed that by adding
the husband’s superannuation (at 1 July 2011) and the wife’s
superannuation (at the same date) into the asset schedule the parties used for
their informal agreement, this resulted in the wife
receiving 7% of the overall
assets including the superannuation. The husband did not dispute that
calculation. She further asserted
that hardship would be caused if she were not
to receive some of the husband’s superannuation given the significant
between the value of the husband’s interest compared to the
wife’s interest.
18 I note the wife was born [in] 1972 and was 43 years of age at the date of
hearing. There are many years left before she would
be able to access any
superannuation – with the usual requirements to reach vesting age and to
retire from the workforce.
Her amended Form 1 application filed 7 September
2015 seeks orders in relation to a superannuation split. Otherwise she asserts
that each party should retain their own assets and debts. The only difference
between the orders sought now and the informal agreement
reached therefore is
the issue of a superannuation splitting order. Given that superannuation cannot
be accessed for many years
to come, an issue arises as to the timing of any
hardship. Is that hardship experienced now if proceedings are not allowed to
and a superannuation splitting order is not made or is hardship
suffered in years to come when the wife retires and has much less
superannuation
to utilise than she would have had if a superannuation splitting order was
19 In the end, hardship is hardship whether experienced now or in the
future. It is at least arguable that the hardship, if any,
begins immediately
as the wife will have significantly less superannuation to her name if a
splitting order is not made. She may
have to work longer in order to secure her
long-term future. She has made a number of contributions, not the least of
which being
to the welfare of the family which the Court may take into account,
when determining their respective property settlement entitlements
considering a superannuation splitting order.
Husband’s case
20 The husband filed a Form 13 financial statement
on 28 July 2015 which indicated that he had a current superannuation interest
approximately $190,000. This is a significant amount in the context of the
parties’ respective financial circumstances.
21 The husband’s affidavit filed 28 July 2015 notes the wife was
“aware of my superannuation” given that she “was
aware of the
superannuation statements I received during our marriage” and he
states his belief that “she was aware of
the existence and value of my
superannuation balance”. The husband does not explain the basis of that
asserted belief. He
also asserts that he had a superannuation balance at
separation of about $115,000.
Conclusions
22 I acknowledge that there are some gaps in the
wife’s chronology; firstly of a period of around six months from when she
first sought legal advice to when her solicitors first wrote to the husband. In
my view, the lack of explanation in relation to
this period is not fatal to the
leave application. The amount of time is inconsequential in the overall
circumstances. The second
period was from November 2014 to May 2015 when
the wife attempted to resolve these issues by negotiation. That delay in
proceedings is understandable and is explained by the husband’s
failure to properly reply to correspondence.
23 I accept that:
(a) the wife has a bona fide claim in relation to property settlement and has
reasonable prospects of achieving a superannuation
splitting order of some
amount. This is particularly so given the period of the marriage and the
contributions made by her throughout
the marriage and the fact that the informal
agreement did not appear to take into account the parties’ respective
superannuation
entitlements. With those entitlements included in the
approximate pool, the wife appears to have received less than she otherwise
might be entitled to;
(b) the wife would suffer hardship if leave were not granted to allow these
proceedings to continue;
(c) the wife has provided adequate explanation for the delay in commencing these
proceedings;
(d) the delay was not of an extraordinary amount of time;
(e) the only potential prejudice to the husband is having to face an application
in which he may lose some of his superannuation.
Again, he will also not access
his superannuation for many years to come and given his age and earning capacity
he has some ability
to rebuild any amount that may be lost pursuant to an
24 Had the parties both taken advice at the time of
their informal agreement then these issues may well have been resolved and had
they sought consent orders at that time these issues may have been brought to
their respective attention.
25 In balancing the prejudice to the husband in allowing these proceedings
to continue and the prejudice to the wife in refusing
to grant leave, the
prejudice to the wife, in my view, is greater. I propose therefore to grant
leave to institute proceedings out
26 I will hear from counsel now as to the appropriate directions to be made
to progress these proceedings.
be and is hereby granted to the applicant under
to institute proceedings against the respondent for orders
of the Act.
extant interim application before the Court are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [26] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Delivered 14 January
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (131 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter