URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/131.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MULLOY and MULLOY [2015] FCWAM 131 (2 July 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
MULLOY and MULLOY
[2015] FCWAM 131
6 OCTOBER 2014
DELIVERED :
2 JULY 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 3819 of 2010
Catchwords:
Property Settlement; short marriage; Husband made majority of financial
contributions; husband wasted sale proceeds of former matrimonial
later declared bankrupt;
(2) adjustment in wife’s favour given
husband’s conduct; superannuation splitting order made in circumstances
other tangible assets available to achieve a just and equitable
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Family Law Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN
THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
1 The parties have been unable to resolve their property settlement issues.
They had a slightly different view as to the period
of cohabitation. The
wife said that the parties cohabited from 26 March 2004 to 6 April 2009; whilst
the husband said the period
was from April 2005 to 6 April 2009. In my view,
the husband’s version is more likely to be accurate.
2 The wife effectively says that the parties lived together from
26 March 2004 when they were spending time together [overseas].
husband says that initially he was simply holidaying with the wife and they did
not live together until she moved to Australia
in April 2005.
3 The parties lived apart from 18 April 2004 to 21 December 2004 and also
from February 2005 to April 2005. In the above periods
of time, the husband
lived in Australia and the wife lived overseas. I accept that they were in a
relationship and they were planning
to live together in Australia, but at that
stage they were not living together on a permanent basis as a de facto
couple or in a
marriagelike relationship. That did not occur until the wife
moved to Australia.
4 The wife relied upon her evidence only and called no witnesses. The
husband similarly only relied on his own evidence.
5 This trial commenced and was completed on 6 October 2014. On that date
I made orders for the husband to provide directly to the
Court an up to
date superannuation statement. That statement was later provided and indicated
that the account balance for the husband
with Sunsuper at 7 October 2014 was an
amount of $125,741.84.
Wife’s case
6 At the commencement of the trial, the wife
clarified her position. In her amended Form 1 application filed on 24 April
sought final orders in the following terms:
sets of property’s [sic] proceeds were worthy [sic] $435,000. The order
of $250,000 is sought.
(i) One [Mr Mulloy] offered his superannuation E$150,000 to me over
the phone. As such, the order of $150,000 is sought; or
(ii) The order of $150,000 is sought from two sets of sold property proceeds.
7 Given the Court’s confusion with precisely what orders
were sought and as to whether it was cash or superannuation or both,
clarified that she meant that:
husband was to pay her $250,000 cash or in the alternative, the husband pay the
wife $150,000 cash plus transfer $150,000 by way
of a superannuation splitting
Husband’s case
8 The husband’s position at the commencement
of the trial was that there should be a superannuation splitting order providing
for $12,500 to be transferred from his superannuation fund to the wife’s
superannuation fund.
9 The following aspect of the husband’s evidence was, quite frankly,
appalling. He conceded that he received the proceeds
of sale of the [Coastal
Town E] property so at 10 August 2009 he had a balance of $122,441.75 in
his account. He says that he lived
overseas from 2009 to 2010. He spent most
of his time in [Country A] and [Country S]Fphill and attempted to secure various
ventures. He was extremely evasive about his evidence on where that
money was spent. He indicated that he invested money into some
schemes and
simply lost it all. He was given numerous opportunities by the wife and by the
Court to properly explain his spending.
He consistently said that he could
not remember what he had spent his money on and he provided absolutely no detail
as to the investments.
I was left with the distinct impression that he was
living an extravagant lifestyle and “blowing” his savings whilst
living overseas. It may well be that the husband was spending money on items
for his personal enjoyment, the details of which he
was too embarrassed to
disclose. He denied, however, that the money was spent on alcohol. An
example of the spending is set out
10 On 24 September 2009 there were a series of ATM withdrawals. From
2.07 pm to 4.48 pm he had withdrawn in eight separate transactions
amount totalling $1,859.93. The husband attempted to explain this and other
transactions by suggesting that there were limits
on how much could be taken out
of an ATM at any one time. Each of the withdrawals, however, was only the
equivalent of between $48
and $360. I take judicial notice of the fact that ATM
withdrawals overseas permit larger withdrawals than that.
11 A further example is on 28 September, he made a series of
17 separate withdrawals from ATMs, withdrawing a total of $3,921.18.
pattern continued through the rest of September and into October. All of the
withdrawals were from ATMs. The husband specifically
denied spending this money
on gambling. He also does not appear to have any substantial assets to show.
In light of his evidence
(which I do not accept) about his failed business
ventures, all that is left is to conclude that the husband has spent that money
on items or on activities that produced no discernible asset, but were for his
personal pleasure.
12 The upshot of the husband’s evidence was that during the period of
time that he lived overseas, he spent the entire net
sale proceeds that he had
received from the sale of land in 2009. When he returned to Australia he had
very little left (about $3,000).
In my view, he utterly wasted that money.
There is, however, little benefit in that finding in terms of the wife’s
That money is gone; the husband is now bankrupt; there are no tangible
assets from which the wife could obtain a reasonable property
settlement. For
the reasons set out below, the only “asset” available for
distribution is the husband’s superannuation.
Bankruptcy of the husband
13 One significant hurdle to the orders sought by
the wife was the bankruptcy of the husband. It is clear that the husband was
bankrupt on 9 September 2013. The official trustee in bankruptcy was
appointed administrator of his estate. The trustee wrote to
advising that it was aware that a family law matter involving the bankrupt
husband was being heard. The trustee provided
the certificate of appointment
and a report to creditors dated 22 October 2013. The letter said:
Initial information obtained by the trustee is that the bankrupt currently does
not hold any real property that could be realised
for the benefit of unsecured
creditors of the bankrupt estate. As such, the trustee proposes to not
intervene in proceedings and
is agreeable to abide by orders of the
14 The report to creditors outlined total unsecured
liabilities (creditors) amounting to $61,928 with assets amounting to $120,439.
15 Of that amount, superannuation comprised an amount of $112,422. The
report indicated that a dividend is not expected to be paid
for the estate.
16 An effect of the bankruptcy is that the trustee has exclusive control
over certain assets. The Court is not able to make orders
would form part of the estate. Any excluded assets, such as superannuation, may
still be dealt with by the
Court. Given the evidence of the husband and the
evidence from the trustee, it is clear that apart from superannuation there is
virtually nothing left to divide between the parties.
17 The wife’s request for payments of either $150,000 or $250,000 cash
is unrealistic and could not be a just and equitable
Superannuation is specifically excluded under the provisions of the
Bankruptcy Act
so the Court may deal with it.
18 The wife does not accept the report of the trustee in bankruptcy. That
is, however, something that she must take up with the
trustee. In her opening
statement, she argued that the nature of the Australian legal system was such
that Judges and Magistrates
have the power and should investigate evidence from
both sides, so effectively should operate as an inquisitorial body. The
legal system, however, is based upon an adversarial system. It is up
to the parties in the case to present evidence and the Court
makes findings
based on the evidence presented and the orders flow from those findings. The
Court does not have the power to independently
investigate allegations made by
parties and, quite frankly, does not have the resources to do so. That is, in
the Australian system,
the parties’ responsibility.
Property Settlement Law
19 The parties were married, therefore the provisions of the
Section 79(1)
of the Act provides that the Court must make such orders as
it considers appropriate.
Section 79(2)
provides that “the Court shall
not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the
circumstances,
it is just and equitable to make the order”.
21 Traditionally that has meant that the Court followed a fourstage process.
22 That process is as follows:
(a) identify the value of the assets and liabilities of the parties;
(b) assess the contributions made by each party to the assets;
(c) assess the factors set out in
(d) consider whether the proposed orders are just and equitable between the
23 The fourth step of this process was seen to be the check required
pursuant to
to only make an order if it was just and equitable to
24 The High Court examined these provisions in
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108.
25 The High Court noted at [36-40] that when exercising the property
settlement power, three fundamental propositions must not be
(a) One must first identify, according to common law and equitable
principles, the
legal and equitable interests of the parties in
the property [emphasis added];
(b) The Court’s power must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles; and
(c) To conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only
because of reference to the various matters set out
separately considering
, would be to “
conflate the statutory
requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the Act
26 The Court also held that the mere fact of separation is not necessarily
enough to warrant exercising the property settlement power
and making an order.
27 The power under
is to alter a party’s interest in
property, which is why the High Court considered it is essential to begin with
an examination
of what interests in property the parties have. It may or may
not be necessary to alter any such interests.
28 The High Court at [42] acknowledged the reality that in many cases, the
“just and equitable” requirement is:
... readily satisfied by observing that, as a result of a choice made by one
or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer
living in a marital
relationship. It will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order
in such a case because there
is not and will not thereafter be the common use of
property by the husband and wife.
29 In the event that the Court decides that
demands that an order
be made, then the Court must make such orders as it considers appropriate. It
must also take into account
the provisions of
30 The parties’ have virtually no tangible assets. There is little
point setting them out in a table. They are of nominal
Is it just and equitable to make an order?
31 The Court must make orders for a property
settlement in this case. The husband wasted the sale proceeds of the Coastal
property to which the wife made contributions. The Court is therefore
unable to make orders for payment of any cash amount to the
wife given the
wastage by the husband. The Court is able to treat superannuation as if it was
an asset and that will be the only
way to achieve some equity between the
Contributions
32 The parties were together for four years.
33 The parties started communicating with each other from December 2003.
The husband visited the wife overseas on more than one
He stayed for reasonably lengthy periods. In December 2004, for instance,
they were together for about seven weeks.
34 I have no doubt that both parties contributed to the maintenance of the
to the welfare of the
family unit that they had created. On 23 June 2004 the husband received
$60,744.03 from the sale of his [Suburb
P] property.
35 In 2006 the husband received more than $50,000 in compensation payments
because of an arm injury.
36 In my view, the wife misunderstood some of the financial transactions
that occurred during the marriage and since separation.
The first of these
issues arose from a bank statement of the husband for his offset home loan. On
31 October 2008 there was an
entry entitled “amount received –
excess funds” with a credit of $388,736.34. Based on that line, the wife
that the husband received that amount and has then ensured that that
money disappeared and has not accounted for that money. What
the wife, in
my view, has failed to appreciate is that the very next line of the same
statement has the following entry:
31 October 2008
amount received – excess funds reversal $388,736.34.
to the amount being put into the husband’s account, his balance was zero.
After that money went in and it was subsequently
reversed immediately, his
account balance remained zero. That was clearly an error by the bank which was
immediately reversed.
The very next line of the statement had the following
31 October 2008 amount received – excess funds
38 This was the correct figure that he had received
from the sale of a property.
39 Despite the above evidence, the wife maintained that there was still
away somewhere. That is clearly not the case.
40 The second of the wife’s errors, in my view, related to the
settlement of the sale of [the Country Town E Property] on Monday
3 August 2009.
The settlement stated dated 3 August 2009 revealed that the sale price for
the property was $269,000 less the necessary
fees, providing a total of
$268,221.32. The various settlement cheques disbursing that amount went to the
real estate agent, the
conveyancers and to other entities. Two specific amounts
are relevant:
payment to the husband was made of $118,746.18.
further payment was made to Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Limited of $140,613.23.
Again, the wife has read (in my view, misread) that
statement to mean that the
husband received two separate amounts; one to him personally and one to an
account in his name with the
Bendigo and Adelaide Bank. What in fact
occurred was that the husband had at that stage two separate mortgages over that
with the National Mortgage Company (operated by the Bendigo and
Adelaide Bank). The two statements from the National Mortgage Company
August to 4 August 2009 revealed that both of those mortgages were discharged
(paid out) with the following amounts:
(i) In relation to BSB account number [xxxxxxxxxxx] the amount is $61,033.31;
(ii) In relation to BSB account number [xxxxxxxxxxx] is a credit amount of
$79,579.92.
41 Those two amounts together total $140,613.23.
It is therefore clear that the amount payable to the Bendigo and Adelaide Bank
was an amount that discharged the existing mortgages over that property. The
husband therefore received, in his hands, the figure
of $118,746.18. That
amount is reflected in his bank statements for his National Australia Bank
account. There is an entry on 10
August 2009 for a credit to his account of
$118,746.18. It is clear the husband did not receive an extra $140,000.
That money went
to discharge the mortgage.
42 The wife gave evidence that she did not know whether the husband had
a mortgage over the Coastal Town E property at the time.
He clearly did
because the settlement statement indicates the mortgage was discharged. The
loan documentation shows that the two
mortgages were set up over the Coastal
Town E property on 19 September 2008. Eighty thousand dollars was the
first mortgage and
$60,000 was the second. One of them was to pay outstanding
debts such as car finance and so on; the second was in order to refurbish
renovate the house.
43 During the course of the trial the wife alleged that the husband had
further cash in a St George Bank account. She relied upon
a statement
attached to the husband’s material to indicate that he had $9,264.86 in
that account. Eventually she conceded
that the account was a MasterCard
statement and the amount referred to above was the closing balance of the
account. That meant
that he owed St George Bank that amount; not that he had
that amount in savings.
Conclusions in relation to contributions
44 There was no evidence of any significant financial contribution to the
acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the
property of the parties
by the wife. She no doubt made some nonfinancial contributions and she
contributed to the welfare of the
family (comprised of the husband and wife).
45 In my view, those contributions should be recognised. I am unable to
order a cash amount as the husband wasted all of the available
cash. Almost all
of the significant financial contributions came from the husband. To the date
of separation I assess the wife’s
contributions on an overall basis
as a relatively minor amount and award a figure of 10%.
Section 75(2)
46 I will detail only the factors that are relevant to this matter.
The age and state of health for each of the parties
47 At trial the husband was 58 years old and the wife was 50 years old.
Despite the reference above to an arm injury, neither party
presented any
independent evidence in relation to any physical limitations for work.
The income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and
the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate
48 The husband is an undischarged bankrupt. The wife has a much better
earning capacity than does the husband. Whilst the wife
is a qualified teacher,
she is not currently working.
The eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or
49 Both parties appear to be in receipt of income tested pensions or
A standard of living that in all the circumstances is
50 It is not possible to maintain anything like the standard of living
enjoyed by the parties when they were travelling between countries
later during their cohabitation in Australia, given the lack of any available
Any fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the Court, the
justice of the case requires to be taken into account
51 The wastage by the husband is a significant factor in this case. On that
basis alone a percentage adjustment in the wife’s
favour is warranted.
Conclusions
52 At the end of the day, the parties were together
for a reasonably short period of time. The wife did not contribute any
significant
financial amounts to the property. The only available resource that
can be used to achieve any form of just and equitable outcome
husband’s superannuation. The amount proposed by the husband to transfer
to the wife out of his superannuation is unreasonably
low. It is not possible,
nor is it just and equitable, to make the orders sought by the wife in relation
to the amounts that she
seeks either by way of a cash adjustment (which is
impossible and inherently unreasonable) or by way of a superannuation splitting
order. The amount sought by the wife by way of a superannuation split
exceeds the amount that is currently in the husband’s
superannuation
account. His current account balance from 7 October 2014 is $126,741.84.
53 Given all of the parties’ respective contributions, and in
particular (and I take this into account pursuant to
the way that
the husband has wasted the net sale proceeds from the Coastal Town E property,
in my view, it is appropriate to provide
a significant amount out of his
superannuation.
54 I take into account the fact that he is a bankrupt, but he will be
discharged from that bankruptcy in due course. He is 58 years
of age and will
have little to retire on when he reaches retirement age. Had the husband not
wasted the net sale proceeds whilst
living overseas, there would have been an
amount of cash from which the wife could have received a proper property
settlement entitlement.
Given that the net sale proceeds are no longer
available and the only entitlement the wife will receive will come from
superannuation
(which will take several years before she is able to access), the
amount that she receives should be significant. In my view, an
amount of 40% of
the available superannuation is an appropriate award. Forty percent of
$126,741.84 is $50,696.74.
as provided for in these orders, the parties shall retain all assets in their
respective use, possession or control as at the
date of these orders.
parties shall forthwith indemnify and keep each other indemnified in relation to
all liabilities in their respective names.
Superannuation
the Court noting the following:
(a) The husband has an interest in
the SunSuper fund, such interest being an accumulation interest (“the
husband’s fund”);
(b) SunSuper is administrator of the SunSuper fund and for the purpose of
this document is referred to as the trustee;
(c) The relevant date is 6 October 2014;
(d) Pursuant to Regulation 22(1)(a) of the
Family Law (Superannuation)
Regulations
2011 (“Family Law Regulations”), the gross value of
the husband’s interest in the fund is $126,741.84 at the relevant
(e) The trustee having been notified, with a copy of the proposed orders, of
the parties’ intention to seek orders in the Family
Court of Western
Australia pursuant to Part VIIIB of the Act, and having been provided with a
copy of the proposed orders; and
(f) The trustee having confirmed that they have no objection to the proposed
consent orders
then the following further orders are made:
base amount allocated to the wife out of the interest held by the husband in the
husband’s fund is $50,696.74.
accordance with s 90MT(1)(a) of the Act, whenever a splittable payment
(within the meaning of s 90ME of the Act) becomes payable
to or on behalf
of the husband from his interest in the SunSuper fund, the wife or her legal
personal representative shall be entitled
to be paid by the trustee of the
husband’s fund the amount calculated in accordance with Part 6 of the
Family Law Regulations,
using a base amount of $50,696.74 and there shall be a
corresponding reduction in the entitlement the husband would have had but
these orders.
operative time for order 5 is 4 business days after the service of these orders
on the trustee of the husband’s fund.
wife shall provide the trustee of the husband’s fund with a notice
pursuant to Regulation 72 of the Family Law Regulations
within 21 days of the
publication of these orders.
trustee of the husband’s fund, having been afforded procedural fairness,
is bound by orders 4-8 of these orders.
parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to give
effect to the terms of these orders.
party shall have liberty to apply in relation to the implementation of, and to
give full force and effect to, these orders.
proceedings are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [54] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (141 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter