URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2019/81.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ELLIS and PENN [2019] FCWAM 81 (13 June 2019)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA AT 150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
CHILDREN AND COMMUNITY SERVICES ACT 2004
ELLIS and PENN & ORS
[2019] FCWAM 81
28 MAY 2019
DELIVERED :
13 JUNE 2019
FILE NO/S :
PTW 7036 of 2018
First Respondent
Second Respondent
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES
First Intervener
Second Intervener
Protection proceedings;
Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Communities having intervened;
Interim orders sought for the
child to remain in provisional protection and
care; interim orders sought to allow the mother and child to relocate to
Queensland;
discussion as to whether the child is in need of protection;
discussion of the limits of the Western Australian protection jurisdiction
allowing interstate relocation of a child in need of protection; possible
transfer of proceedings to Queensland; possible involvement
of the Queensland
counterpart to the Department of Communities; consideration of the relevant
Queensland legislation; finding that
child is in need of protection; order that
the child remain in provisional protection and care; order made placing the
child in the
mother's care; discussion of the impact of the Court's orders on
the mother's application for parole and the father's potential incarceration
pursuant to pending criminal charges; discussion of father's bail conditions ;
indication by the Department that if the child is
placed with the mother, the
protection application would be withdrawn; parenting orders made to take effect
when such application
is withdrawn; parenting proceedings transferred to the
Federal Circuit Court in
Legislation:
Protection Act 1999
Children and Community Services Act 2004
Family Court Act 1997
Family Law Act 1975
Representation:
Self Represented Litigant
First Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Second Respondent
Cassandra Louise Joss
First Intervener
Tichona Mazhawidza
Second Intervener
Prudence Elizabeth Mace Hawkins
Independent Children's Lawyer
Laura De Maio
Solicitors:
Self Represented Litigant
First Respondent
Self Represented Litigant
Second Respondent
First Intervener
Department of Communities
Second Intervener
Empire Barristers and Solicitors
Independent Children's Lawyer
Laura De Maio
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE
BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES’
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
Initial summary of issues:
matter is complex. It involves a number of competing parties and competing
in Queensland.
will canvass each of the precise proposals shortly, but for the time being, the
initial applicant in this matter is the maternal
grandmother [Ms Ellis].
She represented herself in the hearing before me.
application relates to the ongoing interim arrangements for the child, [C]. C
was born [in late] 2017.
first respondent is the mother of C. The second respondent is C’s father.
Department of Communities intervened in these proceedings and was represented by
partner of the father’s mother ([Mr Shine]) also intervened and is known
as the second intervener in these proceedings.
I will refer to him as the
paternal grandfather, and to him and the father’s mother together as the
paternal grandparents.
Independent Children’s Lawyer has been appointed for C.
Department’s position appears to be:
(a) that an
order should be made under the
Children and Community Services Act
the CCS Act
”) for the child to remain in the
provisional protection and care of the Department;
consequent upon that order being made an interim order should be made allowing
the mother to relocate with the child to Queensland;
(c) that the
current care and protection application be transferred to the Children’s
Court in Queensland. This process may
take some time and may be subject to the
consent of the court in Queensland or the consent of the protection agency in
Queensland.
the alternative, the Department’s position is that the court should make
interim parenting orders for the child to live
with the mother and for the
mother to be permitted to relocate the child to Queensland. The Department
would then withdraw its protection
application. That would enable an order
to be made to transfer the existing Family Court of Western Australia
proceedings to the
Federal Circuit Court of Australia in the location nearest to
where the mother will reside - if such a transfer was considered appropriate.
abovementioned alternate position certainly would be more straightforward than
dealing with the necessary jurisdictional issues
which might arise. Any
protection order made in this matter would be made under the provisions of the
Western Australian Act, the
. The Department concedes that
the protection order itself would not provide sufficient authority to the
Department to enable C to
reside interstate.
further alternative canvassed during the hearing was to delay any potential
relocation to Queensland until the Queensland protection
authority (the
Department of Child Safety, Youth and Women) had this matter in hand and a
transfer to the Children’s Court
in Queensland was accepted. That process
might otherwise delay the mother’s potential release from prison in
Western Australia
on parole. The court understands that part of the basis of
the parole application is that she is awaiting orders of this Court to
to relocate with the child to Queensland and that those orders may assist in her
application to be released on parole.
maternal grandmother supports the mother’s application for C to be in her
care. Their joint proposal is that the mother
and C live with the maternal
grandmother in Queensland.
father opposes the mother’s application. The father acknowledges that he
is not in a position to provide ongoing care
for C. He relies upon the
paternal grandparents to provide that care. It is certainly the case that
C has generally resided in
the care of the paternal grandparents from the time
the mother went to prison ([early] 2018) until the Department seized the
in March 2019.
of the reasons for the Department seizing C was their finding that the paternal
grandparents failed to properly comply with the
terms of the agreed safety plan
in ensuring that C was properly supervised when in the father’s care or
that the father was
free of drugs, in particular methamphetamine.
the hearing, counsel for the paternal grandparents submitted that there were
very few concerns raised about the actual care
of C by the paternal
grandparents. There was an indication that the father intended to move out of
their property and obtain his
own accommodation. On that basis the court should
be reassured that C would be safe in the care of the paternal grandparents.
significant problem with this proposal is that the father recently attended a
trial in relation to his criminal charges in the
District Court. That trial
proceeded but was not concluded because of an injury suffered by the father.
The trial had to be aborted
and is likely to be relisted sometime in 2020.
father’s current bail conditions provide that he must reside at the
a curfew). The father
suggested through counsel that he would be making an application to vary
his bail. The difficulty is that
that process is the subject of, firstly, an
application being made; and secondly, that application being successful.
There is no
guarantee that the court would allow a variation of that bail
condition in the circumstances, given the charges faced by the father
previous bail condition to reside in the care of the paternal grandparents.
Independent Children’s Lawyer also supports the mother’s proposals.
Counsel did not express any preference in terms
of whether the protection
aspects of this application
should be withdrawn and parenting orders made
instead. The Independent Children’s Lawyer’s position was that,
C is currently living with the mother in [Prison A] in appropriate
accommodation at that facility, he should continue to live with
the mother upon
her release from prison. Further, that C should be allowed to relocate to
live with the mother and maternal grandmother
in Queensland. There was no
particular concern as to how those arrangements are put in place, whether by
parenting orders or by
protection orders.
Background to the parties’ relationship:
was born prior to the end of the parties’ relationship. After he was
born, the mother and father commenced living with the
paternal grandparents.
Only a few months later, the mother went to prison.
early 2018, the father was arrested in relation to a number of charges.
The father says that the parties separated in early 2018.
on the other hand says that the parties did not separate until August 2018.
This is mentioned in her Case Information
the father’s case, the separation may have had something to do with the
incident the parties both acknowledge occurred [in]
early 2018. At [12] of his
Case Information Affidavit the father says:
Following an incident [in early] 2018, whereby the first respondent [seriously
injured the] second respondent.
father has had to undergo “[reconstructive surgery]” and requires
ongoing plastic surgery.
mother was incarcerated in relation to various offences [in] early 2018. These
were unrelated to the abovementioned alleged
the mother’s incarceration, the father and the paternal grandparents
became the primary caregivers to C.
mother’s version of events in her Case Information Affidavit states:
[In early] 2018, the father attacked me and received significant [sic] injury as
I tried to defend myself.
mother says that no charges have yet been laid. It seems unlikely that any
charges will now be laid given that it is over 12
months since this incident and
the mother has been in prison virtually ever since.
am unable to determine why it is the mother says that separation occurred in
August 2018 well after she was imprisoned. In any
event, date of separation
does not impact the determination of this dispute.
does seem that both parties have been charged with very similar drug-related
Background to these proceedings:
proceedings were initiated by the maternal grandmother. The initial
respondents to her application were the mother and the
father. She sought
interim orders that C live with her and spend time with the mother and the
father as agreed between the parties.
The maternal grandmother lives in
Queensland.
15 November 2018 orders were made dismissing all current interim applications.
This matter was entered into the Judges’
Defended List and was provided a
Readiness Hearing on 24 July 2019. At that stage, the proceedings still only
involved the maternal
grandmother, mother and father.
13 February 2019, the mother filed a Form 2 application seeking a range of
parenting orders. Her evidence in support of that
application
earliest release date would be 6 March 2019;
(b) the Western
Australian Prisoner Review Board decided on a conditional release on parole
pending acceptance of parole being transferred
to Queensland;
(c) she asked
not to be released before 18 May 2019 (the day after the father’s criminal
trial was expected to be finalised).
25 March 2019, the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of the Department
of Communities in Western Australia filed a Notice
of Intervention.
The CEO then became a party to the existing Family Court of Western
Australia proceedings. That action of intervening
in these proceedings has
invoked the protection jurisdiction under the
detailed affidavits by the child protection worker outlined the history of the
Department’s involvement and the various
concerns the Department has for
Maternal grandmother’s case:
maternal grandmother supports the mother in the orders that she seeks. The
maternal grandmother currently cares for the mother’s
other child, [N],
who is 12 years old.
was placed in the maternal grandmother’s care in January 2017 and remains
in her care.
maternal grandmother says that the paternal grandparents “are not
capable” of caring for C.
The mother’s case:
her Form 1A response filed on 12 November 2018, the mother sought orders that:
(a) [C] live
with the mother;
allowed to relocate to Queensland in the event the mother was transferred to a
Queensland prison, or upon her release from
(c) that [C]
spend time with the maternal grandmother as agreed between the mother and her;
(d) that [C]
spend time with the father in Queensland for three oneweek periods on each day
from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm with such time
to be supervised by the maternal
grandmother;
(e) if [C] was
not permitted to live with the mother or the maternal grandmother, then he
should live with the father but only if
he lived with his
mother clarified her current proposals by providing a minute of proposed orders
shortly prior to the hearing. It was handed
up to the court by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
mother’s actual proposals pursuant to the minute can be summarised as
(a) a watchlist
order be in place for [C];
(b) that [C]
live with the mother at the maternal grandmother’s home in Queensland;
(c) that [C]
have electronic communication with the father each evening whilst [C] resides
with the mother in prison;
(d) every six
months the maternal grandmother bring [C] to Perth for a period of seven
days to enable [C] to spend time with the paternal
grandparents. This time to
initially be for 2 to 4 hours for three days and then progressing to overnight
time but for no more than
two consecutive nights;
(e) cost of
travel is to be shared on an equal basis;
paternal grandparents be at liberty to travel to Queensland every six months to
spend time with [C]. [
The practical effect of these proposals would be that
[C] would spend time with the paternal grandparents every three months
(g) that [C]
have electronic communication with the paternal grandparents each week;
(h) that there
be an exchange of photographs, videos, et cetera;
(i) that [C]
only have supervised time with the father with supervision to be by a registered
event the father was incarcerated then there be no physical time spent with him
during the period of that incarceration.
relation to the overall proceedings, the mother’s position is that she
neither consents nor opposes the orders sought by
the Department.
Concerns about the ongoing proposals:
have some concerns about some of the above ongoing proposals of the mother. The
minute provides for time approximately every three
months between C and the
paternal grandparents. Those arrangements, however, are subject to the
capacity of the parties and the
grandparents on both sides to be able to afford
the necessary travel and accommodation that would be required.
The maternal grandmother
gave an assurance to the court that she would have
the capacity to comply with the mother’s proposals by way of travel and
accommodation. I did not obtain any similar assurance by the paternal
grandparents.
seems likely that neither the mother nor the father would be in a position in
the near future to afford such ongoing travel costs.
would likely be dependent upon their own families for financial support.
The father’s case:
his initial Form 1A response, the father sought orders for sole parental
responsibility and for C to live with him.
father says that he has been attending the prison regularly to ensure that C
maintains a relationship with the mother whilst
she is incarcerated. It does
appear (according to evidence from the Department), however, that the rate of
visits at the prison
have decreased significantly. I will discuss this issue in
due course.
father claims that the “driving restrictions” placed upon him by the
Department were “without due cause”
and were made:
following a false allegation made by a prison guard as to the second
respondent’s Hallucinating [sic] and on [sic] drugs at
father says that the maternal grandmother threatened his life in March
2017, saying (at [16] of his Case Information Affidavit):
I may be living in QLD [sic], but I will have you killed and Buried [sic] in
your backyard.
the maternal grandmother lives in Queensland, she has had very little to do with
the overall care of C.
father says that there are other concerns in relation to the maternal
grandmother. In his Case Information Affidavit filed 18
September 2018, he
applicant [
maternal grandmother
] has recently expressed a desire to take
her own life and to return the first respondent’s [
child to the care of his father...”;
applicant has an alcohol and an illegal drug addiction to a drug used for Horses
[sic], this [sic] is purchased online via
the internet and the dark
father also says that there are concerns about the mother’s brother, [Mr
P]. He says that he is 30 years old and lives
with the maternal grandmother in
Queensland. He also says that he is
a known drug seller (methamphetamine and marijuana)...
his part, the father says in his Case Information Affidavit that he has:
significant family support network;
(b) willingly
cooperated with the Department;
(c) complied
with all requests from the Department;
closely with Uniting Care West;
(e) commenced
drug and alcohol counselling with North Metro Drug and Alcohol Counselling;
(f) engaged
with [C’s] health nurse to ensure that all developmental milestones have
The paternal grandparents’ case:
paternal grandparents are in their 70s. They are prepared to provide ongoing
care for C. They did undertake the majority of
C’s care during the period
from early 2018 to March 2019.
that period there was a safety plan in place in relation to C, negotiated with
the Department.
paternal grandfather says that he first became aware of the father’s drug
use when he moved into their home with the mother
and C in December 2017.
noticed that the mother had sores on her face and he noticed that the father
would sleep for days at a time, however, he says
that in hindsight he now sees
that they were both functioning addicts.
claims to have not known that the father was still using methamphetamines until
drug test results were provided to him by the
Department. He admits to being
naïve about the extent of the father’s drug use. He also claims to
have had his eyes
opened since “[C] was taken away”.
paternal grandparents want C to live with them.
The Department of Communities and the Court’s
court’s jurisdiction is covered by the
6 sets out the objects of the Act:
The objects of this Act are —
(a) to promote the wellbeing of children, other
individuals, families and communities; and
(b) to acknowledge the primary role of parents, families and communities in
safeguarding and promoting the wellbeing of children;
(c) to encourage and support parents, families and communities in carrying out
that role; and
(da) to support and reinforce the role and responsibility of parents in
exercising appropriate control over the behaviour of their
children; and
(d) to provide for the protection and care of children in circumstances where
their parents have not given, or are unlikely or unable
to give, that protection
and care; and
(e) to protect children from exploitation in
employment.
with parenting applications, the court is required to take into account the
child’s best interests as the paramount consideration.
to s 8 of the Act, the court must consider a range of factors when
determining what is in a child’s best interests.
They are similar to the
parenting jurisdiction in many respects but there are some important differences
– such as the reference
to the importance of continuity and stability in
the child’s living arrangements. Section 8 provides:
determining for the purposes of this Act what is in a child’s best
interests the following matters must be taken into account
(a) the need to
protect the child from harm;
capacity of the child’s parents to protect the child from harm;
capacity of the child’s parents, or of any other person, to provide for
the child’s needs;
(d) the nature
of the child’s relationship with the child’s parents, siblings and
other relatives and with any other people
who are significant in the
child’s life;
attitude to the child, and to parental responsibility, demonstrated by the
child’s parents;
(f) any wishes
or views expressed by the child, having regard to the child’s age and
level of understanding in determining the
weight to be given to those wishes or
importance of continuity and stability in the child’s living arrangements
and the likely effect on the child of disruption
of those living arrangements,
including separation from —
child’s parents; or
(ii) a sibling
or other relative of the child; or
(iii) a carer
or any other person (including a child) with whom the child is, or has recently
been, living; or
(iv) any other
person who is significant in the child’s life;
(h) the need
for the child to maintain contact with the child’s parents, siblings and
other relatives and with any other people
who are significant in the
child’s life;
child’s age, maturity, sex, sexuality, background and language;
child’s cultural, ethnic or religious identity (including any need to
maintain a connection with the lifestyle, culture
and traditions of Aboriginal
people or Torres Strait Islanders);
child’s physical, emotional, intellectual, spiritual and developmental
(la) the child’s educational needs;
(l) any other relevant characteristics of the child;
(m) the likely effect on the child of any change in the child’s
circumstances.
28 defines when a child is in need of protection:
(1) In this section —
emotional abuse includes —
(a) psychological abuse; and
(b) being exposed to family violence;
harm, in relation to a child, means any detrimental
effect of a significant nature on the child’s wellbeing, whether caused
(a) a single act, omission or circumstance; or
(b) a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances;
neglect includes failure by a child’s parents to
provide, arrange, or allow the provision of —
(a) adequate care for the child; or
(b) effective medical, therapeutic or remedial treatment for the child.
(2) For the purposes of this Part a child is in need of protection
(a) the child has been abandoned by his or her parents
and, after reasonable inquiries —
(i) the parents cannot be found; and
(ii) no suitable adult relative or other suitable adult can be found who is
willing and able to care for the child;
(b) the child’s parents are dead or incapacitated and, after reasonable
inquiries, no suitable adult relative or other suitable
adult can be found who
is willing and able to care for the child; or
(c) the child has suffered, or is likely to suffer, harm as a result of any one
or more of the following —
(i) physical abuse;
(ii) sexual abuse;
(iii) emotional abuse;
[(iv) deleted]
(v) neglect,
and the child’s parents have not protected, or
are unlikely or unable to protect, the child from harm, or further harm, of
(d) the child has suffered, or is likely to suffer, harm as a result of —
(i) the child’s parents being unable to provide, or arrange the
provision of, adequate care for the child; or
(ii) the child’s parents being unable to provide, or arrange the
provision of, effective medical, therapeutic or other remedial
treatment for the
is clear that the jurisdiction conferred upon the court pursuant to the
overrides any jurisdiction of the court pursuant to the parenting
Family Court Act
and s 46 of the
provide the manner in which the
Court is to deal with a protection application:
45. Court may make protection order
If, on a protection application, the Court finds that
the child is in need of protection the Court may, subject to this
(a) make the protection order sought in respect of the child; or
(b) make another protection order in respect of the child.
46. No order principle
The Court must not, on a protection application, make a
protection order in respect of a child unless the Court is satisfied that
the order would be better for the child than making no order at
am satisfied that procedural fairness was accorded to all parties.
All parties had the opportunity to provide affidavit evidence
and minutes
of proposed orders. The mother appeared by telephone link from Prison A. The
maternal grandmother appeared in person.
The other parties were
represented by counsel.
protection proceedings, the court is not bound by the rules of evidence and
is entitled to inform itself on any matter in any
manner it considers
appropriate. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. As
noted, however, in
PVS v Chief Executive Officer, Department for Child
Protection [No 2]
[2011] WASC 318
[55] by Murray J, because of the
seriousness of a finding that a child is in need of protection, the evidence
needs to be of a relatively
high degree of cogency and persuasive power.
is up to the Department to prove that C should remain in provisional protection
and care; subject to the standard of proof referred
Department’s primary position is that C is in need of protection. C
has been taken into provisional care. The Department
seeks orders that he
remain in provisional protection and care and are seeking an interim order that
C be placed in the mother’s
the event the court makes such an order, the Department supports the
mother’s proposal to relocate C to Queensland.
number of potential jurisdictional and procedural issues arise and must be
is a statute of Western Australia. It can only operate in
relation to the protection of children in Western Australia. Each of the
states and territories of Australia have their own child protection legislation.
In Queensland, the
Child Protection Act
(Qld) governs the protection
of children. As in Western Australia, the Children’s Court in Queensland
has the primary jurisdiction
in relation to child protection matters.
Department says that it has no power to allow an interstate relocation, even if
the Department is granted an order for C to remain
in provisional protection.
The rationale behind this proposition is that once the child leaves Western
Australia, he can no longer
be the subject of the CEO’s power. Therefore
the CEO cannot authorise the removal of the child to anywhere outside of Western
the court ordered C to remain in provisional protection and ordered his
interstate relocation, potentially two things would need
(a) the current
protection proceedings may need to be transferred to an appropriate court in
Queensland; and
Department of Child Safety, Youth and Women in Queensland would have to take
over the conduct of the proceedings and stand
in the stead of CEO of the West
Australian Department.
have some doubt as to whether this Court has the power to order an interstate
relocation pursuant to the provisions of the
This is for similar reasons as set out above. The court’s
Australia. The
Child Protection Act
(Qld) provides for child
protection orders to be transferred to Queensland, from a participating state,
under the law of the state
that made the order.
to s 221 of the Queensland Act, the order may not be transferred to
Queensland unless the Chief Executive [of the Queensland
Department] gives
written consent to the transfer and to the provisions of the order.
reasons that will become clear it is not necessary to determine this issue in
order to appropriately deal with the application
before the court.
court must determine the protection application before considering any general
parenting orders. If C is deemed to be in need
of protection, then some of the
above-mentioned issues will need to be determined.
the court is satisfied that C is not in need of protection, then parenting
orders may be made.
relation to this issue, the Department’s position must be examined in more
detail. The Department indicates that if a parenting
order was made for C to
live with the mother and for her to be permitted to relocate C to Queensland,
then the Department would withdraw
its protection application.
Department’s position seems to imply that the Department has no real
concern that the child is in need of protection from
the mother.
For reasons again that should become clear, that is not the actual
a protection order was made, the Department would retain the current placement
with the mother whether she is in or out of prison.
If a parenting
order was made for C to live with the mother, the Department would withdraw its
protection application.
should be recalled at this juncture that the definition of whether a child
is in need of protection relates to the inability of
parents of the
to protect the child from harm or to provide adequate care for the
child [emphasis added].
it seems that the Department is only concerned about one parent, namely the
father. This is why the Department commonly takes
a background position in
many Family Court cases – where risks are associated with one parent only.
In those cases, the Department
does not generally intervene in Family Court of
Western Australia proceedings as long as the child is in the care of the parent
does not present a risk to the child’s welfare.
this matter, however the Department’s evidence makes it clear that its
position is that the mother is unable currently to
provide for the needs of C
and to ensure he is safe.
Department’s involvement and elements of risk:
Department became involved with this family in June 2017. In December
2017, the Department substantiated the likelihood that
C was at risk of neglect
and emotional harm, through exposure to family and domestic violence in the
mother and father’s joint
care. They also substantiated harm due to
concerns about the mother and father’s ongoing drug use and because of the
mental health issues.
that time, both parties had pending drug charges against them. The mother
has now been sent to prison following conviction and
the father is still
awaiting trial.
father denied ongoing drug use to the Department but testing has proved positive
on a number of occasions for methamphetamine.
concern of the Department, over time, has been that the father has been driving
C in his car whilst under the influence of methamphetamine.
Department has been providing this family with intensive family support.
mother accepts that the Department was “involved from the early stages of
my pregnancy...”.
C was born, the Department arranged for tests for “signs of
withdrawal from drugs for [C]”. He was clear and the
mother was allowed
to take him home from hospital.
to a safety plan, C was primarily living with the mother until she was
incarcerated. The father and the paternal grandparents
then took over the
primary care of C. Again the Department remained involved and those
arrangements were the subject of a further
safety plan.
father was facing significant issues at that time in terms of his capacity to
parent and hence he received significant assistance
from the paternal
grandparents.
Department seized C on 21 March 2019 and placed him in the mother’s care
at Prison A.
number of reasons have been given for that action but a significant element was
the alleged breaches of the safety plan by the
father and the paternal
grandparents.
Department’s reasoning can be put in simple terms:
paternal grandparents have been unable or unwilling to properly monitor the
father’s drug use;
(b) the father
has tested positive to illicit drugs at times when he was driving with [C];
paternal grandparents have been unable to effectively ensure that [C] is safe by
ensuring that the safety plan is complied
with in full; and
(d) therefore
the child is at risk in the father’s care and in the paternal
grandparents’ care.
have no doubt that C is at risk in the father’s sole care.
He appears to accept that this is the case, given that his proposals
for C to live with the paternal grandparents.
August 2018, the Department found that the father had engaged in longterm,
weekly drug misuse, and that C was being exposed to
physical harm each time the
father had him in his car.
test results on 22 August 2018 and 17 September 2018 proved positive for
methamphetamine (confirmatory testing was done). The
father produced
negative test results on 21 September 2018 and 4 October 2018.
1 November 2018 he again tested positive to amphetamine and methamphetamine. A
family support member confirmed that the father
drove C to prison on the day
before this positive test result. On 2 November 2018 the second
intervener, Mr Shine, confirmed that:
he would manage the situation to ensure [C] was safe and [Mr Carson] would not
be driving with [C] in the car until his drug test
showed he was
December 2018, the Department appeared satisfied with the safety plan and with
the father and his support network’s behaviour
(save and except that
the father had relapsed on occasions).
14 December 2018 the father produced another positive sample for amphetamine and
methamphetamine. This was the second positive
result since orders were made by
the Family Court of Western Australia which required him to abstain from illicit
mother has been convicted of possession of unlawfully obtained property;
possession with intent to sell and supply methamphetamine
and possession of
prescribed medication (dexamphetamine). She has been sentenced to 26 months,
which commenced in early 2018.
father has been charged with possession of unlawfully obtained property ($3,800
in cash); two charges of possession of methamphetamine
with intent to sell
and supply and one charge of intent to sell and supply MDMA. Given the
mother’s incarceration in relation
to similar charges it seems a
distinct possibility that the father will receive a period of imprisonment if
found guilty of those
may be a greater likelihood of imprisonment if C is not in the father’s
care pursuant to orders of this Court. I have
mentioned the potential impact of
Family Court of Western Australia orders on both the mother and the
father’s liberty given
the pending parole application for the mother and
the pending trial for the father in the District Court.
do so, not to indicate that these potential outcomes might influence my
decision, but to confirm that my decision is based on what
I consider to be
best for C. I merely acknowledge the potential that my orders may have an
impact in relation to other decisions
to be made by other authorities and
Department has raised concerns about the reduction of visits to the prison so
that C could maintain a relationship with the mother.
Until 31 October 2018, C
visited the mother about every two and ahalf days.
reduced to six visits in three months up to 1 February 2019.
Department is aware that the mother is due to be eligible for parole in March
it will be necessary to provide casework support and safety [sic] plan to
address the original danger statements concerning domestic
violence (likelihood
of emotional harm) and likelihood of neglect associated with substance
of the Department’s concern is that
it is very difficult for members of the support network, including the
Department, to identify those occasions when [Mr Carson] is
caring for [C]
whilst under the influence of methamphetamine...
note that the 14 December 2018 safety plan provided that
dad and the safety network should not be under the influence of any drugs or
alcohol whilst caring for [C].
Family Court orders made 21 September 2018 provided that the father be
restrained by injunction from consuming any alcohol or
illicit substances for 12
hours prior to or during any time in which C is in his care.
15 March 2019, the father supplied a further positive drug test result for
amphetamine and methamphetamine. Approximately 25
minutes later he
collected C from his early learning centre. He was observed on video
driving away from the centre with C.
Department determined that
given [Mr Carson’s] continued disregard for any attempts to provide safety
planning for his son, his continued use of illicit
drugs, including
methamphetamine, whilst his son is in his care and his continued actions in
placing his son at risk of physical
injury or death whilst driving under the
influence, it was considered that [Master PennCarson] was at an
unacceptable risk of harm.
Department also noted that the mother is
unable currently to ensure the protection and care of the child and she is
currently incarcerated.
History of family violence, drug use and mental health
maternal grandmother claims that the father was physically, emotionally and
verbally abusive towards the mother during their
relationship. The mother
confirms these allegations. These include that the father punched the mother on
several occasions and
threatened to kill her.
maternal grandmother says that the father has been taking methamphetamine,
heroin and MDMA and has been dealing for “most
life”. It is unclear how the grandmother knows that these allegations are
mother also has a history of previous methamphetamine use. It is clear
that the parties used methamphetamine when they were
maternal grandmother also claims that both the mother and the father have mental
health issues. The mother has been diagnosed
with posttraumatic stress disorder
arising from a rape incident and the father is undiagnosed.
parties allege very significant family violence towards each other. I have not
canvassed in these reasons each and every allegation
made. I have,
however, taken into account they are at the worst end of the spectrum in
relation to family violence. They are both
substantial in severity, and
regular in frequency. It seems an obvious conclusion that the parties, when
together, were embroiled
in a life where drug use, violence, abuse and neglect
were regular aspects of their lifestyle.
all of the evidence, I am satisfied that there is reasonable cause to believe
that family violence took place on numerous occasions
between the mother and the
father. If the court gets to the point where it must consider the
presumption that the parties should
have equal shared parental responsibility,
then it follows that that presumption does not apply because of the family
Capacity to parent:
Notwithstanding
the unsubstantiated allegations by the father, I have no real concerns with
the maternal grandmother’s capacity
to care for C and to provide support
for the mother.
mother is currently in prison and C has been placed in her care by the
Department. The circumstances of her accommodation are
set out in the
caseworker’s affidavit and in the mother’s most recent affidavit.
There is no real dispute about the
nature of those arrangements. As mentioned
earlier, she is due for potential release on parole. Whilst the current
arrangements
for C are adequate, the issue for the court is what might happen
when the mother is released. The court must consider the potential
mother to relapse into regular drug use. The court must also consider what
housing and support options the mother has upon
her release.
the father points out in his affidavit filed on 23 May 2019 the Prison A policy
is to provide an age limit for children living
there of 12 months of age. That
adds weight to the need to have C accommodated outside that prison
environment.
mother has very little support in Western Australia. Part of the reason for her
application to remove C from Western Australia
to live in Queensland is that she
would have the support of the maternal grandmother. Both C and the mother would
also be reunited
with the mother’s other child, N.
mother (significantly in my view) acknowledged (at [15] of her Case Information
Affidavit) that:
My mother will be able to hold me accountable, give me support and offer my
children a safe and protective environment as I reintegrate
into the community
and reunite with my children upon my release.
mother speaks of getting away from the
toxic circle I had come to know in Perth that helped in increasing my dependency
pause here to reflect on these words. The mother also says that she was
“free of drugs at the end of my pregnancy”,
which was November 2017.
She also says that she has remained drug-free since imprisonment (in early
2018). She further says that
“after my arrest I stopped selling
following issues arise:
(a) the mother
does not say that she stopped using drugs between [C’s] birth and her
imprisonment or her arrest;
(b) stopping
use of drugs in prison should be much easier than doing so in the
I commend the mother’s desire to break away from what she describes as the
toxic environment in Perth, a change of location
and scenery is not going to
prevent relapses unless the mother has adequately addressed, and continues to
adequately address, her
ongoing drug addiction.
that point, the mother has completed various programs including the Pathways 100
Hours addictions program whilst in prison. She
has also completed other
skillbased courses and has applied to undertake various other programs. She is
taking a concerted and proper
approach to dealing with her drug addiction.
mother’s incarceration has no doubt helped her deal with her ongoing drug
issues and provided a significant period of time
where she has been away from a
drug culture and has had less access to drugs. She has taken this time to
understand and deal with
her addiction with a view to minimising the
prospect of relapse when she returns to the community.
has set out in her most recent affidavit the various steps that she intends to
take with the support of the maternal grandmother.
These include ongoing
counselling and general practitioner visits to arrange a Mental Health Care
mother also indicates a concern for her safety and wellbeing given her
“decision to turn away from drug dealings and to
be a witness for the
prosecution against [Mr Carson]”.
father on the other hand is not in prison and is still facing serious criminal
charges similar to those upon which the mother
was convicted. He has been shown
to continue to use methamphetamine, despite having C in his care.
father has not shown much progress in relation to his drug use, compared to the
progress shown by the mother.
prospect of incarceration may be a sobering factor for the father and time will
tell whether he utilises any such time effectively.
If he was not imprisoned
pursuant to the current criminal charges, I would have little confidence in
him ending his ongoing drug
use. On that basis I find that he would
present an ongoing risk to C.
Conclusions regarding jurisdiction:
court must first determine the protection application.
Only if satisfied that C is not in need of protection can the court
consider any parenting orders.
protection application must be based on the current facts before the court
– i.e. those that exist at the time the application
The court must, however, consider both the likelihood of past harm and the
potential of future harm to C. The assessment
of the potential of future
harm must be based on the history of behaviour to date, and potential changes in
circumstances that would
decrease or reduce the likelihood of harm occurring in
the future. To that end, it would be proper to take into account the
circumstances such as the mother’s proposals to live in
Queensland with the maternal grandmother.
the moment, the mother is incarcerated and therefore is unable to properly
care for the needs of C and is unable to properly ensure
his protection. That
current housing arrangement is a shortterm placement only.
father is incapable of ensuring C is protected from harm or neglect. This
is evident from his history of drug use, post the
safety plan and post Family
Court orders.
28 provides that a child is in need of protection when the child’s parents
are incapable of protecting the child or
providing adequate care. It matters
not whether grandparents or stepgrandparents are involved in the care of
the child and may be
a better option than the parents in determining whether a
child is in need of protection. The option of allowing people other than
the parents to have the ongoing care of the child is one that is considered
after a finding is made about the protection issue.
29(3) provides that a child ceases to be in provisional protection and care if:
(a) the child
is returned to or placed in the care of a person under section 38(2) or (3)(b);
(b) the Court
makes an interim order under section 133(2)(a) that the child be returned to or
placed with a parent of the child; or
(c) the Court
makes an interim order under section 133(2)(c); or
(d) the Court
makes a protection order in respect of the child or refuses to make such an
38 does not apply. It only applies to a child taken into provisional protection
and care pursuant to section 37 (i.e. without
a warrant). C was taken into
provisional protection and care with a warrant.
133(2)(a) provides that the court may make an interim order placing a child with
a parent of the child.
133(2)(c) provides that the child may be placed with a person approved by
the court, following a report as to that person’s
suitability.
133 also provides that the court may make an order that the child remain in
provisional protection and care.
effect of these provisions, therefore, is that if the court makes an interim
order under s 133(2)(a) that C be placed in the
care of a parent, C ceases
to be in provisional protection and care.
an interim basis, therefore, the CEO of the Department would cease to have
parental responsibility for C (pursuant to s 29(2)).
that would resolve the interim issues, the CEO would still have on foot the
overall application for a time-limited protection
order pursuant to s 44
Department’s position appears to be that if an interim order is made
placing C in the care of the mother, they would withdraw
the protection
application.
court is able to make orders therefore pursuant to the
that placement. Any subsequent parenting orders would only commence after the
protection application is withdrawn (pursuant
Family Court Act
provides that:
a court must not make an order under this act... in relation to a child who is
under the control or in the care (however described),
of a person under a child
welfare law unless –
(a) the order is expressed to come into effect when the child ceases to be under
that control or in that care or
my view, the evidence supports the following findings:
(a) [C] is in
need of protection and he has suffered harm as a result of emotional abuse and
neglect, pursuant to
parents have not protected [C] from harm of that kind;
(c) [C] is in
further need of protection as a result of harm due to his parents being unable
to provide, or arrange the provision
of, suitable care for [C].
intend to make an order that C remain in provisional protection and care.
Beyond that order, I am satisfied that the mother’s
proposals promote
C’s best interests more than the proposals of the father. I can only deal
with those issues on an interim
Department and the Independent Children’s Lawyer both support the
mother’s proposals. I accept that a move to Queensland
significant change in the current arrangements and may have a significant
impact on the relationship between C and the
father and the paternal
grandparents.
between C and the father and the paternal grandparents will be limited and the
opportunity for communication will also be limited.
There remains a significant
prospect of incarceration for the father, which would limit time and
communication with C in any event,
if it eventuates.
Notwithstanding
these concerns, the father and his “support network” are unable to
ensure C’s ongoing safety and
care. Therefore placing C with the
father and his family is not an appropriate option for the court.
only option which accords with C’s best interests is to place him with his
mother. This confirms the current arrangement
and such an arrangement should
continue upon the mother’s release from prison.
C is formally placed in the mother’s care, the next option to consider is
whether C resides in Western Australia or Queensland.
I noted earlier my
concern about the court’s power to make a relocation order pursuant
to the provisions of the
balance, I have determined that it is unnecessary to deal with this issue. I
propose to make orders providing that C remain in
provisional protection
and care and, subsequently, that he be placed in the care of the mother
pursuant to s 133(2)(a). On that
basis the Department is likely to withdraw its
protection application. Parenting orders can then be made to take effect
Department withdrawing its application.
parenting orders will include orders permitting the relocation to Queensland.
practical terms, once the court makes these orders, the Department can
withdraw its protection application and do so prior to
the mother’s
release from prison. Once the protection application is withdrawn, the
parenting orders will take effect. The
Prisoner Review Board could take these
orders into account and may approve release on parole with a transfer to
Queensland. The
mother then could effectively move from prison directly to her
mother’s home in Queensland.
would then be no ongoing need for protection proceedings in Western
Australia as they would have been withdrawn. The court
is then left with the
parenting jurisdiction and a contest between the maternal grandmother and the
mother on one side and the father
and paternal stepgrandfather on the other
the mother relocates with the child to Queensland, the proceedings would
change from being dealt with under the
Family Court Act
instead be dealt under the provisions of the
Family Law Act
the contest would be between residents of different states.
would therefore be no reason to continue any proceedings in the Family Court of
Western Australia. I canvassed this potential
with the various parties and
counsel during the hearing. If the relocation is permitted in the circumstances
described above, it
would be appropriate to transfer the Family Court of Western
Australia proceedings to a court close to the maternal grandmother’s
She lives in [Suburb A], which is closest to [Town A]. My understanding is that
the Federal Circuit Court in Brisbane conducts
circuits to Town A. I therefore
propose to transfer the proceedings to the Federal Circuit Court in Brisbane,
and allow that court
to deal with any circuit listings.
canvassed these legislative issues in some detail, I note that I have
considered other options. For example, C could remain
in provisional protection
and care but be placed with the paternal stepgrandfather. He and the paternal
grandmother provided care
for C for 12 months whilst the mother was in prison
and before C was seized by the Department. I am not, however, satisfied that
the paternal grandparents have been able to properly follow the safety plan and
that they have therefore placed C at risk.
from assertions in the evidence that they would do a better job in the future, I
am not satisfied that they can protect C from
harm from the father’s
ongoing drug use and his inability to comply with court orders and the safety
have also considered the “no order” principle, and in my view it is
necessary to make an order.
have formed the view that the Department does not have the power to allow the
mother to relocate C to anywhere outside of Western
Australia. I have also
found that the court (under the
provisions) has no power to place
C in a parent’s care and permit the child to reside outside of Western
therefore propose to restrain the mother from relocating C from Western
Australia whilst the protection application remains on
foot. Once the
protection jurisdiction has been withdrawn, I am satisfied that relocation on an
interim basis to Queensland with
the mother is in C’s best interests. I
therefore intend to discharge the injunction once the protection proceedings are
Appropriate parenting orders:
the various findings made and the detailed discussion of the evidence, I intend
to give brief reasons in relation to the parenting
the clear history of family violence the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility does not apply. I am therefore
not required to consider equal
time or substantial and significant time. I am dealing with these issues on an
interim basis.
have taking into account the various factors under the provisions of the
Family Court Act
(WA), in determining what orders are in C’s
best interests.
have considered the prospects of C residing with the paternal grandparents and
the father, following the mother’s release
from prison. I am not
satisfied, as set out above, that those parties have taken appropriate steps to
ensure that C is safe in their
care. In my view, C’s best interests lie
in being reunited with his mother in the community and with the maternal
grandmother
and the mother’s other child, N.
C was to reside with the father and the paternal grandparents after the mother
was released from prison, it is unclear as to where
the mother would be
residing. It may be that she would still decide to live in Queensland with the
maternal grandmother. If that
were the case then C would be subject to similar
limitations in terms of his ongoing relationship with the mother, as he will be
if he lives with the mother in Queensland and his relationship with the father
is limited.
my view there is more likely to be a more significant detrimental effect on C in
being separated from the mother, than there is
likely to be in being separated
from the father and the paternal grandparents.
the mother’s release from prison, the current arrangement should continue.
do not propose to make any further orders for time or communication pending the
mother’s release or the cessation of the
current protection proceedings.
I am satisfied with the current arrangements and in any event the time may be
short between delivery
of these reasons and the mother’s release from
release from prison, C should remain in the mother’s care and she should
make arrangements promptly to live in Queensland.
The reason for this
comment is that her support is in Queensland and I am satisfied there is a
need for that ongoing support. In
fact, were there to be any significant delay
in the mother moving to Queensland, I would expect the Department
to monitor that situation
am satisfied that the maternal grandmother will provide necessary housing and
support to the mother and in her parenting of C.
satisfied that the mother has taken numerous steps to address her drug
addiction. The combination of these factors leads
me to conclude that C is
unlikely to suffer further harm in the care of the mother.
that support, however, I would hold significant concerns for the mother’s
capacity to care for C’s needs on her
intend to put in place an order for the mother to have sole parental
responsibility. Given the distance between the parties and
the significant
ongoing issues including the ongoing criminal proceedings and the mother’s
role as a witness, it is clearly
not appropriate for the parties to have equal
shared parental responsibility.
am not satisfied that a watch list order needs to be made. C was in the
father’s care for approximately 12 months and the
evidence does not
support any flight risk. This is particularly so, given that C will reside with
the mother in Queensland.
Orders until further order:
child [C Carson–Penn] born [in late] 2017 remain in provisional protection
said child be placed in the care of the mother at [Prison A] whilst the mother
remains incarcerated there and thereafter generally
in her care upon her release
from prison.
mother be restrained by injunction from removing [C] from Western Australia.
the first intervener withdrawing the current protection application, the
following orders will take effect immediately and without
further notice to any
party and on an interim basis:
(a) [C] live
with the mother;
(b) the mother
have sole parental responsibility for [C];
(c) the mother
be at liberty to relocate [C] to Queensland to live;
above-mentioned injunction be discharged;
(e) the mother
be required to live at the home of the maternal grandmother in [Suburb A] at all
times [C] is in her care;
(f) [C] spend
time with the father and the second intervener and communicate with them in
accordance with the mother’s minute
of proposed orders handed up in court
on 28 May 2019;
proceedings be transferred to the Federal Circuit Court in Brisbane with a
request that consideration be given to listing
the matter for directions in the
[Town A] Circuit;
appointment of the Independent Children’s Lawyer be discharged;
subpoenaed documents be returned to source if original and destroyed if copies;
(j) The Family
Court of Western Australia proceedings otherwise be
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Magistrates Court of Western Australia at 150 Terrace
13 JUNE 2019
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (409 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter