URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/183.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WALKER and CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE [2025] FCWA 183 (1 August 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
WALKER and CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE
[2025] FCWA
1 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
9367 of 2019
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH SERVICE
First Respondent
Second Respondent
MS PATERSON
Third Respondent
WELFARE – Where the child is in Intensive Care in circumstances where the
clinical diagnosis is that he has suffered a
non-survivable and irreversible
brain injury - Where the Applicant is the child's stepfather and primary carer,
having separated
from the Third Respondent mother – Where the Applicant
and the Third Respondent mother have joint decision-making responsibility
pursuant to consent orders – Where the Third Respondent mother accepts the
clinical diagnosis and the advice of the treating
medical practitioners that the
appropriate course is the removal of artificial life support measures –
Where the Applicant
is not yet prepared to accept the clinical diagnosis and
wishes to obtain further advice - Where the Applicant seeks to restrain
health service from "taking any step or refusing to take any step that will
negatively impact upon the options for assessment
and treatment" and seeks a
mandatory injunction compelling the immediate commencement of dialysis - Where
the evidence of the treating
specialist is that the commencement of any form of
invasive treatment, including dialysis, is contrary to the child's best
– Where the Applicant had previously consented to the
undertaking of scans involving the injection of dye which would potentially
confirm the clinical diagnosis but subsequently withdrew his consent –
Where the evidence of the treating specialist is that
there is no clinical need
for scans to confirm what is a unanimous diagnosis, but that treating
practitioners would accommodate such
a scan to provide certainty to the family
and conclusive evidence of brain death – Where one of the two alternative
scans can be undertaken within approximately an hour and provide an
immediate outcome – Where the other alternative scan will
not be available
for several days – Orders made to facilitate the immediate scan, on
undertakings by the health service that
should the scan cast any doubt on the
diagnosis alternative treatment options will be considered and discussed with
the parties,
and that no withdrawal of life support will take place without
either the joint consent of the Applicant and the Third Respondent
mother, or an
order of the Court – Further orders made for the provision of medical
records to the Applicant - Proposed mandatory
injunction compelling the
commencement of dialysis not granted – Proceedings otherwise adjourned
with liberty to relist as
a matter of urgency if
Legislation:
Court Act 1997
Representation:
First Respondent
Ms Paljetak
Second Respondent
No Appearance
Third Respondent
Independent Children's Lawyer
Ms Davidson
Solicitors:
Pepper Legal
First Respondent
State Solicitor's Office
Second Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Third Respondent
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Legal Aid WA
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
(Walker and Child and Adolescent Health Service & Ors)
been approved by the Family Court of Western Australia pursuant to
Family Court Act 1997
This copy of the Court's Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court Rules
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Court Act 1997
(WA) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
[Child A] was born in [2016]. His parents are [Mr Langley] and [Ms
Walker] was in a relationship with Ms Paterson after she and Mr Langley
separated. On his evidence, he has been the primary
carer for Child A since he
began living with Ms Paterson in 2017. Mr Walker and Ms Paterson separated
in 2019. On the evidence
of Mr Walker, Child A has been in his sole care
since that time.
25 March 2020, orders were made by consent as between Mr Walker and Ms
Paterson. Those orders provide for them to have shared
parental responsibility
for Child A, for Child A to live with Mr Walker, and for him to spend time
with Ms Paterson as agreed between
the parties. Mr Langley did not participate
in those proceedings. He apparently presently lives in [Suburb A],
although his particular
details are unknown, to Mr Walker at
21 July 2025, Child A had a medical episode at home. He suffered cardiac
arrest and was administered CPR cumulatively for approximately
60 minutes, first
at home, then by ambulance officers. He was transported by ambulance to
[Hospital A]. He has been in the Intensive
Care Unit ("ICU") since
the evidence of Mr Walker, Child A’s respiratory function has deteriorated
because of his failing renal function. He says
that he has been informed that
Child A has suffered a brain injury which is not survivable. He says that
there is not yet "clear
evidence of brain death", that he is currently
negotiating about a further brain scan, and that he has not yet been provided
medical records despite requesting them and submitting a request under the
Freedom of Information legislation two days ago on 29
The application
Walker seeks orders restraining the Child and Adolescent Health Service (for
ease of reference "the hospital") from "taking any
step or refusing to take any
step that will negatively impact upon the options for assessment and treatment"
of Child A. He seeks
a further order that the hospital forthwith administer
dialysis treatment to Child A. He seeks orders for the provision of copies
of all medical records relating to Child A’s assessment and treatment
since his admission.
his affidavit filed with the application late this afternoon, Mr Walker
says that he wishes to seek a second opinion about Child
A’s overall
condition. Having consulted with "ICU Clinician [Nurse A]", he understands
that his requests are reasonable and
that refusal to administer dialysis "may be
fatal within 24 – 48 hours". He expresses his understanding that
dialysis will
not cause Child A any suffering in his current state, and does not
carry any life-threatening risks, but that "non treatment now
is likely to
result in death within 24 – 48 hours."
Nurse A operates [A Medical] Hotline. He is apparently an experienced intensive
care nurse. It is not suggested that he is a qualified
doctor. He has not
had any involvement in the diagnosis or treatment of Child A. The Medical
Hotline offers services which it says
are designed to improve the lives of
families of critically ill patients in intensive care, assist those families to
"stay in control"
of the destiny of their loved ones, "make informed decisions,
have peace of mind, control, power and influence." It offers services
the review of medical records, and what is described as "professional advocacy"
for critically ill patients and their families.
It also offers to facilitate
second medical and nursing opinions in intensive
receipt of the application of Mr Walker, an urgent hearing was arranged.
All participants attended by telephone or video link.
participated in the hearing and was represented by his solicitor. Ms
Paterson participated in the hearing, albeit given
the urgency of the matter she
did so without the benefit of legal representation. The State Solicitor's
Office represented the hospital,
and Ms Davidson of Legal Aid Western Australia
appeared as amicus curiae on behalf of Child A.
the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the hospital confirmed that they
had no information as to contact details for Child
A’s biological
father, Mr Langley. Ms Paterson indicated that she is prepared to provide those
details. The hospital opposed
the injunction sought by Mr Walker, and the order
sought directing the provision of dialysis treatment to Child A forthwith. The
hospital confirmed that it could provide Mr Walker with an extract of the
digital current hospital records within 24 hours, and that
it did not otherwise
consent to or oppose the order sought in that regard.
The evidence
Walker gave oral evidence confirming that set out in his Case Information
Affidavit filed late this afternoon and summarised earlier
in these reasons. He
said that he had spoken to Nurse A on multiple occasions over the last several
days. He expressed his own
view that dialysis would help Child A survive for
longer than a few days. He was concerned that until he could get a second
he remained unclear as to whether Child A’s condition is
terminal. He felt that an opinion from an independent neurologist
might assist,
but he did not know how long that might take. He said that he was talking to
medical advisers who would point him
to the correct people to talk to.
[Dr A] gave evidence. He is the head of the relevant department at Hospital A.
In that role, he has been aware of Child A’s
circumstances since his
admission and took over his care on Saturday, 26 July 2025.
A explained that a CT scan undertaken on the evening of Child A’s
admission confirmed that he had suffered a severe brain
injury. While he
initially had some reactivity in his pupils, by no later than Saturday morning
his pupils were fixed and dilated.
There has been no sign of neurological
activity since and no reaction to stimuli. Dr A was clear in his diagnosis
that Child A
has suffered an irreversible brain injury, which he will not
explained that Child A has also suffered severe kidney failure and has poor
heart and lung function. He has suffered a general
hypoxic injury to his entire
body, with the oxygen demands of the brain meaning that his brain injury is the
most severe.
explained that there are two options available for a scan to objectively and
definitively confirm the diagnosis. Both involve
the injection of dye and
observation as to whether there is any blood flow to the brain. One involves
the use of radioactive dye,
and one does not.
A said that, sadly, the scans are not clinically required to confirm Child
A’s diagnosis. That said, if they perform a
useful function in providing
certainty to the family that is entirely understandable, and the hospital would
facilitate that. A
CT angiogram (which does not involve radioactive dye) can be
arranged within an hour, takes only a few minutes, and provides a virtually
immediate response. Mr Walker had previously consented to a scan involving
radioactive dye but withdrew that consent based on an
expressed concern
regarding Child A’s renal failure. A scan involving radioactive
dye cannot be arranged outside normal working
Walker had expressed concern that the injection of dye required to undertake the
scan might itself lead to further damage to Child
A’s kidneys.
Dr A was squarely asked that question. He was firm in his opinion that, given
the extensive renal failure Child
A is already experiencing, there is no risk to
his renal function from the administration of the dye and the undertaking of the
A also made clear that, in his view, the administration of dialysis, which is by
its nature an invasive treatment, is not in Child
A’s best interests.
In circumstances where he has a non-survivable and irreversible brain injury,
his treating doctors would
be fundamentally opposed to embarking on invasive
treatment which would be of no conceivable benefit to him.
said, if the administered scan was to cast doubt on the current diagnosis, Dr A
confirmed that the hospital would reconsider
its position on dialysis. In
saying that, he made it clear that even if the scan does not confirm that Child
A is brain-dead, that
does not in any way mean that he will make a meaningful
if the scan confirms the diagnosis, then there are no treatment options for
Child A. The hospital would then maintain his
current life‑support
systems in a sensitive manner to allow his family to come to terms with the
tragic circumstances they
face, to spend time with him, and to be with him when
A confirmed that the diagnosis and prognosis he had explained represented the
unanimous view of the doctors involved in Child
A’s treatment.
He confirmed also that the hospital would facilitate Mr Walker and Ms Paterson
accompanying Child A while the
scan is undertaken if that was their
Disposition
the evidence was given, and all concerned had the opportunity to ask questions
of Dr A, with the consent of Mr Walker’s
lawyer I expressed my
preliminary view. I made it clear, particularly for the benefit of Ms Paterson
as she was unrepresented, that
the expression of that preliminary view was
intended to be of assistance to the discussions that the parties were about to
and did not represent a concluded view on my part. I made it clear that
all concerned would have the opportunity to make submissions
if they sought to
do so, and that I would hear and determine the matter tonight for obvious
explained to the parties the weight I must necessarily give to the expert
opinion of the medical specialists directly involved
in the care of Child A.
With no disrespect to Nurse A or to the support which he provides to families
facing the awful circumstances
in which this family finds
he would not purport to be
a medical expert, nor does he have direct knowledge of Child A.
explained that on the evidence given, the diagnosis and prognosis are
regrettably clear and have been expressed with certainty
and unanimity.
That said, as acknowledged by the hospital, if the family seeks the objective
confirmation of a scan, they should
explained that I would be highly unlikely to order treating doctors to
administer active, let alone invasive, treatment which they
firmly believed to
be contrary to the best interests of their patient. The proposition that
dialysis should be commenced immediately
has to be viewed in that context.
explained further that the evidence made it clear that there was no appreciable
risk to Child A, in terms of his renal function
in particular, in undertaking
the proposed scan. That said, the scan is not seen by the hospital as being
required given the degree
of certainty expressed in relation to the diagnosis
and prognosis. Its purpose would be to provide objective certainty and closure
to the family, by sadly confirming that Child A is brain dead.
explained that, subject to persuasion by submissions to the contrary, I was
likely to conclude that there were only two options
available. The first
logical possibility was that having heard the evidence, Mr Walker and Ms
Paterson on reflection might accept
the diagnosis and prognosis and provide the
necessary consent for Child A’s current artificial life-sustaining
treatment being
discontinued in an appropriate and sensitive timeframe. The
second logical possibility, if Mr Walker and Ms Paterson feel unable
that step, is that arrangements are made (either by their consent, or if
necessary, by order) for the relevant scan to be
undertaken immediately this
evening, with the application being adjourned to await the outcome of that scan
and without any other
order being made at this stage.
parties had discussions but were unable to reach full agreement. Ms Paterson
indicated after those discussions that she accepts
the advice of the hospital,
including the prognosis. Mr Walker has not yet reached that point, which is
entirely understandable
in the circumstances. The taking of immediate
steps to undertake the scan is therefore appropriate. When the results of
are known, which will be later tonight, Mr Walker will then be better
able to consider the clear advice he has been given by the
have determined to make the orders set out below for the reasons articulated,
and having received the undertakings to be recorded.
Noting the undertaking
given through counsel by the Child and Adolescent Health Service that
(a) currently provided life sustaining support for the child will not be
withdrawn other than by the consent of the Applicant and
the Third Respondent,
or as authorised by further order of the court; and
(b) if the result of the CT Angiogram changes the clinical teams’
assessment of [Child A’s] prognosis of irreversible
nonsurvivable brain
injury, then the CAHS will reconsider the course of action in relation to his
care and treatment;
It is ordered:
Child and Adolescent Health Service and all medical practitioners and staff at
[Hospital A] are hereby authorised to administer
a CT angiogram to [Child A],
born in [2016] and to immediately provide the results of that scan to the
Applicant, [redacted], and
his solicitor and to the Third Respondent,
[redacted].
Child and Adolescent Health Service must, as promptly as possible, provide
extracts of the child's digital medical records to
the Applicant, [redacted],
and his solicitor and to the Third Respondent, [redacted].
application of the Applicant filed today is otherwise adjourned generally, with
liberty to all parties to seek a relisting on
an urgent basis.
reasons are the reasons for decision delivered on 1 August 2025, edited in
places but only as to correct grammatical errors
and some infelicity of
expression without variation to the substance thereof.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Family Court of Western Australia.
Mr Walker said he has no
communication with Mr Langley. Ms Paterson volunteered that she is able to
it appears he has had no recent involvement with
The hearing in this
matter commenced at 5:00pm on Friday 1 August 2025 and did not conclude until
approximately 9:30pm. The administration
of a scan involving radioactive dye
could not have taken place until Monday 4 August 2025 at the earliest, where a
CT angiogram could
be arranged
immediately.
As I understand
it, Nurse A provides that support remotely, by telephone and email communication
and via his website.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter