URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/170.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ELDRED and DENZIL [2015] FCWAM 170 (6 August 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
ELDRED and DENZIL
[2015] FCWAM 170
16 JULY 2015
DELIVERED :
6 AUGUST 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 1617 of 2013
Catchwords:
Undefended child related proceedings; need to protect children from potential
harm in father’s care; personal protection injunctions
granted; mother and
children living interstate; children to continue living with the mother and to
communicate with the father.
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : No appearance
Respondent : Ms C Smith
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self-Represented Litigant
Respondent : Reader Lawyers & Mediators
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN
THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
1 [Mr Eldred] and [Ms Denzil] commenced a
relationship in 2006; were married on [in] 2007 and separated in late2008.
2 They have two children, namely, [Child A] born [in] 2006 and [Child B]
born [in] 2007.
3 On 7 February 2013 the mother relocated with the two children to [Sydney].
This matter was initially listed for trial before me
on 16 July 2015 with an
estimated hearing time of two days. On 10 July 2015 the mother filed a Form 2
application seeking to proceed
on an undefended basis and seeking to dismiss the
father’s Form 1 application effectively for want of prosecution.
4 The Court made those orders in those terms and converted the twoday trial
to a twohour estimated hearing time given that it was
undefended. The
Independent Children’s Lawyer was also discharged.
5 The trial proceeded on 16 July 2015 and there was no appearance by the
father. Given that the parties were married, these proceedings
determined under the provisions of the
Family Law Act
The mother’s case
6 The mother relied upon her trial affidavit filed on 8 July 2015, together
with affidavits of [Ms Baxter] and [Ms Bond] filed 2
July 2015. She also relied
upon her Form 13 financial statement filed 2 July 2015.
7 The orders proposed by her were set out in a minute of final orders sought
filed on 29 May 2015. They were in the following terms:
previous parenting orders be hereby discharged.
children, [Child A] born [in] 2006 and [Child B] born [in] 2007 (“the
children”), live with the respondent mother,
[Ms Denzil] (“the
mother have sole parental responsibility for the children.
applicant father, [Mr Eldred] (“the father”), communicate with the
children as follows:
(a) by telephone call the first Sunday of
every month, such call to take place between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm AEDT,
with the father to
initiate the call to the children;
(b) by telephone call on the occasions of Christmas and each of the
children’s birthdays, such call to take place between 6.30
7.00 pm AEDT, with the father to initiate the call to the children;
(c) by way of cards and gifts on the occasions of Christmas, Easter and each
of the children’s birthdays; and
(d) by way of letter on one occasion in each three-month period with the
first three-month period to be from 1 July 2015 to 3 September
communication referred to in paragraphs 4(a) and 4(b) above is to occur with the
father telephoning the children on a telephone
number nominated by the mother,
such telephone number be provided to the father within 7 days of the parties
receiving a sealed copy
of these orders.
communication referred to in paragraphs 4(c) and 4(d) above is to be sent to a
postal address nominated by the mother, such address
to be provided to the
father within 7 days of the parties receiving a sealed copy of these orders.
mother shall facilitate the children communicating with the father by telephone,
email, letter, cards or any other means in accordance
with their wishes.
mother be permitted to remove the children from the Commonwealth of Australia
for the purpose of travelling for a period of no
more than four (4) consecutive
weeks per calendar year.
mother be at liberty to obtain passports for the children and to that end, the
necessity for the father to consent to the issue
of passports for the children
be dispensed with.
to any other requirements of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
passports be issued to the said children to enable
them to leave Australia.
father be restrained by injunction and an injunction is hereby granted
restraining him from:
(a) molesting, harassing or abusing the
mother and/or the children or interfering with the mother and/or
children’s manner of
(b) coming into contact with the children or communicating with the children
other than in accordance with these orders;
(c) coming into contact or communicating with the mother other than in
accordance with these orders;
(d) removing or attempting to remove the children from the care and control
of the mother, any school, any childcare service or third
(e) coming within 100 metres of the residence of the mother and/or the
children or any premises where the mother and/or children are
(f) coming within 100 metres of any school or childcare service attended by
the children from time to time; and
(g) causing, assisting or allowing any other person to engage in the conduct
described by paragraphs 11(a) to 11(f) inclusive.
injunctions provided for in paragraphs 11(a) to 11(f) inclusive a [sic] be
deemed to be injunctions made for the personal protection
of the mother and the
children pursuant to
Family Court Act
(WA) and in the event a police
officer believes on reasonable grounds that the father has breached these orders
the police officer
may arrest the father without warrant.
relation to that last-mentioned paragraph, the Court does not intend to make
that order. In my view it is not a necessary order
to make, but in any event
the provisions of the
Family Court Act
do not apply
to this matter.
9 Notwithstanding the lack of involvement of the father, and the suggestion
by counsel for the mother that the Court might consider
not putting in place
orders in relation to the father’s communication with the children, I
formed the view that such orders
would be in the children’s best
interests. In any event, they were orders proposed by the mother.
10 The Court also took into account the single expert report dated 29 August
2014 by Professor Laidler and the Family Consultant
memorandum dated 16 July
11 Ms Baxter is the mother of the mother in these proceedings. She
corroborated some of the evidence from the mother in relation
12 She is employed as a home and community carer and provides respite care
to the mother for the children, [Child C] and Child A
(I note that the mother
has had two subsequent relationships since the relationship with Mr Eldred ended
in late2008. She has had
two children with [Mr Jones], namely [Child D] and
[Child E], and a third child, [Child F], with [Mr Potts].)
13 She provided positive evidence about the mother’s parenting and her
care of the children.
The single expert
14 Terrence John Laidler provided a single expert report dated 29 August
2014. Whilst I have taken into account the entire contents
of that report, for
the purposes of this judgment in the circumstances I refer to the following.
15 He confirmed that Child A and Child B routinely refer to their father as
[“J”] and that Child A said, “I love
him because he is my
dad...but I’m a bit scared of him too”. Child A also mentioned that
he was “bad to my mum
too...when he hit her and when he threw water on
her”. Mr Laidler expressed the view that:
I had no doubt that what [Child A] said to me was voluntary and reflected his
own wishes: it also reflected the very deep ambivalence
that he feels when he
considers his relationship with his father and the safety and security he enjoys
with his mother.
16 He reports Child B as saying that she:
wants to stay with Mummy...because I remember when [J] was with Mummy and he
was not very nice...he locked me and [Child A] outside
because he doesn’t
like kids...he said he’d chop mine and [Child A’s] fingers off if we
were bad...and he was mean
to Mummy too.
17 She also said that she “loves him, but is a bit scared of him
too”. Mr Laidler concluded that the children should
live with their
mother and that she should have parental responsibility for them and at that
stage the question of the children spending
time with the father should be
Family Consultant
18 Family Consultant Hanavan provided a case assessment conference report
dated 16 July 2013. Both parties attended that conference.
Once again, I
have taken into account the entire content of that memorandum, but highlight the
(a) The Department for Child Protection and Family Support had involvement
with the children in 2009 and 2010 and the file was closed.
They had further
problems between 2011 and 2013. The
father denied any family violence or
threats of violence towards the mother.
(b) In relation to the incident in August 2009 for which he was charged, the
father claims the mother had requested his assistance
as she was being abused by
her then current partner, [Mr Jones]. The father denied the allegations about
threatening to harm the
children and claims he has never harmed them.
19 The Family Consultant raised the following issues of concern:
(a) The parties present different and somewhat polarised accounts of their
relationship and the experiences of the children in each
other’s care.
(b) The issue of primary concern to the Family Consultant is the allegations
[sic] of family violence and harm to the children. The
father has been
charged with carrying and [sic] article with intent to cause fear in 2009 and
there are domestic violence incident
reports provided by police.
Notwithstanding the police incident reports are from several years ago and the
father’s denials
of making threats against the mother or the children, the
allegations are serious in nature.
(c) The Family Consultant is also concerned about the mother’s recent
relocation to Melbourne and the impact this may have on
a relationship between
the father and the children.
Law in relation to parenting issues
20 The proceedings commenced in April 2013, after to the amendments to the
definitions of family violence and abuse which took effect
in relation to cases
commenced on or after 7 June 2012. The newer definitions therefore apply and
will be referred to in these reasons.
21 In deciding whether to make any parenting order, I must treat the best
interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
22 I have also had regard to the objects of the Act and the principles which
underlie those objects. They provide the context in
which the above
considerations are to be examined and weighed.
23 Section 60B(1) provides:
(1) The objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of
children are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their
responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their
24 60B(2) provides:
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or
would be contrary to a child’s best interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents,
regardless of whether their parents are married, separated,
have never married
or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to
enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).”
25 The Full Court in Goode & Goode (2006) FLC 93-286 at [56] made it
clear that when a parenting order is sought, the starting
point is the
application of a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child that
the child’s parents have equal
shared parental responsibility, subject to
the qualifications set out in s 61DA(2) and (4).
26 As the Full Court in
Goode & Goode
(supra) said at [72]:
In our view, it can be fairly said that there is a legislative intent evinced
in favour of substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s
lives, both as to parental responsibility and as to time spent with the
children, subject to the need to
protect children from harm, from abuse and
family violence and provided it is in their best interests and reasonably
practicable.
This means where there is a status quo or well settled environment,
instead of simply preserving it, unless there are protective
significant best interests concerns for the child, the Court must follow the
structure of the Act and consider accepting,
where applicable, equal or
significant involvement by both parents in the care arrangements for the
27 To assess what is in the child’s best interests, I must consider
the “primary” and “additional”
considerations set out in
s 60CC(2) and (3).
Primary considerations
The benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child’s parents
28 It is clear that meaningful means a relationship that is important,
significant and valuable to the child (see
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
The need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
29 The definitions of abuse and family violence that apply to this matter
are set out below:
Abuse, in relation to a child, means:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child; or
(b) a person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with
the first person or another person in which the child
is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and
where there is unequal power in
the relationship between the child and the first
(c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but
not limited to) when that harm is caused by the child being
subjected to, or
exposed to, family violence; or
(d) serious neglect of the child.
Family violence is defined as:
Violence, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls
a member of the person’s family (the family member)
or causes the family
member to be fearful.
30 Section 4AB(2) provides examples of behaviour that may constitute family
violence. These include (but are not limited to):
(a) an assault; or
(b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour; or
(c) stalking; or
(d) repeated derogatory taunts; or
(e) intentionally damaging or destroying property; or
(f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal; or
(g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or
she would otherwise have had; or
(h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable
living expenses of the family member, or his or her child,
at a time when the
family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial
support; or
(i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his
or her family, friends or culture; or
(j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family
member’s family, of his or her liberty.
31 Section 4AB(4) provides examples of situations that may constitute a
child being exposed to family violence. They include (but
are not limited to)
(a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the
child’s family towards another member of the child’s
(b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by
another member of the child’s family; or
(c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s
family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s
(d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has
intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s
(e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident
involving the assault of a member of the child’s family
by another member
of the child’s family.
32 Section 60CC(2A) provides that in applying the above considerations the
Court is to give greater weight to the need to protect
the children from harm.
33 The mother makes a series of family violence allegations in relation to
the father’s violent behaviour towards her. Examples
are contained at
paragraphs [35], [47], [50] and [52] of her trial affidavit. These are examples
only. She says that threats of
violence continued after separation – see
for example paragraphs [99] and [100].
34 Given her evidence was uncontested, and given my brief observation of her
in the witness box, I accept that evidence.
35 It is therefore necessary for the Court to consider appropriate orders to
ensure that the children are protected from potential
36 In my view, the presumption in the legislation that the parents should
have equal shared parental responsibility for the children
does not apply in
this case because of the family violence that has clearly occurred. I am
therefore not bound to consider equal
time or substantial and significant time.
In any event, neither of those arrangements would be in the best interests of
these children
in the current circumstances where the parties live in different
states. They would not otherwise be practicable in any event.
37 Much of the mother’s evidence was taken up by references to the
father’s brother, [R], and his activities, who she
says is a member of the
“[an] Outlaw Motorcycle Gang”. That evidence related to the
mother’s concerns that:
(a) the father intended to join the [Outlaw Motorcycle Gang];
(b) the father had taken the children to the [Outlaw Motorcycle Gang] club
(c) the mother found it intimidating for the children to be involved in that
organisation;
(d) at [89], the mother said:
Whenever I did something [J] did not agree with he started to threaten me
with violence from and involvement by the [Outlaw Motorcycle
(e) the father threatened to get his brother involved [which the mother took
to mean violence];
(f) the father told the Family Consultant in July 2013 that his brother was
no longer involved in the [Outlaw Motorcycle Gang], but
the subpoenaed material
provides evidence that allows the Court to infer that his brother is still
38 The subpoenaed material and the mother’s evidence leads me to
conclude that the mother’s fears are genuine and reasonably
subpoenaed material includes details of injuries that one may associate with
criminal activities.
Additional considerations
39 Section 60CC(3) provides the additional considerations. The relevant
ones are set out below.
Any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the
child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks
relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
40 The children have said positive things regarding the father, but have
also expressed some fear. I have canvassed the views expressed
to the single
expert witness.
The nature of the relationship of the child with:
(i) each of the child’s parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the
41 The mother clearly has an extremely good relationship with the children.
The father has little of a relationship with them given
the lack of time
spent with them and potentially given the behaviour during the relationship. It
is appropriate to maintain some
telephone communication and contact in writing.
The father of course has not sought orders in this matter given that his
application
was dismissed.
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed
to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making decisions about major longterm issues in
relation to the child; and
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child
42 The father has not maintained a regular presence in the children’s
lives. He did not see the children for the first six
to eight months after
separation in October 2008. He initially started seeing them about once per
month. He has never telephoned
the children on special occasions or given them
presents. The lack of involvement is perhaps reflected in the fact that
the children
refer to the father as “J”, not “Dad”.
43 The mother moved to [New South Wales] in an effort to distance herself
and the children from the father in order to afford each
of them some degree of
protection, safety and security.
44 The father has not been actively involved in these proceedings for some
time. The Court’s decision therefore is based solely
mother’s uncontested evidence. On that basis, it is clear that the mother
acted appropriately and protectively and
has provided the children with a warm
and nurturing environment.
45 The children need to be protected from harm or at least the exposure to
violence that may occur in the father’s care. The
orders proposed by the
mother therefore, in my view, are appropriate and in the children’s
best interest. They will ensure,
hopefully, that the children maintain
communication with the father, but are otherwise safe.
Any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s
46 I have dealt with this issue already.
If a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a
member of the child’s family—any relevant inferences
that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the
(v) any other relevant matter
47 Final orders were made by consent on 8 October 2013 in the family
violence order proceedings. That intervention order expired
one year later.
Given that expiration, it is proper to put in place the various injunctions
sought by the mother.
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least
likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation
48 This is not a particularly significant factor in this matter.
Overseas travel
49 Given the history set out by the mother, and the evidence relied upon and
the mother’s clear ties to Australia, I am satisfied
that she is not a
flight risk in any way. I am therefore prepared to put in place the
proposed orders in relation to travel overseas.
previous parenting orders be hereby discharged.
children, [Child A] born [in] 2006 and [Child B] born [in] 2007 (“the
children”), live with the respondent mother,
[Ms Denzil] (“the
mother have sole parental responsibility for the children.
applicant father, [Mr Eldred] (“the father”), communicate with the
children as follows:
(a) by telephone call the first Sunday of
every month, such call to take place between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm AEDT,
with the father to
initiate the call to the children;
(b) by telephone call on the occasions of Christmas and each of the
children’s birthdays, such call to take place between 6.30
7.00 pm AEDT, with the father to initiate the call to the children;
(c) by way of cards and gifts on the occasions of Christmas, Easter and each
of the children’s birthdays; and
(d) by way of letter on one occasion in each three-month period with the
first three-month period to be from 1 July 2015 to 3 September
communication referred to in paragraphs 4(a) and 4(b) above is to occur with the
father telephoning the children on a telephone
number nominated by the mother,
such telephone number be provided to the father within 7 days of the parties
receiving a sealed copy
of these orders.
communication referred to in paragraphs 4(c) and 4(d) above is to be sent to a
postal address nominated by the mother, such address
to be provided to the
father within 7 days of the parties receiving a sealed copy of these orders.
mother shall facilitate the children communicating with the father by telephone,
email, letter, cards or any other means in accordance
with their wishes.
mother be permitted to remove the children from the Commonwealth of Australia
for the purpose of travelling for a period of no
more than four (4) consecutive
weeks per calendar year.
mother be at liberty to obtain passports for the children and to that end,
the necessity for the father to consent to the issue
of passports for the
children be dispensed with.
to any other requirements of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
passports be issued to the said children to enable
them to leave Australia.
father be restrained by injunction and an injunction is hereby granted
restraining him from:
(a) molesting, harassing or abusing the
mother and/or the children or interfering with the mother and/or
children’s manner of
(b) coming into contact with the children or communicating with the children
other than in accordance with these orders;
(c) coming into contact or communicating with the mother other than in
accordance with these orders;
(d) removing or attempting to remove the children from the care and control
of the mother, any school, any childcare service or third
(e) coming within 100 metres of the residence of the mother and/or the
children or any premises where the mother and/or children are
(f) coming within 100 metres of any school or childcare service attended by
the children from time to time; and
(g) causing, assisting or allowing any other person to engage in the conduct
described by paragraphs 11(a) to 11(f) inclusive.
proceedings otherwise be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [49] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter