URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/157.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
STANHOPE and STANHOPE [2025] FCWA 157 (10 July 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
STANHOPE and STANHOPE
[2025] FCWA 157
DELIVERED :
10 JULY 2025
FILE NO/S :
6561 of 2018
MS STANHOPE
MR STANHOPE
PARENTING – Approach to child
related proceedings – Where the parties initially estimated that three
days would be required
for trial – Where that estimate increased first to
five days, then to 10 days, then further – Consideration of the principles
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and the mandatory
requirements of
- Consideration of the powers granted by
define matters in relation to which evidence may be given, by whom evidence may
be given, whether and if so how cross-examination
is to be permitted and the
imposition of time limits for evidence and submissions – Consideration of
broader case management
principles including the obligation of the Court to
ensure that its limited resources are used efficiently – Where permission
to rely on various affidavits already sworn is refused – Where various
proposed witnesses are not permitted to give evidence
at trial – Where
leave to subpoena various other witnesses is declined – Where a trial plan
is imposed – Turns
on its own facts
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Representation:
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Solicitors:
Self-Represented Litigant
Independent Children's Lawyer
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT – PARTIES'
NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Stanhope and Stanhope
has been approved by the Family Court of
Western Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court's Reason for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 312(b)
Family Court
(WA)) or to record a variation of the orders pursuant to r 311 of the
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
Stanhope] ("the husband") and [Ms Stanhope] ("the wife") are the parents of one
child, [Child J] born [in] 2016. An earlier tranche
of parenting
proceedings concluded with the making of final orders [in early] 2020.
Those orders provided for the parties to have
equal shared parental
responsibility, for Child J to live with the wife, and for him to spend time
with the husband for five nights
per fortnight. Other orders were made for
special occasions and in relation to specific issues.
parties propose that the existing orders should be varied. Efforts have been
made to progress the current proceedings towards
trial, but difficulties have
been encountered as summarised in earlier judgments, which I incorporate in
these reasons.
the matter was first listed to a trial to commence in April 2024, it was
listed for three days. When that trial did not proceed,
it was subsequently
listed with an estimated hearing time of five days. Later, the wife estimated
the likely hearing time at 10
days. In response, the husband expressed the
view that still longer might
be required.
reasons delivered [in] April
I made orders requiring the
parties to clearly articulate the final orders that they sought, identify the
matters they would regard
as being in issue in the proceedings, and identify the
witnesses they would propose to call at trial, and the factual issue or issues
to which the evidence of each witness would be directed. I made it clear that
the purpose of that approach was to enable an informed
consideration of the
exercise of the Court's power to limit the matters in respect of which evidence
can be given, make orders as
to by whom evidence may be given, limit the number
of witnesses, and limit cross-examination.
parties and the Independent Children's Lawyer ("ICL") have filed documents as
ordered and made their submissions. After hearing
further oral submissions [in
mid] 2025, I reserved my decision.
The relevant principles
turn now to consider the manner in which the trial should be conducted, the
evidence that should be permitted, and the cross‑examination
that should
be permitted. I do so by reference to the legislated principles for the conduct
of child related proceedings,
requirements of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
Act"), and the powers contained in
designed to assist the Court in
giving effect to those principles and requirements.
sets out principles for the conduct of child related proceedings.
Relevantly, it provides that the Court must (not may) give effect
principles in performing duties and exercising powers in relation to child
related proceedings, and in making other decisions
proceedings.
first principle is that the Court is to consider the needs of the relevant child
and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings
may have on the child, in
determining the conduct of the proceedings.
second principle is that the Court is to actively direct, control and manage the
conduct of the proceedings.
third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way that will
safeguard the parties against family violence
and safeguard the child from being
subjected to or exposed to family violence, abuse or neglect.
fourth principle is that, as far as possible, the proceedings are to be
conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and
child focused parenting by
the parties.
fifth principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay
and with as little formality, and legal technicality
and form, as possible.
provides that in giving effect to those principles the Court must (not
may), among other things:
which of the issues in the proceedings require full investigation and hearing
and which may be disposed of summarily;
deciding whether a particular step is to be taken – consider whether the
likely benefits of the taking the step justify the
costs of taking it; and
with as many aspects of the matter is it can on a single
giving effect to the principles, the Court is empowered by
among other things:
directions or make orders about the matters in relation to which the parties are
to present evidence;
directions or make orders about who is to give evidence in relation to each
remaining issue, and about how particular evidence
is to be given;
directions or make orders as to the matters in relation to which
expert evidence is to be given, the number of experts who may
evidence, and how that evidence is to be provided;
the time for oral argument and for the giving of evidence;
or order that evidence in relation to a particular matter, or evidence of a
particular kind, not be presented by a party;
or decline to allow, cross-examination of a particular witness; and
the number of witnesses who are to give evidence in the
proceedings.
powers are self-evidently directed not only to the principle requiring the Court
to actively direct, control and manage the
conduct of the proceedings, but also
to the required consideration of the needs of the child and the impact that the
conduct of the
proceedings may have. They are also directed to the
principles requiring matters to be determined without undue delay, to promote
cooperative parenting to the extent possible, and to safeguard the parties
against family violence, the broad definition of which
can include coercive or
controlling behaviour in the conduct of
litigation.
also have regard to the following broader principles, which while set out in an
earlier judgment, bear repeating.
Court has inherent power to stay or dismiss proceedings or parts of proceedings
which are frivolous, vexatious or an abuse
That is so even
if it is not demonstrated that proceedings are brought for an ulterior motive or
an illegitimate purpose –
the concept extends "to the use of [Court]
processes so as to cause vexation or
oppression".
Court has an implied power more generally to ensure the effective exercise of
its jurisdiction, subject to the requirements of
power includes the taking of appropriate steps to limit evidence to that which
is relevant to the determination of matters in
issue, and of probative value,
even before any consideration of the limitations of that nature encompassed by
the rules of evidence.
proper scope and purpose of cross-examination of witnesses, particularly
non-expert witnesses, is well-established. As has been
"the aim of
cross-examination of a non-expert witness will usually be to attempt to impugn
the credibility of the witness's evidence,
obtain admissions or concessions as
to matters of primary fact within the witness's personal knowledge, and to
comply with the rule
Cross-examination need
not necessarily be lengthy to achieve that aim. The credibility of witnesses
whose evidence, even if taken
at its highest, is of limited or no
probative value, need not be impugned. Those witnesses need only be
cross‑examined where
necessary to comply with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
, or where it is sought to obtain relevant
admissions or concessions as to facts within their knowledge.
management principles are not an end of themselves. The primary
consideration in the conduct of any proceedings is to do justice
between the
parties, and in child related proceedings to ensure that properly informed
decisions are made in the best interests of
the child. Nevertheless, the
Court has an obligation to litigants more generally to ensure that its limited
resources are used
efficiently.
The starting point – the final relief sought by the
analysis of the steps required to ensure that the trial is conducted in
accordance with the relevant principles must start with
an examination of
the final relief sought by each party. That is so, as the definition of
the issues to be determined is informed
by the relief sought.
Parental responsibility and decision-making
wife seeks sole decision-making responsibility in relation to all major
long-term issues concerning Child J.
seeks a number of related orders. They include an order requiring each party to
keep the other informed of any significant developmental
or health concerns
Child J may have. She proposes that each party should have authority to obtain
information about Child J from
educational institutions, medical health
professionals, and extracurricular activity providers.
wife also proposes an order requiring both parties to "follow all advice
and recommendations from [Child J’s] treating
medical practitioners,
including all medical and pharmaceutical, and allied health professional,
treatment recommendations." She
seeks an order in more specific terms
compelling the husband to act in that manner, and injunctions restraining him
from taking Child
J to health professionals without her consent other than in an
emergency. She proposes an order giving her liberty to change Child
J’s school enrolment from [School O] in [Suburb A] to [School S] and that
once Child J reaches high school age, she be at liberty
to enrol him in the high
school of her choice, upon giving proper consideration to the husband's
husband seeks sole decision-making responsibility in relation to three
identified major long-term issues – (1) education,
(2) health and medical
care, and (3) religious and cultural upbringing. He proposes orders which
would require him to consult with
the wife before making those decisions, and to
notify her once they were made. He seeks an order requiring both parties to
"acknowledge
and support [Child J’s] upbringing within the Catholic faith"
and specific orders supportive of that. He seeks a range of
specific orders in
relation to medical and allied health care generally, including orders requiring
the parties to follow all reasonable
advice and recommendations of treating
medical practitioners. Those include orders for Child J to continue to engage
with his current
speech therapist and occupational therapist "unless otherwise
agreed in writing or on medical advice".
proposes that Child J remain enrolled at School O for the duration of his
primary and secondary education unless otherwise agreed,
and that he be
responsible for the associated costs unless he "becomes incapacitated or
otherwise unable, due to illness, injury,
or significant financial hardship" to
meet those costs, in which case the wife would be obliged to meet them "in full
or in proportion
to her financial capacity". He proposes similar orders in
relation to Child J’s medical costs. He does not address how either
proposal would intersect with any assessment of child
Living arrangements for Child J
wife seeks orders for Child J to live with her, and to spend time with the
husband during school term each alternate weekend
from Friday afternoon until
6.00 pm on Sunday. She proposes those times be extended during school
holidays, such that during the
short school holidays Child J would spend roughly
equal time with each parent, and three separate one-week periods with the
during the summer school holidays.
husband seeks orders for Child J to live equally with both parents, on a week
to personally care for Child
J for a period of four hours or longer, or is unable to deliver or collect him
from school, the other
party should be notified and given "first right of
refusal". He seeks an order in more specific terms requiring that the wife must
offer him the opportunity to care for Child J during any period "during her
scheduled parenting time", including before and after
school, in which she is
unable to personally care for him, and only make alternative arrangements if
(other than in the case of emergency)
she has given him at least 24 hours'
notice of that unavailability and he has declined to take up the opportunity to
care for Child
J. He seeks similar orders in relation to Child J's
extra-curricular activities.
parties seek prescriptive orders in relation to arrangements for special
occasions and significant days.
Communication
wife seeks an order for Child J to communicate electronically with the husband
each Friday on certain conditions and with her
on Mondays. The husband
proposes that Child J should communicate by video with the parent with whom he
is not staying each Wednesday
and Saturday, also on certain conditions. He also
proposes that once Child J commences secondary school, he will provide him with
a mobile telephone, and that both parties must always facilitate his
communication with each parent. The wife does not propose a
specific point at
which Child J should be provided with a mobile telephone but seeks similar
orders as to Child J's communication
with the parties by that means once that
parties propose specific orders as to how they should communicate with each
wife proposes that where handovers do not take place at school, they occur at [a
shopping centre in Suburb C] or such other location
as the parties may agree in
writing. The husband proposes the same, while specifying that handovers on
school days should take place
Extracurricular activities
wife does not seek any specific orders in relation to Child J’s
extracurricular activities. The husband seeks orders,
subject to wishes
expressed by Child J, requiring both parties to ensure that he attends any
extracurricular activities in which
he is currently involved, and any mutually
agreed future extracurricular activities.
wife proposes that both parties should be at liberty to travel with Child J
during "their" time with him,
including interstate and overseas, on specific conditions as to notice,
information to be provided, and avoidance of travel to destinations
particular government warnings. She proposes that she be able to apply for an
Australian passport for Child J without
the husband's consent, that she retain
the passport, and that she provide it to the husband for any agreed
international travel.
husband proposes that Child J not be permitted to travel internationally without
the written consent of both parties, and that
he not travel in any event to a
country which is not a signatory to the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child
Abduction. He otherwise proposes that both parties be
able to travel within Australia during "their" time with Child J on specific
conditions as to notice and the information to be provided. He proposes that he
be able to apply for an Australian passport for
Child J without the wife's
consent, that he retain the passport, and that he provide it to the wife for any
agreed international
travel. He proposes that Child J be included on the Family
Law Watchlist until he reaches the age of
Other matters
husband seeks injunctions restraining the wife from using any form of physical
discipline towards Child J, and from calling him
derogatory or demeaning names,
yelling, screaming, using aggressive tones, or displaying uncontrolled anger
towards him, and mandating
that she communicate with him in a "calm, respectful
and age‑appropriate manner at all times." He proposes an order which
would purport to provide that any breach of that injunction could be "relied
upon in future proceedings to vary the parenting arrangements."
an injunction restraining the wife from denigrating him to Child J.
wife seeks non-denigration injunctions, and that both parties be restrained from
physically disciplining Child J, from discussing
the proceedings with him or
permitting him to see court‑related documents, and from using him as a
"conduit for passing messages
or information to the other concerning any
parenting, financial, or child support matters." She seeks a specific
injunction restraining
both parties from placing footage, text messages or
documents about the other party, or these proceedings, on any form of
husband seeks an order for "judicial referral" of the wife for investigation
into whether her conduct in the proceedings constitutes
perjury, attempting to
pervert the course of justice, conspiring to do so, or other offences. He seeks
other interlocutory orders
of a procedural nature, including orders purporting
to pre-emptively characterise particular actions as serious contraventions of
orders for the purpose of imposing penalties. Those proposals need not be
discussed further for present purposes.
parties seek costs.
The issues as otherwise identified by the parties
Arrangements which promote safety
parties and the ICL raise issues regarding family violence. The wife alleges
violence on the part of the husband, including
towards Child J, and coercive and
controlling behaviour. On her case, the behaviours she alleges were also
exhibited by the husband
in previous relationships to the extent that the
relevant attitudes and behaviours may be found to be entrenched.
husband denies those allegations and suggests the wife has engaged in "collusion
with third parties (including [his] ex-partners)"
in making false allegations.
The husband alleges that Child J has been "subjected to emotionally harmful
behaviour" in the wife's
care, by exposure to "persistent verbal abuse",
"uncontrolled anger and yelling", and the use of physical discipline or threats.
He alleges further that Child J has been exposed to an incident of family
violence between the wife and her then partner.
neither party proposes any form of supervision of Child J's time with the other,
the wife contends that the matters she raises
strongly support a reduction in
the amount of time Child J spends with the husband. The husband's allegations,
similarly, are appropriately
considered by reference to the relief which he
seeks – he proposes an equal time arrangement, albeit with injunctions
restraining
the wife from physically disciplining Child J.
Decision-making and the relationship between the
short, neither party trusts the other. That much is common ground. They
have strongly differing views as to the approach to
be taken in the management
of Child J's health needs. While each would blame the other and profess to be
willing to have a cooperative
parenting relationship, in a practical sense
nothing turns on any apportionment of blame.
the extent, therefore, that the nature of the relationship between the parties
and the reasons for that require exploration at
trial, that exploration might
inform the required consideration of the benefit to Child J of his relationships
with each parent,
and their capacity to provide for his developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs, as appropriately noted by the
exploration of the parental relationship would also inform a consideration
of the impact of that relationship on Child J and
what might flow from that in
terms of determining the appropriate parenting orders.
would not inform the easily reached conclusion that these parties cannot share
parental decision-making in any meaningful
Child J's views
husband contends that Child J has expressed negative views about his time with
the wife and a desire to spend more time with
him. He says that Child J has
also expressed strongly his desire to stay at School O and to avoid before and
after school care.
The husband says that notwithstanding Child J's age his
views should be afforded considerable weight.
wife says that while Child J loves both parents, his age, maturity and
development are such that any expressed views ought to
be given minimal weight.
The ICL agrees.
Child J's developmental, psychological, emotional and
cultural needs
J has been diagnosed with ADHD, Global Developmental Delay, Autism Spectrum
Disorder, Hyperactivity, and Expressive and Receptive
Language Delay. Each
party would contend that they are best placed to manage those issues.
from treating practitioners, including as to their observations (if any) as to
the respective capacities of the parties
to provide for Child J's relevant
needs, will likely inform the required determinations not only as to
decision-making responsibility,
but as to Child J's living arrangements.
parties raise issues as to Child J's cultural needs. The wife emphasises a need
for connection with his [Country B] culture,
while the husband emphasises a need
for him to be raised Catholic.
The benefit to Child J of being able to have a relationship
with both parents, and other significant persons
parties acknowledge that Child J should have an ongoing relationship with the
other. Each would raise questions as to the depth
of the benefit to Child J of
those relationships, given their personal criticisms of each other's character,
behaviour and parenting
capacity. Issues raised by each as to the relationships
of Child J with other family members are not such as to be determinative
decisions required.
The evidence proposed to be adduced
that background, I turn to consider the evidence proposed to be adduced by each
party and the ICL, and the proposed extent
of cross‑examination.
The evidence of the parties
husband has indicated in his Papers for the Judge that he would propose to rely
on "all affidavits previously filed in support
of [his] case." In circumstances
where the husband has sworn over 20 affidavits over the course of the
proceedings, that is unacceptable
for obvious reasons. I note further that in
the same Papers he proposes to rely on his "Trial Affidavit (to be filed upon
completion)."
parties have previously been ordered to file for the purposes of trial a single
stand-alone affidavit with no more than 15 annexures
setting out the whole
of their evidence in chief. The husband has not yet complied with that order.
The wife filed a Trial Affidavit
[in] August 2024, with an accompanying Form 13
Financial Statement.
propose to order the husband to file a single stand-alone affidavit to comprise
his evidence in chief for the purposes of trial
and a Form 13 Financial
Statement and to update that evidence as required prior to trial. The Form 13
Financial Statement is required
given the husband's proposals as to Child J's
continued education at a private school, and as to how his school fees and
treatment expenses should be paid.
propose to order the wife to file an affidavit of evidence in chief limited to
events which have occurred since she filed her Trial
Affidavit [in] August
2024, and an up-to-date Form 13 Financial Statement.
do not propose to permit either party to rely at trial on the multiple
affidavits they have filed in interim and interlocutory
The evidence of the present partners of the
wife proposes to live in Suburb T with her partner [Mr Martin]. She
proposes to file a witness affidavit to be sworn by him,
which is clearly
appropriate.
his Papers for the Judge, the husband asserts that Child J "shares a warm
and consistent relationship with [his] partner" who
is not listed as a proposed
The husband's former partners and his children
husband has children by different partners. To give context to what follows,
the various relationships are briefly summarised
Stanhope] is the husband's oldest child. Her mother is [Ms Hughes], from
whom the husband separated when Elsie was an infant.
On Elsie's evidence,
her childhood in the care of her mother was traumatic, in circumstances where
her mother had mental health
and drug addiction issues. In her witness
affidavit filed by the husband she says that various traumatic events
recounted "transpired
because of the Family Court judge's ruling 27 years
husband's first wife is [Ms Bauer]. They had three children together, [Connor
Stanhope], [Avery Stanhope] and [Edward Stanhope].
Ms Bauer, Avery and
Edward live in [State D]. The husband proposes that affidavits sworn by Connor
and Edward should be received
in evidence for the purposes of trial. He
contends that their evidence is pertinent primarily as to his relationship with
[Ava Stanhope].
Stanhope lived with the husband from approximately 2006 until 2012. They had
one child together, [Finn Stanhope], who was born
[in] 2008. Ava had two older
children from a previous relationship, who lived with her and the husband while
they were together.
The wife proposes that affidavits sworn by Ava should
be received in evidence for the purposes of trial. [Elijah Thomas] is Ava
Stanhope's adult son.
Masai] commenced a relationship with the husband in April 2022. In September
2022, she swore an affidavit at the request
of the husband for use in these
proceedings, in which she described herself as his girlfriend or partner. That
affidavit was filed
by the husband [in] February 2025. Ms Masai then swore
an affidavit [in] March 2025 at the request of the wife, saying that her
relationship with the husband ended in January 2023. The wife filed that
affidavit [in] April 2025. Ms Masai and the husband do
not have children
together. Somewhat curiously, both the husband and the wife seek to rely
on the affidavits prepared at their request
at trial, whereby Ms Masai
would be "their" witness.
turn now to a consideration of whether evidence should be adduced from the
husband's former partners, and from his adult children.
Ava Stanhope
affidavit of Ava filed [in] August 2024 contains evidence of physical and
verbal violence by the husband towards her, and towards
children in their
care. It also contains evidence as to the current arrangements for the
care of Finn and his time with the husband.
matters potentially inform the decisions to be made in the present
proceedings.
husband submits that the evidence of Ava is "highly prejudicial, improperly
motivated, and should be ruled inadmissible under
and the overriding obligation of fairness in family law
proceedings".
He says further
that the conduct alleged by her is "
and lacks probative
and would serve only to
"distract from the current issues." He objects to Ava being "permitted to
testify on the grounds that her
involvement is not genuine or spontaneous, but
rather the result of
deliberate solicitation by [the
He goes so far as
to say that the allegations made by Ava, which are consistent with those
made by the wife, formed part of "a
coordinated and deliberate
between these two individuals, aimed at
discrediting
undermining his credibility
He otherwise
raises criticisms of the ICL which are irrelevant to the determination
presently required.
do not accept the submissions of the husband. A history of family violence in
previous relationships, if proven, can inform a
consideration of both
allegations of that nature in a more recent relationship and the extent to which
the alleged perpetrator can
appropriately provide for the developmental,
psychological and emotional needs of a child. The proposed evidence does not
from the current issues"; to the contrary, it potentially informs
their determination. Witnesses rarely if ever become involved
in litigation
"spontaneously" - they are inevitably sought out by one party or the other. Any
proper objection to specific parts
of the evidence of Ava can be raised at
trial, and any suggestion that her evidence is "improperly motivated" can be
explored in
cross-examination if the husband considers that appropriate and
wife will be permitted to rely on the affidavit of Ava filed [in] August
2024 and any subsequent affidavit of Ava limited to
relevant events which have
occurred since that date.
Vivian Masai
earlier noted, both parties seek to rely on affidavits sworn by Ms Masai. The
husband's pre-emptive application to exclude certain
of her evidence given in
the affidavit sworn at the request of the wife, and in particular copies of
communications from him to Ms
Masai, was dismissed [in] June 2025 for
reasons given that day.
Masai gives evidence directed to the issue of family violence in the form of
coercive and controlling behaviour directed by the
husband both to her and to
the wife, including but not limited to consciously and strategically "peppering
[the wife's] lawyer with
emails" to "drain her funds", and evidence of the
husband's expression of misogynistic views.
evidence potentially informs the decisions to be made in the present
proceedings, for the reasons noted in relation to the evidence
of Ava Stanhope.
Having described Ms Masai in submissions filed only [in] April 2025 as
providing "critical first-hand evidence"
as an "independent observer" with an
"objective perspective", the husband cannot now seek the exclusion of her
evidence by assertions
to the contrary without that evidence being tested in
cross-examination.
wife will be permitted to rely on the affidavit of Ms Masai filed
[in] April 2025 and Ms Masai may give evidence as part of the
wife's case.
The husband should not misunderstand that – he will not be inhibited in
putting to Ms Masai in cross-examination
the affidavit previously sworn by her
at his request or tendering that affidavit into evidence through
Elsie Stanhope, Connor Stanhope and Edward
Connor and Edward Stanhope have each sworn affidavits at the request of the
husband. All were filed [in] February 2025.
the extent the evidence of Elsie recounts the trauma she suffered while in the
care of Ms Hughes, and with no disrespect to her
or lack of regard for what she
experienced, it does not inform the determinations to be made about Child
observation that Ava Stanhope was "very flirtatious" with the husband while Ms
Bauer was away interstate, and her opinion that
Ava "had no regard for the
relationship between a married man and his wife of nine years, a woman that was
carrying his third child",
while making no observation about the husband
commencing a relationship with her, indicates an understandable but unhelpful
of objectivity.
tenor of the evidence is further demonstrated by Elsie's statement that she
"feel[s] it is due to [Ava Stanhope's] love for drama,
greed, and a wish to hurt
my father, that she is now assisting [the wife] in these court proceedings, even
after defaming and attacking
[the wife] in court during her own case against my
father." In contrast, Elsie makes brief but relatively positive observations
note also that Elsie says that due to trauma, she does "not recall many
specifics", and expresses her view that "the Family Court
and the lawyers in
this court case should not have been allowed to retrieve [the file relating
to the proceedings between her mother
and the husband]", and that the husband
did not want her to have to "relive past traumas" or be involved in the current
proceedings
in any way.
husband asserts that Elsie's evidence is pertinent "particularly concerning the
nature of [his relationship with Ava Stanhope]".
do not propose to permit the husband to rely on Elsie's affidavit, nor otherwise
call her as a witness. To the extent she can
give evidence of what she saw and
heard in the household when the husband lived with Ava Stanhope, that evidence
can adequately be
given by another witness. Duplication does not make
evidence more compelling, nor more relevant. To the extent Elsie expresses
unqualified opinions, they are of no probative value.
the husband says that the affidavits of Edward filed [in] February 2025,
and [in] March 2025 (only the latter being filed
once Edward had turned 18)
are intended to provide insight into the dynamics within the household when he
lived with Ava Stanhope.
He does not suggest that Edward lived with them
full-time; he lived with his mother in State D and visited the husband
have read both affidavits. They do not serve the purpose the husband attributes
to them. They are of no probative value, and
I do not propose to permit the
husband to rely on them at trial.
husband says that Connor now lives with him. He seeks to rely on an affidavit
of Connor filed [in] February 2025 but sworn [in]
August 2024 at a
time when he was living in State D. Much of that affidavit is directed to
criticism of Ava Stanhope and is said
by the husband to be "intended to assist
the Court in understanding the far‑reaching effect of the toxic
environment that was
created whenever [Connor] and his siblings came to live
Elsewhere, the
affidavit goes primarily to Connor's positive opinions as to the husband's
and disparaging
observations about the wife.
common with a number of the proposed affidavits to be relied upon by each party,
much of the content of Connor's current affidavit
is of little or no probative
value. That said, in my view it is appropriate to permit the husband to rely on
that affidavit in rebuttal
to the evidence of Ava Stanhope and to file a more
up-to-date affidavit sworn by Connor as to his current circumstances, his
interaction with Child J, and his observations of Child J and
the husband, if in fact they are all now living together.
turn now to a consideration of the other witnesses proposed by each
Other witnesses proposed by the wife – [Ms Murray] and
Elijah Thomas
of these proposed witnesses of the wife have yet sworn an affidavit.
Murray is a family violence counsellor who provided assistance to the wife at or
to adduce evidence from her in
relation to that issue alone. As the question of whether either party
perpetrated family violence
on the other is squarely in issue, and the Court is
required (pursuant to s 60CC(2A) of the Act) to consider any history of
violence, abuse or neglect involving Child J or a person caring for him,
the evidence of Ms Murray potentially has probative value.
I propose to permit
the wife to rely on an affidavit to be sworn by her.
Thomas is the adult son of Ava Stanhope. The wife seeks to adduce evidence from
him, directed to the issues of family violence
already referred to. In
circumstances where I propose to permit the husband to rely on the evidence of
one of his adult children
as to what he saw and heard in relation to the
allegations made by Ava Stanhope, it is appropriate to allow the wife the same
opportunity.
I make it clear that the evidence of Eljah is to be so
Other witnesses proposed by the husband and who have sworn
affidavits – [Mrs Castellanos], [Mr Percy], [Mr Rashid], [Mr Brady],
Dalton] and [Prof Schulz]
husband filed an affidavit of Mrs Castellanos [in] June 2023 and had
previously indicated his intention to rely on it for the
purposes of trial. In
her submissions filed [in] May 2025, the ICL indicated that she did not
oppose that, but expressed the view
that the husband's intention to rely on the
affidavit "may be of greater relevance to these proceedings than the probative
of the affidavit itself." In his submissions filed [in] May 2025 the
husband then said that Mrs Castellanos is "no longer willing
to testify in
these proceedings" while purporting still to rely on the affidavit and
acknowledging that the evidentiary weight of
it may be impacted by that
unwillingness.
decline to permit the husband to rely on an affidavit for the purposes of trial
in circumstances where the witness now refuses
to give evidence. No weight
could be attributed to the affidavit in those circumstances and its admission
into evidence at trial
is pointless.
Percy swore an affidavit [in] August 2024, which was filed by the husband
[in] February 2025. The husband asserts that his evidence
is of probative
value, both because he has been a "direct eyewitness to incidents" and
because he will give evidence to contradict
matters asserted by [Ms Doyle], to
whom further reference is made below.
of the affidavit of Mr Percy are clearly of limited probative value. That
said, he says that he has lived with the husband
and his children for extended
periods, albeit the dates are not overly clear. He has also been
present at handovers, some of which
have been contentious.
propose to permit the husband to rely on the affidavit of Mr Percy.
Rashid swore an affidavit [in] October 2024, which was filed by the husband
[in] February 2025. The affidavit primarily sets
Mr Rashid’s role in taking the husband to the "girlie bar" in Country
B at which he met the wife, negotiating and paying
the "bar fine" for her
"release" to accompany the husband to his hotel, and advising the husband as to
what was, from his experience,
the "standard rate" payable for sex. Otherwise,
his evidence is largely limited to gratuitous expressions of his personal
for the wife and for Ava Stanhope. His affidavit is of no probative
value, and I do not propose to permit the husband to rely upon
it at trial.
Brady swore an affidavit [in] August 2024 which was filed by the husband
[in] February 2025. Mr Brady describes himself as a
lifelong friend of the
husband and is Child J's godfather. He makes limited observations about Elsie
and about the husband's relationship
with Ms Bauer. He makes limited
observations about the husband's relationship with Ava Stanhope, based on
occasions when he visited
them. He otherwise expresses negative opinions
treated the wife and her family, and positive opinions as to the
husband's relationship with and parenting of Child J.
husband's submission that the affidavit of Mr Brady goes "to the heart of
key factual issues in the proceedings, including [the
husband's] parenting
style, the child's disclosures, and the family's functioning – especially
during critical periods relevant
to the child's welfare" does not accurately
reflect the content of the document. There is, for example, no reference
in the affidavit
to anything properly characterised as a "disclosure" by Child
J. With no disrespect to Mr Brady, his affidavit does not add to the
information of probative value in determining the issues in the case. I do not
propose to permit the husband to rely upon it at
Dalton swore an affidavit [in] April 2025 which was filed by the husband [in]
May 2025 in support of an interim application.
He also swore an affidavit
[in] March 2025, filed [in] March 2025. The affidavit filed [in]
March 2025 is the affidavit upon which
the husband appears to seek to rely at
trial. It appears that Mr Dalton resides in the [Country E].
first affidavit contains observations about the husband's current partner
[Jade], and her interactions with Child J. Those observations
probative value in circumstances where, for whatever reason, the husband does
not propose to call Jade as a witness.
affidavit otherwise contains positive observations about the husband,
speculation about the motives of the wife, and some limited
observations about
handovers and the like. In the context of the other evidence available, it is
of no probative value.
the extent the husband might seek to rely on it, the second affidavit of Mr
Dalton refers to what he says he believes was "extreme
malicious harassment
directed at [the husband] and his girlfriend, from a [Country F] national named
[Vivian Masai]" in or about
October 2024. He refers to seeing messages from Ms
Masai on the husband's phone. That affidavit is of no probative value.
do not propose to permit the husband to rely on either affidavit sworn by Mr
Dalton at trial.
Schulz swore an affidavit [in] February 2025 which was filed by the husband
[in] March 2025. Prof Schulz describes himself
as a "very special friend"
of the husband and says that he has observed Child J to be very
well‑behaved child, to whom the
husband is very attentive.
He otherwise expresses his personal admiration for the husband, and his
opinion that Child J would "benefit
greatly benefit (sic) from spending more
time with his loving father" and his further view that he would
"benefit enormously" if
he went into the husband's "full-time care".
observations in admissible form that Prof Schulz makes do not add to the
evidence already available from other witnesses being
called by the husband.
His personal opinions, with no disrespect, are of no probative value. The
emphasis placed by the husband
on what he describes as Prof Schulz’s
"significant professional standing" do not alter that. Prof Schulz is a
legal academic,
who has previously served as a [senior legal professional]. I
do not doubt his professional standing, but it is not in a field which
him to give admissible opinion evidence as to parenting or child development,
were it not for the provisions of s 102NL(1)(c).
While by virtue of that
section unqualified opinion evidence can be admitted, that does not mean it will
be afforded weight. I do
not propose to permit the husband to rely on his
affidavit for the purposes of trial.
Other witness proposed by the husband and who has not yet
sworn an affidavit – [Mr Robinson]
husband proposes to file an affidavit sworn by Mr Robinson, who he says has
known Child J for almost five years and has a close
and trusted relationship
with him. He says that Mr Robinson was present during a recent problematic
video call between Child J and
the wife. He says also that Mr
Robinson has been present when Child J has disclosed being "physically hit" by
evidence is of potential probative value. If the husband seeks to file an
affidavit by Mr Robinson giving evidence as to those
matters, he should be
permitted to rely on that affidavit for the purposes of trial.
statement is equivocal for a reason. In his submissions, the husband says
that Mr Robinson has not yet submitted an affidavit
as he "may act as [his]
McKenzie friend in the event [he remains] unrepresented under the
cross-examination scheme," acknowledging
that his participation in that role
would be subject to the Court's approval.
propose to give the husband liberty to file an affidavit by Mr Robinson,
and to rely on it at trial, provided it is filed no later
than 28 days prior to
the commencement of the trial. In that way, the husband will be given
every opportunity to ascertain whether
he will be represented.
propose to limit the matters as to which Mr Robinson may give evidence to those
asserted by the husband in his written submissions
to be relevant, with one
exception. The husband makes the point that Mr Robinson has attended a
number of hearings in this matter
and has "witnessed the conduct of" the ICL,
"expressed concerns regarding her perceived bias and misleading submissions",
and believes
the ICL's conduct has "influenced the proceedings unfairly." Any
observations or opinions of Mr Robinson of that nature are of no
probative value whatsoever.
Witnesses to whom the husband proposes subpoenas to give
evidence should issue – [Ms Torres], [Ms Gallo], [Ms Simon], [Ms Davies],
[Ms Bernard], [Ms Chen], [the Single Expert Witness], [the ICL, Ms Q], [Ms
Visser], Ms Doyle, [Dr Fadel] and [Mr Andrew Thomas].
number of these proposed witnesses may be dealt with briefly.
is no need for the husband to issue a subpoena to compel the attendance of the
Single Expert Witness at trial; [Mr Newman]
is the appointed Single Expert
Witness in the case and will be called by the ICL. The husband will have
the opportunity to cross-examine
is no proper basis upon which the husband can contend that a subpoena should be
issued directed to the ICL, [Ms Q], to compel
her to give evidence as his
witness at trial.
is no need for the husband to issue a subpoena to compel the attendance of Ms
Doyle to give evidence, as I propose to permit
the issue of such a subpoena by
the ICL. Again, the husband will have the opportunity to cross-examine
Torres is described by the husband as having "served as the Head of Primary" at
School O. Elsewhere, she is described as being
the "Head of primary 2024 /
2025". In response to the submissions of the ICL, the husband said that Ms
Torres "has had no prior
interactions with the [husband] or [Child J]" and
"instead seeks to call" Ms Gallo, Ms Simon and Ms Davies. I proceed
on the basis that the husband no longer seeks the issue of a subpoena
directed to Ms Torres.
Simon was Child J's Education Assistant in years one and two. Ms Gallo was
his year two teacher, and Ms Davies is his current
teacher. The ICL
proposes to subpoena an appropriate person from the school in relation to the
husband's communications with it
but has not proposed to subpoena an individual
my view, it is appropriate for the ICL to issue a subpoena for Ms Torres to
give evidence. Documents have already been produced
under subpoena by the
school; in her role as Head of Primary, Ms Torres can appropriately give
evidence as to the interaction of
the school with the parties, the content of
the school's records, and the broader issues regarding the school that might be
by either party.
is not necessary for the Court to have evidence from Ms Simon or Ms Gallo
against that background. I accept, however, that the
evidence of Child J's
current teacher Ms Davies may be of current and probative value.
propose therefore to permit the husband to issue a subpoena requiring Ms Davies
to give evidence and to permit the ICL to issue
a subpoena requiring Ms Torres
to give evidence. The question of whether an updating subpoena to produce
documents should be issued
is a matter for the ICL to consider, given that she
will have inspected the documents already produced. I express no view in that
regard, as I have not reviewed the subpoenaed documents and would not unless and
until they are tendered into evidence.
Bernard is said by the husband to be Child J's current speech therapist.
Ms Chen is said by him to be Child J's current occupational
therapist. Given
the disputes between the parties as to appropriate health interventions for
Child J, and the appropriate allocation
of decision-making responsibility, I
accept that both witnesses may be able to give evidence of probative value.
While the husband
has not indicated whether he has asked that either proposed
witness will provide a report or swear an affidavit, nothing turns on
present purposes. I propose to give the husband leave to issue subpoenas
directed to them. I also propose to order the
parties to execute any necessary
authorities to enable the ICL to obtain a report from either or both of Ms
Bernard and Ms Chen,
if she considers that appropriate. I note in that
regard the ICL has made submissions that the evidence of Ms Bernard and Ms Chen
is unlikely to assist the Court in determining the relevant issues, and I
proceed on the basis that she may elect not to seek a report
and, in any event,
may not seek to cross‑examine them.
husband seeks leave to issue a subpoena to compel Ms Visser to give evidence.
Ms Visser is a speech therapist at [a paediatric
speech pathology service],
which no longer provides services to Child J. The only purpose which the
husband advances in support
of the proposed leave is his perception that the ICL
relies on unsworn and unspecified "concerns" expressed by the paediatric speech
pathology service as to his conduct, his contention that "hearsay opinions are
inadmissible without testing",
and his assertion that he must "confront and test every adverse statement" from
Ms Doyle and Ms Visser as they relate to what he
would regard as untrue
statements made to them by the wife.
already indicated, I propose to permit the ICL to issue a subpoena requiring Ms
Doyle to give evidence. The husband will have
the opportunity to cross-examine
her. I do not propose to give leave to either the husband or the ICL to issue a
subpoena requiring
Ms Doyle to give evidence; accordingly, any opinions
adverse to the husband previously expressed by Ms Doyle will not be in evidence
and need not be "confronted and tested."
Fadel is the husband's treating psychologist. The husband seeks permission
to call him as a witness. While he does so by the
mechanism of proposing to
issue a subpoena, that would only be necessary if he has requested the provision
of a report verified by
affidavit, and Dr Fadel declines.
is possible that evidence from Dr Fadel will have probative value beyond that
available from the evidence of the Single Expert
Witness psychologist. I
propose therefore to give the husband leave to adduce evidence from him by
affidavit. If, having sought
to exercise that leave, the husband establishes
that Dr Fadel refuses to give evidence voluntarily, he may revisit the
question of
whether he should be granted leave to issue a subpoena.
husband seeks leave to issue a subpoena to require Andrew Thomas to give
evidence. Andrew Thomas was married to Ava Stanhope
for "approximately 10
years" prior to the husband meeting her. The husband met Ava in around 2005.
The husband says that Andrew
Thomas can give evidence as to Ava's "behaviour and
character" and her "alienation of his children." I am not persuaded that any
evidence Andrew Thomas might give would be of any probative value to inform the
determinations currently required. I decline to
grant the requested
Witnesses proposed by the ICL – [the Single Expert
Witness], [Dr Beekhof], [Dr Auffray], Ms Doyle and the Principal of School
is common ground that the Single Expert Witness should give evidence, and that
he should be called as a witness by the ICL. I
have already indicated that I
propose to give the ICL leave to issue subpoenas directed to Ms Doyle and
Beekhof is a paediatrician at the [Suburb V Child Development Service]. He
has been involved with Child J and with the family.
Given the matters
in issue in relation to Child J's medical needs, treatment and decision-making,
his evidence may well have probative
value. The husband does not suggest
otherwise, albeit he suggests that his attendance at trial is not necessary. He
acknowledges
that Dr Beekhof has already provided a "comprehensive report".
It is appropriate for the ICL to be permitted to call him, to place
that report
in evidence and permit the parties to ask any questions they
consider relevant. I propose to grant the ICL leave to
relevant subpoena.
Auffray is also a paediatrician at the Suburb V Child Development Service. Dr
Auffray has had past involvement with Child J and
the family. The ICL
submits that Dr Auffray's evidence may have probative value for the same reasons
as that of Dr Beekhof. I accept
that submission. I note that the husband
does not oppose the issue of a subpoena to Dr Auffray, but questions whether her
will "provide additional value at this stage" as Dr Auffray is not
currently treating Child J. I propose to grant the ICL leave
to issue the
relevant subpoena.
foreshadow that should any independent professional witnesses seek to comply
with a subpoena by giving evidence via Microsoft Teams
I would (subject to
any submissions to the contrary) likely accommodate that. In those
circumstances, the parties and the ICL would
need to ensure that efficient
arrangements are in place if they seek to put any documents to the
The trial plan and limitations on cross-examination
turn now to the time that should be allocated for trial, given the number of
witnesses and the matters in respect of which they
will give evidence. As
foreshadowed, I propose to impose time limits on all aspects of the trial to
ensure to the extent possible
that it is conducted efficiently, while still
permitting evidence to be tested and issues explored.
The estimates of the parties and the ICL
their respective Callover certificates filed in March 2025, the wife estimated a
hearing time of 10 days, and the ICL and the
husband each estimated a hearing
time of five days.
to directions made [in] March 2025, the wife and the ICL filed a consolidated
trial plan [in] April 2025. The husband was
not directed to file a trial plan
but was at liberty to do so; he declined. The filed trial plan does not,
therefore, include any
estimates by the husband as to the time he might require
to cross-examine. It was reasonable for him to decline to provide such
estimates in circumstances where he is not permitted to personally cross-examine
the wife in any event and is awaiting the allocation
of representation under the
relevant scheme.
said, in his response to the draft trial plan put to him, the husband expressed
the view that the "timelines... proposed are
significantly underestimated." He
expressed that view in circumstances where the trial plan estimated that seven
hearing days would
be required to complete examination of witnesses and
submissions by counsel for the wife and the ICL only, without any allowance
time for examination of witnesses and submissions by him.
broad terms, therefore, the outworking of the estimates of the parties and the
ICL would indicate a trial of not less than 10
hearing days, and likely several
days longer. While the estimates by the wife and the ICL included
reference to witnesses upon whose
affidavits I have determined the husband
may not rely, by the same token they made no allowance for the
witnesses the husband proposed
to subpoena.
will be seen, in my view the time required for the proper, just and procedurally
fair consideration of relevant evidence and submissions
required to
determine what orders will serve Child J's best interests is significantly less
than the parties and the ICL have estimated.
the trial plan was formulated on an assumption of 280 minutes per day of
available hearing time, I propose to ensure that no
less than five hours'
hearing time is available to the parties each day.
propose to set timeframes for each aspect of the trial. While the parties and
the ICL should proceed on the basis that they are
required to comply with those
timeframes strictly, that does not mean that they cannot be revisited if and as
appropriate. The progress
of a trial can be fluid and difficult to predict. It
will remain open to both parties and to the ICL to seek extensions (or for
matter contractions) of each allocation of time as the trial progresses; any
such request will be considered at the time on
its merits.
Housekeeping, opening and closing submissions
is likely that there will be procedural or housekeeping matters to be attended
to at the commencement of the trial. If the husband
remains self-represented,
additional time will be spent either at the commencement of trial or at an
earlier status hearing in explaining
various matters to him to ensure procedural
45 minutes for those matters.
ICL and counsel for the wife each estimate that they will require 10 minutes for
oral opening submissions. Bearing in mind that
the parties have filed Papers
for the Judge identifying the issues, and their respective contentions as to the
legislated considerations,
those estimates are sensible. To cover the
possibility that the husband will remain self-represented at trial, I propose to
15 minutes for his opening submissions.
ICL and counsel for the wife each estimate that they will require one hour for
oral closing submissions, with 10 minutes for
a brief final response by the ICL.
I propose to allow 45 minutes for the closing submissions of each party and of
the ICL. Again,
that time may be revisited at trial if needed.
Evidence in chief of witnesses who have sworn
Fundamentally,
the oral evidence in chief of witnesses who have sworn affidavits should be
limited to the correction of any errors
in those affidavits, and otherwise to
confirming their content. Otherwise, it should be limited to brief
evidence as to any relevant
event that has occurred since the affidavit was
propose to make orders whereby the parties will be at liberty to file
affidavits updating their own evidence close to trial.
I propose to allow five minutes for the oral evidence in
chief of each witness who has sworn an
Cross-examination of the parties
ICL estimates that she will require one hour to cross-examine the wife, and two
hours to cross-examine the husband. Counsel
for the wife estimates that he will
require six hours to cross-examine the husband. The husband has
understandably not provided
an estimate as to cross-examination of the wife on
his behalf.
given the volume of evidence and the scope of the matters actually in issue,
suitably focused cross-examination of the husband
should not require the
allocation of eight hours of court time. Additionally, by ruling on these
matters well in advance of trial
counsel are afforded ample opportunity to
prepare to ensure the required focus.
propose to allow four hours for the cross-examination of each party by counsel
for the other, and one hour for the ICL's cross‑examination
I reiterate that it will be open to the parties and the ICL to seek extensions
of those time limits during the trial itself,
if circumstances (which may
include the manner in which the relevant witness responds to questioning)
justify that.
Cross-examination of the Single Expert Witness
ICL estimates that she will require two hours to examine the SEW. While it
may fairly be anticipated that he will be the last
witness called, and that she
will need to put to him matters that emerge over the course of prior evidence,
90 minutes should be
sufficient.
for the wife estimates that he will require one hour to cross‑examine the
SEW. That estimate is reasonable, and I
propose to allow the husband the same
Cross-examination of witnesses who have sworn
propose to allow each party and the ICL 15 to 30 minutes in which to
cross-examine witnesses called by others who have sworn affidavits,
depending on
the witness. Where I assess that the particular witness will give evidence in a
limited scope, I have allowed for shorter
cross-examination. Again, I accept
that for some witnesses less time might be required and that where time is saved
in that manner,
it might appropriately be applied in the cross-examination of
other witnesses.
Evidence of witnesses appearing under subpoena
obvious reasons, where witnesses have not filed affidavits a sensible amount of
time needs to be allowed for them to give evidence
each case, I propose to allow 30 minutes for evidence in chief, and 20 to 30
minutes for cross-examination, depending on the witness,
as reflected in the
trial plan annexed to these reasons. Again, those times may be revisited if
appropriate as the trial progresses.
I anticipate, for example, that less
time will be required for some witnesses appearing under subpoena, while
longer may be required
for others.
Re-examination of witnesses
proper purpose of re-examination is limited. It is to remove ambiguities and
uncertainties and is allowed when an answer given
in cross-examination, unless
supplemented or explained, may leave the Court with an inaccurate impression of
the facts which is potentially
unfavourable to the party calling the witness,
and which represents a distortion or incomplete
propose to allow five minutes for re-examination of each witness, with a
slightly longer time allowed for each party given the
likely length of their
cross-examination.
The trial plan
convenience, the trial plan reflecting the determinations in these reasons is
attached as an annexure to this judgment. I propose
to order that the parties
and the ICL comply with it, subject to the right to seek extensions as already
Self-evidently,
the parties must each give evidence before their respective witnesses. Subject
to availability, ideally the SEW
will be the last witness called. Otherwise,
while the trial plan lists witnesses in a proposed sequence, the parties and the
should not feel constrained to adhere to that sequence. Subject to any
submissions they might make as to any perceived forensic
disadvantage, I will be
open to the interposition of professional witnesses to minimise inconvenience to
necessary, the Court will commence sitting earlier than 10:00 am and sit
late as required.
cover the possibility that in some instances witnesses will be required for less
than the time allocated to them, the parties
and the ICL should ensure to the
extent possible that on each day a witness who might otherwise be expected to
give evidence on the
following day is available at short notice.
Progression of the matter to trial
propose to include the matter in Callover [in late] 2025 for the allocation of a
trial date. That will afford the parties sufficient
time to make enquiries as
to the availability of counsel and witnesses.
acknowledge that the husband has not yet been allocated a lawyer under the
Commonwealth Family Violence and Cross‑Examination
of Parties Scheme.
Legal Aid Western Australia, which administers the scheme, has made it clear to
the Court that the identification
and allocation of lawyers under the scheme is
assisted by matters being listed for trial, rather than that listing being
until a lawyer is identified and allocated.
husband will need to continue to do all things within his power to access a
lawyer under the scheme, to represent him at trial.
I acknowledge that if
through no fault of his own the husband is not able to be allocated a lawyer,
further consideration will need
to be given to the question of whether the trial
can proceed in a manner which is procedurally fair.
A further matter – the husband's allegations of a
"pattern of bias" on the part of the ICL
his recent written submissions, the husband asserts that the ICL has
demonstrated bias against him, failed to be impartial,
and relied on
"unsubstantiated allegations from a non-testifying witness", by whom he refers
to Ms Doyle. In fact, the ICL proposes
to issue a subpoena to Ms Doyle to give
the extent the husband asserts that the positions adopted by the ICL in relation
to the probative value of evidence he seeks to
call is indicative of bias
against him, that assertion is readily dismissed. In making submissions as
to the probative value of
evidence proposed to be called by each party, the ICL
is simply doing her job. To the extent I have accepted her submissions,
self-evidently
I consider them to be correct. To the extent I have rejected
them, that simply reflects the fact that an ICL is not a decision-maker
case and that their submissions on all matters may be accepted or rejected by
husband's submissions also gloss over the fact that he previously applied for
orders discharging the appointment of the ICL,
going to the extent of seeking
orders that she be "banned" at least temporarily from acting as an ICL in any
case before this Court,
on grounds including but not limited to the proposition
that her involvement as a committee member of the Women Lawyers Association
would give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias against male litigants.
That application was dismissed by the Chief Judge for
Reasons delivered
[in] September 2023.
Notwithstanding
the complaints in his submissions, there is no formal application by the husband
for the discharge of the ICL. If
such an application is brought, it will be
heard and determined on its merits.
A further matter
I note reference in the husband's submissions to the possibility that he may
seek leave to issue further subpoenas to produce
documents. He may make
any such request in the usual way, by submitting the subpoena he proposes to
have issued with a covering
letter setting out the basis upon which he would
suggest that the documents sought have a legitimate forensic purpose.
Proposed orders
to any submissions as to form only, I propose to make the following notations
and orders.
NOTING THAT:-
Applicant wife, [MS STANHOPE] has filed the following documents and is permitted
to rely on them for the purposes of trial:
(a) her Minute of Proposed Final Orders filed [in] April 2025;
(b) the affidavit of her evidence in chief filed [in] August 2024; and
(c) her Form 13 Financial Statement filed [in] August 2024.
Respondent husband, [MR STANHOPE] has filed the following documents and is
permitted to rely on them for the purposes of trial:
(a) his Minute of Proposed Final Orders Sought filed [in] May 2025; and
(b) his Form 13 Financial Statement filed [in] August 2024.
IT IS ORDERED THAT:-
Updating evidence for trial – the parties
no later than 4.00 pm on [a date prior to Callover in] 2025 the husband
must file and serve:
(a) a single stand-alone affidavit to comprise the whole of his evidence in
chief for the purposes of trial, with no more than 15
annexures; and
(b) an up-to-date Form 13 Financial Statement.
no later than a date to be fixed by subsequent order once the trial is listed,
being a date approximately 28 days prior to the
first listed day of trial
the wife must file and serve:
(a) an affidavit of evidence in chief, limited to evidence as to events which
have occurred since she filed her substantive trial
affidavit [in] August
(b) an up-to-date Form 13 Financial Statement.
no later than a date to be fixed by subsequent order once the trial is listed,
being a date approximately 28 days prior to the
first listed day of trial
the husband must file and serve:
(a) an affidavit of evidence in chief, limited to evidence as to events which
have occurred since he filed his substantive trial
affidavit pursuant to the
order contained in paragraph 1 of these orders; and
(b) an up-to-date Form 13 Financial Statement.
Witness affidavits of the Applicant Wife
wife may rely on the affidavit of [Ava Stanhope] filed [in] August 2024 for the
purposes of trial.
wife is permitted to file by no later than 28 days prior to the first listed day
of trial an updating affidavit of [Ava Stanhope],
and to rely on such affidavit
for the purposes of trial, subject to that affidavit
being limited to events that have occurred since
[redacted] August 2024.
wife may rely on the affidavit of [Vivian Masai] filed [in] April 2025 for the
purposes of trial.
wife is permitted to file by no later than 4.00 pm [on a date prior to
Callover in] 2025 an affidavit of [Mr Martin] and to rely
on that affidavit
for the purposes of trial.
wife is permitted to file by no later than 4.00 pm [on a date prior to
Callover in] 2025 an affidavit of [Ms Murray] and to rely
on that affidavit
for the purposes of trial subject to the affidavit being limited to evidence as
to her professional interactions
with the wife in the context of family violence
counselling.
wife is permitted to file by no later than 4.00 pm [on a date prior to
Callover in] 2025 an affidavit of [Elijah Thomas] and to
rely on that affidavit
for the purposes of trial subject to the affidavit being limited to evidence as
to what he saw and heard in
the form of behaviour by the husband and/or [Ava
Stanhope] while they lived together and following their separation, to the
any such behaviour if proven could properly be characterised as family
Witness affidavits of the Respondent Husband
husband may rely on the affidavit of [Connor Stanhope] filed [in] February
2025 for the purposes of trial.
husband is permitted to file by no later than 4:00 pm [on a date prior to
Callover in] 2025 an updating affidavit of [Connor Stanhope]
and to rely on that
affidavit for the purposes of trial subject to that affidavit being limited to
evidence as to his current circumstances,
his own interaction with [Child J],
and his observations of [Child J] and the husband.
husband may rely on the affidavit of [Mr Percy] filed [in] February 2025 for the
purposes of trial.
husband is permitted to file by no later than 28 days prior to the first
listed day of trial an affidavit of [Mr Robinson], and
to rely on such affidavit
for the purposes of trial, subject to the conditions in
paragraph [14].
affidavit of [Mr Robinson] to be filed pursuant to the immediately preceding
order must be limited to evidence as to:
(a) his direct observations of [Child J] with the husband;
(b) his direct observations of any video communication between [Child J] and the
(c) his direct observations of instances demonstrating [Child J’s]
understanding of time and routine; and
(d) any disclosures made by [Child J] in his presence as to being subjected to
physical discipline or otherwise struck by the wife.
husband is permitted to file by no later than 4.00 pm [on a date prior to
Callover in] 2025 an affidavit of his treating psychologist
[Dr Fadel], and to
rely on such affidavit for the purposes of trial.
Subpoenas for the purposes of trial
Independent Children's Lawyer is granted leave to issue subpoenas directed to
[Ms Torres] of [School O], [Ms Doyle] of [Paediatric
Speech Pathology Service],
[Dr Beekhof] and [Dr Auffray] to give evidence at trial.
husband is granted leave to issue subpoenas directed to [Ms Davies] of [School
O], [Ms Bernard] of [Medical Therapy Provider]
and [Ms Chen] of [Medical Therapy
Provider] to give evidence at trial.
Authorities and reports from [Ms Bernard] and/or [Ms Chen]
seven days of being requested by the Independent Children's Lawyer to do so, the
husband and wife must each sign any necessary
authority to enable the
Independent Children's Lawyer to request and obtain written reports from [Ms
Bernard] and/or [Ms Chen].
Conduct of the trial
parties and the Independent Children's Lawyer must limit the time taken in their
submissions and examination of witnesses in accordance
with the trial plan
annexed to these orders.
Notwithstanding
the previous order, at any time during the trial the parties and the Independent
Children's Lawyer may make oral application
for extension or reduction of the
times allocated in the trial plan.
affidavit may be filed by either party or by the Independent Children's Lawyer
for the purposes of trial other than as provided
in these orders, or by
subsequent order.
affidavit previously filed in the proceedings may be relied upon by either party
or by the Independent Children's Lawyer for the
purposes of trial, other
than as expressly permitted in these orders or by subsequent
proceedings are included in the Callover [in late] 2025 for the allocation of a
trial date, with an estimated hearing time of
seven days, noting that the matter
is not suitable for hearing and determination by a magistrate.
parties and the Independent Children's Lawyer must each file and serve a
Callover certificate in the usual form by no later than
4.00pm [on a date seven
days prior to the Callover]
of both parties and the ICL are
I certify that the
preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of
Western Australia.
10 JULY 2025
[Stanhope and Stanhope] –
1 day = estimated at 300 minutes.
Housekeeping and related matters.
45 minutes.
Applicant Wife – Opening submissions.
10 minutes.
Evidence of the Applicant Wife
Evidence in chief.
10 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
240 minutes.
305 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
60 minutes.
Re-examination.
10 minutes.
Evidence of the Applicant Wife's Witnesses
Mr Martin (if affidavit is filed)
Evidence in chief.
Husband – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
Re-examination.
Ava Stanhope
Evidence in chief.
Husband – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
Re-examination.
Elijah Thomas (if affidavit is filed)
Evidence in chief.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Ms Murray (if affidavit is filed)
Evidence in chief.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
310 minutes.
Vivian Masai
Evidence in chief.
Husband – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
Re-examination.
Respondent Husband – Opening submissions.
15 minutes.
Evidence of the Respondent Husband
Evidence in chief.
10 minutes.
Wife - Cross-examination.
200 minutes.
295 minutes.
Evidence of the Respondent Husband (Continued)
Wife – Cross-examination (continued).
40 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
60 minutes.
Re-examination.
10 minutes.
Evidence of the Respondent Husband's Witnesses
Connor Stanhope
Evidence in chief.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Evidence in chief.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Mr Robinson (if affidavit is filed)
Evidence in chief.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Ms Bernard (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
Re-examination.
315 minutes.
Ms Chen (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
Re-examination.
Ms Davies (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Dr Fadel (if affidavit is filed)
Evidence in chief.
Wife – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
ICL – Cross-examination.
30 minutes.
Re-examination.
ICL – Opening submissions.
10 minutes.
Evidence of the ICL's Witnesses
Dr Beekhof (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
285 minutes.
Dr Auffray (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Ms Doyle (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
Ms Torres (under subpoena)
Evidence in chief.
30 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
20 minutes.
Re-examination.
225 minutes.
The Single Expert Witness (SEW)
ICL – Examination.
90 minutes.
Wife – Cross-examination.
60 minutes.
Husband – Cross-examination.
60 minutes.
ICL – Closing submissions.
45 minutes.
Husband – Closing submissions.
45 minutes.
Wife – Closing submissions.
45 minutes.
ICL – Short response.
10 minutes.
355 minutes
[2024] FCWA 183
and Stanhope
[2025] FCWA 88
[2025] FCWA
Stanhope and Stanhope
[2025] FCWA 88.
amendments to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) commenced on 10 June 2025,
now found at
Pickford & Pickford
[2024] FedCFamC1A
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
(1979) FLC 90-674
and the authorities there
Rogers v The Queen
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251.
[2015] FamCAFC 94
P v Q (No 2)
[2023] WASCA 163
(2023) 67 Fam LR 399
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
Aon Risk Services
Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
State of Queensland and Anor v J L Holdings Pty Ltd
(1997) 189 CLR
And at other times if
To avoid confusion,
I refer to various persons with a common surname by their given names and mean
no offence in doing so.
Emphasis as appears in the
Emphasis as
appears in the original.
Emphasis as appears in the
Emphasis as
appears in the original.
[2025] FCWA 141
Referring to himself and Ava
paragraphs under a heading titled "My Dad, the good
Samaritan".
By reference to
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), which does not apply in these proceedings.
In any event, see
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Re F: Litigants
in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072
J D Heydon,
on Evidence
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 12
Stanhope and
[2023] FCWA 204.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (989 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter