URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/175.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PHELPS and BUDI [2015] FCWAM 175 (14 August 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
PHELPS and BUDI
[2015] FCWAM 175
30 & 31 MARCH 2015
DELIVERED :
14 AUGUST 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 4538 of 2012
Catchwords:
Child related proceedings; limited issues to resolve; overnight time
commenced; family violence occurred; presumption of equal shared
responsibility did not apply; some sharing of parental responsibility in any
event in best interests of the children.
Legislation:
Family Court Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN
THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
1 These parties have two
children, [J] born [in] 2008 and [E] born [in] 2010. They lived together from
July 2008 to May 2011. They
never married so these proceedings fall to be
determined under the
Family Court Act
These proceedings have, sadly, been on foot since August 2012. The parties have
been able to agree on a range of issues,
but there remain several issues
outstanding.
The mother’s case
2 The mother relies upon her affidavit filed on 16
January 2015, an affidavit of the maternal grandmother filed 8 December 2014 and
the mother’s financial statement filed 8 December 2014.
3 The mother handed up a further amended Form 1A response on the first day
of the trial. She then handed up a “further further”
response on the second day of trial. The first document sought orders in the
following terms:
the children, [J Phelps], born [in] 2008 and [E Phelps], born [in] 2010
(“the children”) reside with the mother and
she have sole parental
responsibility for the children including but not limited to educational and
medical reasons.
[J Phelps’] [sic] name be legally changed to [J Phelps Budi] and [E
Phelps’] name be legally changed to [E Phelps
Budi] to receive $7,000 from [Mr Phelps] for losses sustained by [Ms Budi] on
[Property R] during the 2012/2013 financial year.
[Mr Phelps’] right to operate the Home Loan account for [Property R] be
Phelps] to replace and install the internal garage door to [Property R] at his
Budi] to receive $63,656 from [Mr Phelps] which is equal to an 80% share of all
property and assets held in [Mr Phelps’]
name or in joint names, owned
purchased or disposed of from February 2008 to present.
Budi] to receive Spousal Maintenance from [Mr Phelps] at a rate of $200 per
Budi] to receive $4,424.95 from [Mr Phelps] for legal costs in relation to the
original Form 1A response including the hearing
on 12 November 2012.
the father [Mr Phelps] be granted supervised visitation.
there be an injunction against [Mr Phelps] taking the children or causing the
children to be taken to church and from discussing
his religious beliefs with
the children.
Budi] to be granted twelve (12) months within which to sell [sic] [Property R].
Budi] to make all decisions with regard to the sale of [sic] [Property R]
including but not limited to the real estate agent used
and the offer price
Budi] to receive 100% of any profits from the sale of [Property R].
4 The only changes made to those proposed orders in the document
handed up the following day were:
Paragraph 12 was deleted.
Paragraph 15 was deleted.
The following paragraphs were included:
Budi] to receive $2,020 from [Mr Phelps] to repay the money withdrawn from the
joint mortgage account on 28 August 2012.
[Mr Phelps] be ordered to pay 50% of disclosed costs relating to autism
diagnosis and therapies and IQ testing for [J Phelps]
and [E Phelps] to the
amount of $5,320.
[Mr Phelps] be ordered to pay 50% of all ongoing medical and therapeutic
expenses for [J Phelps] and [E Phelps] on a quarterly
[Mr Phelps] be ordered to complete the Circle of Security course as recommended
by Consultant Pike within six (6) months.
[Mr Phelps] be ordered to complete the three Autism NOOC online course through
Swinburne University commencing on 2 April 2015.
[Mr Phelps] be awarded one (1) weekend day per week visitation from 9.30am to
5 So it seems that between the first and second days of
trial the respondent’s attitude towards the issue of time between the
children and the father had softened and had changed from supervised visitation
to unsupervised on one day per week. She otherwise
reduced the amount that
she sought by way of property settlement orders. She also included a number of
proposed orders in relation
to medical and other expenses which clearly fell
within the purvey of the Child Support Agency. The Court has no power to make
The father’s case
6 The father relies upon his financial statement
handed up in Court on the first day of the trial and sworn on 27 March 2015. He
also relies upon his trial affidavit and earlier affidavits filed on 17 and 19
November 2014, together with the affidavit of [L Phelps]
filed 17 November
2014. He seeks orders in terms of a minute of proposed orders filed on
20 October 2014, namely:
children, [J Phelps] ([born in] 2008) and [E Phelps] ([born in] 2010) be in the
custody of their father each week from Friday
5.00pm until Saturday 5.00pm.
children shall be collected from their mother’s residence at 5.00pm on
Friday and shall be collected from their father’s
residence at 5.00pm on
Saturday unless other arrangements for receiving the children are mutually
agreed upon by both parents.
special occasion days of Easter Friday and Saturday, Christmas, and the
children’s birthdays be shared between both parents
on an alternating
R] jointly owned by [Mr Phelps] and [Ms Budi] ([born in] 1986) is to be either
refinanced as soon as possible to remove
[Mr Phelps’] name from the
mortgage or, by 25/2/2015 it shall be put on the market and sold for a minimum
of $390,000 and that
any offer made on the property for a sum greater than
$390,000 must be accepted by the owners.
proceeds from any sale of [Property R] are to be divided equally between [Mr
Phelps] and [Ms Budi].
sale of [Property R] is to be conducted by a real estate agent that is
independent of both owners.
of the final orders sought by [Ms Budi] in her amended Form 1A – response
to initiating application filed on 30 September
2014 be dismissed.
7 A number of orders were made by consent at the conclusion of the
trial. They were in the following terms (relating to the further
amended Form 1A response handed up on 31 March 2015):
(a) Paragraph 6, with the surname to be “[Phelps-Budi]”;
(b) Paragraphs 10, 11, 17, 18 and 24;
(c) Paragraph 19, but to be reworded in the following terms:
The respondent receive 100% of any profit of the sale of
[Property R] and for the respondent to be solely responsible for any shortfall
from the sale of the property and will indemnify the applicant in relation to
any such shortfall.
(d) Paragraph 20, but with the time to be extended so that the order was that:
The respondent to receive $2,020 from [Mr Phelps] to
repay the money withdrawn from the joint mortgage account on 28 August 2012 with
that payment to be within three months of today.
(e) Paragraph 23, with that requirement to complete the Circle of Security
course being subject to the availability of the course;
(f) Paragraph 24.
8 The Court otherwise preserved the
parties’ ability to apply to relist in relation to the sale of the
property after a period
of 12 months, or in the event there is an issue with the
listing of the property for sale. The proceedings were otherwise adjourned
judgment on a date to be advised.
9 Before these proceedings were finalised, the mother withdrew her
application for spousal maintenance (paragraph 13). She also
withdrew her
proposed order 9.
10 The mother also accepted that the orders already made provided for a just
and equitable property settlement to each party. The
father concurred.
11 For the sake of completeness, my view at the time those orders were made
was that it was just and equitable for the Court to make
a property settlement
order and that the orders made were a just and equitable result to each party in
all the circumstances.
12 That leaves the Court to determine the following general issues:
(a) The issue of parental responsibility;
(b) The issue of how much time should be spent in the father’s care;
(c) The injunction sought in relation to church; and
(d) The child support orders in relation to costs of therapy and other medical
expenses (which the Court cannot make).
13 I note that both
parties used terms that have not been used in the Family Law landscape in
Australia for many years – such
as custody and visitation. I raise this,
not as a criticism of the parties, but to let each of them know that I must use
the language
provided for in the legislation.
The father’s evidence
14 There was very little useful evidence in the
father’s affidavit (which was very short). He relied upon an Anglicare
from May 2013 which said that his supervised visits generally went well.
His time with the children had since progressed to unsupervised
time in any
15 He completed a parenting workshop in 2013. The balance of his affidavit
related to property matters.
16 In my view, the father had a fairly simplistic view about the world. I
do not consider that he is unduly perceptive about emotional
struggled to explain what he had learned from the parenting course (it was,
however, two years ago). He did say that
parenting should be a happy
medium between permissive and controlling styles. He denied being
“short” with the children,
having now learned to give them options.
17 He has also completed a workshop in parenting autistic children and now
accepts J’s condition. He says that J has not had
“meltdown” in several months. I have no doubt that this improvement
is due in part to the therapy that the mother
arranges for J.
Father’s witnesses
18 The father’s witness, L Phelps, said she
had never witnessed any abusive or aggressive behaviour from the father towards
the children. She saw the parties together several times prior to separation in
2011 and saw no abusive behaviour. That of course,
is not conclusive
evidence that such behaviour did not happen, but just that she did not see it.
I have no reason to disbelieve
her evidence. Little emerged from cross
examination.
Parental responsibility
19 Given that the parties have very different
parenting styles and personalities and they have been unable to reach agreement
many issues until the trial was conducted, in my view, sharing parental
responsibility is not a sensible option. Given that the
children will
predominantly live with the mother it is appropriate that she have sole parental
responsibility. There are two exceptions,
in my view; one is in relation to
religion and the other is in relation to significant medical decisions.
In relation to religion,
both parties should be able to involve the
children in the religion of their choice and in relation to significant medical
both parties should attempt to reach a joint decision on such matters.
I therefore tailor the orders in relation to responsibility
to match those
findings. I therefore do not propose to put in place the injunctions sought by
the mother in relation to the children
attending church.
The mother’s evidence
20 The mother says in her affidavit at [4] that the
father “abused” the children. She sets out numerous examples
set out below:
(a) Intentionally putting his leg out to trip up the children;
(b) Pushing the children in the back until they fell over;
(c) Squeezing the children between his legs until they would cry;
(d) Physically forcing the children to clean large areas of the house by pushing
or carrying the children to each item then forcing
them to pick them up using
his hand over theirs;
(e) Leaving the children unattended for significant periods of time;
(f) Not feeding or providing the children with water for significant periods of
(g) Changing the nappies at night, leaving soiled nappies next to them;
(h) Refusing to give the boys cleaned, sanitised bottles as infants;
(i) Telling [J] to “get out of the way” then pushing [J] over
causing him to cry;
(j) Encouraging the boys to fight each other.
21 Further at
[5] she outlines examples of the verbal denigration of the children by the
father, namely:
(a) You’re stupid;
(b) That’s stupid;
(c) You’re a brat;
(d) Go on run to mummy/nanny;
(e) You’re a wimp;
(f) Toughen up;
(g) They’re weird little creatures, almost like they are human.
22 Post separation, the parties entered into parenting plans.
Despite that, the mother says that the father did not spend regular
the children from May 2011 to February 2012 when she ceased visits. Part of her
reason for doing so was that the father’s
abusive behaviour towards the
children continued after separation. At [9] she outlines this behaviour as:
(a) increased name calling;
(b) smacking [J] on the head and back;
(c) threatening the children he would take them far, far away;
(d) making derogatory comments about me to the children;
(e) saying “grandma is a bitch” during visitation with their
maternal grandmother and encouraging the children to say
(f) increased physical and verbal abuse towards me in front of the boys;
(g) intimidating, threatening behaviour towards the maternal grandmother during
visitation causing her to refuse to continue facilitating
visitation in February
23 As a result of these issues, the mother filed a Form
4 notice of child abuse or family violence. She incorrectly reported the
Department’s response and findings in her affidavit. At [10] she said
that the Department “reported that [Mr Phelps]
lacked parenting skills and
suggested he take parenting classes”. The report which was annexed to her
affidavit at “C”
actually said:
... The concerns expressed in the notification do not require further action by
the Department.
The allegations as detailed in [Ms Budi’s] affidavit appear to
outline...an apparent deficit in his [the father’s] parenting
[Therefore the Department is simply repeating the mother’s allegations;
not making its own finding].
It may be fitting for [Mr Phelps] to undertake a parenting course to increase
his awareness and understanding in the areas as mentioned
as concerning by [Ms
24 The Department also referred to the mother’s
claims that [Mr Phelps] Senior is a “child molester”.
25 The mother then complains that the father attended a parenting course but
not the precise one recommended by the Family Consultant.
26 She also claims that, notwithstanding such attendance, the father has
learnt nothing and his abusive behaviour towards the children
continues. She
outlined examples at [13] and [14].
27 Once again the mother raised allegations of concerns by a second Form 4
notice with the Department for Child Protection and Family
Support in March
2014. Their response was short and indicated that no further action would
28 The mother notes that J was diagnosed with “High Functioning Autism
and Anxiety Disorder” in December 2012. She says
the father disputes this
29 She notes that J has a tendency to have a “meltdown” when
“experiencing sensory overload”. He cannot
control his emotions and
requires time and support to calm down. She says that she provides such
support, but according to J the
father tells him off and puts him in a room by
30 The mother also suggested that since unsupervised time had commenced,
J’s anxiety has increased. Despite these stated concerns,
the mother (as
mentioned) amended her proposed orders to continue unsupervised time and to not
revert to supervision.
31 At [29] the mother concedes that the children enjoy their time with the
father. This enjoyment seems to be linked to when the
father is not mean to
them or when he is nice to them (which is perfectly understandable).
32 The mother said that, since her affidavit was sworn, the children have
made comments about going to church with the father. This
is part of the reason
she does not want the children to stay overnight on Fridays. On Saturday
nights, the children usually stay
with the maternal grandmother and the mother
does not wish to vary that routine either. There was no significant evidence
by the mother of any concerns about the father taking the children to
33 In my view, it is an appropriate activity and one the children should be
able to share with the father.
34 She further complains at [31] that the father should have taken [J] to
hospital after he knocked his head. He had a “huge”
lump on his
head and the mother took him to hospital as soon as he returned to her care.
She claims that the doctor told her that
[J] should have been taken to hospital
straight away, but that comment is not contained in the hospital assessment
annexed to her
affidavit at Annexure “G”. Apart from noting
the haematoma, the report indicates that all other signs were normal.
report, therefore, does not support the allegation that an immediate trip to
hospital was necessary in the circumstances. This
seems to be a further example
of the difference in parenting styles between the parties. The mother has a
much more protective and
perhaps over cautious approach to all aspects of
parenting, hence her trip to the hospital immediately. The father has a less
approach and I have no doubt assessed the bump as an everyday childhood
incident and made the decision that a trip to the doctor
or hospital was not
necessary. In the circumstances, and given the report, it appears his decision
cannot be criticised.
35 The mother’s evidence did not match her actions in some respects.
An example was that she said that she did not always
believe the children when
they said something negative about the father, but her actions do not reflect
that statement. She complained
several times of various things the father
did wrong or did not do – all based on what the children had told her.
in her evidence did she say that the children told her something about
the father but she did not believe them.
36 One aspect on which she was consistent was that she earlier sought an
order that the father feed the children. The mother still
believed at trial
that the father could/would fail to feed the children during his time with them.
I did, however, note that she
no longer sought such an order. In my view, this
was an overreaction on her part. I have no such concerns about the
Mother’s witnesses
37 The mother called her mother, [A Budi]. She
2012. She did some supervision after that time, but finally stopped in
38 She has also witnessed numerous handovers since that time. The children
usually stay at her house after seeing the father on
weekends. She says that
the father is consistently late and verbally aggressive – often in front
of the children.
39 The children have told her that the father denigrates them (in similar
terms to the mother’s evidence). She is concerned
overnight time given her observed decline in J’s behaviour and an increase
in his autistic symptoms. She
also corroborated some of the mother’s
evidence regarding verbal and physical aggression by the father during the
relationship.
40 She also confirmed that the father does not appear to accept J’s
autism diagnosis and refers to his behavioural issues as
being a “spoilt
brat” or “throwing tantrums”. I accept that lately the father
has accepted the condition
and will work within its parameters.
41 In general terms [Ms A Budi] was a credible and reliable witness. She
was clearly supportive of her daughter.
Child welfare law
42 Children’s proceedings are dealt with in
of the Act. In deciding whether to make a parenting order, I must treat
the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
43 As the Full Court in
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286 said at
In our view, it can be fairly said that there is a legislative intent evinced in
favour of substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s
lives, both as to parental responsibility and as to time spent with the
children, subject to the need to
protect children from harm, from abuse and
family violence and provided it is in their best interests and reasonably
practicable.
This means where there is a status quo or well settled environment,
instead of simply preserving it, unless there are protective
significant best interests concerns for the child, the Court must follow the
structure of the Act and consider accepting,
where applicable, equal or
significant involvement by both parents in the care arrangements for the
44 As the High Court of Australia emphasised in
(2010) FLC 93-424
and as the Full Court reemphasised in
Cox v Pedrana
[2013] FamCAFC 48
the legislation (in
provides that when making
a parenting order in relation to a child, the Court must apply a presumption
that it is in the best interests
of the child for the child’s parents to
have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
Section 70A(2)
provides that:
the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe
that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a
parent of the child)
has engaged in-
(a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s
family); or
(b) family violence.
Section 70A(4)
provides that:
the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the Court that it
would not be in the best interests of the child for the
child’s parents to
have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
47 The Court therefore clearly must apply the presumption unless it does not
apply pursuant to
or is rebutted pursuant to
48 In determining what is in these children’s best interests, I have
also had regard to the objects of the Act and the principles
which underlie
those objects. They provide the context in which the above considerations
are to be examined and weighed. They are
set out below.
Section 66(1)
(1) The objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children
are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected
to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities,
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
Section 66(2)
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would
be contrary to a child’s best interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents,
regardless of whether their parents are married, separated,
have never married
or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate
on a regular basis with, both their parents and
other people significant to
their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives);
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy
that culture with other people who share that
51 I must consider the “primary”
and “additional” considerations set out in
Primary considerations
52 The primary considerations are:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child's parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
The benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with both of the child's parents
53 It is clear that meaningful means a relationship
that is important, significant and valuable to the child. The Full Court in
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
(2009) FLC 93-405
made this finding and set out what
it considered to be three possible interpretations of this subsection:
(a) One interpretation is that the legislation requires a Court to consider the
benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with both of the
child’s parents by examination of evidence of the nature of the
child’s relationship at the date of
the hearing, to make findings based on
that evidence, which findings will be reflected in the orders ultimately made
present relationship approach”);
(b) a second interpretation is that the legislature intended that a Court should
assume that there is a benefit to all children in
having a meaningful
relationship with both of their parents (“the presumption
approach”); and
(c) the third interpretation is that the Court should consider and weigh the
evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how,
if it is in a
child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular
child has a meaningful relationship with
both parents (“the prospective
approach”).
54 The Full Court concluded that the
prospective approach was preferred, but depending on the circumstances of the
case, the present
relationship approach may also be relevant. The Court
accepted that if only the present relationship approach were followed, the
would be limited in making appropriate orders in circumstances where a
significant relationship had not been established between
a child and a parent
at the date of the trial. I have no hesitation in finding that these children
would benefit from having ongoing
meaningful relationships with both of their
The need to protect the child from physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
55 Amendments were made to the definitions of
family violence and abuse which took effect in relation to all cases that
on or after 5 October 2013. This matter was commenced prior to
that date so the previous version of the definition of family violence
to this matter.
56 The definition of abuse that applies to this matter is as follows:
Abuse, in relation to a child, means:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child which is an offence
under a law, written or unwritten, in force in the State
or Territory in which
the act constituting the assault occurs; or
(b) a person involving the child in a sexual activity with that person or
another person in which the child is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual
object by the first mentioned person or the other person, and where there is
unequal power in the relationship
between the child and the first mentioned
Family violence is defined as:
Family violence means conduct, whether actual or threatened, by a person
towards, or towards the property of, a member of the person’s
family that
causes that or any other member of the person’s family reasonably to fear
for, or reasonably to be apprehensive
57 The note to that provision provides that “a
person reasonably fears for, or reasonably is apprehensive about, his or her
personal wellbeing in particular circumstances if a reasonable person in those
circumstances would fear for, or be apprehensive about,
his or her personal
wellbeing or safety.”
Additional considerations
Any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the
child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the Court thinks
relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
58 There was virtually no
evidence about the children’s views in this matter.
The nature of the relationship of the child with:
of the child’s parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any
grandparent or other relative of the child)
children clearly have a comfortable, supportive and loving relationship with the
mother. I accept that they have a good relationship
with the father and that
they would not be unduly upset by commencing overnight time with him. They
also, no doubt, have an excellent
relationship with the maternal
grandmother with whom they stay regularly.
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has
taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making
decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child;
spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child
father has consistently tried to increase his time with the children throughout
the course of these proceedings, but with
little success. The mother still
opposes overnight time at this stage and, in my view, that opposition is borne
out of a genuine
desire to protect the children. I do not accept, however, that
the children are in need of such protection or that they could not
cope with and
enjoy overnight time. The parties have difficulties in communicating with each
other and have very different views
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain
61 The father did not pay child support until about
six months after separation. There was, however, no explanation in the evidence
The likely effect of any changes in the child’s
circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other
person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he
or she has been living
mentioned above, I do not consider there will be any negative effect on the
children by increasing the time with the father
to overnight.
The practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time
with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or
expense will
substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents on
a regular basis
63 Not applicable.
The capacity of:
(i) each of the child’s parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and
intellectual needs
have no concerns about the capacity of either parent to care for all of the
children’s needs. This is within the limited
parameters of the dispute.
The maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including
lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the
parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the Court
thinks are relevant
65 Not applicable.
If the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander
(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that
with other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact
any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on that right
applicable.
The attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of
parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
67 I have canvassed this already.
Any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family
68 I have canvassed this elsewhere in my reasons.
If a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the
child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences
that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
findings made by the Court in, or in proceedings for, the order; and
other relevant matter
final violence restraining order was made on 7 June 2012. I was given no
information in relation to the abovementioned factors.
The order had since
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be
least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation
70 Not applicable.
Any other fact or circumstance that the Court thinks is
71 Not applicable.
Conclusions
72 There is sufficient material before the Court
that I am comfortable finding that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
a parent has engaged in family violence. The presumption therefore does not
apply. I am therefore not required to consider equal
time or substantial and
significant time. In any event, neither party proposes such arrangements.
73 The range of the dispute in relation to regular time between the father
and the children is relatively narrow. The mother suggests
there should be one
day per week with the father from 9.30 am to 5.00 pm. The father
suggests one overnight per week from 5.00 pm
Friday to 5.00 pm
74 It is however an important step to commence overnight time.
75 Although overnight is a significant step for the mother in particular who
considers the children are not ready, I consider it
is an appropriate step at
this stage of the children’s development. The father’s proposals in
relation to regular time
therefore are appropriate, and accord with the objects
and principals of the Act.
76 Given the parties’ inability to communicate effectively and resolve
parenting issues outside the Court environment, equal
shared parent
responsibility would be against the children’s best interests. In my
view, the appropriate exceptions to this
(a) to allow significant medical decisions to be made jointly; and
(b) to allow each parent to expose the parent to aspects of their own faith.
mother have sole parental responsibility in relation to all decisions, save and
except religion and significant medical decisions,
for the children, [J Phelps]
born [in] 2008 and [E Phelps] born [in] 2010.
parties have equal shared parental responsibility in relation to significant
medical decisions for the children.
party have parental responsibility in relation to religion.
children spend time with the father each week from 5.00 pm Friday until
5.00 pm Saturday.
children shall be collected from the mother’s residence at 5.00 pm on
Friday and shall be collected from the father’s
residence at 5.00 pm
on Saturday unless other arrangements for receiving the children are mutually
agreed upon by both parents.
proceedings are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [76] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter