URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2015/176.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WATERS and READ-LAWSON [2015] FCWAM 176 (17 August 2015)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY COURT ACT 1997
WATERS and READ-LAWSON
[2015] FCWAM 176
9 & 10 FEBRUARY 2015
DELIVERED :
17 AUGUST 2015
FILE NO/S :
PTW 5398 of 2012
MS READ-LAWSON
Catchwords:
Child related proceedings; detailed orders sought by both parties; court
refused to make orders to micro-manage the parties’
respective parenting;
time between child and father increased beyond mother’s proposals (which
were found to be overly cautious).
Legislation:
Family Court Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Mr B Hill
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Solicitors:
Applicant : Benn Hill
Respondent : Self Represented Litigant
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN
THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
1 [Mr Waters] and [Ms
Read-Lawson] have one child, [K], born [in] 2010. K is in pre-primary in 2015
and attends on a full-time basis.
The parties separated in early2012 when K was
two years of age.
Background to proceedings
2 At the start of the trial, both parties sought to
rely upon “alternative” minutes of proposed orders. It was clear
that each document set out the actual orders each party sought and were not
alternatives to some other proposals. The father sought
the following orders:
Father’s alternative minute of final orders sought
previous parenting orders be discharged.
father, [Mr Waters], and the mother, [Ms Read-Lawson], have equal shared
parental responsibility for the child, [K Waters], born
[in] 2010 (“the
child live with the mother.
otherwise specified in these orders, until 31 December 2015, the child spend
time with the father as follows:
(a) During school terms, on a two-weekly cycle:
the first week, from the conclusion of school on Friday until 5.00 pm
the second week, from 5.00 pm Saturday to the commencement of school on Monday;
(b) During school holidays, from Friday 5.00 pm to Sunday 5.00 pm.
otherwise specified in these orders, from 31 December 2015 to 31 December 2016,
the child spend time with the father as follows:
(a) During school terms, on a two-weekly cycle:
the first week, from the conclusion of school on Friday until the commencement
of school on Monday; and
the second week, from the conclusion of school on Thursday until the
commencement of school on Friday; and
(b) During school holidays, from Friday 9.00 am to Monday 5.00 pm.
otherwise specified in these orders, from 31 December 2016, the child spend time
with the father as follows:
(a) During school terms, on a two-weekly cycle:
school terms in the first week, from the conclusion of school on Friday until
the commencement of school on Monday; and
the second week, from the conclusion of school on Thursday until the
commencement of school on Friday; and
(b) During school holidays, on a week-about basis.
child spend time with the father:
(a) At Christmas:
2015 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm on 24 December until
1.00 pm on Christmas Day;
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 1.00 pm Christmas Day until
4.00 pm Boxing Day;
(b) At Easter:
2015 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm Good Friday to
3.00 pm Easter Sunday; and
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 3.00 pm Easter Sunday to 5.00
pm Easter Monday;
(c) If the child would not otherwise see her father on Father’s Day, from
5.00 pm on the Saturday before Father’s Day
until the commencement of
school on Monday;
(d) On the father’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm;
(e) On [K’s] birthday from 2.00 pm to 7.00 pm.
mother spend time with the child:
(a) At Christmas:
2015 and each alternate year thereafter from 1.00 pm Christmas Day until
4.00 pm Boxing Day;
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm on 24 December until
1.00 pm on Christmas Day;
(b) At Easter:
2015 and each alternate year thereafter from 3.00 pm Easter Sunday to 5.00
pm Easter Monday; and
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm Good Friday to
3.00 pm Easter Sunday;
(c) If the child would not otherwise see her mother on Mother’s Day, from
5.00 pm on the Saturday before Mother’s Day
until the commencement of
school on Monday;
(d) On the mother’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm;
parties shall not remove the child’s residence [sic] from the Perth
metropolitan area without the prior written consent
of the other party.
otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, the child attend [P Primary
parent authorise the child’s school to send copies of any reports,
notices, newsletters and the like to both parents.
parent be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the child’s
handover does not occur at the school, handover occur at the Hungry Jacks
restaurant in [Suburb E].
the mother becomes aware of any circumstances whereby she would be unable to
care for the child for a period of more than 24 hours,
the mother shall
the mother is unable to care for
father be at liberty to contact the child every second day between 5.30 pm and
6.00 pm by telephoning the mother’s mobile
mother shall ensure that:
(a) is able to [sic] her mobile telephone is charged and turned on between 5.30
pm and 6.00 pm every second day; and
(b) [K] answers the phone to the father.
parent authorise the child’s school, daycare, treating medical
professional or dental professional to provide duplicate
information to the
other parent directly.
parent notify the other of any emergency concerning the child by SMS or
telephone call as soon as practicable.
parent notify the other of any hospitalisation or any medical prescriptions
relating to the child.
parent inform the other if they intend to travel interstate with [K] and:
(a) provide by email a copy of the flight details in and out of WA; and
(b) facilitate telephone communication between [K] and the other parent whilst
[K] is out of WA.
parents inform each other and keep each other informed of their current contact
details including home address and telephone number
they can contact the child
mother pay to the father his costs of this application.
other orders this honourable Court deems appropriate.
father’s counsel submitted that the parents are different people and that
they have different parenting styles. The
father says that the “primary
issue” is that the mother is not generally supportive of the
father’s relationship
with [K]. He also says that she has not gone much
beyond the bare minimum times in previous orders and that the progression she
suggesting is too slow.
4 The mother sought the following orders in a minute of proposed orders
handed up at the commencement of the trial:
Mother’s alternative minute of proposed final orders
parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the longterm care, welfare
and development of the child, [K Waters] born
[in] 2010 (“the
child live with the mother.
Father’s spend time
child spend time with the father, on a fortnightly basis, as follows:
(a) During Week 1 – in 2015, from 9.00 am on Saturday to 4.00 pm
(b) During Week 2 – in 2015, from the conclusion of PrePrimary on Monday
or 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm; and from the conclusion of
PrePrimary on
Thursday or 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm; and
(c) In June 2016 the addition of The [sic] Friday night Week 1 to 12.00 pm
Sunday (Provided [sic] the child is coping well and has
her own bed);
(d) Such other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
School holidays
the 2015 and 2016 Term and Summer School Holidays, the father’s Week 2
time be suspended and the father spend time with
the child as follows:
(a) On Monday from 9.00 am to Tuesday 4.00 pm;
(b) On Thursday from 9.00 am to Friday 4.00 pm.
Parties’ spend time
Christmas and Boxing Day
(a) Commencing 2015, with the mother from 5.00 pm on Christmas Eve until 5.00 pm
on Christmas Day, and with the father from 5.00
pm on Christmas Day until 5.00
pm on Boxing Day, 26 December;
(b) Commencing 2016, with the father from 5.00 pm on Christmas Eve until 5.00 pm
on Christmas Day, and with the mother from 5.00
pm on Christmas Day until 5.00
pm on Boxing Day, 26 December.
(a) Commencing 2015, with the father from 4.00 pm on 31 December 2014 [sic]
until 4.00 pm on 1 January 2016, and with the mother
from 4.00 pm on 1
January 2016 until 4.00 pm on 2 January 2017 [sic]; and each alternate year
thereafter and
(b) Commencing 2016, with the mother from 4.00 pm on 31 December 2015 [sic]
until 4.00 pm on 1 January 2017 and with the father from
4.00 pm on 1
January 2017 until 4.00 pm on 2 January 2017, and, each alternate year
thereafter.
(a) Commencing 2015, with the mother from 11.00 am on Good Friday until
5.00 pm on Easter Saturday, and with the father from 5.00
pm on Easter Saturday
to 5.00 pm on Easter Sunday, and each alternate year thereafter and
(b) Commencing 2016, with the father from 11.00 am on Good Friday until
5.00 pm on Easter Saturday and with the mother from 5.00
pm on Easter Saturday
to 5.00 pm on Easter Sunday, and each alternate year thereafter; or
(c) Such other times and dates as are agreed between the parties in writing.
the child’s birthday, with the non-contact party on that day as follows:
(a) If a School day, from the conclusion of School or 3.00 pm to
5.00 pm; and
(b) If a non-School day, for a period of three hours as agreed between the
parties or otherwise from 2.00 pm to 5.00 pm on the child’s
the mother’s birthday/father’s birthday, with the noncontact party
on whose birthday it is as follows:
(a) If a School day, from the conclusion of school or 3.00 pm to
5.00 pm; and
(b) If a non-School day, from 2.00 pm to 5.00 pm on the party’s
Mother’s Day/Father’s Day
Mother’s Day and Father’s Day:
(a) In the event Mother’s Day falls when the child is with the father,
then the child spend time with the mother from 9.00
am to 4.00 pm
Sunday on the weekend of Mother’s Day, and the father’s time
otherwise be suspended.
(b) In the event Father’s Day falls when the child is with the mother,
then the child spend time with the father from 9.00
am to 4.00 pm
Sunday on the weekend of Father’s Day, and the mother’s time
otherwise be suspended, and
Other times
(c) Such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
Communication
than in the event of an emergency (where mobile telephone contact should be
used) for the purpose of these Orders the parties
communicate by way of email or
SMS, to a reasonable extent.
parties shall keep each other informed of their telephone contact details, and
notify the other party within seven days of any
changes to the same.
parties use a communication book to inform each other of any matters regarding
the purposes of handover as follows:
(a) Week 1 – at the commencement of his time, the father collect the child
from [S Park Suburb D] and, at the conclusion of
his time, the father deliver
the child to [Suburb F Park].
(b) Week 2 – in 2015, at the commencement of his time, the father collect
the child from pre-primary and, at the conclusion
of his time, the father
deliver the child to the [Suburb F Park]; and in 2016, at the commencement of
his time, the father collect
the child from school and, at the conclusion of his
time, the father deliver the child to the [Suburb F Park].
(c) In the alternative, in the event the parties cannot agree, handover to be
supervised at Relationships Australia or Anglicare
(“the Service
Provider”) at the commencement and conclusion of the parties’ time;
(d) Otherwise, as agreed between the parties in writing.
parties shall not remove the child’s residence [sic] from the Perth
Metropolitan Area without the prior written consent
of the other party, or
further Order of the Court.
party authorise and direct the School at which the child may, from time to time,
attend to provide them with copies of:
(a) Any School reports and access to any portfolio work of the child
(b) Reports on behavioural issues and
(c) Any School circulars or notices concerning functions, parent/teacher nights
and other school activities to which parents are
invited, as soon as practicable
after the same are issued.
party be permitted to attend significant School activities, presentations and
other special events which parents are permitted
party in whose care the child is in shall be responsible for ensuring that the
child attend any scheduled School or agreed extracurricular
or social activities
while the child is in their care.
Medical information
party provide the other with notice of any significant medical appointments
concerning the child.
in the case of an emergency, or other exceptional circumstances, the child
attend [Suburb D Family Medical Centre] for any
appointments with her general
practitioner, [Dr L], or such other medical centre as agreed by the
parties authorize [sic] and instruct each medical and dental practitioner
attended by the child to release to the parties such
information regarding the
child’s medical and dental health as may be reasonably requested from time
a without admission basis, the father be restrained and an injunction be granted
restraining him from:
(a) Behaving in an intimidatory, offensive or emotionally abusive manner towards
the mother;
(b) Entering, remaining upon or approaching within 100 metres of the
mother’s place of residence; and
(c) Entering or remaining in or near the place of study or employment of the
a without admission basis, the parties be restrained by injunction from:
(a) Denigrating or describing in negative terms the other party in the presence
or within the hearing of the child;
(b) Denigrating or describing in negative terms the other party’s family
members or friends in the presence or within the hearing
of the child;
(c) Discussing the proceedings in the Family Court of Western Australia, whether
historical or current, with the child, or with any
other person in the presence
of or within the hearing of the child;
(d) Denigrating or describing in negative terms the other party to any person
within the social environment of the child, including
but not limited to the
parents of the child’s friends, staff and teachers at the child’s
school, and the staff and teachers
or trainers where the child attends the
extracurricular activities;
(e) Allowing any third party to engage in any of the actions or conduct
described in paragraph 24(a)-(d) above.
Child’s safety when travelling
parties to ensure that the child is secured in the back seat of any vehicle in
which she is travelling and the correct safety
restraints utilized [sic] as
mandated by law, otherwise the child is not to travel in the vehicle.
Other orders
parties to provide reasonable notice of any inability to spend time with the
child in accordance with these orders.
November 2015, the parties attend mediation to review the arrangements for the
child, and to attempt to agree to any appropriate
or necessary changes.
applications of the parties relating to the child be dismissed.
5 Both parties therefore seek a number of progressive orders.
Part of the rationale by both parties appears to be that they want
to stay out
of the Court in future if at all possible. It is clear they have not
successfully managed any changes to the current
arrangements. The current
orders were made on 4 June 2013. They have not been varied since.
provide that K spends time with the father in one week from 3.00 pm to
6.00 pm on Tuesday and Thursday and in the second week
from 9.00 am
Saturday to 10.00 am Sunday.
6 They have different views about what is appropriate in the future. The
Court will do its best to put in place orders that will
operate for a
significant period, but the Court must be satisfied that the orders are in
K’s best interests.
7 Each party asks the Court to make numerous orders, many of which can be
described as “micromanaging” the other party’s
Whilst keeping K’s best interests in mind as the paramount consideration,
I must also consider whether it is the
Court’s role to micromanage
parties’ parenting and behaviour and if so, whether the Court should in
this case make such
orders. Such an issue was considered in the decision of
Berman J in
Jackson & O’Shea
[2014] FamCA 72
at 130 where
his Honour said:
Counsel for each of the parties presented a detailed minute of order [sic] which
raise [sic] issues not the subject of evidence or
submissions.
In a general sense they represent minor matters relating to the time
that the child will spend with each of the parties
on her birthday, the use of a
communication book or other method of appropriate communication between the
parties, issues relating
to travel both interstate and overseas, health issues
and medical treatment, contact details for each of the parties and the care
arrangements for the child when she is with each of the parties. I consider
that the general evidence is sufficient for me to make
the necessary orders but
the approach that I have taken is that the parties will have to act responsibly
in respect of the child
and that these orders ought not have the effect of
micromanaging the care arrangements for the child. Each of the parties has
responsibility for the day to day care parenting [sic] of the child and
it is assumed that they will act in the child’s best
interests in relation
to decisions made.
8 The parties agree that K will live mainly
with the mother. The main issue is the time that she is to spend with the
father. The
mother’s minute of proposed orders provides for a gradual
increase in time from one night and two afternoons per fortnight
(operating now)
to extending to two nights in June 2016. The mother proposes that in holidays
in 2015 and in 2016 the father have
a single overnight period per week.
She includes special days such as Christmas and Easter.
9 The father’s proposals start with two nights per week (with
different nights in week 1 and week 2 of the holidays). They
remain at four
nights per fortnight, but move (from 31 December 2015) to three nights in
one week and one night in the second week.
10 From 31 December 2016 the weekends stay the same but the holiday time
Credibility and witnesses
11 In general terms the mother put to the father
that she had offered and facilitated times between K and the father during the
recent Christmas school holiday period (which had ended a couple of weeks
prior to the trial). The father was vague and only prepared
to make limited
concessions. An example is that he stated that he had time with K just once out
of the six-week holiday period.
Upon further questioning, he accepted he also
had time on New Year’s Eve. He also later accepted he had been offered
time, but was working and had declined those offers. His evidence on
those points was unreliable and difficult to accept as genuine.
He appeared to be deliberately vague and tried to present evidence that
unfairly painted the mother in a poor light. The father
alleged that “[Ms
Read-Lawson’s] violent and abusive behaviour continued to increase after
[K’s] birth”.
The mother put to him that he was in fact referring
to his own behaviour rather than hers, which he denied.
12 The father gave evidence regarding an incident when he says that the
mother attacked him and in self-defence, he grabbed both
her wrists and held
them until she calmed down. He accepted, in answers to questions from the
Bench, that his affidavit said nothing
affidavit goes from stating that she was getting angry to stating that he
grabbed her gently
by the arms. Re-examination did not shed any further light
on this gap in his evidence.
13 The father’s evidence was not credible in other respects:
asked about his criminal record he admitted he had a drink driving conviction.
When pressed he conceded he also had a conviction
for obstructing a police
officer. He is hardly likely to have forgotten about it, so I find he attempted
to hide that offence.
father received a drink driving conviction in 2006 and he tried to blame that on
a lack of food. He was unable to properly accept
that, in reality, the high
blood alcohol reading that he had on that particular occasion was because he
drank too much alcohol.
He continued to attempt to blame it on a lack of
14 The police documents produced pursuant to
were tendered into evidence. They revealed:
(a) The father had an “excess 0.08” offence from 1995; and
(b) Had two convictions in 2006 arising out of the same incident, namely driving
under the influence and obstructing public officers
(i.e. the police). He was
disqualified from driving for six months and received a total of $1,000 in
15 The father did however concede that the mother is a
good mother. He denied any issues with his temper and denied any violence
him in the past.
16 The mother readily conceded in cross examination that:
(a) [K] has a close and loving relationship with the father;
(b) She likes spending time with him;
(c) She sometimes misses her father when she is with the mother;
(d) She says positive things about the father from time to time; and
(e) The father wants to have [K] in his life and that that is a good thing.
17 She, however, denied that K enjoys sleepovers at the
father’s house. She says that K has told her that she “feels
funny” about staying overnight. She also claimed that K is scared of
her paternal grandmother.
18 The mother also acknowledged that she cannot take everything K says
19 Leading into Christmas 2014 the father had proposed overnight time with K
from Christmas Day to Boxing Day. He later reduced
the actual times, but still
proposed the overnight period. The mother would not agree to the overnight
period. In her words, “it’s
going to be daytime only on Christmas
Day from 10.00 am to 5.00 pm”.
20 This attitude is difficult to understand as two months earlier the mother
had filed a minute of proposed orders for trial that
included the following:
With the father from 5.00 pm Christmas Day until 5.00 pm Boxing Day.
21 Having filed that minute of proposed orders in October, her
email of 16 December 2014 that was tendered into evidence suggested
daytime period only as set out above.
22 Her explanation, in her oral evidence, was unsatisfactory. She said that
she did not want K to be “exhausted and tired
the next morning”
[meaning Boxing Day]. She claimed that K would not be able to enjoy the next
day [Boxing Day] if she spent
the previous night with the father.
23 She then claimed that it was her own mother who wanted K at the
mother’s home early on Boxing Day to open presents with
Notwithstanding the mother’s refusal to agree to overnight at Christmas
time in 2014, she confirmed that in future she
agreed to it. The point here is
that the mother did not agree to it when it counted. Despite her proposals, she
failed to fully
appreciate the benefit to K of having that time with the father
and the frustration that the father would have experienced by her
changing her
view and refusing to agree even though she had actually proposed the overnight
period in her documents.
24 She further conceded that K had been in her care overnight on Christmas
Eve in each year since separation, that is 2012, 2013
and 2014. Despite this,
her minute of proposed orders still proposed alternating time on Christmas Eve,
but with K’s time
continuing to be with the mother on Christmas Eve 2015.
Much of her justification for not starting the alternate years in 2015 with
father was that K has a brother, [J], who lives with the mother and she wants
them to wake up together on Christmas Day morning.
Notwithstanding that, she
still proposes alternating periods.
25 In my view, there is no sufficient justification for delaying (for yet
another year) the commencement of time for K to spend overnight
with the father
on Christmas Eve.
26 In relation to school holiday periods, the mother conceded that if the
father were to take time off work from 19 December to 5
January in each year, it
would be good for the father to spend extra time with K. During the 2014/2015
school holiday period, however,
K only had one or two extra overnight periods
with the father during that entire period. The parties otherwise maintained the
weekend regime through that period. The mother was specifically asked
if she thought that K would have enjoyed extra sleepovers
with the father during
this holiday period and her response was “no”.
27 The mother’s evidence was that maintaining the alternate weekend
arrangements during the holiday period was best for K.
Her firm view was that K
would not have enjoyed any more additional overnight periods with the father.
28 In my view, the mother’s proposals do not reflect her actions.
Despite agreeing to an overnight period at Christmas time,
she refused to put
that into effect in reality. I do not accept her concerns about extra
overnight periods during the holiday periods.
There is no reason why K cannot
spend more time with the father on an overnight basis during the holidays. The
only evidence of
any note is that K has said that she “feels funny”.
In my view, that is insufficient to warrant limiting time between
father during school holiday periods. That is a time that K should and will
enjoy with the father.
29 The mother had no difficulty with the father collecting K from school or
attending special events at school.
30 The mother has not yet disclosed her residential address to the father.
Counsel in cross examination made it clear that the father
was aware of her
residential address and put it to her in direct questions. It was put to her
also that the father had never been
to her house. Her answer was, “Not
that I know of”. It is clear, however, that the father has never attended
the property
when the mother was there and he has never caused any issue with
the mother at that house. He is clearly aware of the address.
questions were put to the mother in an effort to determine whether handovers
could take place at the mother’s home
or at each other’s home. In
the end, however, each party proposed neutral handover locations. The father
lives in [Suburb
K]; the mother lives in [Suburb D]. The father proposed
handovers (when not at school) at the Hungry Jacks in Suburb E, which is
approximately halfway between the parties’ houses. The mother’s
proposals involved locations currently being used which
are all close to her
31 In conclusion, where the father’s evidence contradicts the
mother’s, unless otherwise stated, I prefer the mother’s
Father’s witnesses
32 The father called [Mr L]. His affidavit filed
in September 2014 was relied upon. He is a longterm friend of the father. He
has two children who he sees on alternate weekends. Because their respective
weekends match up, they sometimes organise activities
together for the three
children to enjoy. Mr L was very positive about the father’s
parenting and his relationship with K.
Nothing of significance arose from the
cross examination, so I accept this witness’s evidence.
33 The father also called [Ms Waters]. Her September 2014 affidavit was
also relied upon. She is the father’s mother.
34 Much of her affidavit related to an earlier shortterm separation of the
parties. She relayed what the mother told her about her
own childhood and her
personal history prior to meeting the father. Very little of that evidence was
useful for my determination.
35 She was (unsurprisingly) supportive of the father’s role as a
parent and confirmed K’s good relationship with him.
Her opinion (whilst
not of much assistance to me) appeared to be consistent with the father’s
views (see [98] of her affidavit).
... I do not think [Ms Read-Lawson] has properly considered [Mr Waters’]
feelings in all of this and what is really in the
best interests of [K].
36 Ms Waters was happy to give the mother credit for her
parenting and her role in producing such a happy child. She did, however,
an unfortunate habit of answering questions with questions. This was an
indication, in my view, of how defensive she was in
answering questions from the
mother (who was representing herself). She was not prepared to accept any
version of events put to
her by the mother. She also put hurtful and quite
frankly irrelevant material in her affidavit because (she said) that she was
to understand the mother’s behaviour. She claimed to not bear
any ill will against the mother. I accept that comment, but
I also find
that she is protective of her son to the point where her evidence is coloured by
her desire to protect him. She was
not, in my view, deliberately avoiding
making proper concessions, but she was unable to concede any wrongdoing or
criticism of the
Mother’s witnesses
37 The mother called her own mother, [Ms Read].
She was supportive of the mother and could think of very little positive aspects
of the father’s parenting. I accepted her evidence as credible, but
it was of relatively little weight.
Law in relation to parenting issues
38 These parties were not married so the
proceedings fall to be determined under the
Family Court Act
(“the Act”).
39 Children’s proceedings are dealt with in
of the Act. In
deciding whether to make a parenting order, I must treat the best interests of
the child as the paramount consideration.
40 As the Full Court in
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286 said at
In our view, it can be fairly said that there is a legislative intent evinced in
favour of substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s
lives, both as to parental responsibility and as to time spent with the
children, subject to the need to
protect children from harm, from abuse and
family violence and provided it is in their best interests and reasonably
practicable.
This means where there is a status quo or well settled environment,
instead of simply preserving it, unless there are protective
significant best interests concerns for the child, the Court must follow the
structure of the Act and consider accepting,
where applicable, equal or
significant involvement by both parents in the care arrangements for the
41 As the High Court of Australia emphasised in
(2010) FLC 93-424
and as the Full Court reemphasised in
Cox v Pedrana
[2013] FamCAFC 48
the legislation (in
provides that when making
a parenting order in relation to a child, the Court must apply a presumption
that it is in the best interests
of the child for the child’s parents to
have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
Section 70A(2)
provides that:
the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe
that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a
parent of the child)
has engaged in-
(a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s
family); or
(b) family violence.
Section 70A(4)
provides that:
the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the Court that it
would not be in the best interests of the child for the
child’s parents to
have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
44 The Court therefore clearly must apply the presumption unless it does not
apply pursuant to
or is rebutted pursuant to
45 Given my preference for the mother’s evidence over the
father’s, I find that there are reasonable grounds to believe
father engaged in family violence during the relationship. The presumption
therefore does not apply. I am therefore not
obliged to consider equal time or
substantial and significant time. I may still find that such time would be
appropriate. In this
case, however, equal time is clearly not in K’s best
interests at the moment nor is it suggested by either party. The father
proposes substantial and significant time and I will consider that in due
46 I have also had regard to the objects of the Act and the principles which
underlie those objects. They provide the context in
which the above
considerations are to be examined and weighed. They are set out below.
Section 66(1)
(1) The objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of
children are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their
responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their
Section 66(2)
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or
would be contrary to a child’s best interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents,
regardless of whether their parents are married, separated,
have never married
or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to
enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).”
49 To assess what is in the child’s best interests, I must consider
the “primary” and “additional”
considerations set out in
Primary considerations
50 The primary considerations are:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child's parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
The benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with both of the child's parents
51 It is clear that meaningful means a relationship
that is important, significant and valuable to the child. The Full Court in
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
(2009) FLC 93-405
made this finding and set out what
it considered to be three possible interpretations of this subsection:
(a) One interpretation is that the legislation requires a Court to consider
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with both of the
child’s parents by examination of evidence of the nature of the
child’s relationship at the date of
the hearing, to make findings based on
that evidence, which findings will be reflected in the orders ultimately made
present relationship approach”);
(b) a second interpretation is that the legislature intended that a Court
should assume that there is a benefit to all children in
a meaningful relationship with both of their parents
(“the presumption approach”); and
(c) the third interpretation is that the Court should consider and weigh the
evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how,
if it is in a
child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular
child has a meaningful relationship with
both parents (“the prospective
approach”).
52 The Full Court concluded that the prospective approach was preferred, but
depending on the circumstances of the case, the present
relationship approach
may also be relevant. The Court accepted that if only the present relationship
approach were followed, the
Court would be limited in making appropriate orders
in circumstances where a significant relationship had not been established
a child and a parent at the date of the trial.
53 K should have an ongoing meaningful relationship with both of her
parents. This is conceded by the parties. The issue is what
progression of
time is consistent with her best interests given all of the evidence.
The need to protect the child from physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
54 Amendments were made to the definitions of
family violence and abuse which took effect in relation to all cases that
on or after 5 October 2013. This matter was commenced prior to
that date so the previous version of the definition of family violence
to this matter.
55 The definition of abuse that applies to this matter is as follows:
Abuse, in relation to a child, means:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child which is an offence
under a law, written or unwritten, in force in the State
or Territory in which
the act constituting the assault occurs; or
(b) a person involving the child in a sexual activity with that person or
another person in which the child is used, directly or indirectly,
as a sexual
object by the first mentioned person or the other person, and where there is
unequal power in the relationship between
the child and the first mentioned
Family violence is defined as:
Family violence means conduct, whether actual or threatened, by a person
towards, or towards the property of, a member of the person’s
family that
causes that or any other member of the person’s family reasonably to fear
for, or reasonably to be apprehensive
56 The note to that provision provides that “a person reasonably fears
for, or reasonably is apprehensive about, his or her
personal wellbeing in
particular circumstances if a reasonable person in those circumstances would
fear for, or be apprehensive about,
his or her personal wellbeing or
57 Whilst I am satisfied there was family violence during the relationship
directed towards the mother I am not satisfied that K
needs to be protected from
any such behaviour.
Additional considerations
Any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the
child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the Court thinks
relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
58 K is too young to
express a view that would be of any significant weight to my determination. I
dismissed an application to rely
upon a report that dealt with the child’s
views and provided expert evidence. In my view the fact that the mother sought
rely upon that evidence indicates that she places an improper amount of
weight on the child’s views and what the child says
during the time she is with the father. She is only five years old. In
discussions with the mother during the
trial she seemed to accept that not
everything a young child says can be taken literally. In practice however, I
find that she does
precisely that, and is unable to accept any other possible
explanation for any concerns raised by the child, save and except that
father’s parenting has failed in some way.
The nature of the relationship of the child with:
of the child’s parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any
grandparent or other relative of the child)
mother is very close to the child and very protective – perhaps too
much in that her concerns do not appear justified
on an objective
60 The father has a good relationship with the child, despite very limited
time to date. The mother thinks that child cannot cope
with more than one
consecutive night away from her. I do not share that view. Nothing in the
evidence of the mother leads me to
such a conclusion.
61 At times the child may be grizzly or crying when she returns to the
mother’s care. There may be any number of explanations.
She may have
missed the mother; she may have been having a great time at the father’s
and didn’t want to stop; she may
have fallen asleep in the car; or she may
just be tired.
62 The fact that these issues may be occurring does not mean necessarily
there is a failing in terms of the father’s parenting
or that the time
that K spends with him should be limited. That however is the argument the
mother makes.
63 In cross examination, the mother put to the father that:
the consecutive nights is what’s the main concern for [K] due to her age
and ability to deal with the current situation.
father’s response was that K seemed fine when she was with him.
65 The parties have different perceptions of how K reacts at handover.
The mother sees her as sometimes being upset and clingy and
therefore that there are issues of concern in relation to the father’s
parenting or his relationship with K. The father
is blissfully unaware of any
such behaviour. He specifically denied ever seeing K upset at handovers in
either direction. I do
not accept that evidence, as it is highly unlikely that
in such a contested matter a child has not been upset at handover even once.
66 Children will invariably get upset when leaving one parent’s care
and returning to the other parent’s care. It is
unrealistic to suggest
that this never happened, so either the father, in my view, is tailoring his
evidence to suit his purpose
or he simply is not sufficiently observant to
notice such behaviour. On balance, I prefer the latter explanation.
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has
taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making
decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child;
spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child
father has taken every opportunity to spend time with K. He claims he has been
“put through the hoops” by the
mother’s attitude. I accept
that the mother is doing what she thinks is best by restricting the
father’s time. I do
not however agree with her approach.
68 The father has not been able to communicate with K by telephone.
The mother will not agree and says that developmentally she
is not ready
and that it would be disruptive to her routine. This is another example of the
mother’s attitude routine is
important but children who have
separated parents must get used to new routines. K is starting fulltime school
this year –
another new routine. Her relationship with the father is
just as important as her daily routine and he should be a part of that
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain
69 Not applicable.
The likely effect of any changes in the child’s
circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other
person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he
or she has been living
mother’s proposals do not proceed fast enough. I do not accept that K
will be unduly affected by an extension of her
current time with the father.
I consider that the progression of K’s time with the father should be
faster than proposed by
the mother, but not as fast as suggested by the father.
In my view, K’s best interests lie somewhere between those differing
The practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time
with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or
expense will
substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents on
a regular basis
71 The only relevant issue here is the location of
handovers when they do not take place at school. The child attends school near
the mother’s home. The father moved to a different location post
separation thereby increasing the distance between the parties.
In my view, the
father should do all of the travelling during school terms, but in holidays
it would be appropriate for the parties
to meet halfway.
The capacity of:
(i) each of the child’s parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and
intellectual needs
have no difficulty finding that each parent is capable of providing for all of
K’s needs. This case is not about the
capacity of either parent.
The maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including
lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the
parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the Court
thinks are relevant
73 Not applicable.
If the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander
(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that
with other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact
any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on that right
applicable.
The attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of
parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
75 An example of the clear difference in parenting
between the parties was seen in relation to what happened when K was sick in the
father’s care. The father denied that he had any difficulty with
coping with a sick child. When K had a cold, he took her
to the chemist
and got medication to stop her eyes watering. He was told to give her Lorapaed.
The mother was seemingly appalled
by the father’s actions. She said that
her doctor told her that children under six should not be given medication for
76 I have no direct or reliable medical evidence as to whether that comment
is an accurate reflection of prevailing medical opinion,
but in any event, this
issue is just a difference of opinion of health professionals.
77 The father did the proper thing by relying on advice from the chemist in
trying to alleviate the child’s symptoms. The
mother’s approach is
different and allows symptoms to settle without the use of medication. Her view
is based on professional
advice that she received. Neither party is right or
wrong, and this issue is not a reflection on their parenting. Consequently,
do not accept the mother’s criticism of the father in relation to this
78 Another issue the parties disagreed on was whether K should have a mobile
phone. K is five years of age. The mother suggested
it would be disruptive for
K to have a mobile phone and in effect, unnecessary. The father disagreed, but
in any event the father’s
proposals are not that the child have a mobile
telephone, but that he be able to contact K on the mother’s mobile phone.
that reason, I need not determine that issue.
Any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family
79 I have dealt with this issue in detail.
If a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the
child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences
that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
findings made by the Court in, or in proceedings for, the order; and
other relevant matter
applicable.
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be
least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation
81 This factor is important in terms of how long I
should put orders in place for and how many changes I should make by default (by
way of selfexecuting orders). Extensions of time after certain periods have the
benefit of clarity for the parties, but circumstances
may change and the Court
must be careful not to make changes too far into the future without the benefit
of further evidence of the
circumstances at the time. The parties might file
further applications to reduce or increase the amount of time. In my view,
is best is to put in place a new arrangement now and then a single
progression from those arrangements after a period of time. That
will allow K
to get used to the current routine before a further change is implemented too
Any other fact or circumstance that the Court thinks is
82 I mentioned earlier the desire to not
micromanage the parties’ parenting unless necessary to do so. I have
found that each
parent is capable of caring for all of K’s needs. There
is therefore no need to put in place a number of the orders sought
parties that, in my view, fall into the category of micromanaging. For this
reason I will not make orders sought by the father
in paragraphs 14 or 16
(the mother should understand that this is an implicit or implied requirement of
any such order regarding
telephone calls). I will also not make orders
sought by the mother in paragraphs 18 (which the parties should understand
of their obligations as parents), 20 (whilst the father may do this and
there is some benefit in consistency of treatment, it is
not required and the
father can choose his own general practitioner), and 24 (this behaviour is
mandated by the relevant road traffic
legislation).
83 It would also be useful to avoid too many handovers between the parties
if practicable. At the moment there are six handovers
per fortnight. The
orders that I propose will reduce that amount. I am satisfied that the
father should have a presence at the
school and can arrange collection and
delivery from and to school.
84 The father suggests orders that will generally reduce the
“midweek” times and his time predominantly occurs on weekends
school holidays. The mother wants to continue the midweek times from
3.00 pm to 5.00 pm on Mondays and Thursdays in each fortnight
changes the day and reduces the time slightly on each occasion).
85 I intend to maintain some midweek times in order to ensure there are not
large gaps of time between each occasion the child sees
the father. I accept
that it would not be fair to allow the father to have the vast majority of
weekend time. K needs to spend
some weekend time with the mother also. She
should be able to enjoy weekend times with both parents.
86 The orders that are put in place will finalise these proceedings. I do
not intend to leave them open with orders to attend mediation
together with the
ability to relist. The parties would have to (subject to certain
exceptions) attend family dispute resolution
in any event before filing any
fresh applications.
previous parenting orders be discharged.
consent, the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, [K
Waters] born [in] 2010.
consent, the child live with the mother.
the beginning of first term 2016, the child spend time with the father:
(a) during school terms on a two-weekly cycle:
the first week from 9.00 am Saturday to 5.00 pm Sunday; and
the second week from the conclusion of school Thursday to the commencement of
school Friday;
(b) in all school holiday periods from 5.00 pm Friday to 5.00 pm
the commencement of first term in 2016, the child spend time with the father:
(a) during school terms on a two-weekly cycle:
the first week from the conclusion of school Friday to 5.00 pm Sunday; and
the second week from the conclusion of school Thursday to the commencement of
school Friday;
(b) in each school holiday period on a two-weekly cycle:
the first week from 9.00 am Friday to 5.00 pm Sunday; and
the second week from 9.00 am Wednesday to 5.00 pm Friday.
immediately, the child spend time with the father:
(a) at Christmas:
2015 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm on 24 December until
1.00 pm on Christmas Day;
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 1.00 pm Christmas Day until
4.00 pm Boxing Day;
(b) at Easter:
2016 and each alternate year thereafter from 3.00 pm Easter Sunday to 5.00
pm Easter Monday;
2017 and each alternate year thereafter from 5.00 pm Good Friday to
3.00 pm Easter Sunday;
(c) If the child would not otherwise see her father on Father’s Day, from
5.00 pm on the Saturday before Father’s Day
until the commencement of
school Monday;
(d) On the father’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm.
mother spend time with the child:
(a) If the child would not otherwise see her mother on Mother’s Day, from
5.00 pm on the Saturday before Mother’s Day
until the commencement of
school Monday;
(b) On the mother’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6.00 pm;
parties shall not change the child’s residence to any location outside the
Perth metropolitan area without the prior written
consent of the other party.
otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, the child attend Parkerville
Primary School.
parent authorise the child’s school to send copies of any reports,
notices, newsletters and the like to both parents.
parent be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the child’s
school terms, handovers are to take place at the [Suburb F Park] when not at
all school holiday periods, handovers are to take place at the Hungry Jacks
restaurant in [Suburb E]. .
father be at liberty to contact the child every second day between 5.30 pm and
6.00 pm by telephoning the mother’s mobile
parent authorise the child’s school, day care, treating medical
professional or dental professional to provide duplicate
information to the
other parent directly.
parent notify the other of any emergency concerning the child by SMS or
telephone call as soon as practicable.
parent notify the other of any hospitalisation or any medical prescriptions
relating to the child.
parent inform the other if they intend to travel interstate with [K] and:
(a) provide by email a copy of the flight details in and out of WA; and
(b) facilitate telephone communication between [K] and the other parent whilst
[K] is out of WA.
parents inform each other and keep each other informed of their current contact
details including home address and telephone number
they can contact the child
parties to provide reasonable notice of any inability to spend time with the
child in accordance with these orders.
proceedings are otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [86] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter