URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWAM/2016/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:54:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PARADISO and WANGMAYUM [2016] FCWAM 5 (11 January 2016)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
150 TERRACE ROAD
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
PARADISO and WANGMAYUM
[2016] FCWAM 5
19 AUGUST 2015
DELIVERED :
11 JANUARY 2016
FILE NO/S :
PTW 3658 of 2013
MS PARADISO
MR WANGMAYUM
Catchwords:
Property Settlement; undefended; discussion of Stanford principles; orders
sought by wife just and equitable.
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Not Reportable
Representation:
Applicant : Self represented litigant
Respondent : There was no appearance by the Respondent
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self Represented Litigant
Respondent : Not Represented
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
WORDS IN SQUARE BRACKETS
REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT - PARTIES’ NAMES AND
IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN CHANGED
1 The husband in these proceedings was born [in]
1979 and the wife was born [in] 1983.
2 The parties started living together in December 2005. They were married
[in] 2008 and separated on 1 October 2011. They therefore
cohabited for a
period of just under six years. They were divorced on 1 October 2013.
3 The wife’s application for property settlement orders proceeded on
an undefended basis pursuant to orders made on 18 November
2014. There was,
unsurprisingly, no appearance by the respondent husband at the trial. He also
did not attend the Conciliation
Conference listed for 8 April 2015.
Wife’s evidence and submissions
4 The wife relied upon her affidavit filed on 3
October 2014 and her Form 13 financial statement filed the same date. Her Form
application set out the orders that were still sought by her at trial. She
clarified her position at the hearing in that she no
longer sought to amend her
final orders and effectively sought orders for:
the husband pay to the wife the sum of $31,158 within 12 months; and
each party retain the motor vehicles and furniture and household contents
presently in their possession or control.
5 The wife also filed
Papers for the Judge which included a detailed chronology and submission in
relation to the various factors
set out in the
Family Law Act
The husband’s financial circumstances
6 The wife is unaware of the husband’s current
financial circumstances, but seems to think that he is working. She could
provide no details as to where or in what capacity.
7 In those circumstances I made the wife aware of the procedural
difficulties that might arise in the event I made an order that
the husband was
to pay an amount to the wife. There are potential enforcement issues regarding
any orders, given her lack of knowledge
as to his whereabouts (to effect
service) and his ability to actually pay any amount ordered (in relation to the
discretion the Court
has to enforce orders).
8 The husband worked as a [barman] and as a [computer technician] during the
course of the parties’ cohabitation and marriage.
The wife says that she
was never aware of his income throughout the marriage given that they maintained
separate bank accounts.
9 She accepted that he worked only part time and about 10 hours per week as
a computer technician. He was also studying during the
course of the marriage
have completed his studies by the time of the trial [emphasis
Principles of law
Section 79(1)
Family Law Act
provides that the Court must make such orders as it considers appropriate.
Section 79(2)
provides that:
The court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied
that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable
to make the order.
11 Traditionally that has meant that the Court followed a
four-stage process.
12 That process was as follows:
(a) identify the value of the assets and liabilities of the parties;
(b) assess the contributions made by each party to the assets;
(c) assess the factors set out in
(d) consider whether the proposed orders are just and equitable between the
13 The fourth step of this process was seen to be the
check required pursuant to
to only make an order if it was just and
equitable to do so.
14 The High Court examined these provisions firstly in
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108.
15 The High Court noted at [36-40] that when exercising the property
settlement power, three fundamental propositions must not be
(a) One must first identify, according to common law and equitable principles,
legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property
[emphasis added];
(b) The Court’s power must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles; and
(c) To conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only
because of reference to the various matters set out
separately considering
, would be to “
conflate the statutory
requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the Act
16 The power under
is to alter a party’s
interest in property, which is why the High Court considered it is essential to
begin with an examination
of what interests in property the parties have. It
may or may not be necessary to alter any such interests.
17 In the event that the Court decides that
demands that an order
be made, then the Court must make such orders as it considers appropriate. It
must also take into account
the provisions of
18 In this case therefore, one must first look to the existing assets. I
have set out my determination of the existing assets (and
the parties’
existing interests in them) in the table below.
Value at separation
Value at trial
Household items
Savings account
Liabilities
Personal loan
Credit card
Financial resources
Value at separation
Value at trial
Liabilities
Financial resources
19 The Court must be very careful, as set out above, not to “conflate
the statutory requirements”. This potential confusion
was highlighted in
Bevan & Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
where there was some similarities on
the evidence. In
(supra) the husband left the country in 1994 and
gave the wife a power of attorney over his assets in Australia. The wife relied
on promises by the husband that she could deal with the assets in Australia as
she saw fit. The parties were not divorced until
2010 and the husband commenced
property settlement proceedings the following year.
20 The Full Court set out relevant parts of the Trial Judge’s reasons
supplementary and perhaps more important consideration relates to what should
flow from my findings in relation to the husband’s
representations; that
is what are the legal consequences, if any, which arise from those statements.
is clear that whatever the husband has said and thought in the past, he has now
changed his mind. He has brought an application
for property settlement, as he
was entitled to do. Once there is before the Court proceedings for property
settlement, they must
be determined according to law. The jurisdiction of the
Court can only be extinguished by an order of the Court or by agreement
the parties properly documented upon strict terms and conditions.
proceedings are before the Court they must be determined in accordance with the
provisions of
[sic] of the Act. Essentially the entitlement of the parties is to be
determined by having regard to the provisions of
, including those relating to the contributions of the parties and their
current circumstances and future needs and obligations.
is no requirement to consider what representations the parties may have made
during the marriage or subsequent to separation.
The essential inquiry is not
what the parties thought or said from time to time, but what is their
entitlement at law.
my view, what the husband said has no direct bearing upon what he is entitled
to. There are, however, some potentially significant
considerations to emerge.
Of a practical significance is the question of the way the Court should view the
wife’s conduct
in terms of her dealings with the property of the parties
in the face of representations and any related questions of what property
now be brought to account and whether there should be any socalled
“add-backs”.
appeared on the husband’s material that he was mounting a case of wastage
in relation to the wife’s borrowings and
losses on investments and in
relation to surplus funds from the [litigation] settlement.
would be a difficult proposition to argue that having, vested in the wife
authority to deal with the Australian property as she
saw fit, to then
retrospectively ask her to bear any adverse consequences flowing from her
decisions to do as she was invited to
do. In the end result, the husband
pressed no such argument.
further possible relevance of the representations brings into focus some
submissions made by counsel appearing for the wife, Mr
Dowding, Senior
Counsel. Mr Dowding argues that the representations made by the husband and
what resulted from them, whilst not
preventing the husband from bringing his
application for property settlement, might justify a determination by the Court
should not make the orders sought by him.
relation to those submissions, Mr Dowding refers in part to a recent decision of
the High Court in Stanford v Stanford
(2012) HCA 52
, a decision handed down on 15 November 2012.
He contends that that case is authority for the proposition that
considerations stand on their own and require the Court to determine
whether it is, in all the circumstances, just and equitable
to make such an
order for property settlement. He contends that, in appropriate
circumstances, it might be considered as something
of a threshold question to be
considered prior to the Court embarking upon the more traditional deliberations
described earlier by
me in the so-called four part process.
review of that case makes it clear that the Court is obliged to properly
consider the provisions of
in their own right. In my view, in order to properly consider such
matters, it is however necessary to also consider what the husband’s
entitlement might otherwise have been in order to determine whether it is just
and equitable to contemplate making an order which
will alter the wife’s
interests in the [M town] property in the context of considering the
consequences for each of the parties
in making or refusing to make such an
believe the following extract from the Judgment requires the Court to undertake
that exercise ...
21 At [53] to [55] the Full Court referred to the
passages where it found a Trial Judge led himself into error:
outlined what he would do, his Honour said (emphasis added):
81. For the purposes of my deliberations in terms of
what might be
the husband’s entitlement under the provisions of the
Act, I therefore remove the $162,000 from the earlier identified property
For the purposes of any evaluation process
if undertaken
, I proceed on
the basis that the net value of the remainder of the property of the parties to
be brought to account is some $907,000.
Honour then made findings about the contributions made by the parties. In doing
so, he said, inter alia:
86. At the same time, however, it must be observed that
the wife enjoyed the almost exclusive benefit of the substantial Australian
property and investments which remained. In many ways the husband was indeed
left to start from scratch in his endeavours without
the benefit of the fruits
of what the parties had acquired over the previous 22 years.
87. It is also appropriate to note that, notwithstanding the changed
circumstances after 1994 the husband did continue to make periodic
contributions generally and other contributions in the form of improvement to
the [M town] property after that time. It
is also clear that he has not
preserved to himself any separate acquisitions of significance over the period
since 1994.
precise language his Honour used in setting out his conclusions in this part of
his reasons is important and we have therefore
emphasised some words he used in
the following three paragraphs:
93. In my view, an adjustment which finds an appropriate
balance based on that overriding foundation, but takes account of the subsequent
would result
in an adjustment to the wife’s advantage of 10
per cent and produce a settlement between the parties of 60 per cent to the
and 40 per cent to the husband.
94. On the basis of such an estate, the extent of the husband’s
entitlement
so evaluated would be
of the order of $363,000 after the
stage one and two evaluation process.
95. The third stage
would require me
to consider whether there needs to
be any adjustment between the parties on account of the so-called
factors. In my view, there is no case for an adjustment under this
[Emphasis in original.]
22 The Full Court’s discussion on
the case of
(supra) is illuminating and is set out in full at
[57] to [75]:
primary focus of Grounds 1, 3 and 4 is on
of the Act, which was carefully analysed in
considering the submissions relating to these grounds, it will be instructive to
discuss the High Court’s decision,
to the extent it has relevance to this
were quite different to those here, and indeed to the
factual circumstances in most cases. Nevertheless, as all property settlement
applications are considered within the same statutory framework, this rare
pronouncement by the ultimate court of appeal warrants
careful examination.
, property applications were commonly dealt with by reference
to what the trial Judge called [and to what I have referred to] “a
stage process”. This process was described at [31] and [32] of his
Honour’s reasons. The jurisprudential basis
for the process was well
established – see the line of cases cited in
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) FLC 93-143
four stage (or step) process involves:
identification
and valuation of the property of the parties;
identification
and evaluation of contributions to the property (including property no longer
owned by the parties);
identification
and assessment of the various matters in
to (g) including, to the extent they are relevant, the matters in
consideration
of matters of justice and equity.
the four step process has been regularly applied, the Full Court has stressed it
is no more than a means to an end, since
the statutory obligation is to alter
existing interests only if it is just and equitable to do so. Thus, in
Norman & Norman
[2010] FamCAFC 66
the Full Court (Finn, May and Murphy JJ) said:
It is the mandatory legislative imperative (to reach a
conclusion that is just and equitable) that drives the ultimate result. For
its usefulness and merit as a “disciplined approach” or a
“structured process of reasoning” (per Fogarty,
Lindenmayer, McCall
unreported, 10 June 1992), the “three-step” or
“four-step” approach merely illuminates the path to the ultimate
like effect, in discussing the four step approach in our joint judgment in
Martin & Newton
[2011] FamCAFC 233
(2011) FLC 93-490
, we said (original emphasis):
that approach is not legislatively mandated, and as the Full Court [in
] said, is simply the preferred approach. This is because it will
be sufficient, in most cases, to have regard to the overall justice
of the orders
determination of the asset pool, consideration of
contributions and assessment of the relevant
in our view, there is no requirement that the justice and equity of the order,
as prescribed by
be considered at the fourth (and last) stage. In
our view, the requirement to make an order that is just and equitable permeates
the entire decision making process, and it is not impermissible to consider it
at an earlier point if the particular case requires
it. We consider this
is such a case.
Waters & Jurek
[1995] FamCA 101
(1995) FLC 92-635
per Fogarty J at 82,375 and
Beneke v Beneke
(1996) FLC 92-698
per Fogarty and Finn JJ at
83,360 and per Kay J at 83,369;
McLay & McLay
(1996) FLC 92-667
Trustee of the property of
Lemnos, A Bankrupt & Lemnos
[2009] FamCAFC 20
(2009) FLC 93-394
per Coleman J at [93];
[2010] FamCAFC 118
per Boland J at [77] and
Manolis & Manolis
[2011] FamCAFC 105
per Coleman, May and AinslieWallace JJ at [65].
Magistrate who gave the primary judgment in
clearly set out and
applied the “four step process”:
Re S by her Case Guardian R and
S by his Case Guardian S
[2010] FCWAM 26
. The Full Court also
accepted there was a “settled approach” in property matters:
Stanford & Stanford
[2012] FamCAFC 1
(2012) FLC 93-495
The High Court had before it both judgments, but made no comment about the
“four step process” or the “settled
the High Court did not disapprove the four step process, we accept it was not
approved either. Given the way the matter
was resolved, there was no
requirement for a pronouncement either way. However, the High Court’s
decision serves to refocus
attention on the obligation not to make an order
adjusting property interests unless it is just and equitable to do so.
obligation was previously described in the High Court as the “overriding
requirement”:
Mallet v Mallet
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
at 647 per Dawson J. In the
same case at 608, Gibbs CJ aptly described
as conferring on a court “a very wide discretion to make such order as it
it is satisfied that it is just and equitable that
order should be made ...” (emphasis added).
understanding of the role of
resonates with authority developed in the early years of operation of the Act.
Rogers & Rogers
[1980] FamCA 66
(1980) FLC 90-874
at 75,539 the Full Court cited
with approval this view expressed by Strauss J in
(1978) FLC 90500 at 77,615:
to me, that the main purpose of
is to ensure that the Court will not alter the property rights of the
parties, unless it is satisfied that cogent considerations
of justice require it
to do so, and that if the Court decides that it is requisite to make any order
under the section, the Court
must be satisfied that the alterations so ordered,
will go no further than the justice of the matter demands.
Notwithstanding
this clear exposition of the law, again approved in
Beneke and Beneke
(supra), perusal of the law reports reveals that it has only rarely been argued
that a court is precluded by considerations of justice
from exercising the
discretion conferred by
It appears to have been routinely assumed by litigants, certainly in more recent
times, that justice requires the court to assess
their claims by reference to
even if one contends that the outcome of that assessment will be an order
leaving existing property interests intact.
reason for this is likely to be found in this passage from
(original emphasis):
many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the
just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied
by observing that, as the
result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are
no longer living in a marital
relationship. It will be just and equitable to
make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will
thereafter be the common
of property by the husband and wife. No
less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the
existing property
arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary
severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. That is, any express
implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing
arrangements of marital property interests were
sufficient or appropriate during
the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the
ending of the marital
relationship. And the assumption that any adjustment to
those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also
brought to an end. Hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a
property settlement order ...
our experience, the circumstances described in the paragraph above encapsulate
the vast majority of cases. Hence, the reminder
the pivotal role of
is unlikely to have any impact in most cases, although it will serve
as a reminder to trial judges that the precondition to making
any order is a
finding that it is just and equitable to do so.
will also serve as a reminder that the four step process “merely
illuminates the path to the ultimate result”. Any future
restatement of
that process should incorporate acceptance of the fact that the power to make
any order adjusting property interests
is conditioned upon the court finding
that it is just and equitable to make an order.
follows that judges would be well advised to avoid what we consider to be arid
discussion of the “stage in the process”
“adjustments” are permissible. Such discussion tends to elevate the
four step process to the status of a statutory
edict, when in fact it is no more
than a shorthand distillation of the words of a statute which has but one
ultimate requirement,
namely not to make an order unless it is just and
equitable to do so.
High Court in
has laid down three “fundamental
propositions” which will provide useful guidance to trial judges in
approaching the task
These were recited above, and could be summarised thus:
Determination
of a just and equitable outcome of an application for property settlement begins
with the identification of existing
property interests (as determined by common
law and equity);
discretion conferred by the statute must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles and must not proceed on an assumption
that the parties’
interests in the property are or should be different from those determined by
common law and equity;
determination that a party has a right to a division of property fixed by
to the matters in
and without separate consideration of
would erroneously conflate what are distinct statutory requirements.
first “fundamental proposition”, which requires identification of
existing legal and equitable interests in property,
is nothing new, since
“property” has always been understood as incorporating equitable, as
well as legal, interests.
Duff & Duff
(1977) FLC 90-217
at 76,133, the Full Court
agreed with Langdale MR in
Jones v Skinner
(1836) 5 LJ Ch 85
Property is the most comprehensive of all terms which
can be used inasmuch as it is indicative and descriptive of every possible
which the party can have.
23 The Full Court then discussed the term “just and equitable”
at [84] to [89]:
as the expression “just and equitable” does not admit of exhaustive
definition, it is not possible to catalogue the
“range of potentially
competing considerations” that may be taken into account in determining
whether it is just and
equitable to make an order altering property interests.
However, in our view, it would be a fundamental misunderstanding to read
as suggesting that the matters referred to in
should be ignored in coming to that decision. Indeed, such a reading would
ignore the plain words of
which make clear that in considering “what order (
make, the court must take into account the matters referred to in that
subsection (emphasis added).
requirement to consider the
matters in determining whether it is just and equitable to make any order
provides fertile ground for potential conflation of the
two different issues,
which the High Court has warned against. However, this potential will not be
realised in many cases because
of what the plurality said at [42] about the
“just and equitable” requirement being “readily
satisfied”.
But there will be a range of cases, of which arguably the
present is a good example, where determining whether it is just and equitable
order altering property interests will not be so clear cut and
will therefore require not only separate but very careful deliberation.
[Emphasis in original.]
do not consider it helpful, and indeed it is misleading, to describe this
separate enquiry as a “threshold” issue.
We say this for two
reasons. First, as was emphasised in
, the initial enquiry is to
determine the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties. Secondly,
is cast in the negative and amounts to a prohibition against making any order
unless it is just and equitable to do so, the corollary
is that if the court
does make an order, such order itself must be just and equitable:
[2004] FCWA 32
; (2004) FLC 93-195 per Thackray J at [53] and
Teal v Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120
per Finn, Boland and Dawe JJ at [70]. The just and
equitable requirement is therefore not a threshold issue, but rather one
the entire process.
will be seen from this discussion that while the
issues must not be conflated, they are intertwined because the text of the Act
links them. This was recognised in
Ferguson & Ferguson
where Strauss
J said that
“is directed to both the questions whether an order should be made at all,
and what the order should be, if one is made”
(supra at 77,615).
understanding of the interplay between
accords with the analysis of Martin Bartfeld QC in his paper entitled
“Stanford and Stanford – Lots of Questions –
Answers”. In that paper, which we drew to the attention of counsel, Mr
Bartfeld opined that:
there is scope for taking into account the factors under
in the exercise of the [s 79(2)] discretion. This can be accomplished, it is
submitted, by treating the contribution factors and
the factors under
as having two simultaneous characteristics;
discretionary characteristic, which is used to identify those matters which are
relevant to enliven the exercise of the discretion.
Thus the fact that a party
has made substantial contributions, over a long period of time, which are not
reflected in their asset
holdings but which are reflected in the other
party’s assets may found a basis for finding that it is just and equitable
an order to be made; and
evaluative characteristic, which is used to measure the weight or to quantify
the effect of a particular contribution.
problem of conflation can easily be overcome by clearly identifying the use to
which a factor is being put.
our view, it will be less likely that the separate issues arising under
will be conflated if judges refrain from
contributions and other relevant factors in percentage or monetary terms until
they have first determined that it would be just and
equitable to make
order. [Emphasis in original.] Ultimately, however, appellate error will
not be demonstrated if it is possible to ascertain, either
by reference to an
express finding or by necessary inference, that the trial judge has given
separate consideration to the two issues.
24 The Full Court
concluded that his Honour had fallen into that error and the following passage
is of assistance.
primary thrust of the appeal is that the trial Judge impermissibly conflated the
issues arising under
In dealing with that submission, it is important to observe at the outset that
his Honour was keenly aware of the requirement not
to conflate the issues and
attempted to keep them separate.
appears from the following paragraphs of the reasons (emphasis added):
where his Honour said that
“makes it clear that the Court
is obliged to properly consider the provisions of
section 79(2)
in their own right
where his Honour discussed how he would treat an item of property “
the event I am persuaded
to make an order for property settlement”;
where his Honour found what the value of the assets would be “for the
purposes of any evaluation process
if undertaken
[93] to [95] where his Honour was at pains to make clear that in assessing the
parties’ entitlements by reference to
he was doing so only with a view to determining what the result “
” if the matter was determined by reference to that provision; and
[108] where his Honour concluded it was “in all the circumstances just and
equitable to proceed to make
order for property settlement ...”
Nevertheless,
there are parts of the reasons which could be seen as suggesting his Honour did
proceed on the basis that some order
altering property interests was inevitable,
and that the entitlements of the parties were to be calculated solely by
reference to
includes his remarks at [50] and [51], which for convenience we repeat:
clear that whatever the husband has said and thought in the past, he has now
changed his mind. He has brought an application
for property settlement, as he
was entitled to do. Once there is before the Court proceedings for property
settlement, they must
be determined according to law. The jurisdiction of
the Court can only be extinguished by an order of the Court or by agreement
between the parties properly documented upon strict terms and conditions.
proceedings are before the Court they must be determined in accordance with the
provisions of
[sic] of the Act. Essentially the entitlement of the parties is to be
determined by having regard to the provisions of
, including those relating to the contributions of the parties and their
current circumstances and future needs and obligations.
we accept that the court’s jurisdiction can be extinguished only when its
power is exhausted by the making of final
orders or by a binding financial
agreement, the proper exercise of the jurisdiction can include the dismissal of
an application because
it is not just and equitable to make any order.
Furthermore, a decision to dismiss can be made for reasons not referable to
since, as the High Court said in
at [40] (original
To conclude that making an order is “just and
because of and by reference to various matters in
without a separate consideration of
would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid
down by the Act.
Nevertheless,
read alone, [50] and [51] of the reasons do not reveal error, since it is
correct to say that the parties’ entitlements
are “to be determined
by having regard to the provisions of
”, because that would include
it will be remembered his Honour went on to say:
is no requirement to consider what representations the parties may have made
during the marriage or subsequent to separation.
The essential inquiry is not
what the parties thought or said from time to time, but what is their
entitlement at law.
my view, what the husband said has no direct bearing upon what he is entitled to
is true the trial Judge later accepted that the husband’s representations
should have an indirect bearing upon his entitlement
– because he
considered them when deciding what assets should be taken into account.
Nevertheless, we consider his Honour
erred in saying there was “no
requirement to consider what representations the parties may have made during
the marriage or
subsequent to separation”. In our view, such
representations clearly could be relevant in determining whether it was just
equitable to make an order adjusting existing interests.
Furthermore,
in saying that “the essential inquiry is not what the parties thought or
said from time to time, but what is their
entitlement at law”, it seems to
us that his Honour considered the parties’ “entitlement at
law” was their
entitlement measured only by reference to
evidence of conflation of the two distinct enquiries can also be seen at [58],
where his Honour commenced by accurately stating
had to be considered separately, but then went on to explain how he proposed to
do that in the present matter. For ease of reference
we set out that paragraph
review of [
] makes it clear that the Court is obliged to properly
consider the provisions of
section 79(2)
in their own right. In my view, in order to properly consider such matters, it
is however necessary to also consider what the husband’s
entitlement might
otherwise have been in order to determine whether it is just and equitable to
contemplate making an order which
will alter the wife’s interests in the
[M town] property in the context of considering the consequences for each of the
in making or refusing to make such an order.
fact the trial Judge placed weight on “what the husband’s
entitlement might otherwise have been” and the consequences
of refusing to
make an order conferring that entitlement can be seen at [100] where his Honour
To refuse the husband’s application would be to
deny him the opportunity to secure an alteration of the interests and a payment
of the type indicated ...
is clearly a matter his Honour took into account when, at [105], he gave what
might be seen as grudging acceptance of the proposition
have a discretion to decline to make any order [emphasis
in original].
our view, while his Honour purported to undertake a separate consideration of
he did so having already made findings which prevented him from taking account
of all relevant factors. In particular, his Honour
had found that he was not
obliged to consider “representations the parties may have made during the
marriage or subsequent
to separation”. It is true that, at [100],
the trial Judge said that in deciding “any threshold question” he
taken account of the husband’s representations, but that
proposition is inconsistent with his earlier unambiguous finding.
inconsistency, at the very least, leads to an inference that insufficient weight
was placed on this factor [emphasis in original].
also consider his Honour erred when, at [106], he took into account, against the
interests of the wife, the fact that the “informal
arrangements”
between the parties were not formalised at any time during the 18 years in which
they lived largely separate
lives. In our view, that was not a material factor
in this matter where the wife had disposed of all the substantial assets in
the parties had any joint interest and thereafter acquired property in her
name, in relation to which the husband never asserted
any equitable interest.
At the very least, his Honour gave the absence of formality more weight than it
trial Judge’s approach also seems to us incompatible with the following
remarks made in
concerning the three “fundamental
propositions” (footnote omitted, original emphasis):
41 ... if the parties to a marriage have expressly
considered, but not put in writing in a way that complies with
, how their property interests should be arranged between them during
the continuance of their marriage, the application of these
accommodates that fact ... These principles do so by recognising the force of
the stated and unstated assumptions between
the parties to a marriage that the
arrangement of property interests, whatever they are, is sufficient for the
purposes of that husband
and wife during the continuance of their marriage. The
fundamental propositions that have been identified require that a court have
principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable
interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may
have been their stated
or unstated assumptions
and agreements
the continuance of the marriage [emphasis added].
our view, if the three “fundamental propositions” can truly
accommodate any consideration the parties gave to how their
property interests
should be arranged during the continuance of their marriage, they must also
accommodate express consideration
given to how those interests should be
arranged after separation. Indeed, the argument for doing so is stronger, given
mutual understanding is less likely to have been affected by extraneous
influences that would be at work whilst their relationship
was intact.
is not to suggest that any understanding between spouses would be conclusive of
any later dispute, since an agreement can only
be conclusive when the
formalities are satisfied or when a
declaration is
made. Long experience in this jurisdiction teaches that there will be cases in
which other factors will be present
that would make it just and equitable to
make an order inconsistent with a previous understanding, even one reached after
separation.
But the reasoning in
makes clear that such an
understanding
would have to be a factor to be taken into account
deciding whether it would be just and equitable to make orders altering existing
interests [emphasis added]. This reasoning is
entirely consistent with
what was said by the Full Court in
Woodcock v Woodcock
[1997] FamCA 5
(1997) FLC 92-739
at 83,968 to 83,969.
it is accepted that a prior agreement or representation is relevant to the
justice and equity of the outcome, we consider that
the period of time a party
has allowed to elapse before making a claim inconsistent with that agreement or
representation must also
be a material factor. The trial Judge did, at one
point, take this into account when he said he was:
satisfied that for a period of at least 16 years the
husband has, by his words and by his conduct, induced the wife to believe that
he did not wish to make any claim against the property in Australia and that she
was entitled to use that property as she saw fit
for her benefit and that of the
we accept the wife’s submission that his Honour appears to have placed
weight on the passage of those 16 years only
as a shield against an argument the
husband ultimately did not run.
trial Judge properly described this case as “unique”. In our view,
the unusual facts demanded consideration of the
justice and equity of making any
order, quite independent of consideration of what the husband would have
received had he pursued
his claim earlier and not led the wife to believe he
would not pursue a claim at all. With great respect to his Honour, we are not
satisfied these matters received the independent consideration they required.
the reasons given, we find there is merit in these grounds.
25 Therefore, referring back to this matter, the Court accepts the
wife’s evidence that there were agreements to repay the
various amounts
set out in these reasons. Those agreements were made by the parties during the
course of their intact relationship.
None of those agreements were supported by
documentary evidence as one might expect with related parties. The parties
however maintained
separate bank accounts and the husband very clearly kept his
financial affairs to himself throughout the course of the marriage.
itself might be a reason why the wife appears to have insisted on providing
advances of money to the husband only if he
promised to repay those funds when
able. It is clear from the above passages that those agreements to advance
money and to repay
money are relevant factors to take into account in
determining whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order
at all in this case. It is unlikely that the wife could enforce any such
agreements outside of the jurisdiction of this Court.
26 The wife is in a negative asset position because she has incurred
numerous debts, some of which were incurred on behalf of the
husband and have
not been repaid. She has significant personal loan and credit card debts,
together with her own HECS debt. She
has reduced those debts since separation
by way of regular payments. As can be seen from the table, the wife has no idea
husband’s financial circumstances and the Court can therefore
make no findings about an essential element of its jurisdiction;
that is, to
make findings about the husband’s existing interests in property.
27 As I mentioned briefly above, a significant part of the wife’s case
is that she agreed to lend certain amounts to the husband.
In each example, she
says that the husband agreed to repay those amounts. All of these loans took
place during the period of cohabitation.
It does seem unusual that parties who
were living together and later married entered a series of commercial
transactions where the
wife lent money to the husband for various purposes and
the husband agreed to repay each amount. I made it clear to the wife
submissions that this Court did not assess such matters on a
“commercial basis”, for example by making findings that
some kind of contract and then deciding whether to enforce. This Court deals,
instead, with the vicissitudes of family
life and generally people enter
relationships with a view to the long term and do so in the context of a loving
relationship. Part
of that relationship approach is that they help each other
out with little expectation (in a commercial sense) of repayment of any
financial assistance. In contract law terms this is referred to as a
transaction made out of “natural love and affection”
and under the
general provisions of contract law is usually unenforceable.
28 So the Court must decide not whether there was an agreement that should
be enforced but, given the overall history, including
the numerous payments made
by the wife for the husband’s benefit; given promises to repay and taking
into account the overall
circumstances of the parties’ marriage, should a
property settlement order be made that will have the effect of adjusting
rights in existing property.
29 The amounts lent by the wife, taken separately, are relatively
inconsequential, but together they add up to a reasonable amount
circumstances where the wife has very little by way of assets in her name.
Taking the question again – is it fair (that
is, just and equitable) to
make a property settlement order that will reduce the husband’s current
asset position or increase
the wife’s current asset position given the
benefit that the husband has received from the wife’s payments to him
with other contributions made by the parties).
30 In this case, the wife made the following payments all of which the
husband promised to repay.
Money lent amount
Not known (the wife gave no evidence of this precise amount)
2006 Semester 1 fees for husband
9 June 2006
2006 Semester 2 fees for the husband
26 September 2006
Husband’s mother’s business venture in [Country S]
7 February 2007
2007 Semester 1 tuition fees for the husband
13 April 2007
Laptop for husband’s study
6 July 2007
2007 Semester 2 tuition fees for the husband
16 July 2007
Purchase of a motor vehicle for the husband (registered in his name)
14 September 2007
For husband’s family in [Country S] to help his mother with her
14 November 2007
To the husband’s brother to support him while studying
January 2008
Part payment to immigration services to enable husband to become an
Australian permanent resident
7 January 2008
Tickets for flights to [Country S] for the parties to meet the
husband’s family
14 August 2008
2008 Semester 2 tuition fees for the husband
2 March 2009
2009 Semester 1 tuition fees for the husband
15 July 2009
2009 Semester 2 tuition fees for the husband and for his permanent
residency application (amount obtained by the wife obtaining a
loan for that
2 August 2010
2010 Semester 2 tuition fees for the husband (obtained by the wife by a
loan of $15,239.23)
6 January 2011
2011 Semester 1 tuition fees for the husband (obtained by a third loan
obtained by the wife this time for $15,208.27)
25 February 2011
2011 tuition fees
18 August 2011
2011 Semester 2 tuition fees for the husband (received by using the
wife’s tax refund)
Total amounts
31 In relation to the $12,000 loan referred to above, the parties agreed
that from 30 July 2009 the husband would start paying $80
per fortnight to
than half of the monthly interest
32 The Court has some confusion in relation to one aspect of the
wife’s evidence. She says that on 6 January 2011 she transferred
into the husband’s account for his 2011 tuition fees. She says at [90]
that in February 2011 “the respondent
(husband) needed to pay for his
Semester 1 full-time 2011 tuition fees.” She then says at [91] that the
respondent:
instructed me to increase my credit card limit in order to help fund his tuition
fees. On 22 January, my credit card limit was increased
from $9,100 to $12,300.
33 At [92] she says that on 25 February 2011:
I agreed to charge $2,900 on my credit card to help pay the respondent’s
tuition fees.
34 What is not explained is why these extra
payments were required given that one month earlier on 6 January 2011 she
transferred
$12,000 into his account for the express purpose of paying those
tuition fees. There is no explanation as to what happened to the
whether they were actually applied to tuition fees. Perhaps the answer is that
the wife did not know. It does, however,
seem unusual that she simply agreed to
increase her debt again one month after arranging for $12,000 to go to the
husband when the
further increases were for exactly the same purpose; that is,
the 2011 tuition fees. She does not say in her affidavit evidence
those tuition fees were. Again, perhaps she did not know.
35 The wife says that after separation she became stressed as he suspected
the husband would stop making the personal loan repayments
to the Commonwealth
Bank of Australia. She then says that she went to her father for assistance and
he provided her with a private
loan to pay off the accumulated debt at the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia. This included the credit card debt and the
loan. At that stage the amount was $42,980.52. The wife accepts that
after separation the husband continued to make loan repayments
ranging between
$100 to $275 each fortnight. He did however (as she suspected) stop making loan
repayments from 18 October 2012.
He then effectively ignored any further
request to continue loan repayments at all. He also refused to attend
mediation prior to
the commencement of these proceedings.
Other contributions made by the parties during the marriage
36 Both parties worked during the course of the
marriage. There is no evidence of any other substantial contributions to
during that time.
Conclusions regarding whether it is just and equitable to make
a property settlement order
37 The wife now has existing debts of $44,945. She
did not have debts to that extent at the commencement of the cohabitation of
parties. I have not taken into account any amounts she says she used for
travel. So the figure I therefore take into account
is the abovementioned
figure less the amount set out for travel of $810; the revised figure is
therefore $53,146.45.
38 The wife has clearly provided substantial financial assistance to the
husband during the course of their marriage. Through her
efforts he has
received tuition fees for numerous years of study. He has promised to repay
each and every amount and has failed
to do so. The wife is now left with
significant debts, and in order to alleviate her position she has received a
personal loan from
her father which has otherwise relieved her of the payment of
significant interest amounts by way of the loan to the bank. She is
however left in the invidious position of entering into a relationship with
the husband and having no substantial debt to leaving
the relationship and
having substantial debt to repay. I accept the husband agreed to repay these
amounts in the unusual circumstances
of this marriage given the level of
separation of their financial affairs.
39 In all the circumstances therefore, I am satisfied that it is just and
equitable to make orders for property settlement. The
proposed orders will have
the effect of decreasing the wife’s current indebtedness. There is no
doubt that debts are property
for the purposes of the
Family Law Act
. The wife has an interest in the debt owed to her father. That debt arose
because of the payments that she made to the husband
during the course of the
marriage. The husband has received a substantial benefit from those amounts
that were paid primarily to
ensure that he was able to continue his study and
become a permanent resident of Australia. The husband promised to repay those
amounts and has failed to do so. It is therefore just and equitable to make
orders that will ensure that there is some degree of
payment by the husband to
the wife taking into account not only the payments made and the promises to
repay, but also the overall
contributions and other factors to take into
account. That is where the Court will consider the extent of any order
that is made.
For the purposes of this current part of these reasons, I am
satisfied it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order.
Court must then move on to what order is appropriate given the circumstances and
all the factors set out in
Section 75(2)
40 The wife is currently receiving Austudy and is a
casual relief [dental nurse]. The husband’s financial circumstances
not known. The husband has had the benefit of years of study supported by
the wife. The Court infers, given that he should have
finished his study by
now, that he has a reasonable earning capacity. The parties do not have any
Conclusions
41 The wife says that contribution up to the date
of separation should be assessed as 5% to the husband and 95% to the wife. She
also says that contribution from separation to trial should be assessed as 60%
to the husband and 40% to the wife.
42 In relation to
factors, the wife makes no precise
calculation of what adjustment, if any, should be made.
43 Given the undefended nature of these proceedings and the orders sought by
the wife, it is abundantly clear that the orders sought
by her are appropriate
and just and equitable. They involve the husband repaying $31,158 to her. The
debts of the wife at separation
which related to loans to the husband for his
education and support amounted to $44,295. The husband has received the entire
of those advances. The payment sought by the wife equates to 70% of
that figure. In my view, it is not necessary to make findings
regarding overall
contributions and any adjustment by way of
factors. An order that
the husband pay the amount sought to the wife is just and equitable in all the
circumstances.
44 The Form 1 application seeks an order that the payment by the husband be
made within 12 months. The application was filed 3 October
2014. I intend
to allow a much shorter period of time for the husband to arrange the necessary
finance and make the payment, given
the time these proceedings have taken.
a period of 3 months from the date of service of these orders upon the husband,
the husband pay to the wife the amount of $31,158.
party otherwise retain the motor vehicles, furniture and household contents
presently in their possession or control.
parties each otherwise indemnify the other in relation to any debts in their
respective names.
proceedings otherwise be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding [44] paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for
judgment delivered by this Honourable
Delivered 11 January
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter