URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/FCWA/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:53:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WILSON and WILSON [2025] FCWA 16 (21 January 2025)
FAMILY COURT OF WESTERN
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
WILSON and WILSON
[2025] FCWA 16
[IN] JANUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
21 JANUARY 2025
FILE NO/S :
3586 of 2023
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Where the parties failed to comply with orders for personal conferral
prior to scheduled hearing –
Where in the face of that non-compliance the
parties were ordered to personally attend at court prior to the commencement of
hearing and to confer – Where as a result of that conferral agreement
was reached in relation to a range of matters - Consideration
of the obligations
of parties and lawyers in relation to conferral – Where oral conferral as
distinct from the exchange of
correspondence is required to properly discharge
those obligations, other than in exceptional circumstances – Potential
implications where those obligations are not met.
PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE– Expert evidence – Where the husband seeks to rely on an
affidavit of his accountant purporting
to undertake a detailed analysis of the
wife's income and expenditure – Where it is conceded that the affidavit
was proposed
to be relied upon as expert evidence – Where it is conceded
that there has not been even token compliance with the relevant
Rules, including
as to conferral – Where the affidavit was prepared by the husband's
lawyer, but no explanation for that non-compliance
is offered – Where it
is not suggested that there are circumstances which would support waiver of
compliance – Application
to rely on the affidavit
Legislation:
Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
Rules of the
Supreme Court 1971
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
IN SQUARE BRACKETS REPLACE WORDS USED IN THE ORIGINAL JUDGMENT –
PARTIES’ NAMES AND IDENTIFYING DETAILS HAVE BEEN
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
pseudonym Wilson & Wilson has been approved by the Family
Court of Western
Australia pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
This copy of the Court’s Reason for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r
Court Rules 2021
(WA)), or to record a variation to the orders pursuant to r 311
Family Court Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence,
except in very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that
identify persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
The substantive proceedings between [Mr Wilson] ("the husband") and [Ms Wilson]
("the wife") were commenced by the filing of the
husband’s application in
[redacted] 2023 in which he sought orders for alteration of property interests.
To their credit,
the parties initially agreed interim financial arrangements,
and other arrangements including an agreed process for valuations, which
intended to move them towards private mediation. After the parties were unable
to reach a final agreement, procedural orders
were made on 3 July 2024 and
the wife filed her substantive response in [redacted] 2024. She sought
orders for alteration of property
interests and spousal maintenance, and a
departure order in relation to the child support payable for the parties’
[Samantha] born [in] [redacted] 2008.
parties each sought various interim and interlocutory orders. The unfortunate
history of the eventual progression to an interim
hearing [in] January 2025 is
set out later in these reasons. Regrettably, even then the disputes
between the parties could not be
heard and fully determined at the scheduled
hearing as had been planned.
Brief relevant background
husband was born in [redacted] and runs a business known as [redacted] ("the
business"). The wife was born in [redacted] and
describes her occupation as
[redacted], being employed part-time by [redacted].
parties began living together in 1998 and were married in [redacted]. They
separated in [redacted]. They have three children,
[Jake] and [Henry] who are
young adults, and Samantha who is 16.
company] is trustee for the [Wilson Family Trust] ("the trust") trading as
the business. The husband is the sole director of
the company, and is the
appointor and guardian of the trust.
[Investments
Pty Ltd] is, as the name suggests, an investment vehicle. The parties are
the directors and shareholders of the company,
in their capacities as trustees
of the [Investments Trust].
Pty Ltd] is trustee for the [Superannuation Fund], of which the parties are the
only members. The parties are, as required,
the directors and shareholders of
the trustee company. The superannuation fund owns an office property on
[Street A] in [Suburb
A], which is rented out to the business.
parties jointly own two separate but adjoining properties on [Street B] in
[Suburb B]. The husband owns a property at [Street
C] in [Suburb
The Court’s attempts to progress the matter
a hearing before a Magistrate on 15 August 2024, the proceedings were
assigned to the Complex Track. The solicitors for the parties
were ordered to
provide any unavailable dates for counsel by 23 August 2024 so that an
interim hearing could be listed on a convenient
date. The orders required the
husband to file documents by no later than 28 days prior to the listed hearing,
and the wife to file
a responsive affidavit 14 days later.
solicitors provided unavailable dates for counsel as had been ordered. On
26 August 2024 (the following working day) the matter
was listed for
interim argument to 9 October 2024, the first date available to accommodate
both counsel. At the same time, orders
were made requiring the solicitors for
the parties to personally confer by face-to-face meeting or telephone, and to
file by 4.00
pm on 2 October 2024 a joint Minute setting out
clearly any orders which could be made by consent, and any other interim or
interlocutory
orders still pressed by either party ("the conferral order").
That order was made as it was apparent on the papers that at least
some matters
should be capable of agreement.
solicitors for the parties did not comply with that order.
On 4 October 2024, orders were made in chambers to vacate the
hearing. The parties were given liberty to seek a relisting upon
compliance with the conferral order.
orders provoked a response on the same day. A joint letter was received
indicating that the solicitors had conferred by telephone
on 2 October
2024, (the date by which the Minute was due to be filed and having had five
weeks’ notice of that requirement),
but that the husband’s solicitor
then required additional time to take instructions. He had scheduled a meeting
with the husband
for that purpose to take place on 4 October 2024. The
letter included a joint request that the scheduled hearing be reinstated,
enclosed a Minute signed by the wife’s lawyer which simply stated that no
matters could be agreed, and otherwise recited
the relief sought by each
request to reinstate the hearing was declined and the parties were again invited
to provide information regarding the availability
of their counsel for a
rescheduled hearing. I could not accommodate a hearing on any of the dates
suggested by the parties in October
or November 2024, and there were said to be
no mutually available dates in January 2025. Accordingly, the matter was
relisted to
my first available date irrespective of the availability of counsel,
being [in] January 2025.
the letter advising of that new
the parties were reminded
that it was apparent on the face of the joint letter sent by their solicitors on
4 October 2024 that even
by that point there had not been proper compliance
with the conferral order. I directed that they comply, and that the required
joint Minute be filed by no later than 10 January
joint Minute was filed on that day. It again stated that no orders could be
agreed and set out the orders said to be pressed by
each party. The issues
were expanded rather than narrowed. The wife sought further injunctive relief
which, on her case, became
necessary because the husband had pre-emptively
withdrawn just over $764,000 from an account operated by Investments Pty Ltd and
applied the funds to discharge a debt to [Bank A] in his sole name and secured
by mortgage. His application
for orders permitting him to do just that, and requiring the wife’s
cooperation in that process, was made on 19 September 2024.
been initially listed for hearing on 4 October 2024, and was scheduled to
be heard and determined on [in] January
wife filed a Minute informally amending her position on 10 January 2025.
She also filed an interlocutory application seeking,
among other things, to be
excused from compliance with the conferral order. In the affidavit sworn
in support of that application,
she confirmed that the telephone conferral on
2 October 2024 concluded on the basis that the husband’s lawyer would
take further
instructions and revert to her lawyers. She says that her lawyers
heard nothing further until 6 December 2024. She acknowledges
that she did
not instruct her lawyers to follow-up in the interim.
says further that on 6 December 2024, the husband’s lawyers wrote to
hers proposing that they confer before 20 December
2024, and that her
lawyer responded on the same day confirming agreement to do so. She says
that various conferral times were proposed,
and that in so doing her lawyer set
out specific details of the matters that might be expected to be agreed, so that
the husband’s
lawyer could take instructions before conferral took
wife says that the conferral was initially scheduled for 10 December 2024
but was then rescheduled by the husband’s lawyer
12 December 2024, and then again to 18 December 2024. She says
that telephone conferral took place on that day, and again
concluded with the
husband’s lawyer informing hers that he would need to take instructions
and revert to her, which he planned
to do urgently. There was then no
further response before an email on 7 January 2025 confirming that the
husband and his lawyer
were to meet that day. By further email on
9 January 2025, the husband’s lawyer advised that he had taken
instructions and
did not think there was "any scope for agreement". He did not
expand on that statement in any way. The husband's lawyer then prepared
joint Minute which was filed on 10 January 2025.
receipt of that Minute, I made an order requiring the parties and their
solicitors or counsel to personally attend at court by
no later than
9.00 am on [the morning of the hearing] [in] January 2025, and to meet
face-to-face to confer as to the matters the
subject of the
conferral order.
parties complied with that order and, albeit over the course of the morning and
with the hearing being stood down on occasion,
reached agreement in relation to
a wide range of matters including:
(a) the payment of non-periodic expenses for Samantha;
(b) an interim order for the husband to pay or cause to be paid various expenses
for the benefit of the wife, to be characterised
as "non-periodic spousal
maintenance";
(c) interim orders for alteration of property interests whereby each party would
receive $120,000 to be paid into their respective
lawyers’ trust accounts,
and the wife would receive an additional $20,000;
(d) the payment of taxation liabilities;
(e) an injunction pending the determination of the remaining competing interim
and interlocutory applications;
(f) the dismissal of the wife’s interlocutory application filed on 10
January 2025; and
(g) the grant of permission to the parties to rely upon certain affidavits.
were also able to be made by consent to resolve a dispute as to whether or not
the wife could rely on certain parts of her
affidavit filed on 31 July
2024, in which she gave evidence as to the circumstances in which the husband
resiled from a Heads of
Agreement executed after mediation. The dispute as to
the admissibility of that evidence had been raised in the husband’s
affidavit filed on 19 September 2024 but was then apparently not the
subject of any conferral until exchanges between counsel, and
my observations in
relation to those exchanges, late in the hearing [in] January 2025.
asserted based on the earlier inadequate attempts at conferral that no agreement
could be reached in relation to any matter,
the parties reached agreement in
relation to the matters just described to a level of detail which required four
agreed undertakings and consent orders.
process having consumed all the time that had been allocated for a hearing (and
more), the remaining disputes were adjourned
to be heard and determined
[in] February 2025, the first available date.
Observations - the duty to confer
I made clear to counsel during the hearing, I do not purport to make any finding
as to the accuracy or otherwise of the wife’s
account as to the course of
the attempts at conferral. I make no finding as to how responsibility for the
failure to properly confer
should be apportioned between the parties or between
those representing them. It would be inappropriate to do so without the
or any lawyer whose interests or reputation might be adversely
affected, having proper opportunity to be heard on the matter. It
would be of
no discernible benefit to the parties in any event, particularly at this stage
of the proceedings. If that matter is
to be revisited, that may appropriately
occur in the context of any application for costs that might be made at the
conclusion of
the proceedings.
said, self-evidently and no matter how responsibility might be apportioned, the
sequence of events outlined above reflects that
the proceedings to date have
been conducted in a manner which is
entirely unacceptable.
main purpose of the
Family Court Rules 2021
") is to ensure
that each case is resolved in a just and timely manner at a cost to the parties
and the court that is reasonable in
the circumstances of the
The court has obligations in
promoting that main purpose
the parties and their lawyers.
acknowledge that, presently at least, there is no express provision in the Rules
requiring oral conferral. That said, r 79 requires
that before filing an
application seeking interim, procedural, ancillary or other incidental orders a
party must make a reasonable
and genuine attempt to settle the issue to which
the application relates, subject only to certain exceptions which do not apply
Even more particularly, in a property case such as this one, the Rules
provide that no such application or response will be accepted
for filing unless
the parties have conferred "on a without prejudice basis for the purpose of
identifying, resolving and narrowing
the issues in dispute", and have certified
that they have done so.
is the common experience of judicial officers in this Court that those
requirements are far from universally met. It is not uncommon
for parties and
practitioners to purport to certify compliance with the Rules by filing a
certificate that confirms that they have
sent an email or letter in relation to
the matter and received no response. Frankly, it is that common experience
which has led
to a number of judicial officers adopting the practice of making
orders for personal conferral by face-to-face meeting or telephone,
as occurred
in this case.
of that nature should not be necessary. As the Court of Appeal has
"As should be well understood, ordinarily at least, discharge of the obligation
to confer will require oral communication. That
is because, as we observed
above, the object of the rule is to promote constructive discussion. As Martin
CJ observed more than
15 years ago, the 'exchange of furious correspondence' is
not meaningful conferral."
that observation be misunderstood by lawyers practising primarily in this Court,
it was made by reference to Order 59 Rule 9
of the Rules of the Supreme
Court 1971 (WA), which is in the following terms:
to confer before making application
(1) No order shall
be made on an application in chambers unless the application was filed with a
memorandum stating —
(a) that the parties have conferred to try to resolve the matters giving rise
to the application; and
(b) the matters that remain in issue between the parties.
(2) The Court may waive the operation of subrule (1) in a case of
urgency or for other good reason.
common with the Rules of this Court, Order 59 Rule 9 does not expressly require
oral communication as a component of conferral.
The clear statement made
by the Court of Appeal applies with equal force to the conduct of proceedings in
this Court.
observations of Martin CJ to which the Court of Appeal referred resonate more
broadly, and bear repetition in
"In far too many cases, the Rule is complied with in form rather
than substance. That is because too often the representatives of
parties consider that the exchange of furious correspondence is an adequate
substitute for meaningful conferral in relation to
the substance of the
interlocutory dispute...
For my part, I favour an approach to the construction of the rule which would
lead to the conclusion that it has not been substantively
complied with unless
and until legal representatives of the parties, with authority to resolve the
particular interlocutory dispute
in question, have orally conferred in respect
of the substantive issues that arise in relation to that dispute, either by
or by meeting face-to-face. It follows that any legal representative
who declines or refuses to participate in such a process of
conferral, without
good cause, is at risk of being ordered to pay the costs which flow from that
refusal personally. There may,
of course, be cases in which a departure from
this approach to the application of [the rule] is justified, but, in my view,
be exceptional."
I do not suggest that the lawyers involved in this matter engaged in conduct of
the nature about to be described, the following
further observations by the
Court of Appeal also resonate with what is regrettably common experience in
litigation in this Court:
"It should not need to be said that inflammatory and pejorative language such as
‘risible’ and ‘disingenuous’
is antithetical to genuine
and constructive engagement in the process of
conferral."
"Nor is it consistent with the object of the rule [requiring conferral] for a
party’s solicitors to seek to unilaterally impose
conditions on the
other party’s solicitors before they are prepared to engage in
any discussion."
limitations on the resources available to the Court are well‑known, as is
the impact on litigants of delay in the resolution
of their matters.
Proper and genuine conferral in all cases, especially where parties are
represented, is essential to the promotion
of the main purpose of the
to the discharge by lawyers of their obligations.
discharge of those clear obligations requires lawyers to actually talk to each
other. The conversation must be conducted
, and reflect genuine
efforts to resolve or narrow issues, not tokenistic "compliance" with the
The conversation must be undertaken with the benefit of adequate instructions;
while it may need to pause for instructions to be
taken, it must then be resumed
and completed. The onus is clearly on the lawyer at whose request the
conversation is paused to proactively
initiate its resumption.
case is but one of many examples in which those obligations have not been met,
to the detriment of the parties themselves and
the system more
The singular contentious matter resolved at the hearing
already noted, once the parties and their lawyers properly conferred agreement
was reached in relation to a significant range
of matters, albeit on an interim
one other matter was able to be heard and determined in the time which remained
husband sought to rely on an affidavit of his accountant [Mr Owen] filed on
10 January 2025. That affidavit, which was prepared
by the husband’s
lawyer and ran to some 479 pages including annexures, purported to represent an
"analysis of the wife’s
income and expenditure" by reference to documents
disclosed by her.
The accountant said that he uploaded "her bank and credit cards from her
disclosure" (presumably referring to statements) to a "subscription
known as Docuclipper" and then "imported these transactions into Xero accounting
software which then summarises this material
into a format that the program can
more readily prepare a report on
He then prepared a
report summarising his findings.
the absence of application or submissions, it is not necessary for me to
determine whether by that process, and in particular
the uploading of the
wife’s confidential documents to what would appear to be an external
service provider, there was any breach
of what is commonly described as the
Harman undertaking
, or r 203.
wife objected to the proposed reliance on the affidavit.
for the husband appropriately conceded the following:
(a) that the evidence of Mr Owen was proposed to be adduced as expert evidence,
given that it involved analysis of facts applying
his professional expertise,
and reaching a conclusion;
(b) that the only evidence in support of the husband’s application seeking
leave to rely on that affidavit did not comply with
(c) that there had been no conferral as required by r 277(2)(a);
(d) that there was no compliance with r 279; and
(e) that the affidavit of Mr Owen did not comply with rr 287 and 288.
other words, it was conceded that there had not been even token compliance with
the clear requirements of the Rules in relation
to expert evidence. No
explanation for that was proffered, nor was it suggested that there was any
circumstance which would excuse
that, or support waiver of compliance with the
provisions of the Rules in relation to expert evidence are clear, and their
purpose is well-known. Indeed, the genesis of the
current Rules lay in a
perceived need to address the conduct of litigation undertaken exactly in the
manner adopted by the husband
in this case.
those circumstances, I was not prepared to permit the husband to rely on the
affidavit. I dismissed his application to do so,
indicating (with the consent
of counsel) that I would provide my reasons for doing so in this judgment.
Counsel also sensibly agreed
that judgment could be published from chambers, to
avoid the cost to the parties associated with another attendance at
I certify that the preceding
paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the Family Court of Western
21 JANUARY 2025
Dated 9 October 2024.
Informally contained in a
Minute of Proposed Orders.
Despite the injunction having been sought some time before the hearing on [in]
January 2025, an undertaking as to damages had not
been filed by the wife, and
that issue was not addressed by either party until I raised it with them during
the hearing. The wife
filed an undertaking as to damages on
16 January 2025.
Family Court Rules 2021
Ibid rr 6 and
Murray Riverside Pty
Ltd v Toscana (WA) Ravenswood Estate Pty Ltd
[2022] WASCA 67
Deleting only comments
specific to the case before His
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Health Solutions (WA) Pty Ltd
[2006] WASC 161
(2006) 33 WAR 1
Affidavit of Mr Owen
filed 10 January 2025 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter