URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/217.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nair and Anor v Town of Vincent [2004] WATPAT 217 (6 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 221 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 217
Heard: 11 November 2004
Decision: 6 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
ELIZA JESSICA NAIR AND DANIEL DAS NAIR
TOWN OF VINCENT
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Development refusal – Roller door addition to carport attached to
house – Corner lot – Secondary street frontage
– Setback -
Preservation of character and amenity
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr D Nair appeared in person
Mr S Bain (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal against the decision by the Town of Vincent
”) to refuse an application for retrospective
approval of a roller door addition to a carport attached to a house at 14 Bulwer
Street, corner Wright Street, Highgate (“
subject land
2. The subject land is also described as Lot 5, Strata Lot 1. What was
once the main yard of the house has become Strata Lot 2
Street and has a new two-storey single house on it. The subject land is owned
by Daniel Das Nair and Eliza Jessica
has frontage of 12.35 metres to Bulwer Street at the south, a frontage of
25.7 metres to Wright Street at the west
3. The house on the subject land has a verandah that extends across the Bulwer
Street frontage and returns about 5 metres along the
Wright Street frontage. A
5 metre by 5 metre carport has been built in the Bulwer Street setback attached
to the verandah and extending
to within 960mm of the Bulwer Street boundary.
The setback to the west side of the carport is 2.8 metres, the same as that of
verandah facing Wright Street. Access to the carport is via a cross-over
onto Wright Street. A brick screen wall approximately
2 metres high is built
around the road frontages except for a wrought iron gate at the
cross-over.
Planning Framework
4. The subject land is zoned Residential R80 under the Respondent’s Town
Planning Scheme No.1 (“
5. TPS1 relies on Part 3.2: Streetscape of the Residential Design Codes
Design Codes
”) for control of setbacks, particularly
clause 3.2.3: Set back of Garages and Carports, which
“ A3.3 Garages set back 1.5m from a secondary
A3.5 Garages set back 4.5m from the primary street. This may be reduced where a
garage adjoins a dwelling, provided the garage is
at least 0.5m behind the
dwelling alignment (excluding any porch, verandah or balcony) or setback 3m
where vehicles are parked parallel
to the street
alignment.”
6. Under the Performance Criteria at clause 3.2.3, it states:
“P3 The setting back of carports and garages so as not to detract from the
streetscape or appearance of dwellings, or obstruct
views of dwellings from the
street and vice versa.”
7. Also referred to is clause 3.2.4: Surveillance of the Street, Performance
Criteria P4, which states:
“Buildings designed to provide
for surveillance between dwellings and the street.”
8. The Respondent’s Policy No. 3.2.4: Street Setbacks, clause 6
“Carports are acceptable because they allow a
clear view between public street and private dwelling. Garages are not
acceptable, unless they can be accommodated without obstruction to
views between the street and house at ground level.
All garages are required to be setback at 6.0 metres from the frontage
street, or at or behind the line of the front main building
wall (not open
verandah, porch, portico, balcony and the like) of the nearest dwelling on the
site, to preserve and possibly enhance
the streetscape.”
9. Under the Design Codes:
(a) a “Carport”
“A roofed structure designed to accommodate one or more motor vehicles
unenclosed except to the extent that it abuts a dwelling
or a property boundary
on one side, and being without a door unless that door is visually
permeable”.
(b) “Garage” is defined
“Any roofed structure, other than a carport, designed to accommodate one
or more motor
10. On 28 May 2002 the Respondent granted conditional planning approval for the
carport. Condition (ii) of the approval
“(ii) the carport shall be one hundred (100) per cent
open on all sides and at all times (open type gates/panels are
permitted)”.
11. The Appellants subsequently erected a roller door on the Wright Street
frontage of the carport.
12. The Respondent served a notice under
Town Planning
and Development Act 1928
advising that the roller door was unauthorised and
required to be removed. An appeal was then filed against the
(Appeal 261 of 2003).
13. Following a mediation conference the hearing of that appeal was adjourned to
allow the Appellants to lodge an application for
retrospective planning approval
for the unauthorised roller door. That application was refused by the
Respondent for the following
“(a) the development is not consistent with the orderly and proper
planning and the preservation of the amenities of the locality;
(b) the non-compliance with the relevant street setbacks and streetscape
requirements of the Town’s Policy relating to street
setbacks and the
Residential Design Codes ...”
14. The Respondent’s decision gave rise to the instant
The Appellants’ Position
15. It was Mr Nair’s evidence that the Wright Street streetscape is
dominated by institutional uses and there are similar roller
doors on other
lots. The proposed roller door will not therefore have an adverse impact on the
residential amenity or the streetscape.
16. In respect of the Bulwer Street streetscape, Mr Nair said the door would not
be visible when looking at the front of the subject
land and so there would be
17. As to surveillance between the street and the dwelling, Mr Nair said the
roller door will not affect this and so the development
is consistent with the
performance criteria of the Respondent’s policies and the Design
18. Mr Nair stressed, as did Mrs Nair who also gave evidence, that the door was
important for their sense of security and physical
protection. Some of the
persons associated with the users of the institutions loiter in the locality and
this has given rise to
apprehension about safety, particularly that of Mrs Nair.
It was their submission that the roller door would be consistent with the
objective in TPS1 which states:
“the Town of Vincent will
protect and enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the Town’s
inhabitants and the
social, physical and cultural environment”.
19. Mr Nair also stressed that the yard in the Bulwer Street setback, is the
only entertaining and gardening area available on the
subject land and the
roller door enhances the privacy of this space, whereas the wrought iron gate
Respondent’s Position
20. Mr Bain, a planning consultant appearing for the Respondent, submitted that
the addition of the roller door made the structure
a garage. The setback
requirements for a garage in the Design Codes must therefore be applied.
21. He said that the development did not comply
(a) The garage is set back only 0.96 metres from Bulwer Street, the primary
street, not the required 4.5 metres; and
(b) The garage is set back more than 1.5 metres from Wright Street, the
secondary street, but is not behind the building
22. Mr Bain said that the proposed development also did not comply with
Performance Criteria P3 of clause 3.2.3 of the Design Codes
because at the set
back applied for it would not maintain the open nature of the streetscapes which
characterise the locality, would
have an adverse effect on the appearance of the
house and would restrict the capacity for passive surveillance between the house
and the street.
23. He pointed out that these performance requirements were also reflected in
clause 6 of the Respondent’s Policy No. 3.2.4:
Street Setbacks and so
the roller door was also in conflict with the policy.
24. Relevant to this matter and referred to in the submissions by the parties,
is the planning approval granted on 28 May 2002 for
the existing carport, to
which the roller door has been attached. In addition to requiring open sides,
the conditions of approval
“(iii) no part of the
roof, including gutters (other than metal beams) shall be setback nearer than
500 millimetres from
southern boundary and any columns within this
setback shall be constructed from brick and/or metal not more than
350 millimetres
in width or breadth.”
25. The southern boundary of the lot is the Bulwer Street boundary. The columns
of the carport are set back 960 mm from this
Also to be noted is
that the setback from the Wright Street frontage is 2.8 metres, which is in
line with the Wright
Street verandah
of the house. There is also a section of
house wall on this side set back 1.5 metres from the Wright Street
26. In recounting the history of the development, Mr Bain quoted the report
considered by the Council of the Respondent when the
carport application was
under consideration in 2002. Examination of that report reveals the
Planning approval is sought for demolition of the existing unauthorised
carport and construction of a new carport addition within
the secondary street
setback area of the existing grouped dwelling.”
27. In the comments section of the report it
Wright Street Setback
The double carport is at the side of the dwelling, is set back behind the
existing main building line and the variation to the Wright
Street setback is
considered acceptable.
Bulwer Street Setback
The setback variation to the secondary street is considered acceptable given
the open style of the carport.”
28. The Respondent has considered the roller door on the basis that the primary
street frontage is Bulwer Street and Wright Street
is the secondary street.
This is in direct contradiction of the analysis made in the report on which the
Respondent made its decision
to approve the carport. When questioned on this Mr
Bain’s response was that as it is now a garage being considered it is
appropriate
that the main frontage again be identified and in this instance
Bulwer Street is considered to be the main frontage.
29. I do not accept that the addition of the roller door so changes the planning
circumstances that a complete reversal of the designation
of primary and
secondary street frontage can be supported. The Respondent previously
determined that Wright Street is the main frontage
and Bulwer Street is the
secondary street frontage and the mere addition of the roller door does warrant
this being changed. The
determination of this appeal is to proceed on the basis
of Bulwer Street and Wright Street having the same relative status as previously
determined by the Respondent.
30. When this was put to Mr Bain, his response was that the resultant garage
still does not comply as the setback from Bulwer Street
is 0.96 metres and not
1.5 metres and from Wright Street the setback is less than 4.5 metres from
the street or, alternatively,
is not 0.5 metres behind the building
line. It was Mr Bain’s submission also that the proposed development
in conflict
with the policy objectives of open streetscapes and mutual
surveillance. He remained of the opinion that there would
still be an
impact on the amenity of the locality.
31. Both parties provided photographs of the subject land from various points in
Bulwer Street and Wright Street and of the buildings
in Wright Street both in
the vicinity of the subject land and further north.
32. The photographs show a roller door parallel to Wright Street and
perpendicular to Bulwer Street. The view to and from the Wright
Street frontage
of the house and its verandah is not obscured in any way by the roller door
because it is beside the house. The
only obstruction to surveillance is because
of the existing 2.0 metre high boundary wall.
33. On the Bulwer Street frontage the side of the garage remains open such as
when approved as a carport. The view of the Bulwer
Street frontage and verandah
of the house from the south-east and from directly in front of the house are not
interrupted by the
roller door. Again, any interruption to the view between the
street and the house is because of the boundary wall. From some positions
south-west along Bulwer Street, this frontage and verandah are obscured by the
roller door.
34. Examination of the plans reveals the verandah to be elevated about
1 metre above the level of the roads and so some surveillance
of the street
over the boundary wall is possible from the verandah. The boundary wall obscures
the view of most of the ground level
open space.
35. Required is a relaxation from 1.5 metres to 0.96 metres in the side setback
from Bulwer Street. As this side of the garage is
to remain open as originally
approved and there is in the main little change in the outlook to and from the
house on this street
frontage, I am of the view that this setback relaxation is
acceptable.
36. On the Wright Street frontage the roller door, and therefore the front of
the garage, is level with rather than 0.5 meres behind
the building line. The
garage is, however, at the side of the house to which it is attached. The plans
show that there is also
a wall of the house 1.3 metres closer to Wright Street
than the verandah and the roller door. I have accepted that this setback
also acceptable in the particular circumstances.
37. The remaining aspect of the proposal to be considered is the impact the
development would have on the character and amenity of
the locality. Both
parties have referred to particular developments about 500 to 600 metres to
the north along Wright Street
support their respective cases. While this mix
of house designs assists in establishing the general character of the precinct,
particular relevance is the streetscape of Wright Street extending about
150 metres from Bulwer Street to Brigatti Gardens.
38. In Wright Street opposite the subject land are three different institutions
that cater, respectively, for the homeless, the addicted
and aged persons. That
directly opposite has an outbuilding with roller doors on the street frontage.
The others do not have development
in the front setback but they are
institutional in character and include car parks and vehicle access ways. On
Strata Lot 2 adjoining
the subject land the two-storey house has a roller door
at the building line, which is at a reduced set back, similar to that of
house on the subject land.
39. I can find no sound planning reason for setting aside the designation of
Wright Street as the primary street and Bulwer Street
as the secondary Street,
made when approval was granted for the carport. It follows, therefore, that the
garage that will result
from the development of the roller door will be at the
side of the house on the subject land and not in the front setback. The
approval of the carport does not, of course, direct that a garage in
the same location must be approved.
40. From the evidence presented, however, I have concluded that, in this
instance, the addition of a roller door to the carport can
be supported.
41. From my examination of this matter, I find that the setback variations
required are acceptable given the set back from Wright
Street will be at the
building line and the existing open frontage to the structure on Bulwer Street
will not be affected by the
roller door. I have also formed the view that the
development that will result from approval of the roller door will generally be
consistent with the policy objectives for the locality. It will not detract from
the streetscape or appearance of the dwelling given
the form and character of
development in the vicinity, and will not unduly affect the existing level of
surveillance between the
dwelling and the street.
42. I have therefore decided to uphold the appeal and approve the roller door
applied for.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (64.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter