URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EVAN and ELLEN STRUDWICK and TONY LINO AND TINA ANNE DE COPPI (Decision O.19659 and O.19679) [2011] WABDT 58 (29 June 2011)
BUILDING DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
CHAIRMAN: J HOCKLEY
BUILDER MEMBER: G PRUNSTER CONSUMER MEMBER: R MEAKES
1 APRIL 2011
ORDERS ISSUED:
4 APRIL 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
29 JUNE 2011
COMPLAINT NO:
O.19659 and O.19679
EVAN and ELLEN STRUDWICK
COMPLAINANTS
TONY LINO AND TINA ANNE DE COPPI
RESPONDENTS
LOCATION OF WORKS:
97 (LOT 417) TUART STREET, SOUTH
REASONS FOR DECISION
0.19659 was dated 27 April 2010 and lodged by Evan and Ellen Strudwick alleging
workmanship faults:‐
to Dulux AcraTex external wall render.
not completed from hand‐over and practical completion
warranty states incorrect products. The redress sought by the owners
(a) Subject to the outcomes of the contractual dispute defects to Dulux AcraTex
render be rectified.
(b) Complete work as per practical completion and hand‐over lists with
alleged contractual issues were listed as:‐
house walls not as per contract/addenda finish. The redress sought by the
owners was stated to be:‐
(a) Estimates of AcraTex render over sand render painting vary $17,500.00
‐ $25,500.00. Due to contracted finish not being
received, reimbursement
of $17,500.00 sought or external finish as per contract.
(b) The ACCC (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) to test Dulux
statements in regard to training applicator. Misleading
statements. Warranty to
be re‐issued stating correct products.
This Complaint was dated 21 April 2010 and supported by 8 pages of supporting
documents together with a letter sent to the builder
on 30 March 2010, letter
sent to the Building Disputes Tribunal on 22 April 2010; a letter in response by
Mr and Mrs De Coppi and
further correspondence amounting to some 20
0.19679 was received on 6 May 2010 and was made by the owners Mr & Mrs
Strudwick and dated 5 May 2010 and listed the
alleged contractual issues
Incorrect details, company name on residential builder warranty
company name applied to contract documents.
Inconsistent
use of an ABN applied to contract documents.
The redress sought was builder to address and have intermediary
apply correct name to Certificate of Insurance re‐issue.
Builder to give written advice on correct and current building
company explaining the inconsistent use of an ABN’s
company/partnership.
This complaint was supported by 12 pages of documentation.
of the Complainants, Mr Strudwick, informed the Tribunal that when he retired he
was a Senior Maintenance Planner at Worsley Aluminum.
answering questions from Mr Meakes, the consumer representative on the Tribunal,
Mr Strudwick said that he had no or very little
knowledge about
Tribunal noted that at page 100 of the BDT Papers Mr Strudwick had
“In the past 38 years we have sold 7 houses, 6 of which we have had
custom built. ... .”
the hearing on 1 April 2011 the Tribunal informed the owners that it had no
power to deal with any matter to do with the ACCC in
regard to misleading
statements. If the owners wish they can take those matters up with the
accordance with the owners wishes the Tribunal considered the workmanship
complaints.
Strudwick stated that they wanted or specified a coarse granular
“rough” look. The owners specified the Dulux two‐step
This was a sealer and then the AcraTex.
Strudwick stated that the finish expected was not obtained because the colour
that protects the render had imperfections and the
aesthetics and visual aspect
changed on application.
Strudwick conceded that beauty was subjective.
owner produced various samples (5 in number) on pieces of fibro showing that
AcraTex and AcraTex painted over with Aqua Shield
and other samples with AcraTex
painted over with three coats of Weather Shield. The samples were produced to
show the Tribunal what
the owners wanted and what finish they received because
of the imperfections in the colour that protects the render and the coatings
that were applied on the recommendation of the Dulux representative to overcome
these imperfections.
owner gave evidence that the contract specified the external walls, garage,
workshop and workshop externals, a total of 456 square
meters to be finished in
Dulux Trowel On AcraTex, Coventry Course coloured render in the colour Pony
Express. The upper storey was
approximately 120 square meters.
late February 2009 the Dulux Trowel On AcraTex, Coventry Course coloured render
in the colour Pony Express was applied to the outside
of the top storey of the
owners’ house. When Dulux AcraTex was applied it had “
tinter floatation
” manifests
itself by small black spots in the paint leaving an unsightly and unacceptable
mottled complexion to the outside
top part of the owner’s
owners discussed this problem with the builder.
owners wanted the problem fixed.
builder said that he would contact the Dulux Representative and follow their
recommendations on how the problem should be remedied.
owners agreed with this course of action.
considerable discussions between the builder and the Dulux Territory Development
representative for the South‐West of
Western Australia, Mr Jamie Buswell
it was decided to coat a membrane over the AcraTex called Dulux AcraShield to
give the colour
the owners wanted with the added benefit of covering the
unsightly and unaccepted mottling.
builder discussed the proposed course of action with the owners who did not stop
the work proceeding.
AcraShield membrane was applied to the upper storey over the AcraTex
paint roller marks (“roll ups”) were visible and the owners were not
happy with the finish.
Buswell then recommended that the upper storey be painted with Dulux Weather
Shield X10.
the 18 May 2009 the AcraTex had been coated with AcraShield and with Dulux
Weather Shield at no cost to the owners.
coatings were applied by trade professional painters, in particular, a Mr
painter also cross‐batched the paints to try and get them uniform. The top
part of the house that was affected amounted
to 120 square meters. The bottom
floor of the house was approximately 336 square meters.
the Tribunal the owners stated that the job was imperfect and that it was not
fit for the purpose. The owners also raised an
additional issue, that the
application must be applied by trained applicators and not by the painters of
the surface of the bottom or lower storey there was a problem with white
stippling visible.
Buswell after consulting his State Manager and other persons with paint
expertise in Dulux recommended that the bottom section
of the house had to be
painted with Weather Shield, some three coats, to overcome the white stippling
problem and secondly so that
it had the same thickness of membrane as the upper
level of the house.
practical completion inspection (13/11/2009) reference was made to
“AcraTex finish, 10 year warranty to be supplied to the
owner by Dulux and
note finish to be discussed.” The builder stated that the owners signed
the Inspection Sheet accepting the
job. At practical completion there was no
complaint about the render and AcraTex warranty to be provided.
regard to the owner’s house as it is today Mr Buswell stated that the
bottom level of the house is excellent.
Strudwick stated to the Tribunal that the bottom level storey of the house was
acceptable.
5 August 2010, some 15 months after the coatings and some 8 months after
Practical Completion, the owners had “
the premises and prepare a written report. In their report
states that the owners’ complaint was that they wanted a two step
finish to the outside of the house but they ended up with
a four step on the
upper storey and a three step on the lower storey. The owners stated that the
finish neither complied with the
contract or with Dulux specifications that
stated a three step process.
accuracy of the Houspect Report was challenged by both the builder and Mr
De Coppi stated in a letter addressed to Mr and Mrs Strudwick (BDT Papers at
page 145) that he had spoken to Mr Reece Tatham the
person that Mr Coalcliffe,
the author of the Houspect Report, sought out for plastering advice. Mr Tatham
stated that he told Mr
Coalcliffe that the job required a
finish and “in order to achieve the specified colour in any brand of
texture a final painted coat would be required. This statement
from the Houspect Report prepared by Mr Mark Coalcliffe.
conversations with the author, Mr Mark Coalcliffe stated to the builder that he
had left out of the report the following statement.
Buswell criticized aspects of the Houspect Report in a letter dated 4 October
2010 (BDT Papers at page 61). Mr Buswell stated that:
“At this stage we have not seen any documentation from Mr Coalcliffe or
Housespect to verify qualifications as a Coating Inspector.
We have also had conversations with Reece Tatham of Better Wall Plasterers
who was nominated in the Investigation Report as being
an approved applicator.
Please be advised that Better Wall Plasterers is not currently a Dulux AcraTex
approved applicator and does
not currently have an account with Dulux. Reece has
indicated he would like to attend a course in the future.
Reece also stated that he informed Mr Coalcliffe that in order to achieve the
specified colour in Texture System, eight top coat would
Strudwick informed the Tribunal that he gave Mr Coalcliffe and/or Mr Tatham
an “incentive” to produce the report.
Houspect Report provides the basis for Mr and Mrs Strudwick to claim a sum of
$31,110 to remove the coatings on the house and
to replace them with AcraTex and
no paint topcoat.
all of the reasons stated above the Tribunal did not place a great deal of
weight on the Houspect Report. The author of that report
and his plastering
advisor had little knowledge of Dulux products and were not qualified
applicators or Coating Inspectors.
Tribunal preferred the evidence of Mr Buswell who is an authority on Dulux
products. Mr Buswell’s evidence referred to below
indicates that nothing
further needs to be done to the house. Mr Buswell stated that the
obtained although smooth not rough in texture, as originally sought by the
complainant, would last longer, it would not fade and would
be more resistant to
the weather.
owner stated that in his view the integrity of the upper floors was compromised
by multiple coats. He referred to “coating
failure” but on
questioning admitted that there were no problems to date. Mr Strudwick was
concerned and fearful that the coatings
would begin to peel and fail in the
future. He was also concerned that the owners do not have a product warranty in
Strudwick admitted that there had been no coating failure to date and that for
18 months the surface had been fine.
Tribunal could not establish any reasonable or rational basis for the
owners’ fear of coating failure.
Dulux representative for the South‐West of Western Australia, Mr Jamie
Buswell was called to give evidence on behalf of
the builder. Mr Buswell had
never met the owners.
Buswell gave evidence that in the Mandurah – Albany – Esperance area
some 15,000 litres per year of AcraTex coatings
had been applied. It was a
widely used product with very few problems.
Buswell was shown the samples tendered to the Tribunal by the owner. He stated
that the sample the owner said was representative
of the upper storey of the
house was not an accurate representation as it had a very heavy film thickness
of AcraShield compared
to the Weather Shield and the membrane was about twice as
thick as it was on the house. He stated that AcraShield has a dry thickness
68 microns and Weather Shield a thickness of 30‐35 microns. Mr Buswell
later in his evidence corrected this thickness to
69 microns for AcraShield and
25 microns for Weather Shield.
Buswell stated that on the top floor of the owners house where the AcraTex
coating was applied one coat of AcraShield was applied
and then one coat
WeatherShield. On the bottom storey there were three coats of Weather Shield.
The reason for this was so the same micron film build
would be present on both
the upper and lower storey. Mr Buswell stated that when tinter floatation was
detected the builder immediately
consulted with the builder. Mr Buswell said to put on AcraShield on the top
story to overcome
the tinder flotation. On the bottom story the AcraTex had
some white stippling through the texture coat but minimum tinter floatation.
this surface Mr Buswell said that after consulting his head office in regard to
both the upper and lower storey’s that he
was advised that in respect of
the lower story, to put Weather Shield over the AcraTex and smooth out and
finish and remove roller
marks. Mr Buswell stated that the initial product had a
five year warranty. Dulux had issued a ten year warranty on AcraTex and Weather
Shield. Mr Buswell admitted that the warranties issued in regard to the
owner’s premises stated the wrong type of Weather Shield.
stated that Dulux was prepared to issue the owners with a ten year warranty for
both the upper and lower storeys of the
house for the products that have been
applied. Mr Buswell stated that the extra coatings had required the use of
materials, labour,
scaffold, paint and painters.
builder had paid all of these costs amounting to
approximately
charged the
owners anything for the painting.
Buswell stated that he had no problems in sponsoring the applicator Mr Brad
Valli who worked on the owners’ job to attend
the next course available in
Perth to become an accredited applicator. Mr Buswell stated that he did this on
the basis of Mr Valli’s
previous work after inspecting various jobs
undertaken by Mr Valli prior to him working on the owners’ house in May
Buswell stated that the applicators, including Mr Valli subsequently
attended a training course conducted by Dulux in September 2009
and were after
the course officially accredited applicators for AcraTex products. Mr
Buswell stated that although not accredited
in May 2009 Mr Valli had been
selected as a suitable candidate to become accredited when the next course was
Buswell was asked by the Tribunal whether he could be an independent witness and
whether he could give evidence independently of
the fact that he had been called
by the builder.
Buswell stated that he was an expert in paint and coatings and their application
and he could give independent evidence to the
Tribunal and he took an oath and
said he would give independent evidence.
Tribunal found Mr Buswell a truthful, reliable witness in whom it could place
great confidence. Mr Buswell honestly and forthrightly
answered questions from
all members of the Tribunal. Mr Buswell impressed the Tribunal with his
knowledge and expertise.
following extracts from the evidence give an indication of the evidence given by
Mr Buswell and why the Tribunal placed great
weight on his evidence in reaching
its decision and consequential order.
Buswell stated:
“...AcraTex is the trade name that is called Dulux AcraTex. The system
involves different colours. Obviously there is a primer;
there is a texture and
a top coat. So our primer is called AcraPrime, the texture is called Coventry
Coarse and the topcoat is called
AcraShield. So what we have here in in the
specifications is those three products, it gives us adult film build, it gives
drying times. The data sheet that we are looking at is an indexed data
sheet for the product Coventry Coarse. So it gives you more
in his evidence Mr Buswell had referred to "tinter floatation" and
“Well we saw some black flecks in what I call a blotchiness. It
wasn’t a consistent black fleck, it was sort of a blotch
here and a blotch
over here sort of which is consistent with tinter floatation.
The cause is a saturation of tinter in the paint, yes. The product itself
just physically cannot hold any more tint, so what they
do is they can use a
mixer and they drill up as they normally would on site, but once they put it
up on the wall and the product settles then the tinter
actually blotched to the
surface and in this case being a dark colour there was a lot of black tint in
the product and that's what
floated to the surface. So basically the tint has
actually separated from the product itself.
In regard to the “white fleck” Mr Buswell stated:
“There was a little bit of white fleck in there, not so much that I
would have been concerned about to be honest, but the white
fleck is caused from
when they first trowel on the product, then they come back with the float sponge
and when they work it up the
actual coating is separated from the aggregate and
that's what we are seeing. We are seeing the tops of the aggregate in small
particles.”
Buswell stated that in order to obtain a warranty the full Dulux Tech System
had to be followed. The specifications from Dulux
now required that AcraTex be
coated with an AcraShield top coat. Dulux would no longer supply a warranty for
AcraTex without the
AcraShield topcoat.
was evident to the Tribunal that the owners wanted to go back to the old
specifications and have an AcraTex coarse finish without
an AcraShield
view of the changed product specifications by Dulux a warranty could not be
obtained for AcraTex without an AcraShield topcoat.
Mr Strudwick wanted a
warranty or warranties for the work.
Buswell was asked when the bottom storey was finished:
“What did you think of the bottom compared to the top?
A. “Compared to the top, even better."
Q. Was better?
Q. How would you describe the bottom part?
A. "In what sense?"
Q. Would you say it was good, acceptable, unacceptable?
A. "I'd say it was good."
Q. You thought the bottom part‐‐?
fact to this day there's been people that have driven past the house and
commented how good the render is and these are people
from the Master Painters
Association was in Bunbury last week and actually commented on the house and I
believe one of the members
of the Painters’ Registration Board based in
Bunbury has commented on the house to and they like the
Buswell was cross‐examined by Mr Strudwick but he did not deviate from his
opinion as stated in regard to: the need for the
coatings; the quality of
workmanship; and the standard of the applicators that later became qualified
Dulux accredited AcraTex applicators.
Buswell was asked by the Mr Meakes, the Consumer Representative on the
“Q. Just one other thing, the paint system that was applied, is it in
any way exceptional, or is it standard that you would—
A. It has become a standard practise. We have released Weather Shield now in
a matt finish which was used on this project which has
now become a very common
practise for people who are looking to keep the texture finish and not feel it
so much with a product, like
a membrane. So now they're using a paint one
A. And we are actually in the process of having a specify onto our system,
we use a website called a G‐track system which
is where we get these
specifications from. Now, these are all written by our commercial team in
Melbourne and by our technical advisor
in South Australia. Now, they are
actually going to be putting out a specification for AcraTex with Weather
Q. Okay, so in an absolutely conforming paint system, there is no
need for a tie coat that goes on top of the other; you can
confirm that?
A. One on the top of the other, yes.
Q. You can confirm that?
A. Yes, not a problem.
there is no inherent fault in putting the painting system that you’ve put
A. Not a problem.
Q. There is no doubt in your mind?
A. No doubt at all."
Mr Buswell was asked the following questions:
“Q. And in your expert opinion what did you think of the house at the
A. My personal opinion?
Q. Yeah, that’s what we want. You’re an expert?
well my personal opinion is that the house is fine, uniform texture
top and bottom.
what if anything do you think needs to be done to it at the
A. Well, at the moment I don't think anything needs to be done to
Q. So you don't need to re‐touch it at the moment?
think the only issues that have arisen really is in regards to a
cross‐examination by Mr Strudwick seeking a separate warranty for the top
storey and one for the bottom or lower storey Mr
“But what I'm saying is do we need to have a separate‐‐will
scrap all this and have one warranty to say top floor
this, bottom floor this
and that you are protected with a 10 year warranty for the overall building, I
am happy to do that.”
questioning by the Tribunal Mr Buswell stated that he had authority to issue
such a warranty as he had described above and that
he would do so in a
relatively short time period.
Buswell stated that in three years there were six jobs that he knows of where
AcraShield was used that had been painted over.
Buswell stated Dulux now insist that AcraTex must have a top
members of the Tribunal found this significant in view of the fact that the
AcraTex on the top level of the house already had
a coat over the top of it and
the AcraTex over the bottom level of the house had three coats of Weather Shield
over it. Mr Buswell
told the Tribunal that Dulux was prepared to give a ten year
warranty for both upper and lower storey’s and his view was that
Houspect report where the surface could be taken off and no coat placed over the
AcraTex was completely wrong in view of the
changed product specification
requirements insisted on by Dulux in regard to a coating over the
members of the Tribunal were unanimous in their consideration that they agreed
with the evidence of Mr Buswell.
Tribunal then returned and looked Mr Strudwick in the eye and all members of the
Tribunal then told Mr and Mrs Strudwick the reasons
why they intended to dismiss
the complaint. The Tribunal explained its reasoning and asked Mr and Mrs
Strudwick to point out any
errors in this reasoning.
session lasted for some 45 minutes. During this session the Consumer Member of
the Tribunal, Mr Meakes, an engineer with considerable
experience in the paint
industry at a ship Dock Yard, spelt out to Mr Strudwick his reasons why the
Tribunal had to accept Mr Buswell’s
evidence that there was nothing wrong
with the painting job.
Tribunal found that the builder had done everything correctly. When there was a
problem found he contacted the expert, Mr Buswell,
the State representative of
Dulux. The owner agreed with the builder that the
should be called in and relied upon. This was done. The owner admitted that
he had not met Mr Buswell or even seen him until the
day of the hearing.
members of the Tribunal were of the view that Mr and Mrs Strudwick were given a
very fair hearing and they were asked if there
were any mistakes or failings in
the reasons given by the Tribunal members as to why they intended to dismiss the
complaints. They
were asked to please tell the Tribunal and the Tribunal will
consider those matters.
Tribunal did consider the matters raised by Mr Strudwick.
was the unanimous view of the Tribunal that the complaints be
Tribunal then made Orders in the presence of Mr and Mrs
Orders made by the Tribunal were that the complaints be dismissed for reasons
explained at the hearing.
J J HOCKLEY CHAIRMAN
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (835 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (142 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter