URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/223.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Connor and Anor v Town of Victoria Park [2004] WATPAT 223 (21 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 232 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 223
Heard: 6 December 2004
Decision: 21 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
FRANCIS DAVID O’CONNOR AND MARIA ANN
TOWN OF VICTORIA PARK
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Development refusal – Funeral parlour – Local Centre zone
– Traffic – Noise – Hours of operation –
neighbours – Purpose of zone
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr M Hardy (instructed by Hardy Bowen) appeared for the Appellants
Mr S Allerding (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal against the refusal by the Town of Victoria Park
”) to grant planning approval for the development
of a funeral parlour at Lot 7 on the north-west corner of the intersection
of Berwick Street and Sussex Street, East Victoria Park (“
2. The subject land is owned by the Appellants. The proposed funeral parlour
would be a branch of the funeral business of Parravale
Pty Ltd operating as
Chippers Funerals.
3. The subject land has an area of 1155m
. The corner of the
intersection is truncated leaving a frontage to Sussex Street at the south-east
of 15.17 metres and a frontage
to Berwick Street on the north-east of 41.62
metres. The north-west boundary abuts a right of way and the south-west
boundary abuts
a residential lot on which there is a house. On the subject land
is a building previously used as a service station and more recently
vehicle workshop but now vacant.
4. The proposed funeral parlour would be a single storey building within which
would be a chapel, reception area, foyer, manager’s
office, coffin
display, meeting/arrangements room, preparation room, cool room and enclosed
garage. The garage would accommodate
three cars and main access would be via a
roller door from the right of way. The building would have a parapet wall 11.34
long on the boundary with the back yard of the adjoining residential lot.
The existing crossover onto Sussex Street would be closed,
as would the
northernmost of the two crossovers to Berwick Street. Access to 6 parking bays
and a second roller door to the internal
garage would be from Berwick Street and
to 7 bays from the right of way. To note is the presence of a median strip
of the Berwick Street frontage.
5. The subject land is zoned Urban in the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
6. Under its Town Planning Scheme No.1 (“
Respondent has divided its district into a number of precincts. The subject land
is within East Victoria Park Precinct
Precinct P12
and is zoned Local Centre. Sheet A of Precinct P12 reproduces from the Zoning
Table of TPS1 the use classes for the Local
Local Centre
Consulting Rooms, Day Care Centre
Convenience Store, Service Station
Educational Establishment, Place of Worship
Fast Food Outlet, Restaurant
General Industry, Transport Depot
Hazardous Industry, Noxious Industry
Hospital, Nursing Home, Residential Building
Hotel, Motel, Tavern
Light Industry
Lodging House, Serviced Apartment
Massage Rooms
Motor vehicles and Marine Sales Premises
Open Air Sales and Display
Restricted Premises
Single House, Group Dwelling, Aged or Dependent Persons’ Dwelling,
Multiple Dwelling
7. A funeral parlour is a use not listed in the Zoning Table. Clause 16 of TPS1
“Unlisted Uses” reads:
“If the use of land for
a particular purpose is not specifically mentioned in the Zoning Table and
cannot reasonably be determined
as falling within the interpretation of one of
the use class categories Council may:
(i) determine that the use is consistent with the objectives and purpose of
the particular zone and is therefore permitted; or
(ii) determine that the proposed use may be consistent with the objectives
and purpose of the zone and thereafter follow the advertising
procedure of
clause 37 in considering an application for planning approval; or
(iii) determine that the use is not consistent with the objectives and
purpose of that particular zone and is therefore not permitted.”
8. It is specifically stated for Precinct P12:
the use of the land for a particular purpose is not specifically mentioned in
the Zoning Table and cannot be determined
as falling within the interpretation
of one of the use class categories Council may consider it an unlisted
(ie discretionary)
requiring that the advertising procedures referred
to in clause 37 of the Scheme Text be followed.”
9. Precinct P12 has two Local Centre zones. The subject land is one of four
lots in that named “Berwick Street Shops”.
Two of the other lots are
vacant, the fourth contains a restaurant. The subject land is about 40% of the
total area. Under Precinct
P12 it states:
“These centres
offering services for the day–today (sic) needs of the local population
can be further consolidated. Uses
such as local shops, consulting rooms, child
care facilities and restaurants are appropriate in these areas. ...
Careful control will be exercised over the nature of any proposed new uses,
their design and layout to ensure the amenity of adjacent
residential uses is
maintained. ... Additionally, adequate parking is to be available to ensure
that retail traffic does not encroach
into the residential areas, although
on-site parking requirements may be waived by the Council where uses are to
serve the local
population, and are unlikely to require prolonged stop overs by
customers. ... Access from new parking areas will not be permitted
directly onto
Berwick Street.”
10. Section 3.5: Non-Residential Uses in or Adjacent to Residential Areas of the
Respondent’s TPS1 Policy Manual includes:
(a) To ensure non-residential uses in or adjacent to residential areas are
compatible with existing nearby dwellings.
3.5.3 Policy
(a) Non-residential
development on land which abuts land which is or may be used for residential
purposes shall only be permitted
where the nature of the non-residential use
will not cause undue conflict through the generation of traffic and parking or
the emission
of noise or any other form of pollution which may be undesirable in
residential areas.”
The refusal
11. The Respondent refused the application for the following
“1. Non-compliance with clause 3.5.3 of Town
Planning Scheme No 1 Policy Manual with regard to generation of
non-residential
traffic associated with the use within the residential area due
to the solid median island adjacent to the subject site on Berwick
2. Non-compliance with clause 3.5.3 of Town Planning Scheme No 1 Policy
Manual with regard to the likely noise and disturbance
after normal office hours.
3. The proposed use is considered to negatively impact on the conservation of
the amenity of the existing adjoining residential area
by interfering with the
ordinary enjoyment of life by the residents.”
12. Mr Kimberley Chipper, a Director of Parravale Pty Ltd, appeared as a
witness. He said Chippers Funerals currently operate a funeral
parlour at 190
Albany Highway, Victoria Park. Those premises are about 70 years old and
are now unsuitable. The proposed purpose
built funeral parlour on the subject
land would replace the existing premises.
13. Mr Chipper described the Victoria Park funeral parlour as a “small
branch office”. Chippers Funerals’ three
main funeral parlours are
at Subiaco, Myaree and Rockingham, with another smaller branch at Mandurah.
Hearses and other vehicles
would be regularly housed at Subiaco not the subject
land. Deceased persons collected mostly go first to the mortuary at Subiaco,
going to Victoria Park only for the funeral.
14. Based on business at the Albany Highway branch, Mr Chipper anticipated there
would be up to five funerals per week at the Berwick
Street premises. In his
experience the number of persons who attend ranges from 5 to 20. When questioned
he said 500 might be possible,
but it has never happened. For the majority of
funerals people go straight to the cemetery.
15. When questioned, Mr Chipper acknowledged that his firm would welcome growth.
He hoped that there would initially be growth to
five funerals every week and,
in time, more. Based on the current Albany Highway business, he did not
anticipate rapid growth.
16. Mr Allerding, a planning consultant, who appeared for the Respondent,
pointed out that the proposed development is not listed
in the use class table
under TPS1. It was his main submission, therefore, that the proposed use cannot
be considered as of right
in this zone and must be tested against the criteria
of TPS1 and the policy framework.
17. Essentially, to be examined are the impact of the proposed use on the
locality and the residential neighbours because of traffic,
parking and noise
and the appropriateness of the use in the Local Centre zone.
18. The issues raised in respect of the proposed development can be examined
under the following headings.
19. There was no dispute that the median strip the full length of the Berwick
Street frontage prevents vehicles travelling south-easterly
from turning right
into the subject land. Those drivers who wish to enter the subject land have to
complete one of two different
manoeuvres. One is to go just past the subject
land, turn right into Sussex Street, do a U turn or turn using a house
re enter Berwick Street in a north-westerly direction and then turn
into the funeral parlour. The second is to turn right into Ashburton
Street just
before the subject land, then do a series of left turns; first into Gascoyne
Street, then into Sussex Street, back into
Berwick Street and then into the
funeral parlour car park. To note is that Ashburton Street is a cul de sac
beyond Gascoyne Street.
20. The Respondent submitted that both of these manoeuvres are not consistent
with maintaining the amenity in the adjoining Residential
zone as they result in
non-residential traffic travelling past houses.
21. The Respondent called two neighbours. Mr Den Welch lives in Sussex Street in
the house that adjoins the subject land. Ms Natasha
Bowman lives next door to Mr
Welch. Both were concerned about the prospect of vehicles using their driveways
to turn or vehicles
doing U turns in front of their houses. They were also
concerned that additional traffic and the bus stops in Sussex Street near
houses might make conditions unsafe.
22. There were differences between the parties about the capacity of Gascoyne
Street to accommodate additional traffic. Mr Hajigabriel
specifically measured
Gascoyne Street. It is 6.8 metres wide from curb to fence line. Parking bays on
the south west side are marked
at 2.6 metres width leaving a carriageway of
4.2 metres. His view that, even if cars were parked, there would be sufficient
to accommodate any increase in traffic from the proposed use appears
23. The Appellants acknowledged the traffic manoeuvres required. It was argued,
however, that there would be little, if any, change
from what previously
occurred. It was also submitted that the traffic volumes would most likely be
greater with many of the uses
that might be approved under the zoning.
24. There is an average of one funeral per day. No study was conducted, but it
is not unreasonable to assume that not all visitors
to the funeral parlour will
need to make the manoeuvres through the residential area. For most funerals it
would appear that at
most up to ten cars, if that, would have to make the
manoeuvres.
25. From the submissions of the parties, particular on the previous use of the
site, potential uses in the zone, the proposed use
and that the long standing
median in Berwick Street is likely to remain, I lean to the view that the
traffic from the proposed use
using the adjoining residential zone will not be
materially different from that which occurred previously and from what can
be expected in the future because of the zoning of the subject land.
26. The parties referred to the parking requirements set out in the report on
the proposal prepared by the Respondent’s officer
for the ‘Ordinary
Council Meeting’ of 7 September 2004. As the proposal is a use not listed
the officer assessed parking
space requirements on the basis
(a) public assembly floor area: 16 spaces - 14 provided
(b) office/administration: 1 space – 3
27. Mr Allerding said this revealed a shortfall of parking for those attending
funerals. For large funerals the impact on neighbouring
residential streets
would be even more unacceptable.
28. Mr Welch and Ms Bowman objected because they believed that those attending
large funerals and those confused by the circuitous
access to the parking would
park in front of their house using spaces their guests would otherwise use.
29. Mr Chipper’s evidence was that for most funerals up to 10 cars might
attend. In the absence of any other information it
is agreed with the
Appellants that the level of parking is adequate for the development proposed.
30. Mr Welch expressed concern that activity could occur at any time of the
night, any day of the week and this would conflict with
Policy 3.5 and have an
adverse impact on him in particular. He also believed theme funerals, such as
the Scottish funeral offered,
would be a source of unwanted noise.
31. It was Mr Chipper’s evidence that most funeral services are conducted
between 9.30am and 11.30am and 1.30pm and 3.30pm.
The events that mark a theme
funeral, such as bagpipes, occur at the cemetery between the gate and the
crematorium or graveside.
32. Mr Chipper said after-hours activity usually would be associated with the
collection and delivery of a deceased person and this
would be one in 20 times
before midnight and one in 50 after midnight. That is, about once per month on
average. The noise associated
with this would be the opening and closing of the
garage roller door facing the right of way. This noise, he said, would be no
than that of a roller door on a domestic garage.
33. A condition of approval could prevent funerals being conducted after normal
working hours. The Appellants make a strong point,
however, in that the
previous service station use operated after hours and to be of service to local
needs, the list of uses in the
zoning table that might be approved would also
have to operate after hours.
34. I could find nothing in the evidence that leads to a conclusion that the
proposed use will generate noise that would be sufficient
to provide a reason
for refusing the proposed use.
Use of land in Local Centre
35. Counsel for the Appellants said that the proposed development would provide
a service for mainly local people who died. This
was based on an analysis of
the last 100 funerals conducted at the Albany Highway funeral parlour. Sixty
four per cent of those who
had funerals lived within 5 km. Twenty one percent
had lived within 5km to 10 km and 15% had lived beyond 10 km.
36. The Respondent submitted that most of those who would attend the funerals
would be people from outside the district and therefore
the use would not be
serving the day-to-day needs of the local population.
37. Mr Hardy submitted that the Respondent cannot have exclusivity for this
site. People from other suburbs will visit the site whether
it is a funeral
parlour, a service station or any of the other uses in the zoning table. In the
Appellants’ submission it serves
the local community.
38. Pointed out were that the proposal includes a chapel which is a Place of
Worship and an office, both of which are considered
a P, or permitted, use in
39. Mr Welch and Ms Bowman were of the opinion that a funeral parlour does not
provide for their daily needs and so cannot be said
to provide for the daily
needs of the local population. Both were of the view that the nature of a
funeral parlour is such that it
caters mainly for people outside the immediate
40. From the Appellants’ figures, 85% of perhaps five funerals in a week
would be of people who had lived within 10km. That
is an average of about 4
local deceased per week. Three, if a 5km radius is used.
41. Mr Allerding referred to the distinction between local and district centres
in TPS1 and the respective local and district catchments
of the two different
centres. In respect of the development of the subject land, he spoke of the
‘opportunity cost’.
He explained this as the opportunity foregone
if the subject land is not developed for a use that, in the Respondent’s
serves the day-to-day needs of the local community consistent with the
specific objectives for the zone. A use that only catered
for a district or
wider catchment, he said should not be located in the Local Centre zone. It is
noted that the subject land is
Street Shops”.
42. Ms Bowman said she would like a use she would frequently use; a use she
thought would enhances and make a contribution to the
locality. When examined
by Mr Hardy about the uses listed for the zone Ms Bowman said she would be
concerned by the traffic
by a fast food outlet for instance. As in
this instance, she would make her views known to the Respondent if any other
for was of concern to her.
43. The only guide to “day-to-day” is from Precinct Plan P12 where
it says of the two areas zoned Local
“These centres offering services for the day–today (sic) needs of
the local population can be further consolidated.
Uses such as local shops,
consulting rooms, child care facilities and restaurants are appropriate in these
44. This statement provides a list of uses and there are others in the zoning
table for the Zone that might be approved. It can
be inferred that these
activities are appropriate for the Zone as they serve the needs, in a general
sense, of the local population,
if not every day, then as part of ordinary
routine and regular activity.
45. The proposed funeral parlour would provide a service for local people, but I
am not convinced it is a use that can be easily
placed among the other uses
listed. It is a use that caters for such a small proportion of the local
population and for such a specific
purpose. I have concluded that it not one
serving the day-to-day needs of the local
population.
46. The zoning table for the Local Centre zone has designated as P (permitted)
or AA (a use requiring the exercise of discretion
for approval), a number of
high traffic generating and people attracting uses and some of which would in
the normal course of events
operate after hours, such as fast food outlet,
restaurant, convenience store, service station and perhaps doctors’
rooms. It was submitted that such uses have the potential to
conflict with the Precinct Plan P12 objective of ensuring that the
“amenity of the adjacent residential uses is maintained”. The
median in Berwick Street also necessitates that non-residential
traffic must
“encroach into the residential areas” in conflict with the policy
for Precinct Plan P12.
47. The evidence has shown that noise and hours of operation of the proposed
funeral parlour would have little impact on the adjoining
Residential zone.
Traffic and parking would be introduce into the neighbouring zone, but most
likely not have any greater impact,
and possibly less, than most of the P and AA
uses in the Zoning Table for the Local Centre zone.
48. From Precinct Plan P12, however, it is clear that the Local Centre zone was
created particularly for development that would serve
the day-to-day needs of
the local population. A funeral parlour would provide a particular service for
the local population, but
I have formed the view that a funeral parlour does not
serve the day-to-day needs of this population and so would not be consistent
with the objectives for this zone, which was created particularly for this
49. I must therefore advise that the appeal has been dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (98.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter