URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/230.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cutts Transport Pty Ltd v Shire of Manjimup [2004] WATPAT 230 (24 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 182 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 230
Heard: 18 and 19 October 2004
Decision: 24 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
CUTTS TRANSPORT PTY LTD
SHIRE OF MANJIMUP
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Development refusal – Fast food outlet – Highway frontage
– Service Industry zone – Discretionary use –Planning
– Draft town planning scheme - Traffic – Town gateway –
Streetscape
Cases referred to
Dilatte v MacTiernan
[2002] WASCA 100
Appearances
Mr A Roberts (instructed by Minter Ellison) appeared for the
Mr P Wittkuhn (instructed by McLeods) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal by Cutts Transport Pty Ltd (“
against the refusal by the Shire of Manjimup (“
to grant planning consent for the development of a “Red Rooster”
fast food outlet at Lot 824 Mottram Street,
Manjimup (“
2. The subject land has an area of 2457m
with a frontage of
52.21 metres to the western side of Mottram Street. The Appellant
previously used the subject land as a
depot. It is now unused and
contains a corrugated iron industrial shed.
3. Mottram Street is a continuation of the South Western Highway as it passes
through the Manjimup townsite. The subject land is
between Mottram Street and
the Westrail railway line. West of the railway is the Town Centre of Manjimup,
referred to by the parties
as the Central Business District
4. Adjoining to the south of the subject land is Manjin Park, created on railway
reserve. This park comprises grassed areas, play
equipment, toilets, picnic
facilities, landscaping, access ways and parking. From Manjin Park is a
pedestrian path at grade across
the railway to the railway station and then to
the adjacent CBD. Immediately to the north of the subject land are two service
lots now unused. To the north of them on the corner of Railston Street
is a farm machinery business with buildings and a display
5. Railston Street provides a level crossing for vehicles from Mottram Street to
the CBD. To the south of Manjin Park at Ipsen Street
is another level crossing
providing vehicle access from Mottram Street to the CBD.
6. Diagonally opposite the subject land to the north-east is the Manjimup Motel,
directly opposite is a caravan park. The caravan
park has beside its Mottram
Street entrance the “Manji Central Take-Away Food and Supermarket”,
providing convenience
goods and take-away food. South of the caravan park is a
treed recreation reserve. A significant feature of the east side of Mottram
Street is a dense strip of mature trees that appear to be both on the verge and
on private land, extending from the front of the
motel south past the caravan
park and recreation reserve.
7. The proposed development includes a 200m
building of standard
corporate or “template” Red Rooster design with kitchen, dine-in
area, take-away counter and “drive-thru”
facility. The building
would be set back 17.5 metres from Mottram Street. Parking is situated in
the front setback behind
wide landscape strip and to the side
adjacent to the boundary with Manjin Park. A single cross-over to Mottram
8 metres wide
would provide both access to and egress from the
subject land.
Planning Framework
8. The subject land is zoned Service Industry under Shire of Manjimup Town
Planning Scheme No.2 (“
9. Amendment No.101 to TPS2 was published in the Government Gazette of 18 July
2003. This Amendment added to TPS2 the use class
“fast food outlet”
which is defined as:
““fast food outlet” means
premises used for the preparation and sale and serving of food to customers in a
ready to be eaten without further preparation primarily off the premises
but does not include a lunch bar.”
10. The Respondent placed the proposed use within the “fast food
outlet” use class. In Zoning Table 1 of TPS2 this use
class has the
notation AA for the Service Industry zone. This means it is “a use that
is not permitted unless approval is
granted by the Council”.
11. The Respondent adopted
Local Planning Strategy 2003-2013
”) in November 2003 “to support a new Town
Planning Scheme for the Municipality”. The Strategy was endorsed by
Western Australian Planning Commission in December 2003.
12. The Respondent is having prepared draft Town Planning Scheme No.4
”). The latest version is dated September 2004. To
note is that the draft is incomplete. For example, the zoning table is
13. The Strategy includes the subject land within Manjimup Precinct 1
– Town Centre. This precinct encompasses the CBD
currently zoned
“Commercial” and adjoining “Service Industry” land, and
“provides for the expansion
of the town centre land use category to
include lots along the railway line that have been leased from the Government
for many years”.
Figure 17 shows that this includes the subject land.
14. For Manjimup Precinct 1 – Town Centre, the Strategy includes at page
134 a list prefaced by “Planning should provide
for”. Relevant items
of the list are discussed below.
The Refusal
15. The Respondent refused the application for the following
“1. The Development is likely to lead to the
fragmentation of the town centre.
2. The development is likely to create unsatisfactory traffic safety and
traffic management issues along Mottram Street.
3. It would be premature to make such an ad hoc decision and a precedent
prior to the finalisation of TPS 4, where the development
of a strategy for this
area is a key issue to be resolved.
4. The development is contrary to Policy recommendations in the new Local
Planning Strategy, which specifically excluded a fast food
outlet in the
16. In 1996 an application was made for planning approval of a Chicken Treat
outlet on the subject land. This brand and Red Rooster
are now owned by the same
company. The Respondent failed to determine the application within the
prescribed time and an appeal against
a deemed refusal was lodged with the
Minister for Planning. That appeal was dismissed 12 October 1996 (Appeal Ref: AP
42007.96L).
In 1997 a further application was lodged for a similar development,
but was withdrawn before it was determined.
17. The Respondent drew attention to a decision in
Dilatte v MacTiernan
[2002] WASCA 100.
Reference was made to paragraph 61 in which the Court
identified that inconsistency has the potential of bringing the decision-making
process into disrepute because it suggests the decision is arbitrary, rather
than made in accordance with the application of sound
town planning principles.
18. The Appellant submitted that
is not applicable to the instant
case. Reference was made to paragraph 62 which
“The determination of whether there has been
inconsistency between successive decisions depends upon a comparison of the
circumstances
in each case, and, in particular, to those relevant to each
decision. The comparison obviously involves questions of fact and degree.
test is that ordinarily there would need to be a “similarity, if not
virtual duplication of circumstances and conditions
to establish the basis for a
complaint of inconsistency.””
19. The proposed use is essentially the same as that previously the subject of
applications and the unsuccessful appeal. Seven years
have now passed, however,
and TPS2 has been the subject of Amendment 101. Prior to Amendment 101 fast
food outlet was included within
the broad use class “shop”, then an
AA use. An approval of a shop would have given rise to the consideration of
shop uses in the locality. TPS2 now includes “fast food
outlet” as a use and the planning considerations have a narrower
“Shop” has become an IP use, allowed only if incidental to the
predominant use.
20. I am inclined to the view that there has been sufficient change to the
planning circumstances that if a decision not to repeat
the appeal decision of
1997 were made, it would not amount to inconsistency and arbitrariness according
to the test.
Traffic Safety and Management
21. In their evidence, Mr Hocking, an experienced architect, planner and urban
designer and Cr Curo of the Respondent Council, raised
concerns about the
proposed use giving rise to traffic safety and management issues because of
likely unacceptable conflict between
local and through traffic, trucks and cars
and vehicles and pedestrians.
22. Mr Riley, a qualified traffic engineer who appeared as a witness for the
Appellant, gave evidence that 11% of vehicles using
Mottram Street are trucks
and of those 4% are classified as long, medium combination or long combination
trucks. He considered trucks
to be a relatively small percentage of the
vehicles using Mottram Street.
23. The Respondent’s witnesses said that vehicles travelling south in
Mottram Street, including large trucks, would be forced
to stop behind cars
turning right into the Red Rooster outlet and this was potentially dangerous.
The Appellant pointed out that
this would mirror the situation that exists with
vehicles travelling north stopping behind cars seeking to turn into the Manji
Mart and the caravan park.
24. Mr Riley’s evidence was that crash data collected by Main Roads
Western Australia indicates that within the five year period
during which the
data was collected there were only two crashes recorded in this section of
Mottram Street. These involved vehicles
hitting objects rather than collisions
between vehicles or collisions with pedestrians crossing Mottram Street.
25. The Appellant submitted that, if there have been no crashes associated with
vehicles having to slow or stop behind vehicles turning
into the Manji Mini
Mart, there is no reason to suspect that vehicles stopping or slowing behind
vehicles turning into the Red Rooster
outlet would be any more likely to lead to
collisions.
26. Trucks parking on the side of Mottram Street was raised as a specific
concern. The crash data produced by Main Roads Western
Australia indicates that
parking of trucks in this manner has led to no accidents over the five year
period during which crash data
was collected.
27. It is desirable that no trucks park on the verge and ideally it would be
best that trucks that already stop had available a designated
parking area.
There is no reason, however, to suppose that the current practice would now lead
to accidents as a consequence of the
development of a Red Rooster outlet on the
subject land.
28. Mr Riley said there is space within Manjin Park with dimensions suitable for
the parking of trucks, even though bays are not
marked. It is noted, however,
that there is no evidence that trucks use, or are even able to gain access to
Manjin Park. It would
seem undesirable to allow trucks to use the parking area
of a passive recreation facility.
29. Safety of the additional pedestrians crossing Mottram Street to the proposed
use, either from the uses on the east side of the
road or from their vehicle,
particularly trucks, parked on the verge, was raised as a concern Cr Curo and Mr
30. Pedestrians already cross Mottram Street. About a third of the town’s
residential area is east of Mottram Street, as are
the caravan park, mini mart
and the motel. West of Mottram Street are the CBD, education and sporting
facilities. The Respondent
has established a pedestrian link through Manjin
Park and across the railway so that people can move between the facilities on
side of Mottram Street and the railway.
31. Mr Riley’s evidence was that the crash data indicates there have been
no accidents involving pedestrians and vehicles over
the five year period in
which the data was collected. In his opinion traffic volumes along Mottram
Street are such that they will
allow plenty of time for pedestrians to cross
Mottram Street, even with the proposed use.
32. This suggests that pedestrians can cross Mottram Street safely and the
proposed development would not make the situation any
less safe for pedestrians.
The Appellant pointed out that 39 parking bays for cars would be provided, well
in excess of the 14 bays
required by TPS2 and so it would not be necessary for
cars to park on the opposite verge.
33. The crossover for the proposed development will be close to those for Manjin
Park, the caravan park and the mini mart. While
the Respondent was concerned
that the potential vehicle interaction had not been satisfactorily addressed,
there was nothing presented
to dispute Mr Riley’s advice that the
proximity of these access points would not cause a traffic problem.
34. Cr Curo speculated that with additional plantation timber and woodchips
being produced in the future there would be an increase
in the volume of trucks
travelling along Mottram Street and this would add to the dangerous situation
for turning vehicles and pedestrians.
35. Mr Riley provided evidence of a “sensitivity test” that showed
that even with a 20% increase in traffic, Mottram
Street would still operate at
a level of service A, that is, an excellent level of service.
36. In May 2004 the “Road Corridor Planning Manager” of Main Roads
Western Australia advised the Respondent there was
no objection to the proposal.
Counsel for the Respondent indicated that officer might now have a different
view, but the officer
was not called as a witness.
37. The Respondent has raised concern that the proposed use will result in
unacceptable traffic and safety problems. Ideally, local
land uses should not
have direct access to a by pass and pedestrians should be directed away. Lots on
this section of Mottram Street,
however, depend upon such access and the
planning for the town has established pedestrian routes across Mottram Street.
limit on this section of Mottram Street is 60km/h.
38. Mr Riley’s evidence is that a Red Rooster outlet on the subject land
will not lead to any additional traffic impacts that
will so diminish existing
safety levels as to provide a reason for refusal. On the evidence presented, Mr
Riley’s position
is accepted. If the development were to proceed any
traffic management requirements could be the subject of
conditions.
Anti social behaviour and security
39. The Respondent raised potential antisocial behaviour as an issue. The
concern was that the proposed use would cause youth to
gather. This was then
considered to make the locality vulnerable to vandalism, such as was already
occurring in Manjin Park, and
the premises that back onto the west side of the
railway the targets of illegal activity. The presence of unused and unsupervised
land between the proposed use and the railway made it necessary to guard against
such an outcome.
40. Mr King, the State Manager of Red Rooster who appeared as a witness, said
there was no record of any of his firm’s premises
generating such
activity. The proposed development will close at 10.00pm each night.
41. The photographs provided show that behind the subject land is a flat area
devoid of vegetation with a clear view to the railway
line. The proposed use has
lighting and an open car park around the building and is intended to attract all
youth gathering in such a setting would be stimulated into
illegal acts they might not otherwise commit was difficult to grasp. This
argument has been afforded little weight in my deliberations on this matter.
Fragmentation of the Town Centre and interference with the
strategy objectives
42. Mr Hocking argued that it is an important planning objective of the Strategy
that uses of land along Mottram Street should attract
visitors to stay a while
and visit the CBD. This would enhance Manjin Park as the “Town
Gateway”, or “welcome
mat”, as he put it. That objective, he
said, was based on dot point 3 at page 134 of the Strategy which
“Redevelopment of the vacant railway land to create
a visual linkage and pedestrian connection from the South Western Highway
town centre, including a park and facilities for parking vehicles –
including caravans and trucks – to encourage
people to stop, shop and
visit the town.
43. Mr Roberts, for the Appellant, pointed out that the subject land is not
“vacant railway land” and submitted that
the Strategy objective of
development to attract visitors to stay and visit the CBD does not therefore
relate to the subject land.
44. Mr Hocking’s evidence was that the Red Rooster outlet would tend to be
an autonomous and self-contained operation, with
limited scope only to encourage
visitors into the CBD. This would lead to a fragmented rather than an integrated
town centre. A fragmented
centre he described as one where the edges compete
with the centre. There would be a shift of attraction from the CBD to uses on
the by pass road and this would make the town centre less attractive to be in.
45. The inference is that people who stop at the subject land for take away
food, if they notice the town centre at all over the
railway, would not be
inclined to pay the centre a visit. A further inference is that if the take away
food were to only be in the
CBD, these same people might detour to get to it and
be tempted to remain and attend other businesses.
46. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that it is speculative to say that
patrons of a Red Rooster outlet on the subject land may
not choose to visit the
CBD. In the opinion of Ms Chapman, a planner who was a witness for the
Appellant, the proposed development
would give motorists a reason to stop. Once
stopped some might take the opportunity to visit the CBD. Mr King indicated a
willingness
to promote Manjimup in the Red Rooster outlet, although little
detail was provided. Under cross examination Mr King agreed that the
use relies on rapid turnover and it would become of concern if the car park was
used by people visiting the CBD after eating
to the exclusion of new
47. The Respondent has submitted that if the subject land were to be developed
as a local produce shed or for the display of local
artefacts, two examples
mentioned in evidence, customers of such uses would be more inclined to visit
48. The evidence presented indicated that there were not any specifically
tourist orientated activities in the CBD. Nor does it have
“heritage” characteristics. The CBD would appear to cater for the
every day shopping and service requirements of
residents of the town and
district. It was not clear why a CBD of this character might be attractive to
the customers of certain
49. The Appellant submitted that is highly improbable that a single fast food
outlet is of such a substantial nature as to fragment
the Town Centre. The
concept of fragmentation, it was submitted, was essentially an economic
argument. If the patrons of the proposed
development were not encouraged to
travel into the CBD other commercial operators in the CBD will have lost a
commercial opportunity
and so be adversely affected. It was the
Appellant’s submission that this is not a relevant planning consideration.
50. Mr Hocking explained his vision and what he understood as the
Respondent’s vision for Manjin Park as the gateway to the
CBD. The subject
land, as the first lot to be redeveloped in this section of Mottram Street,
would set the character of the town
and he considers the use approved to be
critical. Cr Cumo said he had a preference for traditional design, even a
corrugated iron
shed rather than the “template” design applied for.
He was of the view that it was better to wait for an acceptable use
rather than
accept the first applied for.
51. The Respondent is concerned approval would set an undesirable precedent for
the ad hoc establishment of similar uses along Mottram
Street incompatible with
the character of the locality and objectives of the Strategy.
52. The Appellant submitted it is not relevant to compare the proposed
development with some other hypothetical development. It was
entitled to have
the application determined in accordance with sound town planning principles
applied in the context of existing
planning controls and existing circumstances.
To the extent that future planning options are mere possibilities, they should
be excluded
from consideration or, at best, accorded very little weight.
53. The alternative uses preferred for the subject land suggested by Mr Hocking
have not materialised in the seven years since the
last application was lodged.
The two lots immediately to the north have also apparently been vacant for some
of this time.
54. Mr Hocking conceded in cross examination that other “AA” uses
that might be approved on the subject land, such as
car sales premises, fuel
depot, dry cleaning premises and a drive in theatre would not attract visitors
to the CBD. Mr Roberts for
the Appellant said these uses were designated
“AA” for the zone in Amendment 101 of July 2003 and so are not an
historical position long overdue for change.
55. The first dot point on page 134 of the Strategy indicates that planning for
the Town Centre Precinct should provide for:
“A broad range
of uses including retail, commercial offices, service commercial and service
industry, tourist-related businesses
and accommodation, community and medical
facilities and the opportunity to allow innovative proposals.”
56. The Appellant said retail uses would encompass a fast food outlet as
proposed by the Appellant and the Strategy contemplates
uses such as a fast food
outlet being developed in the Town Centre Precinct that includes the subject
land. There is no evidence
that similar developments such as the Manji Mini Mart
or the roadhouse north of the subject land on the highway near the entrance
the town have led to noticeable consequences that could be attributed to
fragmentation.
57. The Respondent further submitted that an important planning objective of the
Strategy was set out in dot point 5 on page 134
“Maintain the character and amenity of the South
Western Highway adjacent to Precinct 1 to retain and enhance the “forest
like” streetscape and avoid any development that Council considers
detrimental to the streetscape, such as fast food outlets”.
58. Mr Hocking said the proposed fast food outlet would be in conflict with the
Strategy because it is specifically mentioned and
does not meet any of these
objectives.
59. The matter of landscaping of the subject land and its contribution to the
streetscape was raised. The difficulty the Appellant
would have is to make a
contribution to a forest like streetscape without obscuring the building. The
Appellant said the forest like
landscape was in any event only on the east side
of the road, while the Respondent pointed to trees on the west side south of the
subject land at Allambie Park and to the planting of saplings in Manjin Park.
60. Unfortunately there was not available a comprehensible plan of the finished
layout of Manjin Park and what plants were planted
where. How the vegetation
would look when mature was not known. It was not possible to discern how the
landscaping of Manjin Park
was to contribute to the “forest like”
streetscape while also providing a “Town Gateway” and view through
to the CBD. It was therefore difficult to determine whether any landscaping of
the subject land should be required to complement
the gateway concept or the
forest concept.
61. There was no dispute that the subject should be landscaped, with trees
included where possible. I consider that the scale of
any landscaping should be
tempered by the location of the subject land on the western side of Mottram
Street adjacent to the gateway
park and by the reality that the zoning is
Service Industry and commercial development which requires some visibility can
be contemplated.
62. Mr King said the development would include the usual array of Red Rooster
signs. The template design makes the brand readily
distinguishable. The
Respondent’s concern was that the proposed development makes no
contribution to the setting and is not
indicative of the character or history or
economic base of the district. No evidence was given, however, of any design
available in either TPS2 or the Strategy that could be readily used
to address such a concern.
63. Mr King gave evidence that he would be willing to make some modification to
the design. An agreement on a variation of colours
and materials might be an
appropriate condition should the development
64. The Respondent has in place TPS2 which includes fast food outlet as an AA
use in the Service Industry zone. Mr Wittkuhn for the
Respondent pointed out
that the use is not permitted unless discretion is exercised to approve it. The
Respondent submitted that
it was therefore wrong to begin with the assumption
that all AA uses are prima facie suitable unless demonstrated to be unsuitable.
Approval should not be mere formality. It is necessary to consider the
suitability of the use having regard to the full range of
planning controls in
65. The Respondent said the Strategy is to guide decisions and the inference is
that if this requires a moratorium on certain development
then that should occur
in the interim until TPS4 is complete to ensure the benefits of the planning
process are not lost.
66. The Respondent has adopted a strategic position of using parts of the
Strategy to ensure consolidation of the CBD until TPS4
is complete. When TPS4
will be completed is not known, but it might well be over a year.
67. The Appellant submitted that the Strategy was adopted four months after
Amendment No.101 and its only purpose is to provide guidance
for the preparation
of TPS4. The Strategy is not a document for interpreting existing TPS2.
68. Selective parts of the Strategy have been implemented. For example Manjin
Park has been developed to provide the town gateway,
but the provision of
parking for caravans and trucks on railway land in the vicinity of the subject
land, which is also an objective
of the Strategy for the Town Centre Precinct
Gateway, has not. When, where and even if this parking will be provided is not
69. I have found the concepts in the Strategy too lacking in consistency and
detail to be useful in the practical application of
TPS2. While the objectives
expressed should be addressed and refined in the preparation of TPS4, TPS4 is
still in an incomplete draft
form and cannot be considered as a seriously
entertained planning proposal. I have not been convinced that TPS4 is
sufficiently advanced
and the Strategy is a sufficiently well developed guide to
place a moratorium on development applied for under TPS2. As mentioned
the zoning table of TPS4 is blank and nothing was said of any provision included
in TPS4 that would have fast food outlets
treated differently if proposed for
Mottram Street as opposed to anywhere else in the Town Centre precinct. There
does not appear
to be provisions to differentiate between uses likely to attract
visitors to certain parts of the town centre precinct as rather
parts. There is also no apparent inclusion or clarification of the imprecise
Strategy requirement that “any development
the Council considers
detrimental to the land scape should be avoided” in that part of the Town
Centre precinct near Mottram
Street. It is not clear that there is a real
likelihood of the Strategy being implemented in full in TPS4. I am therefore of
view that if the Respondent wants to effectively prohibit specific uses in
certain locations it should do more than to simply rely
on the Strategy.
70. Notwithstanding that Mottram Street is a continuation of South Western
Highway it has over time evolved to have a number of functions,
some of which
are incompatible, including by pass, access for local businesses, pedestrian
route and access to Town Gateway.
71. From the evidence presented I have formed the view that the proposed use,
along the lines submitted by Mr King in evidence, is
consistent with the use
made of this section of Mottram Street and the impacts it would have are not
sufficient to be fatal to the
proposal. As set out above, I have found that the
future planning of the town has not yet become sufficiently certain to support
moratorium on development until TPS4 is completed.
72. I have therefore decided to allow the appeal. This approval is subject to
such conditions as might reasonably be imposed. Should
the parties not agree on
any conditions there is liberty to apply to the Tribunal have the differences
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (80.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter