URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/79.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EX PARTE COMMISSIONER OF THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE [2025] WADC 79 (3 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CHAMBERS
EX PARTE COMMISSIONER OF THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE
[2025] WADC 79
22 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
22 OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
3 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
POC 2 of 2025
In the matter of an application pursuant to
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
COMMISSIONER OF THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE
Proceeds of crime - Ex parte application for
restraining order pursuant to
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(Cth) - Property suspected to be under effective control of person suspected of
committing serious offence - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Code
Proceeds of
Crime Act 2002
Application for restraining order granted
Representation:
Mr B McGowan
Solicitors:
Australian Federal Police, Proceeds Of Crime Litigation
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
The Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police v Memon (No 4)
[2025] NSWSC
[This decision was delivered extemporaneously on 22 October and edited
from the transcript.]
originating summons dated 17 October 2025, the applicant seeks a
restraining order pursuant to
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(Cth) (Act), to prevent any person from disposing of or otherwise dealing with
real property located at 34 Cooks Avenue, Canterbury,
New South Wales,
being the whole of the land comprised in certificate of title folio identifier
informed by the affidavit of Philip Kimbell, sworn 20 October 2025,
and assisted by the outline of submissions dated 22 October
2025, to which
counsel, Mr McGowan, spoke at the hearing this morning. I am
satisfied that the court has 'proceeds jurisdiction'
for the purposes of
of the Act.
satisfied that the applicant has the requisite authority to apply for a
restraining order, being a 'proceeds of crime authority'
as defined in
of the Act. I am satisfied that Mr Kimbell is duly
authorised.
applicant has requested that the application be heard ex parte. The
applicant has furnished an undertaking as to damages in
terms that the
Commonwealth of Australia will abide any order of the court as to damages
sustained by any person who has an interest
in the property, the subject of the
restraining order to be made, and who is not in any way involved in the alleged
Section 26(1)
of the Act provides that written notice of an application for a restraining
order covering property be given to the owner, subject
provides that the court must consider the application without notice having been
given if the responsible authority requests
the court to do so. I am satisfied
that it is appropriate to hear and determine the application ex parte and
without notice to the
owner or any other person having an interest in the
application has been heard on an urgent basis as the six-month period following
the conviction of Simon Cahill (described in
the originating process
as the respondent) of a serious offence, at the expiration of which property
subject to a restraining order
is forfeited, expires on
24 October 2025. That period commenced when Mr Cahill was
sentenced to a term of six years' imprisonment
by this court on
24 April 2025.
Relevantly,
a serious offence is an indictable offence punishable by three years'
imprisonment or more and relating to narcotics
or unlawful conduct relating to a
breach of pt 9.1 of the Criminal Code (Cth).
unable to find that there has been any undue delay in the prosecution of the
application, having regard to the nature and extent
of the investigations
required to be undertaken since the conviction date as deposed to by
Mr Kimbell.
of the Act provides that property the subject of a restraining order is
forfeited to the Commonwealth at the end of a
six-month period starting on the
conviction day if the person is convicted of a serious offence.
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that Mr Cahill has
committed a serious offence by reason of him having
been convicted of one count
of attempting to possess a border-controlled substance, to wit, cocaine,
contrary to s 307.5(1) of the
Criminal Code.
am satisfied that the affidavit requirements of s 18(3) have been
satisfied. These are: that the deponent is an authorised officer;
deponent suspects that the suspect - in this case, Mr Cahill - committed
the offence; and that if the application is to
restrain property of a person
other than the suspect, the authorised officer suspects that the property is
subject to the effective
control of the suspect.
am also satisfied that the authorised officer, Mr Kimbell, holds the
suspicions deposed to in his affidavit on reasonable grounds.
court must make a restraining order if the requirements set out in s 18 are
satisfied, even if there is no risk of the property
being disposed of or
otherwise dealt with.
the purpose of s 92, an interest in relation to property is defined by
s 338 as a legal or equitable interest or estate, or a
right, power, or
privilege in connection with the property, whether present or future, and
whether vested or contingent.
application is sought on the basis that the property is subject to the effective
control of Mr Cahill. Section 337 provides
that property may be
subject to the effective control of a person, whether or not that person has a
legal or equitable estate or
interest in the property, or a right, power, or
privilege in connection with the property. Property that is held on trust
ultimate benefit of the person is taken to be under the effective
control of the person.
337(5) provides that the court, in determining whether or not the property is
subject to effective control, may have regard
to, among other things, 'Family,
domestic, and business relationships between persons having an interest in the
property'. Section
337(7) provides that effective control may be exercised
by more than one person.
registered proprietor of the property is Mariam Khalil. Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) is a registered mortgagee.
Ms Khalil is
believed to be the spouse of Mr Cahill. That belief is based on the
transactional history of the property, as deposed
to by Mr Kimbell,
and bank statements and Australian Taxation Office (ATO) documents that have
been annexed to his affidavit.
deposes to his belief that Mr Cahill has effective control of the property
and otherwise has a right, power, or privilege
in connection with the property.
I find that the basis for Mr Kimbell's belief is reasonable. The basis for
Mr Kimbell's belief
is that the property was acquired by Mr Cahill and
Ms Khalil as joint tenants in 2004 for $730,000. Mr Cahill and
Ms Khalil borrowed
$335,000 against the property from the Commonwealth Bank
of Australia in 2005.
1 July 2017, Mr Cahill and Ms Khalil owed $166,989 to the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Between that date and
19 October 2019,
the loan was paid off by payments that averaged
$8,000 per month. According to the ATO records annexed to Mr Kimbell's
from 2016 to 2020 Mr Cahill received a disability support
pension of $20,000 - $22,400 per annum. Over the same period of five years,
Ms Khalil declared taxable incomes in the range of $58,902 - $70,035.
was arrested on or about 8 July 2022 for the subject offence. On
15 May 2023, Mr Cahill transferred his interest in property
Ms Khalil, apparently for no monetary consideration. Mr Kimbell
deposes to his suspicion that Mr Cahill committed the subject
the basis of his conviction and a signed statement of material facts signed by
him upon which he was sentenced.
deposes to the grounds for his suspicion that Mr Cahill has effective
control of the property on the basis that he had
an interest in it as a
registered proprietor from 2004 to 2023; that he transferred his interest in the
property to Ms Khalil in
2023 after having been charged with the subject
offence; and that there is no apparent reason for doing so other than to
himself from the property to avoid, as I understand the applicant's
position, the consequences of his conviction.
follows from my being satisfied of these matters that the restraining order must
be made. The hearing having been conducted ex
parte, counsel has addressed
the issue of prejudice. Counsel has observed that if the restraining order
sought by the applicant
is made, then the property will be forfeited to the
Commonwealth on 24 October 2025 pursuant to s 92.
has also observed that the forfeiture will occur before Mr Cahill,
Ms Khalil, and ANZ become aware of the application, as
otherwise be pursuant to s 92A, which requires the applicant to give
written notice of the date on which the property
would be forfeited, and other
information regarding potential relief from forfeiture.
court has been referred to the
The Commissioner of the Australian Federal
Police v Memon (No 4)
[2025] NSWSC 967
, a decision of
Schmidt AJ. Her Honour found in that case that automatic forfeiture
occurred six months after the relevant conviction
day irrespective of whether or
not a person who has an interest in the property had been given a s 92A
notice before the forfeiture
took effect. I see no reason to disagree with
her Honour's construction of the relevant provisions in this respect.
has observed that there is a procedure for extending the period after which
automatic forfeiture would occur by an application
for extension under
s 93, which can be made by Mr Cahill or another person with an
interest in the property.
applicant submits that the prejudice occasioned by the forfeiture occurring
without notice is mitigated by the provisions of
pt 2-3 div 3 of
the Act that provide interested parties with various forms of relief from a
forfeiture order made under s 92. Specifically,
If property is forfeited to the Commonwealth under section 92, the court
that made the restraining order referred to in paragraph
92(1)(b) must, if:
(a) a person who claims an interest in the property applies under
section 104 for an order under this section; and
(b) the court is satisfied that:
(i) the applicant
had an interest in the property before the forfeiture of the property; and
(ii) the applicant's interest in the property is neither proceeds of unlawful
activity nor an instrument of unlawful activity; and
(iii) the applicant's interest in the property was lawfully acquired;
make an order:
(c) declaring the nature, extent and value of the applicant's interest in the
property; and
(d) either:
(i) if the interest is still vested in
the Commonwealth - directing the Commonwealth to transfer the interest to the
applicant; or
(ii) directing the Commonwealth to pay to the applicant an amount equal to
the value declared under paragraph (c).
seems to me that the interests of Ms Khalil as registered proprietor and
ANZ as mortgagee are protected by this provision. Those
parties, and indeed,
any other party, who may claim an interest in the property could make an
application pursuant to s 104 for an
order declaring the nature and extent
and value of the interest, and either directing the Commonwealth to transfer the
interest to
that party or directing the Commonwealth to pay an amount equal to
the declared value.
this end, it is proposed that if a restraining order is made, the applicant
serve Mr Cahill, Ms Khalil, and ANZ with the order,
together with a
copy of the originating summons, the supporting affidavit, the undertaking, and
a letter outlining the requirements
and effect of s 92, s 102, and
s 103; and further, that the Commonwealth not dispose of the property
before 25 July 2026 unless any
and all applications made by a person
claiming interest in the property have been determined. The applicant will also
not to oppose any application for leave to apply out of time for
relief from forfeiture.
provisions of the Act permit the making of a restraining order on the basis of
the court being satisfied of the reasonable suspicions
of an authorised officer
that a person has committed a serious offence and that the person has effective
control of a property, even
if it does not amount to a legal or equitable
court must make the restraining order if the requirements are satisfied. In
this case, the court is so satisfied. It is appropriate
that the application be
heard ex parte in the circumstances, given that the court is able to give
relief from forfeiture to persons
having a legitimate interest in the property
and thus relieve them of the adverse effects of the
forfeiture.
make orders as follows.
Proceeds of Crime Act
the application by originating summons be heard and determined
of the Act, no person may dispose of or otherwise deal with the
property specified in the schedule, except in the manner and circumstances
specified in this order or with the written consent of the applicant.
applicant must notify Simon Cahill, Mariam Khalil, and the Australia
and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd of the order by serving
on each the order,
together with the originating summons, the supporting affidavit, the undertaking
as to damages, and a notice explaining
the requirements and effect of
of the Act.
of the Act, the applicant may delay serving the order as
directed in [31(3)] until as soon as practicable after a proceeds of crime
memorial has been registered on the certificate of title of the property.
the event that the Commonwealth is in a position to do so, the Commonwealth may
not dispose of the property prior to 25 July 2026
unless any and all
applications for relief from forfeiture by a person claiming an interest in the
property have been determined.
applicant do provide an undertaking that it will not oppose any application for
leave to apply out of time under ch 2
the Act, or ch 2 pt 2-3 div 1 and div 3 of the
The real property located at 34 Cooks Avenue, Canterbury, in
the State of New South Wales, being the whole of the land
comprised in
certificate of title folio identifier 23/9484.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to Judge Staude
3 NOVEMBER 2025
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (179 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter