URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- NG [No 2] [2025] WADC 62 (19 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CRIMINAL
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- NG [No 2]
[2025] WADC
1 & 16 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
19 SEPTEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
IND 109 of 2023
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
KENNY MENG WAI NG
Criminal law - Fitness to stand trial - Whether
accused has a mental impairment for the purpose of
Law (Mental Impairment) Act 2023
(WA) - Meaning of mental impairment -
Whether significant cognitive impairment amounts to mental impairment
Legislation:
Criminal Code
Criminal Law
(Mental Impairment) Act 2023
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired
Accused) Act 1996
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Accused not fit to stand trial
Order for special
proceeding to take place
Representation:
The State of Western Australia
Ms C Aynsley
Ms P S Chong
Solicitors:
The State of Western Australia
State Director of Public Prosecutions
Patti Chong Lawyer
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
GAE v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WADC 5
R v Radford
(1985) 20 A Crim R 388
The State of Western Australia v Altieri
[2024] WADC 31
The State of Western Australia v IMK
[2018] WADC 171
The State of Western Australia v KC (a pseudonym)
[2019] WADC 179
The State of Western Australia v Ng
[2025] WADC 42
The State of Western Australia v Siddique [No 2]
[2016] WASC 358
History of proceedings
relevant history of these proceedings has been summarised in my previous
decision of
The State of Western Australia v
reasons) and need not be repeated.
determined in my previous reasons that
Criminal Procedure
(WA) (CPA) did not preclude the operation of
div 2 of the
Criminal Law (Mental Impairment) Act 2023
Act), I listed a fitness inquiry under s 29 to take place before me on
1 September 2025.
the time of conducting the inquiry, the accused person Mr Ng was legally
represented by Ms Chong. At her request, the proceedings
were conducted in
the absence of Mr Ng due to a concern that the nature of the proceedings
and his ongoing participation in them
were having an adverse effect upon his
mental condition.
conscious of the need to provide Mr Ng with a fair hearing in accordance
with ordinary
procedures,
as not interfering with his right to be involved in
proceedings,
needs must be balanced against the need to ensure Mr Ng is provided with
the best possible treatment, care and
Mr Ng was legally represented, I was prepared to proceed in
Mr Ng's absence so as to achieve that
part of that inquiry, Mr Ng called Dr Cindy Cabeleira
(neuropsychologist) and Dr Gosia Wojnarowska (psychiatrist) for the
of supplementing reports both had previously provided to this court
pursuant to s 29(3).
Applicable legal principles
carrying out the exercise of any function under the Act I must have regard to
the principles set out in s 7(2). Section 8 provides
my paramount
consideration is the protection of the community. I also have had regard to the
objects of the Act which are provided
for in s 7(1).
provides for the process that a court must undertake when determining the
question of an accused's fitness to stand trial
when the question arises.
Section 29 of the Act provides for how the court is to conduct the inquiry.
accused person will be presumed mentally fit to stand trial until the contrary
question of whether an accused person is unfit to stand trial can be raised at
any time before or during a
The question
is to be decided on the balance of
probabilities.
In determining the question, the court may inform itself as it considers
appropriate.
accused person will be unfit to stand trial if a court is
(a) the accused has a mental impairment;
(b) the mental impairment renders the accused unable to do one or more of the
matters set out in s 26 of the Act; and
(c) the accused will not become fit within six months.
found to be unfit to stand trial, an order must be made under
an unfitness finding is made by this court, the only order that can be made is
for a special proceeding to take place under
pt 3 div 2,
subdivision 3.
the commencement of these proceedings the State advised the court it 'accepts
that Mr Ng has difficulties and certainly doesn't
dispute that he has
significant cognitive
difficulties'.
What was identified as being the 'sole issue' for resolution was whether those
'significant cognitive difficulties' amounted to
a mental impairment for the
purposes of the Act.
can be seen, in addition to the three issues for resolution outlined above at
], the State's position raises a
preliminary issue that must be resolved regarding what constitutes a mental
impairment for the purposes
of the Act.
What constitutes a mental impairment?
of the Act defines a 'mental impairment' as any, or a combination of,
the following:
(a) an intellectual disability;
(b) a mental illness as defined in
The Criminal Code
section 1(1). Section 1(1) of the Code defines a 'mental illness' as 'an
underlying pathological infirmity of the mind,
whether of short or long duration
and whether permanent or temporary, but does not include a condition that
results from the reaction
of a healthy mind to extraordinary stimuli';
(c) an acquired brain injury;
(d) dementia.
definition of 'mental illness' is reflective of what was said by King CJ in
when considering the meaning of 'disease of the mind'. There he considered a
'disease of the mind' to include 'a major mental illness
or psychoses such as
schizophrenia are clearly diseases of the mind as are physical diseases, such as
psychomotor epilepsy and arteriosclerosis,
when they affect the soundness of the
mental faculties'.
reference to a 'pathological infirmity of the mind' within s 1(1) of the
Code has been interpreted as referring to 'an underlying
infirmity of the mind
caused by disease or abnormal bodily affection or
condition'.
the remaining terms 'intellectual disability', 'acquired brain injury', and
'dementia' are not defined within the Act.
of these terms can hold a technical meaning for diagnostic purposes. The State,
in its submissions, proceeds on an assumption
that the diagnostic meanings, and
associated criteria within them, equate to the same meaning as to how those
terms are used in
The correctness of that assumption, and whether it holds textual support
from the Act, must be examined.
noted above, s 7(1) of the Act provides what the objects of the Act are.
When one has regard to s 7(1)(a) and s 7(1)(b)(i) -
is clear the Act is not for diagnostic purposes.
Section 7(1)(b)(i)
provides it is the object of the Act 'to ensure persons with mental impairment
who are charged with an offence
are identified early in their contact with the
justice system'. Such an object does not support a meaning to be afforded to
Act that places restrictive or prescriptive diagnostic criteria on what
might amount to a 'mental impairment'.
although s 7(2)(c) provides that 'persons with mental impairment in the
justice system should be provided with the best
possible treatment, care and
support', it is evident that the Act does not operate solely as a therapeutic
scheme. Individuals are
not identified under the Act simply to facilitate
treatment. Rather, consideration of appropriate treatment arises once it is
established
that a person's mental impairment affects their capacity to
participate in ordinary criminal processes.
criteria provided for by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) and the International
Classification of
Diseases (ICD) provide useful tools for the identification and treatment of
disorders. But these are for medical,
not legal, purposes. Mr Ng's matter
provides a useful illustration of why the distinction is material.
is a consensus in the opinions held by the experts who reviewed Mr Ng that
he has widespread cognitive impairment. That cognitive
impairment is of a
level consistent with what one would expect from someone with an intellectual
an acquired brain injury
dementia. There is also
a consensus that Mr Ng's cognitive impairment deprives him of the ability
to understand some, or most, of
the criteria provided for in s 26 of
origin and cause of Mr Ng's cognitive impairment are both plainly important
for diagnostic and treatment purposes. To the extent
the court may be required
to make an order under pt 5 of the Act, then this could have some
significance. This seems to be what
s 7(2)(c) specifically contemplates.
it would be a peculiar outcome, and one seemingly at odds with the objects of
the Act as outlined in s 7(1), if Mr Ng were found
fit to stand trial
merely because his acknowledged cognitive impairment could not be
diagnostically
classified as an intellectual disability,
acquired brain injury,
Notwithstanding,
the State maintains that because none of the examining specialists, particularly
Dr Cabeleira and Dr Wojnarowska,
were able to make a clinical
diagnosis of Mr Ng's condition beyond describing it as a 'cognitive
impairment', that this cannot be
regarded as an intellectual disability for the
purposes of the Act. In support of this submission the State has
Wager DCJ's decision (as her Honour then was) in
GAE v The State of
that decision, her Honour observed that 'the definition of mental impairment in
s 8 of the [1996]
include cognitive
impairment'.
is the part of her Honour's reasons that the State relies upon in support of its
submission that the meaning of 'intellectual
disability' does not include a
cognitive impairment. With respect, that interpretation of her Honour's
reasoning overstates what
her Honour was saying.
that matter her Honour was resolving a divergence in the opinions offered by
Ms Vidovich (as she then was) and Dr Brett. Ms Vidovich
does not have an intellectual disability ... [h]owever, his limited
access to consistent and specialised academic input and intervention
early developmental years and schooling has likely meant that he was not
afforded the opportunity to cultivate his verbal
language skills/knowledge, and
literacy and numeracy.
opinion was the accused had a mental impairment, but could not say where
that impairment came from, nor was he able to
say it was related to his
cognition, but he did say it was consistent with an intellectual disability. He
was of the view the neuropsychological
testing pointed towards a functional
impairment or organic impairment, such as from a head injury, but did not think
it was consistent
with brain damage.
attempting to explain the difference in opinion between Ms Vidovich's
opinion that the accused did not hold an intellectual disability,
Dr Brett's opinion that he did, Dr Brett said there was no clinical
definition of intellectual disability so far as mental impairment
is concerned
in respect of s 8 of the 1996 Act and 'that's one of the problems with it'.
Dr Brett's opinion was the accused had a
'cognitive impairment' but that it
was 'more semantics rather than anything else'.
State treats her Honour's words as interpretive when in truth they were
descriptive of her factual conclusion and her reason
for rejecting
Dr Brett's opinion. This much is evident from the following
There is no evidence
Ms Vidovich's findings that Mr E did not have an intellectual
disability, from which the court can infer that some cognitive
impairment fits
within the definition of an intellectual disability. Although I am
satisfied Mr E has some cognitive impairment
I am not satisfied that
Mr E has a mental impairment as defined in s 8 of the Act and
therefore the questions posed by s 9 of the
Act do not apply.
if I am wrong and a cognitive impairment is a form of intellectual impairment
divorced from intellectual impairment as neuropsychologically
defined, I would
then be required to consider whether, on a balance of probabilities after
inquiring into the question and informing
myself, I am able to answer the
questions posed in s 9 of the Act in the negative.
Honour's reference to 'if I am wrong' shows her Honour then moved to contemplate
an alternative scenario to her original one.
The alternative scenario was
one where the kind of cognitive impairment Dr Brett was considering
separate ('divorced') from the kind of intellectual impairment
Ms Vidovich had considered, and excluded, when offering her opinion.
The fact her Honour expressed this as the alternative to the original scenario
where she expressed the view outlined above at [
] suggests the original scenario
contemplated a meaning of 'intellectual impairment' that was
from cognitive impairment.
her Honour observed that 'cognitive impairment' was not included within the
definition of 'mental impairment', she was not narrowing
the operation of
s 8. Rather, she was explaining that the elements of the accused's
condition described by Dr Brett as a 'cognitive
impairment', to the
extent they could amount to 'intellectual disability', had already been
considered and excluded by Ms Vidovich.
Any remaining features that fell
outside of what Ms Vidovich was referring to as an 'intellectual
disability' could not constitute
a mental impairment in their own right given
the absence of a distinct category of 'cognitive impairment' within 'mental
impairment'.
simply, Ms Vidovich's testing led her to conclude there was no intellectual
disability. Having accepted that opinion, her Honour
found there was no
intellectual disability within the meaning of the Act. That factual
finding left no scope for Dr Brett's description
of the accused's condition
as a 'cognitive impairment' to satisfy the meaning of 'intellectual disability'
provided for in s 8 in
case. It was not a finding by her
Honour that 'cognitive impairment' is excluded, as a matter of
interpretation, from the concept
of 'intellectual disability' or could not
constitute a 'mental impairment'.
is clear her Honour's reasons were not intended to be a substantive
interpretation of the definition of 'intellectual impairment'
for the purposes
of the 1996 Act. At no point does her Honour make any attempt to engage with
the concept or meaning of 'intellectual
disability' or why it would not, as a
matter of construction, include 'cognitive impairment', nor do her reasons
provide any textual
analysis supporting such a construction.
if her Honour's reasons were intended to have been authority for the
construction in the way the State submits, then it
is regrettable this was not
drawn to the court's attention in
The State of Western Australia v
that matter the accused had suffered cerebral ischaemia which caused a cognitive
impairment affecting executive function. Not
only did Sleight CJDC
conclude the accused suffered from a cognitive impairment which constituted an
intellectual disability 'and
therefore falls within the definition of a mental
impairment within the meaning of the Act' he did so after the State had made
concessions
Honour described those concessions as being 'appropriate'.
The State of Western Australia v
fact the accused had 'significant risk factors for cognitive impairment' was one
of the factors which satisfied his Honour the
accused had a 'mental impairment'.
Notably, his Honour did not make a finding any more specific than that regarding
the nature of
the impairment.
recently, in
The State of Western Australia v
Gillan DCJ, when considering the meaning of 'intellectual disability' for
the purposes of the 1996 Act noted '[t]he term 'intellectual
disability' is not
further defined and so has its ordinary
considering the meaning of 'intellectual disability' under the current Act her
Under the 2023 Act the term 'intellectual disability' is not further defined.
Accordingly, the term 'intellectual disability' under
the 2023 Act would appear
to have the same meaning as under the 1996 Act.
to the extent that there was an apparent inconsistency between Wager DCJ's
decision in
and Gillan DCJ's decision in
, it appears that inconsistency was not drawn to
Gillan DCJ's attention when considering the meaning of 'intellectual
disability'.
my view, any apparent inconsistency between the way in which Wager DCJ
dealt with the interaction between 'intellectual disability'
and 'cognitive
disability', and the way the court has subsequently dealt with the meaning of
'intellectual disability' is readily
reconciled in the way I have addressed
]. I see no reason why I
should depart from the approach adopted by Gillan DCJ in
determining what the 'ordinary meaning' of 'intellectual disability' might be,
the following definitions give some
(a) intellectual:
of or relating to the intellect;
(b) intellect: the power or faculty of the mind by which one knows,
understands, or reasons, as distinct from that by which one feels
and that by
which one wills; the understanding or mental capacity, especially of a high
(d) disability: lack of competent power, strength, or physical or mental
ability, incapacity; a condition which restricts a person's
mental or sensory
processes, or their mobility;
(e) cognitive: (adj) cognition; the act or process of knowing, perception;
the product of such a process, thing thus known, perceived.
defined as 'a state of mental disorder characterised by impairment or loss of
the mental powers; commonly an end result of several
mental or other
(a) intellectual disability: a disorder characterised
by subaverage general intellectual function with deficits or impairments in
ability to learn and to adapt socially. The cause may be genetic, biological,
psychosocial or sociocultural;
(b) intellect: the power and capacity of the mind for knowing and
understanding, as contrasted with feeling or with willing;
(c) cognitive: pertaining to the mental processes of comprehension, judgment,
memory and reasoning, as contrasted with emotional and
volitional processes;
(d) cognition: the mental process characterised by knowing, thinking,
learning, understanding and judging;
(e) dementia: acquired impairment of cognition sufficient to affect
activities of daily living but without altered consciousness or
psychiatric
can be seen, the meanings of 'intellect' and 'intellectual' embrace the concepts
of the mind, understanding and reasoning. It
follows that an 'intellectual
disability' must refer to a condition that has reduced or impaired the ability
of a person's mind to
understand or reason.
one compares this to the meaning of 'cognition' it is clear there is a
significant overlap between 'cognition' and 'intellect'
with the two concepts
being closely related.
whereas cognition appears to encompass the broader mental processes of acquiring
knowledge through perception, processing
and then storing that knowledge through
memory, and then drawing from that knowledge to reason and problem solve, the
intellect focuses
on the latter part within cognition which relates to the
higher order processes of reasoning, analysis and engaging in complex and
abstract thinking.
can see that, in some cases, the distinction between 'intellect' and 'cognition'
may be material. But it is difficult to immediately
see how that would be the
case in this matter. The fact that a cognitive impairment will not always
amount to an intellectual disability
does not mean that a cognitive impairment
fall within the meaning of an intellectual disability.
when one looks at the different meanings of 'dementia' it is apparent what they
incorporate are concepts of an impairment
to the operation of a person's mind
resulting in a diminishment of functional ability, brought about by some disease
or condition
affecting the brain.
is particularly clear, however, is that none of these definitions require the
collateral or corroborative evidence required
by the diagnostic criteria in the
DSM-5 or ICD. I see no basis for this court to import such a requirement when
interpreting the
terms 'intellectual disability' or 'dementia' under s 9 of
relation to 'acquired brain injury' this, in my view, is even easier to define.
Here 'acquired' is simply a reference to an injury
to the brain that has been
sustained from after birth onwards. However, to have any relevance to the
discharge of the court's function
under pt 3 of the Act, obviously that
brain injury must cause some level of impairment to the accused's understanding
of one or more
of the criteria contained within s 26. So, again, here the
reference to an 'acquired brain injury' refers to something more than
injury to the brain following birth but, to be relevant, an injury to the brain
that affects the person's ability to understand
one examines the collective meanings of 'intellectual disability', 'acquired
brain injury', 'dementia', and the meaning of 'mental
illness' as provided for
by s 1(1) of the Code and the manner in which it has subsequently
interpreted, there is a conceptual commonality
between all four terms in
(a) the impairment originates from an underlying
non-self-induced condition, whether that is a disease, injury, abnormality or
pathological
change, as opposed to an impairment that has been brought about by
virtue of the mind's temporary reaction to an external circumstance;
(b) the underlying condition causes a reduction in the person's mental
capacity, specifically in relation to the person's ability
to reason, understand
or exercise proper judgment; and
(c) that reduction has a functional consequence upon the person.
simply, each refers to an underlying condition or injury of the brain or mind
that materially impairs a person's cognitive functioning,
including their
ability to understand, reason, or exercise judgment, and can be
distinguished from temporary or non-pathological
responses to external stimuli.
The resultant consequence is the diminution in the person's functional mental
capacities.
construing the meanings to be attributed in the way that I have, one can see
that the essential question is to what extent the
person's mental functioning
has been impaired. None of this is surprising when one remembers that the four
terms used in s 9(a)
- s 9(d) are
collectively
endeavouring to define the meaning of 'mental impairment'. To the extent that a
person's mental functioning may be impaired due
to cognitive impairment, there
does not appear to be any textual justification for why that would not amount to
a 'mental impairment'.
The evidence
Ancillary materials
noted at [6] - [9] of my previous reasons, this matter initially came
before me for the purposes of sentencing Mr Ng. Reports
had been ordered
for that purpose. Those reports were prepared by Dr Nicholas Ho,
psychiatrist, dated 7 March
Ms Claire Lynn, psychologist, dated 2 March
reports had not been prepared pursuant to s 29(3) of the Act.
Notwithstanding, it was agreed by the parties I could have regard
contents of these reports pursuant to s 29(2) and they were received into
evidence on that basis. Neither author was called
as part of the inquiry.
A continual theme during [the] interview was Mr Ng's difficulty with
language, regardless of whether he was listening to the writer
and responding in
English or to the interpreter. The interpreter struggled throughout while he
reiterated that Mr Ng was not answering
questions ... [o]verall, Mr Ng presented as confused,
disorientated, potentially anxious and unable to understand or respond
language and comprehension limitations.
of the background history was obtained from Mr Ng's brother as '[a]cquiring
clear and consistent information from [Mr Ng] was
not possible at any
brother reported that Mr Ng did not speak until somewhere between 5 to 7
years old. He has always been highly reliant on
his family as he has never
demonstrated a capacity to live independently. Mr Ng was never formally
assessed for any condition despite
having learning difficulties. He ceased
schooling at approximately
grade 6 or 7.
brother suggested there had always been developmental delays and limitations in
Mr Ng's capacity that have impeded communication,
learning, understanding
and managing the demands of independent
Ms Lynn concluded
[t]he assessment revealed that [Mr Ng] presented with severe developmental
delay in relation to speech and language ... demonstrated
adaptive behaviour and associated skills ... and his presentation
raised further questions around his cognitive functioning
and capacity
suggested a disability specific assessment may be necessary to clarify
Mr Ng's cognitive function and capacity.
reported that when examining Mr Ng '[i]t was extremely difficult to elicit
a history from Mr Ng, who appeared to misunderstand
questions posed of him,
or respond in a longwinded or at times irrelevant
difficulty was experienced when questioning regarding the index offending with
Dr Ho noting he was unable to elicit the
'underlying emotions, motivations,
cognitions, and circumstances surrounding his offending' despite multiple
efforts to rephrase
questions and spending over 45 minutes separated into
three discrete blocks endeavouring to do
conducted 'brief cognitive screening' but Mr Ng experienced significant
difficulty.
provided the diagnosis of '[a]pparent cognitive impairment for further
investigation'.
There was no evidence of a serious mood, anxiety or psychotic disorder nor
a diagnosis of 'major mental
However, given the difficulties Dr Ho sustained in obtaining reliable
information from Mr Ng and the apparent incongruity between
cognitive testing coupled with matters Mr Ng was saying, it was impossible
for Dr Ho to provide any degree of diagnostic
certainty in the absence of
information.
presented a significant limitation to the extent that Dr Ho could provide
any reliable assessment.
this reason, Dr Ho recommended further medical evaluation for possible
neuropsychological causes of his apparent cognitive
impairment.
Dr Cindy Cabeleira
Dr Cabeleira
provided two reports dated 16 January
(first report) and 23 October
report). The first report was prepared following Dr Ho's recommendation
and in anticipation of the sentencing proceedings
that were to take place.
Similarly, this report was also received into evidence pursuant to
s 29(2). The second report was obtained
pursuant to s 29(3) of
Dr Cabeleira
initially saw Mr Ng across three sessions on 24, 29 November and
1 December 2023 with the assistance of a Cantonese
interpreter. She
observed he presented with a significant cognitive impairment over and above
what might be expected from his hearing
impairment and language
reviewed a CT scan of Mr Ng's head which was performed on
showed 'volume loss and signs of
ischaemia'.
further scan on 16 July 2023 identified 'patchy white matter
hypoattenuation consistent with chronic small vessel disease. Punctate
attenuation foci in the right
there was no sign of cerebral injury.
the conclusion of her first report she
(a) Mr Ng demonstrated areas of 'mild to marked' cognitive
impairment with 'significant' deficits in visuomotor speed, attentional
capacity, auditory working memory and aspects of higher executive functioning.
Features of the executive functioning impairment
included divided attention,
indicators of concrete and rigid thinking and issues with self-monitoring and
mental tracking.
(b) His cognitive profile was characterised by significant slowing, verbal
language deficits and attentional executive weaknesses
which were likely to
negatively impact on, and cause, variability in his daily memory functioning.
(c) The cognitive profile testing was not indicative of an intellectual
developmental disorder however the 'significant' cognitive
deficits are
considered to be longstanding and neurodevelopmental in nature.
(d) His cognitive and adaptive functioning deficits appear to have worsened
over time, partly due to his poorly managed medical conditions
and vascular risk
factors. He is at significant risk of further decline.
(e) He is at risk of the possible emergence of a neurodegenerative condition
such as dementia.
(f) Further assessment of Mr Ng's decision-making capacity was 'strongly
recommended' in order to ascertain whether a guardian and
administrator needed
to be formally appointed.
preparing her second report, Dr Cabeleira again interviewed Mr Ng,
this time in a single session that lasted four hours. Mr Ng
once again had
the assistance of a Cantonese interpreter but, once again, Dr Cabeleira
experienced a level of difficulty in carrying
out the interview that exceeded
the difficulty she would have expected to be caused by the language difficulty
and Mr Ng's hearing
impairment.
observed he continued to present with significant cognitive impairment as well
as noting generalised slowing.
neuropsychological testing carried out on this occasion showed that Mr Ng
continued to demonstrate difficulty with working
memory. Notwithstanding the
difficulties Mr Ng experienced in carrying out the testing,
Dr Cabeleira was satisfied the testing still
appeared to be a valid
reflection of Mr Ng's cognitive capacity.
testing on this occasion suggested Mr Ng experienced the following
limitations:
immediate auditory attention span and auditory working memory were assessed as
being extremely low and borderline respectively.
(b) His processing speed was extremely low.
(c) Verbal and language abilities could not be quantitatively assessed due to
the language difficulties Mr Ng exhibited. These difficulties
notwithstanding efforts made to simplify testing.
(d) His higher level visuoconstructional skills were well-intact, being
assessed as high average.
(e) Verbal learning and memory functions could not be assessed due to his
significant language impairment. A modified test was administered
utilising a
picture memory test. Mr Ng experienced significant difficulty over
repeated trials. His learning and memory function
was considered to be
negatively impacted by attentional and executive deficits.
(f) Weakness was seen across a number of Mr Ng's executive skills. His
simple visual strategy formation/problem-solving was impaired
with very concrete
and rigid thinking observed. Divided attention and cognitive flexibility were
also qualitatively poor. Difficulties
were also observed with Mr Ng's
self-monitoring and his mental tracking.
conclusion, Dr Cabeleira remained of the view Mr Ng continued to
demonstrate areas of 'largely marked cognitive impairment' with
'significant'
deficits in his visuomotor speed, attentional capacity, auditory working memory
and aspects of his higher executive
functioning. Whilst unable to be
quantitatively assessed, significant language impairment was observed with
frequent difficulties
being seen in his inability to understand the Cantonese
interpreter.
qualitatively comparing his results to those obtained during the assessment
conducted for the purposes of preparing the first
report, Mr Ng's level of
cognitive functioning and areas of impairment appeared to have remained
concluded that Mr Ng has a 'cognitive disability that appears longstanding
and neurodevelopmental in nature and partially associated
with his significant
hearing impairment from birth'. That language impairment appears to have
contributed to significant attentional
and executive impairments. She was of
the view this cognitive impairment was neurodevelopmental in nature and was
likely to have
largely been present since
Dr Cabeleira
opined that Mr Ng 'impressed as a severely (cognitively) impaired and
vulnerable man with very limited informal (daily
and social)
neurodevelopmental cognitive condition has 'likely worsened to some degree with
poorly managed medical conditions and vascular
risk factors'.
Oral evidence
Dr Cabeleira
gave evidence to supplement her two reports.
was asked to clarify the distinction drawn between an intellectual developmental
disorder, such as intellectual disability, versus
the widespread cognitive
impairment that the testing showed Mr Ng to have. She explained the
principal distinction was a diagnostic
'intellectual disability' is where a person has 'widespread cognitive deficits
that are present from birth and lead to widespread
deficits in daily or
adaptive functioning - also from birth or from
'cognitive disability' is 'usually for something that happens
seen, there is a degree of overlap between an intellectual disability and
cognitive disability. An intellectual disability
largely appears to be a
subset within a 'cognitive disability' with the principal point of
distinction being the onset. Where a
cognitive disability is incurred after
birth, this would then be assessed as an 'acquired brain
Mr Ng's case, Dr Cabeleira agreed that his widespread cognitive
impairments were consistent with having been present from an early
including from birth, but her principal difficulty in providing a diagnosis
of 'intellectual disability' was the absence of
corroborative evidence
demonstrating an impaired ability to adapt to that cognitive
impairment.
such corroborative evidence was present, then Dr Cabeleira confirmed it
would be possible Mr Ng would meet the criteria, but she
would require that
corroborative information as Mr Ng held some 'pockets of [relative]
strength' in visual processing skills and
mathematical ability, which were not
findings one would commonly see in someone with an intellectual
disability.
she explained
to identify dementia, you'd need at least one area of cognition to be
significantly below or to have significantly declined from
where the person was
at in terms of that ability before, perhaps, but you also need corroborative
history about their adaptive functioning
and evidence of functional
Ordinarily,
such a source of corroborative evidence would be a parent rather than a
sibling, as a sibling will ordinarily be similar
in age which make any
assessment of intellectual functioning unreliable as it is formed through the
perspective of a
lives with his mother who provides him with day-to-day support. She is his only
remaining parent. She is unable to provide
a reliable corroborative
history as she has dementia. Mr Ng's only other source of collateral
corroboration was his younger brother
who provides sporadic support but, due to
the limited involvement he has with Mr Ng, he was not considered to be a
reliable source
from which to make comparative assessments.
Nevertheless,
Dr Cabeleira confirmed Mr Ng's current level of cognitive impairment
coupled with the presence of volume loss seen
in the CT scan on
1 January 2023 would otherwise be consistent with dementia or, at the very
least, has exacerbated a pre-existing
injury sustained from
clarified that the apparent stability she identified in her second report did
not suggest there had not been further deterioration
but, rather, once testing
fell beneath a certain minimum baseline it was impossible to reliably determine
if there had been any further
in the absence of being able to provide a diagnosis of dementia,
Dr Cabeleira confirmed the small vessel disease evidenced from
CT scan on 16 July 2023 was likely to have contributed to Mr Ng's
cognitive impairment and was consistent with the ischaemic
injury and volume
loss seen in the CT scan on 1 January
she noted Mr Ng's significant hearing impairment may be a complicating
factor to any diagnosis as the hearing impairment
itself could be partially
responsible for his widespread cognitive
explained early onset hearing impairment where there was an absence of supports
to manage it can affect a child's language development,
problem solving,
executive functional development, reasoning and
basis alone, Dr Cabeleira suggested the hearing impairment had the capacity
to have a 'profound impact' upon Mr Ng's cognitive
impairment.
summary, Dr Cabeleira was satisfied based upon the testing and the
information she had received from Mr Ng, that he held a widespread
impairment.
difficulty was in providing a diagnostic classification for that cognitive
impairment due to an inability to pinpoint its onset
because of the absence of
reliable corroborative history. She opined the possible diagnoses
the cognitive impairments had been present from birth, this would meet the
criteria for intellectual disability.
(b) Mr Ng's significant hearing impairment, from an early age, could
have impacted upon his cognitive development.
event that could have resulted in brain injury.
(d) Dementia, if corroborative evidence could be obtained to show a
deterioration in functioning.
(e) An emerging neurodegenerative condition that could not be identified due
to Mr Ng's poor performance in the testing.
Dr Gosia Wojnarowska
to s 29(3) of the Act, Dr Wojnarowska provided a report dated
22 March 2025
addressing the question of Mr Ng's fitness to stand trial. As part of that
assessment, she conducted a meeting on 13 March 2025
with Mr Ng with
the assistance of a Cantonese interpreter. That meeting was of 'relative short
duration' due to Mr Ng prematurely
terminating it. Notwithstanding,
Dr Wojnarowska was still able to provide an opinion based on the
information she was able to obtain
from Mr Ng during the interview, coupled
with the materials she received to assist in the preparation of the
claimed to have remembered being assessed by Dr Wojnarowska three years
previously and was familiar with the interview location,
having been there a
'long time ago'. This was, in fact, Dr Wojnarowska's first time
specific questioning by Dr Wojnarowska as to the purpose for why Mr Ng
was being assessed, he maintained a denial of his alleged
offending and
was observed to become increasingly agitated. It was shortly thereafter
that he terminated the interview prematurely.
the assistance of the Cantonese interpreter, Dr Wojnarowska experienced
similar difficulties to Dr Cabeleira in the answers
he provided. She notes
the content of his answers were 'difficult to assess due to illogicality of his
answers'. The interpreter
confirmed a number of Mr Ng's answers were not
grammatically correct. His presentation suggested his cognition, insight and
were all significantly
addressing the question of whether Mr Ng has a 'mental illness or mental
impairment' she confirmed he did not present with a 'major
psychiatric disorder
such as psychosis or mood
Dr Wojnarowska opined Mr Ng 'has a confirmed cognitive deficit, most
likely related to complications related to premature
birth and progressive
neurodegenerative disorder related to vascular
was of the view the likely cause of the 'enduring cognitive deficit' was due to
prematurity. Dr Cabeleira notes in her first
report that Mr Ng's
brother advised Mr Ng was born 'very premature' and was 'reportedly
the size of an adult's palm/hand at
refusing to answer any of Dr Wojnarowska's questions in relation to the
charge or court matters, Dr Wojnarowska still offered
the opinion that he
'would have no understanding of the Australian legal
was unfit to plead and unfit to stand
Oral evidence
Dr Wojnarowska
was called to give oral evidence to supplement her report. She confirmed she
was able to exclude the operation of
any of the 'major mental illnesses' like
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and bipolar
to the possibility of an acquired brain injury, her answer was 'well we don't
know really'. The inability to say with any degree
of certainty was due to an
absence of any brain imaging to compare
in offering this opinion it was clear Dr Wojnarowska was referring to a
traumatic brain injury where the cognitive impairment
was caused by external
insult, and was not intending to exclude an impairment which had been acquired
subsequent to
relation to dementia, she could not 'commit [her]self' to such
a diagnosis,
seemingly for similar reasons to Dr Cabeleira. However,
Dr Wojnarowska did appear to be prepared to go slightly further by noting
that if the claims Mr Ng made to her that he worked upon arrival in
Australia in 1987 were in fact correct, then this would give
some indication of
his level of functional
of dementia.
Collateral information received from Mr Ng's brother suggested
a history of work as a kitchen hand, but Mr Ng was often terminated
from these jobs as he was unable to properly follow instructions or demonstrated
difficulty in carrying out the tasks he was responsible
Additionally,
she shared the view expressed by Dr Cabeleira that the neuroimaging was
suggestive of vascular
However, she would not be able to provide a diagnosis or a concluded view
regarding vascular dementia due to the absence of the
corroborative
Dr Wojnarowska
offered the additional explanation that vascular dementia is a condition that
creates a 'stepwise' decline rather
than a progressive one as cognitive
deterioration will be associated with the occurrence of an
infarct is the necrotic damage resulting from a loss of oxygen, which can be
caused by an ischemic event.
further cognitive deterioration would not be expected to be seen until a new
infarct occurs, Dr Wojnarowska suggested this
was a likely explanation for
the fact there had been no further cognitive deterioration observed in the
testing carried out by Dr
Cabeleira in the intervening period between her
two reports.
though, Dr Wojnarowska considered the cognitive impairment was likely to be
connected to the additional risk factors caused
by 'extreme
prematurity'.
she explained, extreme prematurity increases the risk of hypoxia after
birth which can cause damage to the brain. The area of
cognitive functioning
likely to be impaired will be dependent on where the damage is localised,
but usually the impairments are associated
with loss of memory, loss of
cognitive ability to perform tasks, executive dysfunction and
hypothesis was that Mr Ng was someone who had been born prematurely and
with a severe hearing impairment which has caused cognitive
vulnerability and
compromise at birth. The further risks caused by vascular dementia were then
superimposed over that
vulnerability.
Dr Wojnarowska
agreed with the reasons why Dr Cabeleira was unable to provide a diagnosis
of intellectual disability and stated that
it was also 'not [her] remit' to do
Nevertheless,
she was of the view that Mr Ng's widespread cognitive impairments would be
capable of satisfying the diagnostic definition
of 'intellectual impairment' and
the only thing impeding a diagnosis was the absence of the corroborative
went on to explain that the absence of an ability to do so did not mean that
Mr Ng did not have a mental impairment. Her opinion
was 'he is cognitively
impaired ... [a]nd certainly not able to process the information that
'is'] required to meaningfully participate in - in a
Does Mr Ng have a mental impairment?
four experts who reviewed Mr Ng reported his apparent significant cognitive
difficulty. There is nothing in the materials before
me that would cause me to
question Dr Cabeleira's assessment that these cognitive difficulties are
widespread.
is apparent from Dr Cabeleira's evidence, Mr Ng's cognitive
'difficulties' are more than mere difficulties - they are, in truth,
profound. As Dr Cabeleira said, 'the widespread nature and severity of his
cognitive deficits fit or are similar to those various
conditions listed in the
significance as to the level of those impairments was reflected in what
Dr Cabeleira described as the 'floor effect' in that
Mr Ng did 'so
poorly already on the test that there's no room to get
impediment to Dr Cabeleira providing a
to that effect was
the absence of the corroborative history from Mr Ng's mother.
Relevantly,
whilst Mr Ng's cognitive impairment was described as 'widespread', where he
demonstrated 'significant' impairments were
to the higher-level executive
functions, including limitations to his problem-solving, strong indications of
rigid, concrete and
perseverative thinking and issues with self-monitoring and
of these limitations would fall within the realm of 'intellectual' functioning
that I have discussed above at [
All of them were described as appearing to be 'neurodevelopmental in nature
(i.e., likely and largely present si
and all of them were identified as having
caused him 'a long history of learning difficulties and cognitive and adaptive
functioning
with the opinion held by Dr Cabeleira that the impairment is
'neurodevelopmental in nature', I am satisfied Mr Ng's condition
contributed to, or caused by, one or more of the following combination of
(a) An ischaemic injury or insult sustained by Mr Ng
which caused, or created vulnerability for, damage
to Mr Ng's brain, producing widespread cognitive impairment in the manner
hypothesised
by Dr Wojnarowska above at [
(b) Mr Ng's profound hearing impairment from
an early age, which significantly impacted his expressive and receptive
development of
language. In turn, that expressive and receptive limitation
had a widespread adverse impact by restricting the development of Mr
executive functioning, specifically his ability to reason, engage in abstract
thinking and his ability to form and recall
(c) At some point, after having been born,
Mr Ng has sustained one or more infarcts caused by the onset of vascular
dementia and resulting
in ischaemic injury. That ischaemic injury has caused
volume loss to Mr Ng's brain, significantly in the thalamus, corona radiata
and the lacunar
are deep internal structures of the brain that have some responsibility for
executive functioning.
indicated by my findings at [
satisfied that Mr Ng's cognitive impairment arises from an underlying
condition or injury to his brain. This impairment has
materially affected the
functioning of his mind, particularly in the domains of executive and
attentional processes, and has consequently
diminished his capacity to reason
and to understand. Even in the absence of corroborative evidence from
Mr Ng's mother, I am satisfied
the impairment to Mr Ng's cognitive
functioning is such that it would amount to an intellectual disability in the
way that I have
discussed the meaning of that term above at [
as noted at [
(b)], I am satisfied
there is a link between Mr Ng's hearing disability during early childhood
and the significant impairment to the
development of his executive functioning.
For the reasons I have already outlined, Mr Ng's executive impairment has
resulted in
limitations to Mr Ng's ability to reason and understand.
This would constitute an 'infirmity of the mind'. Similarly,
Mr Ng's hearing
disability would constitute an 'abnormal bodily
affection or condition'. As referred to above at [
], where an 'infirmity of the mind' is
caused by an 'abnormal bodily affection or condition' this will constitute a
'mental illness'
for the purposes of s 1(1) of the Code. On this basis,
Mr Ng's cognitive impairment is also capable of amounting to a 'mental
when one applies the meaning of 'dementia' as I have outlined above at [
], then the finding I have made at [
(b)] is capable of meeting that
criteria. Regardless, the ischaemic injury, or injuries, caused to
Mr Ng's brain because of one or
more infarcts would constitute an acquired
brain injury in the manner that I have discussed above at [
the reasons I have outlined above, each of the findings I have made relating to
Mr Ng's cognitive impairment are, by themselves,
capable of satisfying each
of the meanings provided for in s 9(a) - s 9(d). Those
meanings can be satisfied even in the absence
of corroborative evidence and even
in the absence of a
finding to that effect.
the definition of 'mental impairment' as provided for by s 9 does not
require Mr Ng's cognitive impairment to be clearly
classified or referrable
condition within s 9. That is, s 9 does not
require Mr Ng's cognitive impairment to be identifiable as either an
intellectual disability
a mental illness
an acquired brain
dementia. Mr Ng will have a mental impairment if
Mr Ng has 'any of, or a combination of' those conditions.
one considers the totality of both Dr Cabeleira and Dr Wojnarowska's
evidence, both independently and together, it is clear
the uncertainty each
expressed in providing a diagnosis for Mr Ng's widespread cognitive
impairment was not because it was unclear
to either doctor as to whether it had
been caused by intellectual disability, mental illness, an acquired brain injury
dementia, it was because they could simply not say which one it was.
There was never any question that Mr Ng's 'significant cognitive
difficulties' amounted to a
mental impairment
for the purposes of the
the reasons I have set out, I am satisfied that Mr Ng's significant
cognitive impairment constitutes a mental impairment, as
Does Mr Ng's mental impairment render him unfit to stand trial?
of the Act sets out nine criteria. An accused person who, because of a mental
impairment, satisfies one or more of those
nine criteria will be unfit to stand
making the assessment, the court may have regard to what extent appropriate
support measures may be able to assist a person's
capacity to overcome any of
the criteria they would otherwise
the present matter, Dr Cabeleira considered Mr Ng to satisfy eight of
the nine criteria. The only criteria Dr Cabeleira was not
Mr Ng met was
noted above at [
Dr Wojnarowska was unable to specifically test the criteria due to the
premature termination of her interview with Mr Ng. Notwithstanding
still was able to confirm he was 'unfit to stand trial'.
the course of her evidence she elaborated upon this by drawing reference to her
collective 'experience in assessing people
who are fit to stand trial' that 'the
major issue in people who have limited cognitive abilities is about
understanding the consequences
of entering non-guilty plea and then
participating in trial and hearing the evidence and how that evidence is weighed
by the justice
effect of Dr Wojnarowska's evidence was that Mr Ng may have
capacity to understand the distinction between guilty and not guilty
and if 'coached' would be able to adequately explain what the
role of a judge,
prosecutor, defence counsel and jury was. However, where the limiting effect of
his cognitive impairment would
arise would
He would not be able to understand that by saying 'I'm not guilty' that the
matter would not proceed further. So he would - he would,
think, this is just my hypothesis, by maintaining innocence, the matter would go
Notwithstanding
the fact that in providing the answers outlined above Dr Wojnarowska did
not specifically refer to the criteria identified
in s 26 of the Act, I
infer from her evidence that Mr Ng would satisfy s 26(b),
s 26(d), and s 26(f) - (i).
State accepts that in the event I conclude Mr Ng has a mental impairment,
that he is unfit for trial and will not become fit
within the next six
is a concession that is appropriately made.
relation to the assessment of the criteria under s 26, to the extent there
are any inconsistencies between the opinions offered
by Dr Cabeleira and
Dr Wojnarowska, I prefer the opinions of Dr Cabeleira given her
ability to carry out a more detailed and comprehensive
assessment of Mr Ng.
However, I do not see any meaningful inconsistency between Dr Cabeleira and
Dr Wojnarowska's opinions. Dr Wojnarowska's
opinions usefully inform
when considering the more detailed assessment made by Dr Cabeleira.
the reasons outlined by Dr
satisfied Mr Ng meets the criteria contained in s 26(b)(i) of the Act.
relation to s 26(a) (unable to understand the nature of the charge)
Dr Cabeleira suggested Mr Ng 'was generally aware of, and
understand, the nature of this remaining charge including the details regarding
such contained the Statement of Material
Nevertheless, this does seem to sit inconsistently with subsequent material
contained within her report.
example, when explaining why Mr Ng satisfied s 26(b) (unable to give
instructions to a legal practitioner representing the accused)
[H]e had instructed or suggested to his lawyer that the victim ... be
medically examined ... as he seemingly felt this would clear
the current charges and prove that she was not sexually penetrated.
When it was put to him that this would likely not 'clear'
charges (as indecent dealings did not require penetration and included
inappropriate touching for example which is what
has been alleged for the
current remaining charge), he had trouble understanding this. He then
continued to perseverate on his former
idea of instructing his lawyer to get
[the victim] medically examined throughout the 3 to 4 hours spent in
his company.
is not necessary for me to make a finding in relation to Mr Ng's capacity
to 'understand the nature of the charge' for the purposes
of s 26(a).
However, the above does demonstrate the difficulty encountered when endeavouring
to 'compartmentalise' a widespread
cognitive impairment into specific criteria,
though to be clear, that is not what I am suggesting Dr Cabeleira has
sought to do.
Inevitably, there will be a level of overlap given many of the
criteria provided for in s 26 are facets of the same concept.
example, a person's ability to understand the difference between 'guilty' and
'not guilty' at a conceptual or definitional level
be capable of
meeting the words of s 26(c). But where a person then demonstrates a
fundamental inability to understand how those
pleas interact within the Western
Australian criminal justice system, the significance that those pleas hold
and the consequences
that come from them, then it is questionable whether the
person actually does, for the purposes of s 26(c), understand the
is perhaps best demonstrated by Dr Wojnarowska's evidence that Mr Ng
could have the capacity to know the difference between
'guilty' and 'not guilty'
and therefore, arguably, fails to meet s 26(c). But if Mr Ng truly
does think that by pleading not guilty
and 'maintaining innocence, the matter
would go away' it does suggest that the criteria in s 26(c) has been met.
the inquiry, the State suggested that Mr Ng's prior experience of giving
evidence as a witness in unrelated
proceedings
demonstrated a sufficient level of his understanding of the process, thereby
casting doubt on the genuineness of his alleged inability
to do so. This was
emphatically rejected by Dr Cabeleira as making 'no difference at
a submission was ultimately made by the prosecutor in the matter where
Mr Ng did give evidence that apparent difficulties
in the Mr Ng's
evidence may have been
self-evidently
explicable because of an 'underlying cognitive
Notwithstanding
the fact Mr Ng gave evidence as a special witness with measures taken to
assist in that process, it is apparent those
measures did not remedy the
underlying difficulty. That is not surprising given the underlying difficulty
is Mr Ng's impaired ability
to understand. This was consistent with
Dr Cabeleira's opinion, which I accept, as to why no measures
would be able to adequately
assist in remedying Mr Ng's unfitness to stand
fact a person, with sufficient 'coaching', can explain the role of a prosecutor,
judge or defence counsel may still fall short
of what is required by s 26.
Similarly, the ability for a person to sit and give evidence from a remote room
as a special witness
simply suggests an ability to parrot or mimic what might be
expected of them. It does little to suggest an ability to understand
occurring and why.
of the primary focuses of s 26 is on the accused person's ability to
understand. The word 'understand' is specifically referred
to in five of the
nine criteria. For the remaining four, it is at least arguable that an
incapacity to understand either underlies
the criteria or is, at the very least,
implicitly relevant to satisfying them.
Ultimately,
what has always been evident from the material is that Mr Ng is someone who
is significantly cognitively impaired. That
impairment has had a marked
impact upon his ability to understand, as evidenced by his considerable
confusion and his perseveration
on unrelated and irrational matters. Anyone who
has spoken to Mr Ng, including the
readily come to that conclusion. I am no different.
am satisfied that Mr Ng holds a 'mental impairment' as defined within
s 9 of the Act.
am satisfied that because of the mental impairment, Mr Ng is unable to do
any of the things outlined in s 26(b) through to s 26(i)
of the Act.
of the nature of the mental impairment, I am satisfied Mr Ng will not
become fit to stand trial within the next six months.
Accordingly, I order that
a special proceeding under subdivision 3 take place, as required by
s 37(3) of the Act.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to Judge Astill
19 SEPTEMBER 2025
of Western Australia v Ng
[2025] WADC 42
7(1)(b)(iii) of the
7(1)(b)(v) of the
7(2)(c) of the
Pursuant to
s 14 of the Act, the provisions of the CPA, including s 88, will apply
'with the necessary modifications'. Section 88(1)
defines 'proceedings' as
including 'at trial'. To the extent any modification of 'proceedings' is
required to incorporate an inquiry
under pt 3 div 2 of the Act, I make
modification.
Section 27 of the
of the Act.
Section 29(1) of the
29(2) of the
35(1) of the
37(3) of the
(1985) 20 A Crim R 388
State of Western Australia v Siddique [No 2]
[2016] WASC 358
(Jenkins J).
See State's supplementary outline of submissions dated 9 September 2025
(State's supplementary submissions) pars 19, 20, 22.
v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WADC 5 (Wager
Criminal Law (Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
(WA) (the 1996
respect to her Honour, the word 'that' appears to have been included by
The State of Western Australia v IMK
[2018] WADC 171 (Sleight
The State of Western Australia v KC (a pseudonym)
[2019] WADC 179
[34(a)] (Sleight
The State of Western Australia v Altieri
[2024] WADC 31 (Gillan
Macquarie Dictionary
Macquarie Dictionary
Mosby's Dictionary of Medicine, Nursing & Health Professions
4 (Dr Ho's report).
Exhibit 5 (Ms
Lynn's report).
report, page 2, par
report, page 2, par
report, page 3, par
report, page 4, par
report, page 5, par
report, page 3, par
report, page 3, par
report, pages 8 - 9, pars
10.8 - 10.14.
Dr Ho's report, page 9, pars
11.3 - 11.5.
Dr Ho's report, page 9, par
report, page 10, par
1 (Dr Cabeleira's first
Exhibit 2 (Dr Cabeleira's second
Cabeleira's first report, page
Cabeleira's first report, page 5, par
condition caused by the restriction of blood supply causing lack of
Cabeleira's first report, page 5, par
Cabeleira's first report, pages 17 -
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, pages 8 -
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, page
Exhibit 3 (Dr Wojnarowska's report).
Wojnarowska's report, page 2, par
Wojnarowska's report, page 5, pars 26 -
Wojnarowska's report, page 6, par
Wojnarowska's report, page 6, par 35.
Wojnarowska's report, page 6, par
Cabeleira's first report, page 10 par
Wojnarowska's report, page 7, par
Wojnarowska's report, page 7, par
report, page 3, par 3; Dr Cabeleira's first report, page 10, par
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's first report, page 5, par
Cabeleira's second report, page
State's supplementary submissions, par
Cabeleira's second report, pages 10 -
Cabeleira's second report, page
Cabeleira's second report, page
State of Western Australia v Ruse (IND 149 of 2024)
Transcript, Ruse, District Court, 30 April 2025,
Transcript, Ruse, District Court, 30 April 2025,
Transcript, Ruse, District Court, 28 April 2025, 167.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (603 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter