URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/224.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lurie and Anor v Town of Vincent [2004] WATPAT 224 (22 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 253 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 224
Heard: 13-16 December 2004
Decision: 22 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
MICHAEL IAN LURIE AND NICHOLAS JOHN AITKEN
TOWN OF VINCENT
Mr P McGowan
(President)
Development application – Group dwelling – Residential
Design Codes – Plot ratio – Setbacks – Inventory
of trees of
significance – Amenity
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr D McLeod and Mr C Slarke (instructed by McLeods) appeared for the
Mr A Roberts (instructed by Minter Ellison) appeared for the
The Tribunal:
1. The Appellants are the registered proprietors of land known as
128 (Lot 28) and 130 (Lot 27) Joel Terrace, Mount
subject property
2. The subject property is zoned Residential R60 under the provisions of the
Respondent’s Town Planning Scheme No.1 (“
zoned Urban under the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
3. The subject property is presently vacant, save for a partly constructed
driveway which provides access to the land from Joel Terrace.
Of significance
is that on the subject property is a camphor laurel tree (“
”) which is on the Respondent’s Inventory of Trees of
Significance. On 8 December 2003 the Appellants made application
Respondent for approval to develop seven grouped dwellings on the subject
property comprising 3 two level dwellings and 4
three level dwellings.
4. On 28 September 2004 Council of the Respondent resolved to refuse the
development. It provided the following
“(a) The development is not consistent with the orderly and proper
planning and the preservation of the amenities of the locality
in the precinct
(b) The non-compliance with the building setbacks, plot ratio, the number of
storage retaining walls, privacy, the number of building
walls, stores and
building height requirements of the Residential Design Codes and the
requirements of the Banks Precinct and Riverside
Locality Plan.
(c) The Camphor Laurel Oak Tree is currently listed on the Town’s Trees of
Significance Inventory and the extent of required
pruning of this tree to
accommodate the proposed development will significantly reduce the value and
significance of the tree.
(d) In the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer and Executive Manager
Environmental and Development Services (having given consideration
arboriculturists reports submitted by Charles Aldous-Ball dated 3 December 2003
and John Banks dated 20 August 2004
necessary pruning excavation
required on building construction in close proximity to the significant tree
will result in disfigurement
and a significant loss of its root system and
canopy and this would have the potential to compromise the tree’s long
term stability
and cause a corresponding deleterious effect and its possible
deterioration.
(e) The creation of an undesirable precedent in the locality.
(f) Consideration of the significant number of objections
5. The present appeal is brought from that refusal.
Description of the Development
6. The subject property has a number of constraints in relation to the proposed
development. The subject property is on the east
side of Joel Terrace. The
land falls steeply to the east down an embankment. The eastern portion of the
subject property then flattens
out where it abuts a foreshore reserve adjacent
to the Swan River (given the location of the subject property, the development
application
required approval from the Swan River Trust
”). SRT approved the development subject to a number of
conditions).
7. The highest point of the subject property is 9.36 AHD and the lowest
point 3.44 AHD representing a fall of 5.92 metres
distance of some
8. To the north west and south of the subject property the land is used for
residential buildings comprising some original single
and two storey houses as
well as new single two and three storey dwellings, grouped dwellings and high
rise multiple dwellings.
9. Within 500 metres of the subject property are the Western Power offices,
the former East Perth Power Station, the Western
Switch Station, a small
commercial industrial area and the Mercy Hospital which is approximately
300 metres to the north.
10. The subject property also is somewhat oddly shaped including a rectangular
indentation measuring 10.75 metres by 18.48 metres
at the south western
corner of Lot 28. It is in that area that the Tree has grown and which was
the focus of particular interest
not only in the reasons offered by the
Respondent for refusing development application but in the evidence led in these
proceedings.
11. At the outset it should be emphasised that at no stage have the Appellants
approached this matter on the basis that they intended
to remove the Tree. That
had a number of implications. First that necessarily involved detailed
discussions with the Respondent
in relation to the way in which development may
be effected with the tree remaining. Secondly, of course, it immediately
design constraints once it was accepted the tree was to remain, and
thirdly, there was much debate as to what pruning could or would
development were to take place around the Tree.
Considerations
12. There are a number of planning instruments which proved to be relevant in
these proceedings. They include:
(a) Town of Vincent Town Planning Scheme No.1 (“
(b) Banks Precinct Policy. (The Banks Precinct is defined as an area between
Lord Street in the west and Swan River in the east,
Sommers Street in the south
and the northern extension of Joel Terrace and Guildford Road in the north. The
subject property is
within this area.)
(c) Local Character Policy.
(d) Building Scale Policy.
(e) Street Setbacks Policy.
(f) Riverside Locality Policy. (This is a larger area incorporating both the
area the subject of the Banks Precinct Policy together
with a further area
extending further west of Lord Street.)
(g) Also relevant are the Residential Design Codes
13. Relevant provisions of TPS1 include the
“19 RESIDENTIAL PLANNING CODES
(1) The Residential Planning Codes are to be read as part of this Scheme and
will be made available for inspection with the Scheme
for determining
residential densities.
(2) Unless otherwise provided in, or consistent with, this Scheme or a
planning approval, the development of land for any of the residential
dealt with by the Residential Planning Codes is to conform with the provisions
of those Codes.
20 SPECIAL APPLICATION OF THE RESIDENTIAL PLANNING CODES
(5) The Council will consider
variations to Residential Planning Codes where it considers that acceptable
levels of residential amenity
can be achieved. ...
21 CONSERVATION OF TREES
The removal, destruction of and/or interference with any tree(s) listed on the
Town of Vincent Trees of Significance inventory contravenes
this Scheme unless
planning approval has first been obtained from the Council. ...
40 DETERMINATION OF NON-COMPLYING
APPLICATIONS
(1) In this clause:-
(a) an application which does not comply with a standard or requirement of
this Scheme (including a standard or requirement set out
in a planning policy or
in the Scheme Map), where the standard or requirement does not provide for any
permitted variation, is called
a “non-complying application”;
(b) a non-complying application does not include an application involving a
prohibited use.
(2) Subject to subclause (3), the Council may refuse or approve a
non-complying application.
(3) The Council cannot grant planning approval for a non-complying
application unless -
(a) if so, required by the Council under Clause 38 (2) and the
application has been advertised; and
(b) the Council is satisfied by an absolute majority that -
(i) if approval were granted, the development would be consistent
(a) the orderly and proper planning of the locality;
(b) the conservation of the amenities of the locality; and
(c) the statement of intent set out in the relevant Scheme Map; and
(ii) the non-compliance would not have any undue adverse affect on -
(a) the occupiers or users of the development;
(b) the property in, or the inhabitants of, the locality; or
(c) the likely future development of the locality.”
14. It is accepted by the Appellants that in various ways the present
application is a “non-complying application” and
as a result in
order to obtain approval discretion must be exercised in accordance with
provisions of clause 40 of TPS1.
15. As I have indicated at all times the Appellants accepted that the Tree would
not be removed as part of the development proposal
and that as a result careful
attention would have to be paid to the way in which the development proceeded,
on the premise that the
Tree was to remain.
16. The Tree is approximately 70 years old and appears to have been planted on
the subject property by the son of one of the original
17. The Appellants rely primarily upon the evidence of Mr Charles Aldous-Ball.
Mr Aldous-Ball is an arboriculturist. He obtained
his certificate of
arboriculture from the Merrist Wood College of Agriculture in 1980. He has
practised as such since then. He
relocated to Perth in 1991 and since then has
practised in Perth as an arboriculturist. He indicates that 90% of his work
providing advice to local governments on arboricultural matters.
18. Of particular interest is that he has worked for the Respondent, including
advising on the preparation of its Register of Significant
Trees. As part of
that he assessed a draft list of trees on which he made various comments and
recommendations. He recommended
that the Tree be included on the
Respondent’s Register of Significant Trees. He said that he recommended
the Tree be included
because of its age, size and aesthetic value when viewed
from Joel Terrace.
19. As a result it would appear his recommendation was accepted and was included
on the Town’s Trees of Significance Inventory.
It is of interest that
there are 26 trees on the inventory of which 6, including the Tree, are within
private gardens. This inventory
was created as a result of the Trees of
Significance Policy:
SIGNIFICANCE
1) To identify, preserve and protect trees or other vegetation worthy of
retention within the Town of Vincent.
2) To inform the applicant and community that trees of significance are
considered by the Town of Vincent when determining demolitions,
planning and
applications.
This Policy relates directly to the Town of Vincent:
1) Trees of Significance (Inventory);
2) Interim Significant Tree Data Base –
Possible Inventory
3) Interim Significant Tree Data Base –
The Town of Vincent
is to strongly encourage the retention of any tree listed on the above three (3)
lists when discussing, assessing
and determining all demolition, planning and
building applications.
If the planning legislation is amended in the future to provide a more
appropriate legal basis for the preservation and protection
of significant trees
and other vegetation, the Town of Vincent will review this Policy and the Town
of Vincent Town Planning Scheme
No. 1 in order to play a more proactive
role in the preservation and protection of significant trees and other
vegetation.”
20. Mr Aldous-Ball is familiar with the Tree having first of all inspected it
for the purpose of assessing it for the Respondent’s
Register of
Significant Trees, and then more recently, having carried out inspections on
28 November 2003 and more recently
request of the Appellants in
order to precisely identify the pruning of the Tree that would be required to
carry out the development
21. In particular, he worked closely with Mr John Sneddon. Mr Sneddon is the
project architect and ensured Mr Aldous-Ball was familiar
with the plans of the
proposed development.
22. As a result Mr Aldous-Ball prepared a report dated 3 December 2003 in
relation to the proposal. The proposal in essence
create a courtyard
around the trunk of the Tree approximately 6 metres by 8 metres. There
will be timber decking located
the courtyard but raised above ground
level both to provide access to the Tree within the courtyard and to preserve
The courtyard will be enclosed on the south, east and north
by walls that will be part of annexure 7.
23. Mr Aldous-Ball points out that the Tree has a clinometer height reading of
24.08 metres with canopy spread of 27.4 metres east
west and 26 metres
north south.
24. He observes that the branch structure is well formed but equally observes
that the canopy is aesthically unbalanced upon its
western section due to limb
removal to alleviate encroachment into the adjacent southern property. He also
observed that there has
been pruning which has occurred in the past, possibly up
to 15 years ago. He made his report on the basis that he understood the
development would occur within 3.5 to 5 metres of the Tree.
25. He indicated in the course of his oral evidence that those figures were
indicative and could be monitored during the course of
construction.
26. It is of particular importance that the proposed method of construction in
relation to foundations involves what are called pile
foundations as opposed to
trench foundations. This significantly reduces the extent of excavation that
will be required in order
to carry out the construction work. Having exposed
this to Mr Aldous-Ball he accepted that that will significantly reduce damage
way of root severance, soil compaction and so on. Nevertheless this will
require, as he puts it, “a tree protection zone”.
27. Having reviewed the whole of the plans and considered the method of
construction, Mr Aldous-Ball indicates that there are a number
of limbs which
will have to be removed. The more detailed proposal is as
“3.8 In summary, the tree has 7 major connecting trunks, which each branch
into smaller limbs and boughs of lesser structural
significance. It is proposed
(a) remove the epicormic limbs from
Branch 1 (growing to the north, over the neighbours’ property);
(b) remove Limb 1 of Branch 5 at source (growing south, over
neighbours’ property);
(c) remove the lower bough of Limb 2 of Branch 5 (growing towards the east,
handing low in the canopy);
(d) review during construction whether the upper bough of Limb 2 of
Branch 5 may need to be removed;
(e) remove Limb 1 of Branch 7 (a lower limb, growing to the northeast);
(f) remove Limb 2 of Branch 7 (growing horizontally to the north
(g) remove Limb 3 of Branch 7 (growing horizontally to the east); and
(h) review during construction whether any further pruning of Branch 7 is
necessary.”
28. Although this appears to be greater than the pruning which he contemplated
when he wrote his report in December 2003, he accepts
that it is not excessive.
In fact he goes so far as to say that the effect of such removal would represent
no more than 15 to 20%
of the lower part of the canopy.
29. It is important to emphasise, as Mr Aldous-Ball points out,
“4.4 What perhaps is overlooked is that the pruning which is required will
not in any way affect the canopy of the tree as
it is viewed from Joel Terrace.
The only pruning is to the lower part of the eastern side of the tree, which is
not visible from
Joel Terrace. I do not think that pruning will adversely
affect the amenity value of the tree, and certainly it will have no noticeable
impact at all on the Joel Terrace
streetscape”.
30. To a different view is the evidence given by Mr John Banks. Mr Banks
was called by the Respondent.
31. Mr Banks also is an arboriculturist and also attained his qualification
through the Merrist Wood College of Agriculture and Horticulture
in England. He
has practiced as an arboriculturist in 1989 and has practised as such in Western
Australia since 1993. He again
has had significant experience in the field and
appears to provide consultancy services for a wide range of local government and
government departments as well as the private sector.
32. Mr Banks’ involvement with the Tree is somewhat different. His first
involvement was in February 2004 when he was engaged
by Mr Bebee.
Mr Bebee (and his wife Dr Katrina Alexander who gave evidence in these
proceedings) live at Lot 50
(HN 124) Joel Terrace
which is immediately
to the west of that portion of the subject property which includes the Tree.
prepared a report dated
27 February 2004. As he observes,
that report was prepared after a 1 hour inspection. Of significance,
is that in that
report he indicated there were 5 leaders (or main branches)
coming out of trunk. In his written statement,
forming part of these
proceedings, he indicated there were 6 leaders. He accepted that the
number of leaders was an important
matter. There is no ready
explanation other
than perhaps the limited nature of his inspection to explain why he was not able
identify 6 leaders in February
33. As he points out in his report:
“The following is not a
full comprehensive report but rather a general overview and conclusion based on
a one hour inspection.”
34. On the basis of that limited inspection nevertheless he offered the view
that the development proposal, as he understood it,
would require the removal
“approximately 60 to 75% of the total canopy
35. In August 2004 he was again engaged by Mr Bebee who requested
Mr Banks undertake a detailed inspection and assessment.
36. In his written statement in these proceedings at paragraph 35 he gave
evidence in relation to what he said would be the extent
of excavations required
to construct the walls, the subject of the Appellants’ proposal.
37. The presentation of such evidence in that form was misleading. First, this
appears to represent the details as they appeared
in his report of
20 August 2004, but secondly and more importantly, that report contains the
“... Mr Bebee provided this consultant with a
hand drawn plan showing the shape and dimensions of the proposed constructions.
Furthermore, he also provided this consultant with a hand drawing (an elevation)
of the location and depth of proposed excavations
relative to the
38. Of course, Mr Bebee did not give evidence in these proceedings.
39. In any event it would appear that however the length and depth of the
excavations contemplated were arrived at by Mr Bebee
in turn relied
upon by Mr Banks) they appear to have assumed that trench excavations would
be undertaken. I am satisfied
evidence of Mr Sneddon and Mr
Aldous-Ball that fundamentally different considerations apply on the basis that
pile foundations
to be used.
40. To the extent therefore that Mr Banks’ ultimate conclusion depends
upon acceptance of the correctness of the method of
construction and the extent
of the excavation to be carried out, I am satisfied that it is factually
flawed. As a result such conclusions
cannot be relied upon. Nevertheless, even
with that assumption, the conclusion expressed in August 2004 by Mr Banks
“Loss (removal) of approximately ¼ of its
overall structure”.
41. In Mr Banks’ statement apparently prepared after a further inspection
carried out in early December 2004 he offered
“Based on an inspection of the proposed
development plans, the tree and the area surrounding the tree, it is my opinion
in order to construct the dwelling as indicated on the plans and, at the
same time, accommodate the tree within the context of the
future construction,
it will be necessary to remove (prune off) between 50 and 60% of the
42. When Mr Banks was pressed in cross-examination as to how it was he had
moved from a position where in August 2004 he accepted
that perhaps one quarter
might be lost to a position in December 2004 during the course of the hearing,
where he estimated 50 to
60%, his explanation was that he had in August 2004
underestimated the height of the walls. He then said, “so on that basis
have changed my mind”. No such explanation appears in his statement of
evidence. The matter was only elicited in cross-examination.
It is entirely
unsatisfactory and represents an inadequate basis upon which to accept this
evidence. There is no doubt that the
report of August 2004, in contrast to the
report of 27 February 2004, was a carefully considered report. For a
professional
to so significantly alter his view and to present
evidence to that effect to this Tribunal demands an explanation. The
such an explanation being proffered at the earliest possible time seriously
militates against the ready acceptance of
the conclusions
now offered.
43. To the extent to which those conclusions are to differ from or are at
variance with Mr Aldous-Ball’s opinion, I prefer
the opinion of
Mr Aldous-Ball.
44. During the course of cross-examination Mr Banks again seemed to be at
pains to emphasise that there were some limitations
the exercise undertaken
in August 2004. He initially suggested that what they were using was just some
stick. The report, however,
describes the instrument (which was a surveying
instrument) as:
“an extendable (telescopic) measuring
45. There is no qualification in the report of August 2004, nor in the written
witness statement provided, to suggest that there
were any of the constraints of
which Mr Banks latterly complained during the course of cross-examination.
Again, it simply adds
properly to the basis upon which the evidence of Mr
Aldous-Ball is preferred.
46. The question therefore remains, accepting Mr Aldous-Ball’s evidence,
whether what is proposed addresses the Trees of Significance
Policy and in broad
planning terms impacts on the amenity of the area. By the amenity in relation
to the Tree is primarily meant
and understood to be the streetscape from the
Joel Terrace side.
47. In the case of the latter point Mr Aldous-Ball makes clear that the pruning
that will be required in order to undertake the development
will not affect the
Joel Terrace streetscape. In relation to the Trees of Significance Policy I am
satisfied that as the Tree is
to be retained there is no conflict with the
48. Ultimately any proposal to proceed with the development must be subject to a
management plan in relation to the pruning of the
Tree to be supervised by
Mr Aldous-Ball. This in any event was a matter which was proffered by the
Appellants to the Respondent
throughout the process and represents, in my view,
an appropriate approach to the development proposal.
49. To the extent to which this is an issue which relates to the determination
of the appeal, I am satisfied with the approach proposed
by the Appellants and
believe in the circumstances that on this issue there is no impediment to the
development proceeding.
Residential Design Codes
50. The Tribunal has observed on a number of occasions already that the proper
approach in relation to the interpretation and application
of the Residential
Design Codes (“
”) is first to have regard to the
objective in relation to the particular design element, secondly, to the extent
to which it
is applicable, have regard to the performance criteria and only
then, to the extent to which it is proposed by the proponent, have
regard to the
acceptable development provisions to see whether or not there is a deemed to
comply outcome.
51. In this case almost without exception, the Appellants’ approached this
matter on the basis that they wish the application
for development approval to
be assessed by reference to the relevant objective and performance criteria in
relation to the various
design elements.
52. This approach, which the Tribunal has endorsed on a number of occasions, is
consistent with the views expressed by Mr Simon
Mr Bain is a
Town Planner retained by the Appellants. Mr Bain has some 25 years experience
as a planner and local state
and private enterprise. He also
presently represents the Planning Institute of Australia (PAA) on the review of
the Residential
Design Codes in the Liveable Neighbourhood (Community
53. He has been extensively and intensively involved with the application
involving the subject property.
54. To a contrary view is both the way in which the assessment exercise was
undertaken by the planning officers of the Respondent.
55. In Mr Simpson’s case particularly his approach primarily has been
to approach the matter on a basis by having regard
what he considers in each
case to be the relevant acceptable development provision of the Codes and then
compare the variance
the present application in each case.
56. As I have indicated above this is flawed for three reasons. First because
the Tribunal has previously indicated that is incorrect.
Second, because that
is not the way upon which the application was presented by the Appellants and
thirdly, and perhaps most importantly,
because the way in which the matter was
presented upon the hearing of the appeal, particularly by Mr Bain, involved
the consideration
of the objective and performance criteria.
57. The consequence of those differences in approach is significant.
58. As Mr Bain observes the Design Codes are presently the subject of an ongoing
review. It may well be that the prescriptive nature
of the previous R Codes in
1991 may have affected, if not infected, the approach adopted by local
government and planners.
59. It needs to be emphasised again that that is not the approach to be adopted,
and in any event, the matter is to be approached
on the basis by which and upon
which the appellant in each case presents the application for development
60. Thus if, for example, an applicant lodges an application and wishes the
matter to be addressed by the relevant acceptable development
standards then
thus the approach will be pursued. If, however, it is to be addressed by
reference to the performance criteria then
equally the matter falls to be
determined upon that basis.
61. It seems to me that the Respondent, and to some extent Mr Simpson, have
fallen into error in assuming that because in respect
of each relevant design
element there has been a departure from the referrable acceptable development
provisions, that what is involved
is said to be in accordance with the
provisions of clause 40 of TPS1 a “non-complying application”. It
is said to be
non-complying because of the incorporation by reference in
clause 19 of TPS 1. If the Codes necessarily incorporate the objectives
and performance criteria in respect of each design element, then the measure, if
the proposal is advanced by the Appellants upon
that basis, is that the relevant
design element does not meet the performance criteria or objective, then only in
that sense can
it be said to be a non-complying application. In other words,
clause 40 of TPS1 reserves further discretion above and beyond
discretion necessarily enshrined within the objective and performance criteria
contained within the Codes.
62. Such a broad discretion needs necessarily to be understood.
63. It seems to me that the approach of the Respondent and necessarily of
Mr Simpson was in that sense both in error and artificially
64. A matter pressed upon me was the fact that the relevant planning officers,
in particular Mr Abel and those under him, had
recommended
approval of the
present development application. The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Giorgi,
and Mr R Boardman, the
manager in effect
overrode the recommendation and
prepared a different recommendation which went to Council to the effect that the
development application
should be refused.
65. Councillor Ian Ker gave evidence that this had only occurred about half a
dozen times since the establishment of the Town of
Vincent in 1995.
66. The Appellants seemed at pains to make some point in relation to both the
change in recommendation and ultimately the adoption
of that position by the
Respondent.
67. As the Tribunal has observed on numerous occasions this is a hearing
de novo. As a result the Tribunal expresses no view
relation to the
processes by which in the circumstances with the underlying decision was arrived
at by the local government.
68. The separate positions of the local government and the Tribunal have been
identified on previous occasions.
69. The statutory source in each case and the role to be discharged in each case
is of course different. As a result the processes
are approached
differently.
70. That is the genesis upon which it is properly said that an appeal, when
heard by the Tribunal, is a hearing de novo.
71. It is simply noted that the planning officers of the Respondent recommended
approval of the present application subject to a
large number of conditions and
that the planning evidence adduced on behalf of the Respondent was not from the
planning officers
of the Respondent but rather from an independent
consultant.
72. No inference is drawn adverse or otherwise in relation to those
Minimum Site Area
73. This is a point which is by no means determinative of this appeal but
appears to have attracted significant attention of the
planners who gave
evidence in this matter, namely Mr Bain and Mr Simpson.
74. This is one of the few areas in which the Appellants invite the Tribunal to
address the position by reference to the acceptable
development provisions of
75. Clause 3.1.3A(3)(iv) of the Codes provides as
“Subject to 3.1.2A the following variations to the
minimum site area set out in column 3 of table 1 may be made: ...
(iv) in the case of Grouped Dwellings in areas coded R12.5 – R17.5
and R60, the minimum site area shall be as permitted
Table 1 of the
Residential Planning Codes, December 1991, where applications are made prior to
31 December 2004”.
76. Mr Simpson’s approach then was to ascertain that the minimum site area
by reference to Table 1 of the 1991 Codes was for
the proposed development
. He then undertook an exercise by which he identified that
the right of carriageway in relation to the subject property extending
units 1, 2 and 3 could not be included with the minimum site area. As a
result he has done a further revised calculation
which he expresses the view
that Lots 4 and 5 fall below what is described as the minimum site area and
given that the proposed
is more than 5% (which he gets from
performance criteria 3.1.3) there is no basis upon which to approve the
application.
77. Again, as I have indicated this is not a matter which is of itself
determinative of the matter but represents, it seems to me,
an error in approach
by Mr Simpson.
78. The contrary view expressed by Mr Bain, with which incidentally the
recommendation of the Respondent for its meeting on
28 September
concurred, is that the 1991 Codes did not specify a minimum or an average. As a
result the method of calculation,
reflected by the text for the 1991
Codes is simply to divide the total land area by the number of dwellings that
the property. In this case it is accepted that the appeal site
gives 9 grouped dwellings.
79. There are changes which have occurred in relation to the 2002 Code which
produce a minimum and an average area.
80. Why, in the circumstances, Mr Simpson would have regard to the performance
criteria of the 2002 Codes to address this question
is not apparent, but in any
event it is incorrect.
81. The position is as identified by Mr Bain, namely that there is no difficulty
with the minimum site area so far as the Codes are
82. The references within the code to plot ratio are a little difficult to pin
down in terms of formal application to Table 1. It
is sufficient to say I think,
however, that both parties accepted plot ratio as a relevant measure or standard
for the purpose of
determining the present application. On the basis of Table 1
of the Codes it appears that with a zoning of R60 the maximum plot ratio
permitted for a grouped dwelling is 0.65.
83. Mr Bain seems to suggest that there was some quirk to this given that in
relation to grouped dwelling it is only for zoning of
R60 in relation to grouped
dwellings that plot ratio figures appear in Table 1.
84. As Mr Simpson observes, however, which is the case, there was such a plot
ratio in relation to zoning R60 in the 1991 Codes albeit
that it was 0.55. Such
persistence with plot ratio in the present Codes serves to underscore the fact
that it remains a relevant
and applicable measure in relation to development
applications, notwithstanding Mr Bain’s view that it is somewhat anomalous
and even to the extent to which it is now proposed that in a review of the
present Codes it be eliminated as a relevant measure of
planning control.
85. For the present, however, I am bound by the provisions of the Codes insofar
as they are incorporated by reference by TPS1 and
as a result observe that the
relevant maximum plot ratio for a grouped dwelling with a zoning of R60 (which
the subject property
is) is 0.65.
86. Mr Simpson has undertaken an exercise in which he concludes that the actual
plot ratio of the proposed development is 0.825 which
he indicates is 27%
greater than that permitted under Table 1 of the Codes.
87. To the extent to which discretion is available under clause 40(3) of TPS1 he
contends that the departure is so great that the
discretion should not be
exercised in favour of the Appellant.
88. I accept that of course plot ratio is a measure but not necessarily the
determinative measure by which the application is to
be approved.
89. The basis upon which the application was lodged was that the plot ratio was
0.71. The starting point for the Appellants is, in
any event, that the
discretion needs to be exercised in their favour to permit a development which
exceeded what is described as
the maximum plot ratio under Table 1 of the
90. The difference between 0.71 and 0.825 appears to be arrived at by the
inclusion of verandas, the alfresco area and decks within
the calculation.
Somewhat oddly Mr Bain puts the matter in his responsive statement on the
following basis:
“The verandas, alfresco and decks could all be made to be excluded from
the calculation of plot ratio by ensuring they are
not enclosed on more than 2
sides. This can easily be achieved by stepping back to balconies and inclusion
of screens instead of
walls. This could be dealt with as a condition if deemed
appropriate.”
91. Mr Bain also makes the observation that a courtyard should not be included
in a calculation. The retort from Mr Simpson was that
he did not include the
courtyard and therefore we are only concerned with the inclusion of the
verandas, alfresco and decks.
92. The starting point as I have indicated above is that by any measure, what is
proposed exceeds the maximum plot ratio in Table
93. It is odd in the extreme that the evidence of Mr Bain should be postulated,
in effect, on a design change which is itself not
part of the plans forming part
of the present application before me. I find it difficult in the extreme to
entertain the notion advanced
by Mr Bain.
94. As the Tribunal has observed on previous occasions it is not for it to
redesign the proposal. Rather, it is to determine the
proposal based upon the
way in which it is advanced by the Appellants.
95. Given the way in which the matter is proposed, it seems to me that the
appropriate measure of plot ratio is as advanced by Mr
Simpson, namely 0.825. I
accept that as a result that this represents a 27% increase over the maximum
plot ratio referred to in Table
1 of the Codes.
96. One of the arguments advanced by the Appellants as to why this and other
standards should be relaxed is that the zoning of the
property, having regard to
the way in which the 1991 Codes are approached, indicated that up to 9 units
could be constructed and
that as a result of the preservation of the Tree, in
effect some credit should be given for such an undertaking.
97. It seems to me that that is an oversimplification of the matter. As far as
the matter presents to me, once the Appellants have
accepted that the Tree is to
be preserved it seems to me somewhat fallacious to then undertake an exercise as
to the notional amount
of units that might be erected on the property. What is
then available to be erected is necessarily a consequence of the acceptance
the Tree will remain.
98. There appears no provisions in TPS1 which would lead to the result that the
acceptance of the preservation of the Tree involves
the creation of some bonus
arrangement to be accorded to the Appellants.
99. Mr McLeod, who appeared on behalf of the Appellants, sought to persuade me
that Clause 20 may be applicable in the present circumstances,
in particular
clause 20(2)(b):
“The proposed development conserves or
enhances an existing dwelling or existing dwellings worthy of
retention.”
100. It is sought to argue that by analogy the preservation of the Tree leads
to that outcome.
101. It seems to me that such an argument is misconceived. The express reference
to “dwelling or existing dwelling” and
by implication a reference to
the relevant heritage register cannot, in my view, lead to the inclusion of the
102. As a result I am satisfied that no provision exists within the Scheme upon
which credit of the kind contemplated by the Appellants
could be granted.
Rather, the matter falls generally to be determined in accordance with the
provisions of Clause 40 and in particular
“the conservation of the
amenities of the locality” and those additional matters contained within
clause 40(ii).
103. At the outset therefore the effect of the departure from the maximum plot
ratio presents as circumstances which, without more,
would lead to the result
that the present application could be refused. The following matters to be
addressed impact on whether in
the circumstances there is a basis upon which the
discretion contained within clause 40 should be exercised in favour of the
Appellants.
104. Again it should be emphasised that the approached adopted by the Appellants
is to have regard to the objective under the Design
Elements in the Codes and
then seek to comply with the performance criteria. Again in an attempt to
measure setbacks by reference
to acceptable development it is neither
appropriate nor applicable nor is it appropriate to endeavour to assess
performance against
performance criteria by reference to the extent to which
there is a variance from or a departure from what appears under the instances
acceptable development.
105. Thus in relation to setbacks, the Codes provide the objective as
“To ensure adequate provision of direct sun and ventilation for buildings
and to ameliorate the impacts of building bulk, interference
with privacy, and
overshadowing on adjoining
properties”.
106. The performance criteria for new development is as
“3.3.2 Buildings on Boundary
P2 Buildings built up to boundaries other than the street boundary where it is
desirable to do so in order
effective use of space; or
Otherwise enhance the
amenity of the developments; and
have any significant adverse effect on the amenity of the adjoining property;
Ensure the direct sun to major
openings to habitable rooms and outdoor living areas of adjoining properties is
not restricted.”
107. Again the Respondent relies upon the evidence of Mr Simpson who has
undertaken an assessment in relation to this issue. He nominates
the following
as relevant in relation to this question:
(a) North parapet wall on unit 1
(b) North parapet wall for the dwelling on unit 1
(c) Parapet walls on unit 6
(d) Parapet walls on unit 7.
108. I deal with each of those in turn. In the case of the north parapet wall Mr
Simpson assesses the height of the wall B 2.5-3.7
and in the case of the north
parapet wall, unit 1 will be a height of 4.8-5.7 metres to existing ground level
at the boundary. Whilst
he concedes that having regard to the performance
criteria the proposed parapet wall does make effective space, he does not
that it will not have a significant adverse effect on the amenity of the
adjoining property.
109. The adjoining property Lot 26 is a duplex development. Of the two duplexes
the western dwelling is set back 3 metres from the
northern boundary of the
subject property and the eastern dwelling is set back 6m from the northern
boundary of the subject property.
110. Mr Simpson offers the view that:
“A wall of 4.8-5.7 m
will create a sense of enclosure and dominate the outdoor living areas of
adjoining dwellings. The parapet
wall extends beyond the height of the gutters
of the adjoining building.”
111. He also makes the point that views that might be lost by the owners of Lot
26. The point that was primarily made by Mr Bain
in response was that the views
of the two dwellings on Lot 26 were primarily towards the east which views will
not be impacted or
diminished in any way by the proposed development. Whilst he
reluctantly accepted that there may be some limitation to the views
south, he continued to emphasise that the primary attitude of the building was
towards the east. Whilst that is so, it in
no way diminishes the point being
advanced by the Respondent. It does seem to me that the effect upon the
dwellings on Lot 26 is
as described by Mr Simpson.
112. Almost by way of an alternative Mr Bain proposed that there be a condition
of approval to the effect that:
“design features being
incorporated in the northern elevation wall of unit 1 to reduce the visual
impact of the wall”
113. This was not at all apparent during the course of rhe hearing. If there is
some physical design which may be effected then they
were certainly not part of
the formal plans which were the subject of the present application. In any event
it seems in the present
doubtful that a condition expressed in that or a similar
way would necessarily overcome the relevant objection raised by the
Respondent.
114. Unit 6: Mr Simpson refers to the proposed development of unit 6 in the
following way:
“The proposed development will create a
building up to 8.6m in height which is 1.3-2.3 m from the boundary creating an
of building bulk.”
115. The evidence in this matter was supplemented by a view which took place on
15 December 2004. I accept in those circumstances
that the proposed development
including the parapet walls on unit 6 will have an impact on the amenity of the
adjoining property
120 Joel Terrace and their outdoor living area. Evidence to
that effect was given by the owner of that property that is Katrina Alexander.
Again supplemented by the view which took place I accept the evidence to that
effect. As a result I also accept as Mr Simpson contends
that the last two
performance criteria in 3.3.2 P2 do not appear to have been met by this aspect
of the development.
116. Unit 7: The parapet walls on unit 7 particularly impact on 120 Joel
Terrace, that is the property immediately to the west. The
northern parapet wall
of 3.7 metres adds and its proximity to 120 Joel Terrace and the impact on the
open space of that property
creates the sort of situation which is frowned upon
by the performance criteria 3.3.2P2. Again I am not satisfied that the
development
meets those criteria. I agree with Mr Simpson that the effect of
those limited setbacks and the nature of the proposed development
including the
height of the wall creates an impression that would have an impact on privacy,
would impact in terms of building bulk
and would limit views through the subject
property. In that sense I am satisfied that the setbacks proposed do not meet
the relevant
performance criteria.
Building Height
117. The Riverside Locality Policy addresses height in the following
“A general height limit of 2 storeys (including loft)
can be considered provided the second storey (including lofty) is generally
back a minimum of 6 m from the street and the amenity of the area is protected
in terms of privacy, scale, and bulk.”
118. The Banks Precinct Policy addresses height in the following
“Building with two storeys (including loft) are
strongly encouraged.
A third storey (including loft) can be considered, provided that the amenity
of the adjacent residential area is protected in terms
of privacy, scale and
119. In addition the Building Scale Policy of the Respondent specifies as a
small box in paragraph 90 in Mr Bain’s
Maximum Building Heights
No of Storeys
Top of external wall (roof above)
Top of external wall (concealed roof)
Top of pitched roof
120. Finally, in relation to the Codes, performance criteria in relation to
height in clause 3.7.1 P1 provides as
“■ Building height consistent with the desired height of buildings
in the locality, and to recognise the need to protect
the amenities of adjoining
properties, including, where appropriate, adequate direct sun to buildings in a
pertinent open space;
■ adequate day light to major openings to habitable rooms;
■ access to views of
significance.”
121. The Appellants through Mr Bain concede that for units 4-6 the wall height
exceeds 6m but the roof ridge height is less than
9 metres and that in relation
to unit 7 small sections of wall exceed 6m by a maximum of 0.5 – 1 m and
the roof is below 9
metres. Thus it would appear that no part of the building is
above the 9m height contemplated as a maximum 2 storey building.
122. That to me seems like an appropriate way to approach the matter. That is,
the reference in the Banks Precinct Policy and the
Riverside Locality Policy are
to be read with the Building Scale Policy to provide a basis upon which one can
understand the maximum
building heights.
123. Mr Bain observes that TPS1 contains no definition of what is considered to
be a loft. He offers the view that the proper way
to approach the question is to
treat including as meaning in effect “plus”. That would lead to the
result that “loft”
in itself may become a storey. The relationship
between the Riverside Locality policy and the Banks Precinct policy on the one
and the Building Scale policy on the other is consistent and operable on
the basis that “loft” itself is not a storey
but is included within
a storey. That is, the inclusive reference is not to the building but to the
storey. It is certainly not expressed
in a disjunctive or an additional form,
rather it is an inclusive form incorporating the word “loft” within
124. On that basis I am satisfied that having regard to the policies the maximum
height is to be 9m. The Appellants were also at
pains to emphasise that there
will be a degree of cut into the site to accommodate undercroft parking which
will lead to the result
that the overall height of the building will be
125. I accept that the height of the proposed development although perhaps in
itself consistent with the limitations contained within
the policies to which I
have referred, will nevertheless impact upon the amenity of the adjoining
properties and will certainly impact
on the views of significance for properties
to the west of the appeal land. In respect of the last point the Appellants
contend that
the view to the east, that is across the river for the property to
the west of the subject property is in any event interfered with
by the presence
of the tree.
126. That is to some extent true. There is no doubt however that the
development, if it proceeds, will impact in a most significant
way upon those
127. In the circumstances I am satisfied that having regard to the excessive
plot ratio, to the issues created in relation to setback
and in relation to the
bulk and scale of development, notwithstanding that measured in isolation its
height may just be within the
relevant policies, there are proper bases upon
which the present application is to be refused.
128. As a result the appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (130 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter