URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAGAB/2005/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re AB [2005] WAGAB 1 (14 June 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION BOARD
[2005] WAGAB 1
MS H LESLIE (SENIOR SESSIONAL MEMBER)
MR J JAMES (SENIOR SESSIONAL MEMBER)
MS J STANTON (SENIOR SESSIONAL MEMBER)
19 JANUARY 2004
DELIVERED :
14 JUNE 2005
FILE NO/S :
GU 226 of 2003
Catchwords:
Guardianship - Need - Involuntary patient -
Contraception - Medical treatment - Advocacy - Implant medication - Efficacy of
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Mental Health Act 1996
The Public Advocate be appointed for 12 months as AB's
limited guardian for the purpose of consenting to the administration of
contraceptive
treatment to AB.
Representation:
Applicant : Self-represented
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self-represented
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applications
1 An application in respect of the proposed represented person, Ms ALB
(hereafter "AB"), was lodged on 6 November 2003
for an order
limited guardian be appointed ("the application"). At the time of the
application AB was an inpatient detained
involuntarily
at the Alma Street Mental
Health facility in Fremantle.
2 The applicant Andrew Barclay is from the mental health service responsible
for the care of AB and is currently her case manager.
The application seeks an
order that AB's parents be appointed jointly as limited guardians for the sole
purpose of consenting to
the administration of appropriate contraceptive
treatment to AB so as to prevent pregnancy. AB's parents originally consented
so act but by the time of the hearing, the Board was advised, no longer felt
able to put themselves forward as candidates for appointment
and the matter
proceeded on the basis that if there was to be an guardian appointed, it would
be the Public Advocate.
3 All other interested parties are in support of the intention behind the
application. The Office of the Public Advocate (OPA)
however, expressed some
doubt about the efficacy of any order in achieving the purpose given the
attitude of AB herself (to which
reference will be made).
4 The issues for determination by the Board are therefore those of capacity and
5 As referred to later in these reasons, AB suffers from a mental illness and
at the time of the hearing was being treated for that
illness as an involuntary
patient under the
Mental Health Act 1996
(WA). At the time of the
hearing, AB had been released from hospital but was the subject of a Community
Treatment Order.
6 It appeared at the time of the hearing that, immediately prior to her
discharge from hospital, AB underwent a minor procedure
under local anaesthetic
whereby the long acting (three year) contraceptive implant Implanon was inserted
subcutaneously in her arm.
7 There is an issue about AB's capacity then and at the time of the hearing to
which we will refer.
8 Despite the apparent link between AB's desire to become pregnant and her
mental illness (to which reference will be made), following
enquiry by OPA, the
Board has been advised that in the view of the chief psychiatrist, contraception
cannot be enforced under any
authority sourced in the
Mental Health Act 1996
(WA). A letter of 9 December 2003 from Brendan Clarke, the first
replacement applicant, to OPA states:
"... [the consultant]has consulted Dr Davidson, the chief psychiatrist, on
this issue and (sic) been advised that due to community
sensitivity it was not
appropriate for the chief psychiatrist to use his powers to authorize
involuntary medical treatment in the
case of enforced contraception under the
Mental Health Act 1996
(WA). In addition use of contraception by implant
or depot injection would not be seen as psychiatric treatment as it treats the
consequences of the behaviour and not the symptoms or disorder itself. The
chief psychiatrist advised proceeding with the current
Guardianship application
as the most appropriate course of action
9 The hearing was attended by the applicant and Mr Mansveld, the Public
Advocate's delegated representative. Neither AB nor
parents attended.
Dr Joan Mc Sweeney, consultant psychiatrist in charge of AB's
care in the community gave evidence
by phone to
the Board. The Board also had
the benefit of Mr Mansveld's report of
18 January 2004.
10 The Board must consider the issue of capacity as a precursor to the
consideration of application for orders relating to an adult
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
"(1) In the performance of its functions the
Board shall observe the principles set out in subsection (2).
(b) Every person shall be presumed to be capable of –
(i) looking after his own health and safety;
(ii) making reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
(iii) managing his own affairs; and
(iv) making reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the Board."
"(1) Subject to
, where the Board is satisfied that a person in respect of whom an
application for a guardianship order is made under
(a) has attained the age of 18 years
(i) incapable of looking after his own health and safety;
(ii) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to
his person; or
(iii) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of his own
health and safety or for the protection of others;
(c) is in need of a guardian
the [Board] may by order declare the person to be in need of a guardian, and
if it does so shall appoint –
(d) a person to be a plenary guardian or a limited guardian and, if it is
expedient, a person to be an alternate guardian; or
(e) persons to be joint plenary guardians or joint limited guardians,
as the case may require, of the person in respect of whom the application is
13 The Board received the following evidence in relation to
At the time of the application (early
November 2003):
14 Dr K Bewley, registrar in psychiatry at the Alma Street Centre
wrote a report for the board dated 5 November 2003.
In that report
was said to have impairment in her cognitive ability or mental function, namely
Schizoaffective Disorder
(of two - three years
duration). Her substance
abuse was also referred to. She was described as being incapable of making
decisions in relation
to personal health care or her living situation
or of executing a valid enduring power of attorney and as being
able to make
a limited contribution to any hearing. Dr Bewley described a slow
progressive improvement in psychosis over
the previous month of
treatment but
referred to lack of insight and judgement "with no further improvement evident
or likely, based
on persisting impairment
since the onset of her illness two
years ago". He described the impairment to her functioning as static
referred to her denial
that she has ever been mentally ill and her denial of the
need for psychiatric treatment, medication or
need to refrain from drug
He went on to state:
"[O]bserved to be sexually provocative with male patients and history of
promiscuity but denies pregnancy is a possibility and has
no adequate plans for
prevention of pregnancy. Refuses contraception. Unfit mentally to be a mother.
Pregnancy would be a contraindication
to her current medications which are
urgently needed."
15 He attached to his report by way of background a report written by
Dr Chris Hodgson, consultant psychiatrist, to the
Mental Health
Board dated 25 August 2003 and discharge summaries from the
WAY Adolescent Mental Health Unit
relating to AB's admissions
centre from 8 January 2002 to 2 April 2002 and from
24 January 2003
to 16 April 2003. The Board notes from
those reports
corroborative references including to AB being "on a mission to
pregnant [and] behaving appropriately to achieve this goal";
"promiscuous behaviour prior to admission" including "having
sex to get drugs",
"engaging in public masturbation", the view
that she was "a danger to herself in
her current state", her statement
that "she wanted to become pregnant and [that]
her dress and
behaviour was markedly sexually inappropriate", that AB was
"practising
unsafe sex and ... refusing to consider any form of
contraception".
16 The Board also had a report of 5 November 2003 from
Leith Maddock, the social worker attached to AB's treating
team at the time
of the filing of the application (and subsequently replaced as applicant by
Mr Clarke and then Mr Barclay
due to staff rearrangements).
report he refers to AB's diagnosis and history and family circumstances. He
speaks of AB's
thinking as being very disorganised
and of her difficulty in
concentrating in conversation; of her being still elevated in mood and
inappropriate in conversation
and goes on to state
"her ability to make decisions is impaired to a significant degree at the
[her] safety and well being are very much at risk due to her lack of insight and
her disinhibited behaviour ... It is important that
[AB] have an appointed
Guardian able to ensure contraception."
17 In the covering letter sent with the application, Mr Maddock refers to
"the poor state of [AB's] mental health and her continuing
vulnerability in
terms of her risk of pregnancy due to sexual encounters whilst unwell".
He reports her inappropriate sexual involvement with other patients and the
need at times to have AB checked every 15 minutes to ensure
18 In the application itself, he refers to AB's "treatment resistant [mental]
illness", her lack of insight complicated by substance
abuse and non-compliance
with medication and her sexually disinhibited behaviour and refusal to accept
contraception. He comments
"part of her psychotic behaviour is a drive to
become pregnant". He refers to the need for a guardian to make decisions
contraception and comments that "[after a period of time] hopefully by
then [AB's] mental health will have stabilised and her insight
into her illness
increased so that she can make an informed decision about falling pregnant or
not". He expresses the view that
AB is not able to make an informed decision
the adverse affects that AB's current required psychiatric medication
might have on a foetus.
At the time of discharge
from hospital (early December 2003):
19 Other than as extrapolated by the Board from the evidence abovementioned,
the Board did not have the benefit of any other evidence
from the treating team
at Alma Street specifically addressing the question of AB's capacity at this
time. She is said to have "consented"
to the insertion of the Implanon prior to
discharging herself. Certainly it appears no other consent was relied upon.
The context
of her discharge appears to have been that the treating team was not
prepared to release her back into the community without the
question of
contraception being addressed. AB (it is suggested by her parents to
Mr Mansveld) is likely to have approached
by saying that she
would agree to the Implanon if the treating team would release her from
hospital, that is, that she
consented "as a strategy to achieve
discharge".
20 Mr Mansveld invited the Board to conclude
from the fact of the
performance of the procedure
(our emphasis) that AB was competent at
the time to consent to her contraception. He accepted however that her capacity
was fluctuating.
21 Evidence was given by telephone to the Board by Dr Mc Sweeney that
her understanding was that AB's improvement whilst
in hospital
had not been
great, that she remained unwell at discharge and for the almost two months
following and that she would
be at least
a year away from being able to give
informed consent. She agreed that AB would only have deteriorated after
It appeared
to be common ground that AB's capacity would have been
at its best at that point in time.
22 The Board also notes the contents of the letter of 9 December 2003
written by Brendan Clarke to OPA. It is to be noted
this appears to have
been written relatively shortly after the Implanon insert procedure was
performed. Its contents are somewhat
contradictory.
23 On the one hand he says that "the circumstances and reasons which
necessitated the application for guardianship in November2003
still exist and,
as they have not been settled, the application is still required" and further
"despite considerable improvement
in her psychosis, she still displays poor
impulse control and lack of insight into the consequences of her actions only
considering
immediate gratification". He goes on to detail her risk taking
24 On the other hand he states "While [AB] was competent to give consent for
the contraceptive implant once most of her psychosis
had resolved, there remains
the issues of her continuing the implant and later her consent to have the
implant reinserted should
she have it removed" and further "Dr Bailey believes
that she is highly likely to cease medication upon discharge and relapse into
state of poor mental health again presenting issues relating to her
competence".
At the time of the hearing (mid
January 2004):
25 Dr Mc Sweeney gave evidence that she had seen AB on the morning of
the hearing, that she was unwell and her capacity
informed consent
regarding contraception at the time was impaired. She had significant "magical
thinking" about her capacity
care for a child and little concept of the care
needs of a child, her accommodation needs etc. She had faulty cognition
the significance of being hepatitis c positive and the
significance of this for herself, any sexual partner and any baby. AB
believed that she would be able to choose the right sexual partner and avoid
infection, and had only limited ability to understand
the effect of the illness
and the passage of infection. Dr Mc Sweeney reported that AB had
advised that she had an appointment
a GP for the afternoon to arrange the
medical removal of the Implanon insert. She confirmed that such removal would
AB to achieve at any GP's surgery.
26 Dr Mc Sweeney reported her understanding that AB was currently
working as a sex worker and as such, without contraception,
a high risk of
falling pregnant given her past refusal to use condoms; that she was incapable
of looking after a child and would
most likely have any child removed from her
care which itself would have a significant impact on her mental health. She
the view that AB's desire to become pregnant was part of her mental
illness and psychosis and went far beyond the normal wish of
a young woman her
age to become a mother. She did not disagree with the descriptions of the
desire as "delusional" and "obsessional"
put to her. She described a direct
correlation in the strength of the desire and the severity of the psychosis.
She described a
concern that AB's work in the sex industry and her promiscuity
may be driven by her desire to fall pregnant as well as by her need
27 Dr Mc Sweeney reported that since her discharge from hospital, she
had not seen AB well, that there was concern as
she would take oral
medication, that she regularly broke the terms of her CTO and was now on a
breach order and on antipsychotic
medication by depot injection; that she had
had a test dose of the depot that morning and would be due another dose on
or an earlier date if thought appropriate.
Dr Mc Sweeney confirmed that AB's current incapacity to make decisions
fertility and contraception stems from her mental illness and that the
treating team supported the appointment of someone as
to consent to and
ensure contraception for
28 Having considered all of the evidence in this matter, the Board finds that
AB is not competent to make reasonable judgements
concerning the question of her
contraception. The Board further has reservations about whether she was able to
or did in fact give
a free and informed consent to the insertion of Implanon
immediately prior to discharge from hospital. Certainly the Board is not
prepared to place any weight upon the events at that time as supporting the
proposition that she is competent now.
29 The Board is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the requirements
have been satisfied and that AB is a
person for whom a guardianship
order could be made.
30 The Board is required to take into account the provisions of
which provides that:
"[An] order shall not be made if the needs of the person in respect of whom an
application ... is made could, in the opinion of the
Board, be met by other
means less restrictive of the person's freedom of decision and
31 and, pursuant to
" ... the Board may only make an order if it is satisfied that there is a
32 The Board received the following evidence in relation to the question of
33 The evidence from the parents (as reported by Mr Mansveld) and from the
treating team(s) is that AB will not reliably use
will not take oral
contraceptive medication and will not consent to the administration of
contraception by depot injection
provera). She appears in early December
to have cooperated in a procedure for the insertion of subcutaneous long acting
contraceptive
medicine in her arm in the context described above but is now
actively taking steps to have it medically removed. It is suggested
parents given evidence of cuts on her arm, that she may indeed have attempted to
remove it herself previously. (This could
not be confirmed by
Dr Mc Sweeney.)
34 The unchallenged evidence is that AB works as a sex worker in the sex
industry engaging in unprotected sex and, outside of this
work, behaves in a
sexually provocative and promiscuous manner, also unprotected. It appears that
much of this is done by her in
pursuit of her psychotically driven desire to
become pregnant and have a child.
35 The evidence of the treating team is that such a course would be very much
against the best interests of both mother and child
and that there is a need to
protect her against this eventuality at this time.
36 There is no other way for consent to contraception to be provided other than
by a guardian. The chief psychiatrist does not
have authority to consent to
medical treatment outside of an authorised hospital. It appears that even if AB
were an inpatient,
the chief psychiatrist might not be prepared to use his
authority to provide consent to contraception. It appears that although
contraception is clearly part of medical treatment for the purposes of the
(2002) GU 0052/02 published
17 September 2002] it may not be for the purposes of the
Mental Health Act 1996
. Further, it appears to be his view
that contraception does not, even in AB's circumstances, form part of her
psychiatric treatment
and he will therefore not countenance its inclusion in
compulsory treatment under a CTO. AB's parents do not wish to be responsible
for the decisions regarding contraception and, it appears, do not feel able to
effect contraception in any less formalised way (for
example under
37 Having considered all of the evidence in this matter, the Board is satisfied
(1) AB is in need of continuing effective contraception to
prevent pregnancy at this time;
(2) there is a need for a guardian to be appointed to consent to the delivery
of the same in whatever form is thought by AB's doctors
to be appropriate;
(3) AB's needs cannot be met in a less restrictive way.
Efficacy of the Order
38 In the making of an order, the Board needs to be satisfied that the person
in respect of whom the order is made is incapable,
there is a need unmet
that requires that something be done for the person and that there is a need for
an order. Whilst it
that the Board need not concern itself greatly with
the difficulty of the task that falls to a guardian or the mechanisms
guardian might utilise in meeting the task, in determining whether there is a
need for an order (that is, for a guardian)
must turn its collective
mind to whether there is any realistic prospect that the making of an order will
meet the demonstrated
(in this case, the delivery of effective
contraception); that is, the efficacy of any order.
39 It is not in the public interest for the Board or any court or tribunal to
issue orders that are ineffectual.
40 In this case, this is the issue that has been the most difficult to resolve.
The Public Advocate's position, put by Mr Mansveld,
is that, absent the
cooperation of AB and absent any coercive mechanism available to a guardian
(such as exists for the administration
of psychiatric treatment under the
Mental Health Act 1996
), what can a guardian do to achieve
contraception? The guardian might officially consent to a procedure or to
medication but cannot
enforce its performance or administration. He argues that
discussion, persuasion, cajoling and counselling so as to achieve a change
mind on the part of AB are things that could be done by her family and those
charged with her care and that to appoint a guardian
just for this purpose is
not a sufficient reason for an order.
41 The view of the Board is that all that can be done in an attempt to protect
AB from pregnancy at this time should be done. If
there is a chance that as her
psychosis responds to treatment and her drive for pregnancy lessens (and the
evidence of Leith Maddock
and Dr Mc Sweeney give the Board cause
to hope that this will occur albeit slowly) her opposition to the idea of
contraception
be worked on and she can be cajoled into cooperating in
relation to contraception, but there will need to be someone authorised
consent whilst AB's incapacity continues. Time may indeed be of the essence in
such a situation and it would be unsatisfactory
the parties had to bring the
matter back to the Board again at that point. She will also need someone to
speak on her behalf
the treating team and to look at the options for
contraceptive treatment and to advocate for her in this regard. It may also
that with a guardian in place and with her parents supporting, other options for
the management of the issue might be able to
explored with the treating team
and the chief psychiatrist. There was discussion at the hearing, for example,
of depo provera
administered with the consent of the guardian (and
therefore lawfully, even against AB's wishes) at the same time as
depot antipsychotic
medication was to be administered. These solutions may
seem an unlikely prospect at the present time but that, it seems to the Board,
is not a reason not to make an order. What is certain is that AB's best
interests will
be served (in that there will be no legal
mechanism for adequate contraception) if the Board does
Wishes of the proposed represented
Section 49(2)(f)
Guardianship and Administration Act
requires that the Board:
"as far as possible, seek to ascertain the views and wishes of the [proposed
represented person] as expressed, in whatever manner,
at the time, or as
gathered from the person's previous action
43 In this case the Board was not able to determine the wishes of AB concerning
the appointment of a guardian. The Board assumed
AB would be opposed to the
underlying purpose behind the application, namely contraception and that she
would therefore be opposed
to any order.
of the Public Advocate (OPA)
44 In this case the Public Advocate, having adverted to the abovementioned
difficulties in effecting contraception, elected not
to make a recommendation
concerning the making of an appointment. Her representative did however support
the need for contraception
as being in AB's best interests if it could be
Plenary or limited order
Section 4(2)(d)
constrains the Board to appoint only a limited
guardian, rather than a plenary guardian, if such an appointment would be
in the view of the Board to meet the needs of the person in respect
of whom the application is made.
46 The underlying philosophy of the
is that the Board act in a way that
imposes the least restriction possible on the proposed
represented person's
freedom of decision
and action.
47 In the circumstances of this case, the Board takes the view that a limited
appointment is appropriate in view of the scope of
the decisions that require to
be made on behalf of AB.
48 In relation to all applications, the Board is required by
to consider the best interests of the proposed represented person.
49 In all the circumstances, the Board considers that the appointment of the
Public Advocate as limited guardian of AB is in her
50 This matter was heard and determined by the Guardianship and Administration
Board on 19 January 2004. Since then, the
of that Board
has been assumed by the State Administrative Tribunal (SAT) under the relevant
new legislation. These
reasons for
decision are delivered pursuant to the
relevant transitional provisions by SAT.
51 The Board, having considered all the evidence both written and given at the
hearing, orders that the Public Advocate be appointed
for 12 months as AB's
limited guardian for the purpose of consenting to the administration of
contraceptive treatment to AB.
I certify that this and the preceding 13 pages comprise the reasons for decision
of the Tribunal.
______________________________
Senior Sessional Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (78.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter