URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/148.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KMN -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 148 (20 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 148
AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 118 of 2024
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND XXXX of XXXX
law - Appeal against sentence - Drug offences - Parity principle - Whether other
offenders are co‑offenders for the
purposes of the parity principle -
Whether the disparity between sentences was sufficient - Whether appellant has
justifiable sense
of grievance.
Legislation:
of Drugs Act 1981
of time to appeal granted
appeal granted
Representation:
S H King & M J
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (WA)
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
appellant was convicted on his pleas of guilty of two
to possess a trafficable quantity of methylamphetamine with intent to sell or
supply it to another contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
of methylamphetamine with intent to sell or supply it to another contrary to
Misuse of Drugs
counts were counts 3 and 4 on the indictment. The other counts
(counts 1 and 2) related to another offender. Count 3 related
[redacted] kg of an inert substance [redacted]. Count 4 related to
[redacted] g of methylamphetamine that was found by police
appellant's pocket on the same day. The appellant was sentenced to
6 years' imprisonment on count 3 and 12 months' imprisonment
count 4. The sentences were ordered to be served cumulatively, thus
producing a total effective sentence of 7 years' imprisonment.
appellant seeks leave to appeal against his sentence on the sole ground that it
breaches the parity principle having regard to
the sentences imposed on two
purported co‑offenders. Though the ground does not specify, it appears to
relate to both the
individual sentence on count 3 and the total effective
sentence. The appellant has also applied to adduce additional evidence on
appeal, being the written submissions on sentence made on behalf of one of the
other offenders.
appeal notice was filed approximately one month late. The delay is partially
explained in an affidavit of the appellant. In
any event, the delay is
relatively short, and an extension of time is not opposed by the respondent. An
extension of time should
be granted.
other two offenders mentioned in the ground of appeal will be referred to as X
and Y. X, who was dealt with on a separate indictment,
was sentenced to a total
effective sentence of 8 years' imprisonment. Y, who pleaded guilty to
count 1 on the indictment that also
charged the appellant, was sentenced to
11 years' imprisonment.
appellant, X and Y were each charged with offences relating to different
quantities of drugs. X and Y's offending related to
approximately
[redacted] kg of methylamphetamine, being the total quantity [redacted].
Having regard to the quantity of drugs involved
in X and Y's offending, and
their more significant roles, the appellant contends that the differences
between their sentences and
his own do not fairly reflect the different levels
of criminality. He claims that there is insufficient disparity in the sentences
and that this has caused him to have a justifiable sense of grievance. A
critical assumption in this argument is that, for the purposes
of the parity
principle, the appellant, X and Y are co‑offenders.
a proper analysis of the facts, the contention that X was a co‑offender of
the appellant cannot be sustained. There were
two separate criminal
enterprises. The first related to possession of the [redacted] kg of
methylamphetamine and only involved X
and Y. The second related to the attempt
to possess the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine and only involved Y and
the appellant.
Thus, the appellant and X were not involved in the same criminal
enterprise. A comparison between the sentence imposed on the appellant
imposed on X cannot be undertaken for the purposes of the parity principle.
In any event, the sentence imposed on X was
significantly reduced for
totality reasons because he was already serving a sentence of imprisonment for
other unrelated matters.
X also received a larger discount for pleading guilty.
regards Y, her offending encompassed the attempt to possess the
[redacted] kg of methylamphetamine, although she was also involved
possession of the larger quantity of [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine.
The appellant and Y were involved in the same criminal
enterprise, but only in
relation to the attempt to possess [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine.
They were co‑offenders to that
limited extent. In those circumstances,
the parity principle can be applied in respect of Y. However, the sentence of
imprisonment imposed on Y properly reflected the difference
between her criminality and that of the appellant, as well as their different
personal circumstances. There is no basis for the appellant to have a
justifiable sense of grievance having regard to the sentence
imposed on Y.
the more detailed reasons that follow, leave to appeal should be granted, and
the appeal dismissed.
following facts cover the criminal conduct of X and Y, as well as that of the
[redacted], police officers commenced an investigation into the suspected
criminal activities of
During those investigations police officers lawfully intercepted telephone
communications between X, Y and others. Police also obtained
photographic
evidence, telephone records, trip data and CCTV footage. This revealed the
existence of a drug trafficking business
enterprise, in which both X and Y were
[redacted], between approximately 9.45 am and 10.15 am, Y leased a
storage unit [redacted] for one
The storage unit premises were at [redacted]. The complex was multi‑level
with the relevant storage unit being on the [redacted]
level. The unit was
accessible from the ground level by a
the same day, at approximately 10.30 am, Y was joined by X at the storage
X arrived in a separate vehicle. While Y entered the office of the storage unit
complex, X removed a suitcase and a black tub from
the boot of his vehicle. He
then retrieved a trolley and brought it back to his vehicle. He placed the
suitcase and black tub on
the trolley and pushed the trolley with the items on
it to the lift. Y and X then entered the lift together. About
12 minutes later,
Y returned to her car and drove off. About
five minutes later, X returned to his car and drove
that afternoon, at about 4.30 pm, X returned to the storage units and
He returned to his car about 80 minutes later pulling a suitcase. X placed
this suitcase into his vehicle and drove
[redacted], at approximately 9.30 pm, Y and X attended the storage units in
a vehicle driven by
X got out of the vehicle, collected a basket and Y joined him briefly near the
lifts on the ground floor. X then entered the lift
and took it to
level [redacted] where the relevant storage unit was located. Y returned
to the vehicle and stayed there until X
returned a short time later holding
the basket. Y then drove the vehicle away with X in the front passenger
seat holding the
[redacted], at about 12.10 am, Y and X attended the storage units in a
vehicle driven by
X got out of the vehicle and entered the lift on the ground floor. Y remained
in the vehicle. About five minutes later, X entered
the lift on
level [redacted] where the storage unit was located. At that time, he was
holding a shopping bag. X returned and got
into the vehicle and Y drove away at
approximately
that day, at approximately 11.35 am, police executed a search warrant on
the storage
The search revealed that the only items in the unit were a trolley on which was
a large plastic tub with a lid. Inside that tub
was a black bag and inside the
black bag were [redacted] packages, each covered in what appeared to be
[redacted]. Police seized
the [redacted] packages as well as some white
crystalline powder that was loose at the bottom of the black container.
Analysis of
those packages revealed that they were each approximately
[redacted] kg in weight ranging from [redacted]. Each contained
methylamphetamine
with a purity ranging between 69% ‑ 82%. The
loose white crystalline powder consisted of [redacted] g of methylamphetamine
82% purity. The total amount of methylamphetamine was [redacted]
police constructed substitute packages each containing an inert
They then returned those reconstructed packages to the storage unit. They also
installed a surveillance device to record activity
at the storage
[redacted], at approximately 2.20 pm, X arrived at the storage unit as
a passenger in a vehicle driven
X collected a trolley from the trolley area on the ground floor and
returned to the vehicle. A black plastic tub was put on the
trolley which
X pushed to the lifts on the ground floor. He took the lift to
level [redacted] and placed the large black plastic
tub in the storage
unit. He then left the unit about 4 minutes later pushing an empty
trolley. He returned to the vehicle and entered
the front passenger seat.
Y then drove the vehicle away from the storage unit.
the same day at approximately 9.40 pm, police executed a further search
warrant on the storage
Police saw that the first black storage tub was still on the trolley in the
storage unit. A search of that tub revealed that all
[redacted] packages
containing the inert substance were still in the tub. There was, however, a
second black storage tub now located
on the trolley. In that second tub was
[redacted].
of the [redacted] packages revealed each was approximately [redacted] kg in
weight, ranging from [redacted], and each contained
methylamphetamine with
purities ranging between 74% ‑ 82%. The total amount of
methylamphetamine in the [redacted] packages
was [redacted] kg. Police seized
the [redacted] packages containing methylamphetamine and reconstructed
substitute packages each
containing an inert substance. They then returned
those [redacted] reconstructed packages to [redacted] in the storage
following day, [redacted], at approximately 11.00 am, X entered the
storage unit and left about 5 minutes
[Redacted].
Y and the appellant were both arrested and police conducted a roadside search of
the vehicle and its
located a [redacted] package in the appellant's
In the front pocket of the appellant's jeans, police also located [redacted] g
of methylamphetamine at 72% purity in a medium sized
clipseal bag. They also
found a further [redacted] g of methylamphetamine in the appellant's
backpack. These latter drugs were
in six separate clipseal bags, weighing
[redacted] g, [redacted] g, [redacted] g, [redacted] g, [redacted] g, and
[redacted] g respectively.
The appellant was also found in possession of $240
in cash, two sets of electronic scales, and various sized clipseal
appellant spoke to police at the roadside
appellant told police that the two digital scales in his backpack were used by
him to weigh methylamphetamine for his personal
use so that he did not overdose
when he injected
As regards the various clipseal bags, the appellant said these were used to mix
up the methylamphetamine with water in preparation
for his use of it. He said
that he had used a couple of points of methylamphetamine a day, up to about a
gram, and that he would
pay for it in any way that he could. He said that he
had been using methylamphetamine for 'a fair while'. He said that he was 'on
the dole' at the time and that he would do 'a bit of painting work for a mate'
and also engage in online
relation to the bag of [redacted] g of methylamphetamine located in his front
pocket, the appellant
[redacted].
He then changed his story and told the police that the [redacted] g was given to
him by a man whose name he did not know and for
which he paid no money. He said
that the man had given it to him to on sell to someone else. [Redacted]. He
said that he was expecting
to receive some methylamphetamine in exchange for
doing this transaction. He claimed that he had never met the man before and had
never done anything like this for the man
previously.
relation to the [redacted] g of methylamphetamine in clipseal bags located in
his backpack, the appellant told police that he
had purchased those drugs from a
man the previous
The appellant said that
[redacted].
relation to the $240 in cash, the appellant told police that he could not
remember where it came from, but it might have been
cash that he withdrew from
his bank account. He said that the cash was in his possession for about a
also spoken to by the police at the
She also elected to participate in an electronically recorded interview. In
summary, Y told the police that she had met X at her
friend's house on
[redacted]. She thought that X was using her friend's home as a safe
house. She said that her friend pulled out
of helping X and that she then
asked X what he wanted. He said that he wanted to put 'a bit of stuff' in
She agreed to rent the storage unit so that X would leave her friend alone.
She said that she believed that X wanted the unit to
store stolen goods,
methylamphetamine.
agreed that she had rented the storage unit for one month in her name and that
X had paid for the
To get into the storage unit, she said she had set up a code which was
[redacted]. She agreed that she had taken X to the storage
[redacted]. She said that X arrived with a suitcase and opened it up in
the storage unit and told her that it was [redacted]
'[redacted]'.
said that on another occasion she had seen X with approximately $[redacted]
She said that X would come to her friend's house with hundreds of thousands
of dollars daily. X would borrow her and her friend's
She said that on the occasions that she had taken X to the storage unit she
had not gone into the unit but had stayed in the car
and not asked any
questions. She had also been driving X around to a few places including
locations where she understood that he
was burying and retrieving
said that she had an argument with X about the drugs in the storage unit
and told him that they needed to be
X decided that he would not remove the drugs, instead he wanted the unit for
another month. [Redacted]
arrested at a different location at about 9.55 pm on the same evening, that
[redacted].
value of the nearly [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine was between
$4.6 million, if sold by the kilogram, and $21 million, if
sold by the
point (0.1 g). The value of the drugs the subject of count 3, that is
the approximately [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine
that Y and the
appellant attempted to possess, was approximately $250,000, if sold by kilogram,
and approximately $1.1 million, if
sold by the point. The value of the
[redacted] g of methylamphetamine found in the appellant's pocket was
approximately $11,000,
if sold by the ounce, and $32,000, if sold by the
Procedural history
events resulted in two indictments; one charging X only, and one charging Y and
the appellant.
indictment relating to Y and the appellant contained four counts.
Count 1 charged Y with possession of the
[redacted] kg of methylamphetamine found at the storage unit on
[redacted].
Count 2 charged Y with possession of the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine
found at the storage unit on
[redacted].
Originally, count 3 jointly charged the appellant and Y with attempting to
possess the [redacted] kg quantity of
methylamphetamine.
Count 4 charged the appellant with possession of the [redacted] g of
methylamphetamine found in his pocket when he was arrested.
appellant pleaded guilty to counts 3 and 4 on
[redacted].
That was shortly prior to the joint trial of the appellant and Y, which was due
to commence on [redacted].
proceeded to trial, however on the second day ([redacted]) a negotiated plea
agreement was reached with the
prosecution.
Pursuant to that agreement, count 1 was amended so that it covered the
whole of Y's conduct covered by original counts 1 to 3. This
achieved by amending the date of count 1 to cover the period between
[redacted]. Y entered a plea of guilty to the amended count
prosecution accepted that plea in discharge of the indictment as against
Counts 2 and 3 were later formally discontinued as against
The facts alleged against Y did not substantially change.
effect of this was that the appellant and Y were not convicted of any common
offence. However, count 1 against Y was amended
to encompass the
criminality that was formerly covered by count 3.
was charged on a separate indictment with five
Count 1 charged X with possession of the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine
found at the storage unit on [redacted]. Count 2 charged
X with possession
of the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine found at the storage unit on
[redacted]. Count 3 charged X with possession
of [redacted] g of
methylamphetamine found at the time of his arrest on [redacted]. Count 4
charged X with possession of $[redacted]
in cash that was reasonably suspected
to have been unlawfully obtained. Count 5 charged X with possession of
[redacted] g of methylamphetamine
found on [redacted] following his
pleaded guilty to all counts on
[redacted],
and was sentenced on [redacted] to a total effective sentence of 8 years'
imprisonment (reduced from 10 years' imprisonment for totality
At the time of his sentencing X was a serving prisoner. The term of
8 years' imprisonment was ordered to be served cumulatively
on an existing
term of 6 years' imprisonment with the result that X was to serve an
overall total effective sentence of 14 years'
imprisonment.
Sentencing remarks - the appellant and Y
appellant and Y were sentenced on
[redacted].
sentencing Y, the sentencing judge noted that when Y leased the
storage unit, she knew that X was going to use it for something
illegal but
did not know that it was going to be used to store large quantities of
methylamphetamine.
However, on [redacted] X told Y that he was storing large quantities of
methylamphetamine at the storage unit, and she continued
to hire the unit with
that knowledge. Her Honour said that Y's conduct also included the
assistance that Y provided each time she
attended at the storage unit in company
with X when he delivered or collected
sentencing judge noted that the State had accepted that Y was 'not the
principal offender'; rather, X was the principal offender
Y had aided him in committing his
Her Honour said that that was not to suggest that Y's offending was not
serious. Her Honour said that Y had facilitated the large‑scale
warehousing of drugs in readiness for distribution into the community. That
distribution would have occurred but for the intervention
of the police. Y had
allowed her name and personal details to be associated with the warehousing of
the drugs and this had allowed
X an opportunity to plausibly deny any
involvement.
relation to the appellant, the sentencing judge described his role in respect of
counts 3 and 4 in the following
You, [the appellant], in relation to count 3, will be sentenced on the
basis that you took possession of that [redacted] kilogram
parcel at the
request of [Y] to give it back to her with the expectation that it contained
methylamphetamine, and that you would
receive some of the methylamphetamine for
your own use.
You, [the appellant], in relation to count 4, will be sentenced on the
basis that you had the methylamphetamine, that is the [redacted]
grams, in your
possession, to deliver ·to another person at the request of [X], and that
doing such activity would cut out partly
or entirely the drug debt
that you owed to him.
sentencing judge described the seriousness of Y's offending in the following
For you, [Y], such matters include your role in this offending which I canvassed
earlier in my remarks. Of course, your involvement
was not fleeting. Your
involvement was over the course of about 10 days.
It not only involved you continuing to lease the storage unit in the full
knowledge that it stored a very large quantity of drugs,
but you also ferried
[X] to and from the storage unit on a number of occasions over that 10‑day
period in the full knowledge
that he was moving drugs to and from that
In my view, your offending is far from the low end of offending of this kind.
You were not a courier or intermediary. You are placed
in the chain of
offending where you have warehoused these drugs for further distribution into
the community.
Your motive for committing this offence was for financial gain in the sense that
you had an expectation that you would receive drugs
in return for your
assistance. The quantity of drugs involved in your offending was in the order
of [approximately] [redacted] kilograms.
On any view of it, that is a very
large quantity of drugs you were warehousing in the knowledge that they would be
distributed into
the community to cause the destruction in our community that
you are well aware.
The degree of purity of the methylamphetamine was around 80 per cent,
that being of such purity that it could easily have been diluted
a number of
times for sale in the community. The value of the drugs that you were
warehousing was significant, and the value of
the [redacted] kilogram of drugs
you were to [on sell] was also significant.
sentencing judge described the seriousness of the appellant's offending in the
For you, [the appellant], such matters include your role in this offending which
I have canvassed earlier in my remarks. Your offending
in relation to the
[redacted] kilogram package which you believed to be methylamphetamine in
count 3 is at the lower end of the range
of offending of this kind.
[Redacted] the parcel at the request of [Y], but knowing that it was drugs for
which you were going to
get some to feed your own drug habit, and you had an
appreciation, of course, that some of those drugs would be distributed in the
In relation to your offending in count 4, it is accepted that you were
taking the drugs from one place to another to cut out a drug
debt you owed to
[X]. It is difficult to accept that this is at the absolute lowest end of
offending of this kind because this is
exactly the conduct that is critical to
the drug business, that is, getting those that are drug addicts, that have drug
engage in delivering drugs to cut out drug debts, and it just continues
on. It's the vicious cycle.
The motive for committing these offences, for committing count 3, was to
some drugs out of it,
and your motive for committing count 4 was to take the risk in getting the
drugs from one place to another
to cut out a drug debt. The quantity of drugs
in count 3 was [redacted] kilogram of methylamphetamine. That is a serious
of drugs, and in count 4 was [redacted] grams of
methylamphetamine.
The degree of purity of both lots of methylamphetamine was such that they could
have been diluted further for sale. The value of
both lots of drugs was
significant, that is, the [redacted] kilogram of methylamphetamine was valued at
approximately 1.1 million
and the [redacted] grams of methylamphetamine was
valued at approximately 32,000 if they were both sold in points. Your offending
was not a one‑off but, rather, a piece of ongoing drug offending by
sentencing judge was alive to the issue of parity, at least insofar as it
related to Y and
Her Honour considered whether the sentence of 8 years' imprisonment
imposed on X, for the equivalent offence to that of Y, justified
starting point for Y. She noted that X's sentence had been significantly
reduced for totality reasons because it was made
cumulative on an existing
sentence (resulting in a total effective sentence for X of 14 years'
imprisonment). It is unnecessary
to explore further her Honour's reasons for
concluding that X's sentence was of limited utility in determining the
appropriate sentence
for Y, given that this appeal does not relate to Y.
sentencing judge made no express reference to parity as being a consideration as
regards the appellant. However, during sentencing
submissions, her Honour
commented that she did not think that parity applied in respect of the
sentencing judge imposed a sentence of 11 years' imprisonment on Y for
appellant was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment on count 3 and
3 year's imprisonment on
The sentence on count 4 was reduced to 1 years' imprisonment for
totality reasons. The sentences on counts 3 and 4 were ordered
served cumulatively, resulting in a total effective sentence of 7 years'
imprisonment.
Y and the appellant were made eligible for
Personal circumstances - the appellant
appellant was 32 years of age at the time of the offences and 34 years
of age when he came to be sentenced. He was born in [redacted]
eldest of three children born to his parents' union. His parents separated when
he was 11 years of age.
appellant reported that his father was violent towards his mother and had a
gambling problem, which led to financial difficulties
His parents often argued, and his mother struggled with depression and anxiety.
His parents had a highly acrimonious relationship
until the appellant was in his
teenage years, when they became more amicable. After his parents separated, the
appellant and his
siblings lived between the parental homes on alternate weeks
until the appellant was 17 years of age. He found this regular relocation
unsettling and disliked the instability. When he turned 17 years old, he
commenced living with his mother
permanently.
addition to his full siblings, the appellant has two half‑siblings on his
father's side from his father's current relationship,
and an older
half‑sibling on his mother's
The appellant feels that his father favours his new family over the family he
had with the appellant's mother. The appellant has
always had a close
relationship with his mother, sister, and brother.
appellant suffered a traumatic event when he was 12 years of age, which was
canvassed in a psychological report. He suffers
unresolved trauma as a result
of that event. After this event, his school grades deteriorated, and he became
involved with antisocial
peers. He also began using illicit substances and lost
positive direction in his
to education, the appellant attended primary and high school in [redacted] until
After leaving school, he pursued a trade in concreting and frame working and
subsequently completed an apprenticeship. He was then
employed in [redacted]
before moving to Western Australia in or about 2011 to obtain work in the
mining industry. He found work
predominantly as a concreter in the construction
of bridges, mining camps, tilt panels, pipelines, and pumpstations. He had a
good employment history until about 2016, when his
methylamphetamine addiction got out of
appellant has had two significant relationships in his
He was in a three‑year relationship from 21 years of age with an
older woman. The relationship was marred by substance abuse
and was otherwise
an unhealthy one. The appellant has a child from that relationship who is now
11 years of age. He separated from
the child's mother when the child was
2 years of age, and he has very limited contact with the child. The
appellant was then in
a relationship from 24 ‑ 34 years of
age. That relationship was also marred by substance
appellant does not have any major physical health
As to his mental health, he has suffered from anxiety and depression from about
11 years of age due to the acrimony and instability
of his parents'
separation, as well as feeling neglected by his father. This anxiety and
depression was exacerbated by the trauma
he suffered as a
12‑year‑old, as well as his intimate relationship problems, lack of
and lack of positive direction. He has
expressed shame and embarrassment about some of his life decisions and
appellant has used prescription medication sporadically for his anxiety and
depression, but with little reported
He was not medicated at the time of the offending. He had not engaged in
counselling in order to address the unresolved trauma in
his life. The
psychologist who prepared a report expressed the opinion that the appellant may
have antisocial personality disorder
with depressive personality traits. He is
also likely to have mild anxiety, chronic depression, and a significant
dependence on
alcohol and illicit substances. He does not reach levels
sufficient to support a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder.
appellant has a significant history of drug use, especially cannabis, which
commenced when he was 15 years of
He then progressed to using methylamphetamine on the weekends until the age
of 18. He became a regular user of methylamphetamine
at the age of
24 years, during his time off when he was working on a
fly‑in/fly‑out basis. In the immediate lead up
to the current
offending the appellant was a daily user of methylamphetamine. He has also used
other drugs such as cocaine, ecstasy,
and hallucinogenic drugs. His use of
alcohol has also been significant since the age of 15. He has used illicit
substances predominantly
to self‑soothe, and to escape and distract from
negative feelings and problems in his life. He also developed a gambling
between the ages of
appellant has a lengthy criminal
In June 2018, he committed numerous offences, including firearm and weapon
offences, possession of stolen property, possession of
drug paraphernalia,
possession of methylamphetamine, and possession of methylamphetamine with intent
He was sentenced to terms of imprisonment for the drug offences. In
September 2018, he committed further drug offences, including
possession of
drug paraphernalia, selling methylamphetamine, as well as possessing
methylamphetamine with intent to sell or
In May 2020, the appellant was sentenced for a number of firearm and drug
offences, including two offences of possession of methylamphetamine
with intent
to sell or supply it to another, for which he received a total effective
sentence of 3 years'
imprisonment.
On 5 August 2020, he was released from prison on parole. He initially
complied with the parole order, but then resumed using methylamphetamine
failed to attend supervision. He also committed offences in breach of his
parole, including in July 2021, when he was found
in possession of drug
paraphernalia as well as carrying an article with intent to cause
In August 2021, the appellant was found in possession of methylamphetamine
as well as drug paraphernalia, for which he was fined.
His parole was breached
in 2021 and he was returned to prison. In January 2022, he committed
offences of stealing property, possessing
drug paraphernalia, and possessing
methylamphetamine, for which he was again
The current offences were committed in May 2022.
sentencing judge noted that the appellant had a history of drug offending,
including dealing in significant quantities of drugs,
and offending whilst on
He had been provided with numerous opportunities to stop offending but had
continued, with the current offences being a significant
elevation in that
offending. The sentencing judge noted that whilst the appellant's criminal
history did not aggravate the current
offending, it revealed a disregard for the
law and meant that personal deterrence and punishment assumed greater
importance.
regards the appellant's pleas of guilty, those pleas were indicated at different
times, and her Honour assessed the value of those
pleas as being 7% for
count 3 and 15% for
regards whether the appellant had shown genuine remorse, the sentencing judge
took into account his pleas of guilty and his police
She noted that in the interview, the appellant had sought to minimise his role
in the distribution of drugs. Her Honour also referred
to a letter from
the appellant and said that she found it difficult to know the true extent of
the remorse expressed in that letter.
However, her Honour was prepared to
give the appellant the benefit of the doubt and to accept that he was
remorseful, though she
could not determine to what degree. She said that any
remorse was tempered by the appellant's self‑serving versions of events
the police and his late plea of guilty to
sentencing judge summarised the appellant's account of how he came to commit the
offences in the following
Again, I consider why or how it is that a 32‑year‑old man, as you
were then, would commit such offences. Your counsel
tells me that - tells me
that, at around the time of this current offending, you were effectively
and [Y] had recommenced contact with each other,
after having parted company some months earlier after the end of a brief
relationship. Two days before your offending, [Y] put you in contact
with someone you could purchase drugs off for your own use.
You then purchased the drugs off [X], but you could not fully pay upfront for
the drugs, and you accrued a debt. On the day of your
offending, that is
[redacted], you had asked [Y] to take you to [X's] place, which she did. It was
at that time that [X] asked you
to courier some methylamphetamine, [redacted],
to another person, and then - and that would then pay the debt off you owed
Whilst at that address, [X], you - whilst at that address with [X], you, [the
appellant], consumed methylamphetamine intravenously,
and you were significantly
intoxicated by the time you were on your way to deliver [redacted] of
methylamphetamine. [Redacted]
[Y] did not tell you what was in the package, but you knew that any package was
likely to contain illicit drugs, particularly methylamphetamine,
although I'm
told you had no idea about the amount. [Redacted]
At that time you appreciated that the package had some weight to it. Your
intention at that time was to supply the package back
to [Y], or to [Y] with no
expectation that you would receive anything from it.
sentencing judge referred to the appellant's references from his parents and
friends, and also to his prospects of
rehabilitation.
Her Honour noted that the appellant had reverted to drug use after previous
sentences of imprisonment but had expressed a wish to
undertake a drug
rehabilitation program. She said that the appellant would need to address his
addiction and the underlying causes
of that addiction if he was to have a
prospect of avoiding further
Personal circumstances - Y
34 years of age at the time of the offence and 36 years of age when
she came to be sentenced. She was born in Perth and is
the eldest of two
children born to her parent's
She reported a positive and stable upbringing, and she continues to enjoy close
relationships with her family.
a primary school in metropolitan Perth and had no learning or behavioural
difficulties.
She then attended high school where she faced severe physical and psychological
bullying from year 8. As a result she transferred
to another high school
where the bullying continued throughout the rest of her high school years. This
experience led her to become
somewhat isolated. She is reported to have low
self‑esteem, anxiety and depression. She has developed a strong aversion
confrontation. She left school three weeks before completing
leaving school Y completed a [redacted] and briefly worked at a
[redacted].
She then worked in a department store and then a retail electrical store, where
she became a team leader. From 2011 ‑ 2015
[redacted] and then returned to employment in retail for about 12 months.
She then did not work between 2016 ‑
2020, which she has
attributed to addiction to drugs. Whilst Y was on home detention bail from
early February 2022 ‑ May 2024,
Y was employed with a
[redacted] in various positions commencing as a night packer and then moving to
daytime work in administration.
After being remanded in custody,
Y requested work in the prison system and was assigned to the kitchen,
progressing to a privilege
unit within a short
had three significant intimate
relationships.
The first was when she was 16 years of age. She married her partner when
she was 21 years of age and they had one child together,
a daughter who was
[redacted] at the time of sentencing. She separated from her husband when she
was 25 years of age due to his
infidelity, which caused her to struggle
emotionally. She briefly reconciled with her husband a few years later but
there was ultimately
another separation, and finally divorce when she was
29 years of
formed a second relationship of three years duration which ended in
This relationship was marred by mutual alcohol misuse and physical abuse towards
Y and her daughter. More recently, Y commenced
a relationship when
she was 33 years old which initially lasted for five months. There was
then a separation, followed by a short
reunion, but ultimately this relationship
came to an end when Y was
[redacted] daughter is cared for by her (Y's) parents. Her daughter's father
has unrestricted visitation rights.
no physical health issues. In terms of mental health, she has experienced
recurring bouts of anxiety and depression which
she attributes to being bullied
at high school. Her unhealthy intimate relationships have contributed to those
issues. Y returned
to live with her parents while she was on home
detention bail and this alleviated some of her anxiety. She was not medicated
any health issues at the time of sentencing.
terms of substance abuse, Y reported that whilst at high school she began
experimenting with
dexamphetamines.
She turned to using methylamphetamine on her eighteenth birthday. Thereafter
she used this drug on weekends or social occasions.
By the time that she was
which included sporadic use of
cannabis. From when she was about 31 years
of age, she engaged in habitual intravenous daily use of methylamphetamine until
was arrested. She commenced using alcohol when she was 16 years of age
and did so socially until the age of 23. At the time of
her arrest her
alcohol use was problematic and she was consuming two to three bottles of
champagne daily, often commencing in the
morning. She said that she now
appreciated the negative impact that drugs and alcohol had had on her life and
the lives of those
around her, particularly her daughter. She reported being
abstinent from illicit substances from the time of her arrest in May 2022.
She said that being on home detention bail and then being remanded in prison had
been the circuit breaker that she needed to get
her life back on track. She
claimed to have no interest in using illicit substances in the
or about 2020, when Y was approximately 32 or 33 years
of age, she developed a gambling problem after she experienced some mood
following a win with a
This escalated into a daily addiction to gambling both at casinos and online.
She reported that she sometimes gambled to support
her drug habit and manage her
mood, convinced that she would always win. She admitted to frequently seeking
money, including from
her parents, often with fabricated reasons to support her
drug and gambling addictions. She reported that her last gambling episode
in May 2022 coinciding with her decision to quit drugs after her arrest in
relation to the current
regards her adult criminal history, Y has been convicted of offences of
aggravated assault occasioning bodily harm, and breach
of a violence restraining
order, in relation to her ex‑husband. In December 2019, she was
convicted of driving under the influence
of alcohol, and in March 2020,
with driving whilst under the influence of illicit
In June 2020, she committed two criminal damage offences, and a trespass
offence. In December 2020, she was found in possession
methylamphetamine. In August 2021, she was again found in possession of
methylamphetamine, as well as cannabis and drug paraphernalia.
For those past
offences she was either fined or dealt with by way of a community‑based
noted earlier, Y entered a plea of guilty to an amended count 1 on the
indictment. The sentencing judge found that it was always
open to Y to plead
guilty to count 1, and that, accordingly, her guilty plea was very late. A
discount of 5% was allowed for that
sentencing judge found that, prior to being sentenced, Y had made important
steps towards turning her life around, including
by obtaining employment and
remaining abstinent from illegal drugs, alcohol and
Her Honour found that Y had made good progress towards rehabilitation but
had a long way to
The ground of appeal
ground of appeal is as
The appellant has a justifiable sense of grievance due to the insufficient
disparity between his sentence and the sentences of co‑accused
The appellant's submissions
appellant contends that X and Y are his
co‑offenders.
On that premise he submits that the parity principle applies. He submits that
the criminality of X and Y was significantly greater
than his, and that the
disparities between their sentences and his are insufficient to reflect the
extent of that differing
criminality.
regards X, the appellant submits that it is not necessary for co‑offenders
to know each other or to be working directly
in concert with each
At the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the appellant submitted that, even
though the attempt by the appellant and Y to possess
the [redacted] kg of
methylamphetamine did not involve X, there were other factors connecting the
appellant and X. Counsel identified
those factors as being, first, that on
[redacted] the appellant had agreed to deliver the [redacted] of
methylamphetamine for X.
Secondly, that Y provided the appellant with transport
on that day, and she had strong links with both X and the
regards Y, the appellant submits that she and the appellant were engaged in a
common enterprise to possess the [redacted] kg of
methylamphetamine.
However, counsel for the appellant accepted that Y was not convicted of a
separate charge in respect of that
Y was convicted of a rolled‑up count that incorporated all of her conduct.
This makes comparison between her sentence and that
of the appellant difficult,
though not impossible. Given that Y was also involved in possessing the larger
quantity of [redacted]
kg of methylamphetamine and that the attempt to obtain
the [redacted] kg was her idea, the appellant submits that her criminality
significantly greater and should have resulted in a larger difference between
her sentence and that of the appellant.
The respondent's submissions
respondent submits that whilst X and Y were engaged in the same criminal
enterprise in relation to the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine
stored in the
storage unit, and Y and the appellant were engaged in the same criminal
enterprise in relation to the [redacted] kg
package [redacted], at no point were
X and the appellant engaged in the same criminal
enterprise.
The attempt [redacted] the [redacted] kg package occurred entirely
independently of X.
respondent submits that the appellant's explanation for the [redacted] g of
methylamphetamine, namely that he was delivering
it for X in order to discharge
a drug debt, is of no consequence because X was not charged in relation to that
quantity of
Nor can that connection create any common enterprise as regards the attempt to
possess the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine.
relation to Y, the respondent submits that whilst Y and the appellant were
engaged in the same criminal enterprise in relation
to the [redacted] kg
package, the appellant was convicted of attempting to possess it and Y was
sentenced with possessing it
[redacted].
As Y was not sentenced for her possession of the [redacted] kg separately
from the remaining drugs, the parity principle had no application.
the alternative, the respondent submits that even if the parity principle
applies in respect of the appellant and Y, it was not
Y was sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment for her role in respect of the
[redacted] kg amount. The appellant was sentenced to 6
years' imprisonment
for the attempt to possess the [redacted] kg amount (count 3). The
five‑year difference appropriately
reflected Y's greater involvement with
a much larger quantity of drugs and her lesser discount for pleading guilty.
Relevant legal principles
parity principle is an aspect of equal justice. Equal justice requires that
like offenders should be treated alike but, if there
are relevant differences,
due allowances should be made for them. The critical question is whether
disparity, or lack of disparity,
in the sentencing outcome is capable of giving
rise to a legitimate or justifiable sense of grievance, or to give the
in the mind of an objective observer that justice has not been
parity principle requires that the sentences imposed upon co‑offenders be
proportionate to the co‑offenders' respective
degrees of culpability; the
aggravating and mitigating factors that apply to each of them; and, their
personal circumstances and
antecedents. The sentences imposed upon
co‑offenders must reflect any differences between them in relation to
appellate court may interfere with a sentence on the ground of a marked and
unjustifiable disparity, or on the ground of an absence
of a marked or
justifiable disparity, even though the sentence in question, viewed in
isolation, would not necessarily be regarded
as manifestly excessive or
otherwise open to challenge. Parity of sentencing does not, however, require a
sentencing judge to be
so lenient as to 'shock the public conscience' by
imposing a sentence entirely disproportionate to the offence in
appellate court can refuse to intervene on the basis of the parity principle
where disparity is justified by differences between
co‑offenders. This
may include differences in relation to age, background, criminal history,
general character and the part
each co‑offender has played in the relevant
criminal conduct or
enterprise.
has been recognised that the norm of equal justice may be engaged by a
marked disparity in the respective sentences imposed on
co‑offenders in
relation to a single common offence, or in respect of the total effective
sentences imposed in relation to
multiple common offences, even though one, or
both, of the co‑offenders was sentenced for other offences. The basic
underpinning parity as a distinct ground of appellate intervention is the
desirability that 'persons who have been parties to the
commission of the same
offence should, if other things are equal, receive the same
parity principle is not confined to offenders who are charged with the same
offence in respect of the same criminal conduct.
It may arise in respect of
offenders who commit different offences in respect of the same criminal
enterprise. In
v The Queen
, French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ
Lowe v The Queen
Postiglione v The
, this Court was concerned with the application of the parity
principle to persons charged with the same offences arising out of the
criminal conduct or enterprise. Those decisions are not authority for the
proposition that the principle applies only to persons
so charged. The
foundation of the parity principle in the norm of equality before the law
requires that its application be governed
by consideration of substance rather
than form. Formal identity of charges against the offenders whose sentences are
compared is
not a necessary condition of its application. Nevertheless, as
Campbell JA recognised in
, there can be significant practical difficulties in
comparing the sentences of participants in the same criminal enterprise who have
been charged with different crimes. The greater the difference between the
crimes, the greater the practical difficulties, particularly
where disparity is
said to arise out of a sentence imposed on a co‑offender who has been
charged with an offence that is less
serious than that of the appellant. The
existence of those difficulties may be accepted. So too may the inability of a
criminal appeal to undertake, under the parity rubric, a de facto
review of prosecutorial charging discretions. Those practical
difficulties and
limitations, however, do not exclude the operation of the parity principle.
The effect given to it may vary according
to the circumstances of the case,
including differences between the offences with which co‑offenders are
charged. (footnotes
Jimmy v The
Campbell JA noted that considerations of parity had been recognised as
being difficult to apply where co‑offenders are charged
with significantly
different offences. His Honour then said that the parity principle had
been applied in cases where multiple offenders
had participated in a common
criminal enterprise but not committed the same
[U]nequal treatment that is so great as to bring about a justifiable sense of
grievance can sometimes arise between participants
in a common criminal
enterprise who have committed different crimes. In my view there is no obstacle
of the type the Crown submits
to the parity principle being applied simply
because a case is one in which the sentence by comparison with which the
sentence under
appeal is sought to be reduced was for a different crime.
There are significant limitations, however, on reducing a sentence on the basis
of that of a co‑offender who has committed
a different crime. At least
some of the limits on the use of the parity principle in such a case
cannot overcome those differences in sentence that arise from a prosecutorial
decision about whether to charge a person at all,
or with what crime to charge
X v Formosa
it is used to compare the sentences of participants in the same criminal
enterprise who have been charged with different crimes,
there can be significant
practical difficulties. Those practical difficulties become greater the greater
the difference between
the crimes charged becomes, and can become so great that
in the circumstances of a particular case a judge cannot apply it, or cannot
that there is any justifiable sense of grievance arising from the
discrepancy:
cannot overcome differences in sentence that arise from one of the
co‑offenders having been given a sentence that is unjustifiably
X v Armstrong
X v Diamond
are particular difficulties in an applicant succeeding in a disparity argument
where the disparity is said to arise by comparison
with the sentence imposed on
a co‑offender who has been charged with an offence that is less serious
than that of the applicant:
X v Stanbouli
stands as one example where that result arose.
(citations omitted)
is apparent from
parity principle is not confined to cases where co‑offenders are jointly
charged, or charged with the same offences.
The application of the parity
principle is concerned with substance rather than form. Offenders who are part
of the same criminal
enterprise may rely on the parity principle because there
is a meaningful connection between their offending. Participation in the
criminal enterprise creates a reasonable expectation that the sentences imposed
on participants will bear some proportionality
to each other. However, this
should not operate to obscure the difference between the application of the
parity principle and the
more general principle of ensuring consistency in
sentencing outcomes for unrelated offenders. Whilst the parity principle is
with actual outcomes and the avoidance of a justifiable sense of
grievance in respect of co‑offenders, the more general principle
concerned with ensuring consistency in the application of sentencing
principles.
Apkarian v The State of
this court cited
in which the Victorian Court of Appeal referred to a common criminal enterprise
for the purpose of the parity principle as involving
'a course of criminal
activity usually encompassing multiple unlawful acts which may be of the same or
a similar nature, but each
of which is related to the same criminal
However, in
and Bongiorno JJA suggested that parity may apply in some cases that did
not strictly involve a common criminal
enterprise:
If there are offenders whose offending is very similar and is in some way
related, the sentence imposed on one offender may be a
relevant factor to take
into account in the exercise of the sentencing discretion for the other. The
connection between the offenders
may not fit within the rubric of a common
criminal enterprise. Their offending may involve the same victim or the same
subject matter,
or there [may] be some other connection. The weight to be
attributed to the sentence which is the subject of comparison will depend
such things as the nexus between the offenders, the degree of similarity between
their conduct, and factors personal to each
offender. Depending on those
circumstances, the principle of equal justice may require a sentencing judge to
give the specific sentence
imposed on the other offender substantial
determined that parity did not apply to offenders selling drugs out of the same
house (on at least one occasion), as they
were operating independently of each
other and for their own
The fact that the offenders in that case knew each other and were connected by
the house where one sale occurred was said to be an
insufficient basis to
establish the existence of a common criminal enterprise. Further, these facts,
together with the fact that
the two men were targets of the same police
operation, were said to be insufficient to establish any other connection which
Disposition
appellant's submissions are premised on the assumption that the parity principle
applies as between all three offenders. The
threshold question is whether the
appellant, X and Y are co‑offenders for the purposes of the parity
was no suggestion that the appellant was involved in the criminal enterprise of
X and Y to possess the [redacted] kg of methylamphetamine
in the storage unit.
Whilst the appellant did have an association with X in relation to drug dealing,
that association did not include
any involvement by the appellant in the
[redacted] kg quantity of the drug. Equally, X had no involvement in the
attempt by the
appellant to obtain possession of the [redacted] kg amount
on [redacted] at the behest of Y. Neither Y nor the appellant were acting
the authority or knowledge of X at that time. [Redacted]
these circumstances, it could not be said that the appellant and X had the same
criminal purpose. In effect, there were two distinct
criminal enterprises,
first, the criminal enterprise of X and Y to possess the [redacted] kg quantity
of methylamphetamine; and,
second, the criminal enterprise of the appellant and
Y to attempt to possess the [redacted] kg quantity of methylamphetamine.
was no criminal enterprise in common between the appellant and X so far as the
[redacted] kg of methylamphetamine was concerned.
Nor was there any other
relevant nexus or connection that justified application of the parity principle.
[Redacted]. The connection
with X in relation to the delivery of the [redacted]
g of methylamphetamine had nothing whatsoever to do with either the possession
of the [redacted] kg by X, or the attempt to obtain the [redacted] kg by Y and
the appellant.
Accordingly,
the appellant and X were not co‑offenders for the purposes of the parity
principle. The aspect of the ground
relating to alleged disparity with the
sentence of X must fail for this reason.
relation to Y, the appellant and Y were engaged in the same criminal enterprise
in respect of the [redacted] kg quantity. The
appellant was convicted of
attempting to possess that quantity. Y was not convicted of an equivalent
offence. However, her actions
in attempting to possess the [redacted] kg
quantity were relied on as forming part of the criminal conduct comprising her
of the [redacted] kg quantity. In those circumstances, a part of the
criminal conduct in which Y was engaged was a criminal enterprise
in which the
appellant was also engaged. At least to this extent, the parity principle
comparison between the sentences of Y and the appellant is complicated by the
fact that there is no common offence. The common
criminal enterprise only forms
a part of Y's offending and no separate component of the sentence imposed on her
can be attributed
to that part. Y's criminal conduct was effectively
rolled‑up into the single count to which she pleaded guilty. Her
criminality
extended beyond the conduct in which she engaged with the appellant.
However, any assessment of her greater criminality cannot be
confined to a
simple comparison of the quantities of drugs involved.
was not treated as a principal offender in respect of the [redacted] kg
quantity, rather her role was to provide assistance to
X by leasing the storage
unit and transporting X to the unit on several occasions. There was no
suggestion that she was an owner
of the drugs or stood to receive a share of any
profits. She was relatively low in the hierarchy, though her role was
nonetheless
important. She pleaded guilty to a single charge of possession of
the [redacted] kg quantity. That plea was entered part way through
personal circumstances of the appellant and Y are largely comparable. Any
differences effectively cancel each other out. The
appellant was entitled to a
greater discount for pleading guilty, but he had a more significant prior
criminal record, which increased
the importance of personal deterrence. Y's
prospects of rehabilitation were better than those of the appellant.
would be expected in these circumstances that Y would receive a higher sentence
than the appellant to reflect her additional criminality.
However, parity does
not require mathematical precision. It has been recognised that the severity of
a sentence increases at a
greater rate as a sentence becomes longer. Nor is
there a linear relationship between the quantities of drugs involved and the
of the sentence. Factors such as the role played by an offender may be
more important than the quantity of drugs involved.
did in fact receive a higher sentence. Y was sentenced to 11 years'
imprisonment in respect of count 1, which encompassed the
involving the appellant. The appellant received a sentence of 6 years'
imprisonment for count 3, which is the comparable
offence. Taking into
account the difference in their respective culpability and their personal
circumstances, the disparity was
not such as could reasonably engender a
justifiable sense of grievance on the part of the appellant. Nor, once it is
appreciated
that there was a proper basis for cumulacy as to the sentence
imposed on the appellant for the offending the subject of count 4,
lack of disparity as to the total effective sentences reasonably engender a
justifiable sense of grievance on the part of
the appellant.
we would grant leave to appeal in respect of the ground, in our view it does not
extension of time is granted.
appellant's application in an appeal seeking leave to adduce additional evidence
is granted.
to appeal is granted.
appeal is dismissed.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Hall
20 OCTOBER 2025
ts 298 - 299.
ts 294 - 295.
ts 320; WAB 230 -
ts 321; WAB 231 -
Giangiulio v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 77
Ngo v The State of Western
[2017] WASCA 3
Green v The
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
(French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
[30] (French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
Jimmy v The
[2010] NSWCCA 60
(2010) 77 NSWLR 540
, 588 (Campbell JA,
Howie & Rothman JJ
Akoum v The King
[2023] WASCA 102
[10] (Buss P & Mazza JA); citing
(French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
Apkarian v The State of
Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 67
Farrugia v The
[2011] VSCA 24
(2011) 32 VR
Bongiorno JJA).
Bongiorno JJA).
(Buss JA, Mazza JA &
[49] (Buss JA, Mazza JA & Chaney J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (399 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter