URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
COAD [2022] WACIC 6 (3 May 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2022] WACIC 6
C F HOLYOAK-ROBERTS
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
CIC 701 of 2019
BENJAMIN JOHN COAD
Procedural fairness - Involvement with drugs
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
A & E Legal PTY LTD
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
for Decision
John Coad, (the applicant), who was born on 16 March 1993 made an
application on 7 April 2019, resubmitted on 7 September
compensation for injuries he suffered as a result of an offence which occurred
on 24 April 2016 at Margaret River (the offence).
On 31 March 2022 I
awarded the applicant $12,975.00 compensation for injuries and losses he
suffered as a consequence of the offence.
By letter dated 7 April 2022,
the applicant's solicitors A & E Legal, requested my reasons for decision
which are set out below.
application was made pursuant to
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 2003
(the Act) which authorises an assessor to award
an applicant compensation if satisfied the claimed injury and any claimed loss
as a consequence of the commission of a proved offence. Proved offence
is defined in
of the Act.
relation to the offence, Samuel Isaac Norris, (the offender), entered a plea of
guilty to the charge of with intent to do grievous
bodily harm unlawfully wounds
another, in the District Court at Bunbury on 22 August 2016, having
previously entered a plea of guilty
in the Magistrates Court on 20 June
2016. As such I was satisfied a proved offence as defined in the Act was
constituted.
circumstances of the incident as recorded in the Statement of Material Facts
provided as part of the brief for fast track plea
by the Department of Public
Prosecution (DPP) outlines the circumstances of the offence as
The victim and accused have known each other since they were children and
regularly socialise. The accused and the victim's father
both live at the same
unit complex at ... Margaret River.
On 24 April 2016, the accused was at home in ..., Margaret River. the victim
and accused's relationship had recently been on bad
terms because of family
issues. The victim knocked on the accused door to visit. The accused was in an
agitated state, he warned
the victim of his anger but let him into the unit.
The accused aggressively began questioning the victim about family issues. The
victim tried verbally [sic] calm the accused down.
The accused pushed the
victim to the chest and grabbed him around the throat with his hand. The victim
pushed back at the accused
which further aggravated him. The accused grabbed
the victim by the throat again and reached for a knife which was sitting near
them on a kitchen bench. The accused lunged towards the victim with the knife
held in his right hand above his head. The accused
pushed the knife down
towards the victim's head. The victim ducked his head down towards the ground
resulting in the knife inserting
into the back of the victim's head and neck.
The victim sustained a 10cm wound between the base of the skull and the C3
The victim's father head [sic] the shouting and went to the unit to assist. The
victim and his father fled whilst the accused followed
them with the bloodied
knife. The victim shouted "get out of town and don't come back". The victim
ran to the hospital whee he
was treated and subsequently conveyed to Bunbury
The accused was interviewed and made full admissions, stating "I wanted to hurt
him" and "see him in pain". The accused was charged
and his bail
support of his application the applicant submitted medical records from Margaret
River Hospital where he attended following the
incident. It is recorded by
hospital staff he attended on the 24 April 2016 with a head injury stating
he was stabbed by a knife
to the back of the head. He had a past medical
history of drug abuse and was currently taking Naltrexone daily for a
methamphetamine
addiction and further he presented with a knife wound to the
base of his skull. A pressure bandage had been applied but he was bleeding
heavily. Adrenaline was applied to the wound and suturing commenced. He also
had a three inch laceration to his right forearm which
was sutured. A three
inch laceration to his right hand was noted which was also sutured. He was
given a tetanus shot and commenced
on IV fluids. It was recorded by hospital
staff the applicant told them he "had a bong" before this offence occurred.
applicant was transferred from Margaret River Hospital to Bunbury Hospital for
further treatment. A urine drug screen noted
"THC", "Meth" and "AMP" (which I
took to be "methamphetamine" and "cannabis") in his system. He was referred for
a scan and not
long afterwards discharged himself against medical advice. The
Discharge Summary noted the applicant was accepted by the Surgical
with instructions for a CT scan. The CT scan was substantially
unremarkable with post-laceration changes in the midline
of the cervical spine
noted. He was told to follow-up with his General Practitioner (GP).
applicant also provided some medical notes from Margaret River Medical Centre
who I understood to be his GP. He first attended
on 26 April 2016
following the offence where wounds and facial bruising were noted. It is not
clear what treatment he received.
He further attended on the 3 May 2016
for suture removal with additional blood tests conducted. He reattended on
17 May 2016 and
was reported to be doing well. His blood tests were normal
though it was noted the applicant had been on cannabis (THC) since he
years old. He described both parents as "addicts". It was recorded "Chilled
all on Naltrexone tabs – given to him
by father for his own alcohol". The
applicant reattended on 27 May 2016 where it was noted the scalp wound was
healing well. He
had mild to moderate symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) from the offence and wanted to see a counsellor. He said
friend (who I assume to be the offender) was on "meth" and he (the applicant)
had been off everything for approximately nine
weeks. When he attended on the
15 July 2016 for an unrelated matter it was recorded he had had a few
sessions with "Katrina Yates".
He reattended on the 30 September 2016 for
a welfare check and was noted to not be on "speed", but having the occasional
His mood was good and he felt positive about the future. He presented
on 16 May 2017 needing a counsellor and was referred to Mr
Rosenback-Ziembinski (Zish) on a mental healthcare plan. Whilst he attended on
the 4 June 2019 for mental health issues, it
is not clear to me the origins
of those issues. On 20 August 2019 he attended reportedly struggling with
the experience from the
offence. On the 29 October 2019 he attended for
another reason but it was recorded he had also seen the psychologist Zish, but
not been back for awhile. He was encouraged to go back. He subsequently
had mental health issues primarily relating to his relationship
with his wife
and child and on presentation on 6 November 2020 it was recorded his PTSD
was discussed and his symptoms were faded
most of the time. A copy of the
mental health plan was not provided in the documents.
the applicant's admission of drug use immediately prior to the incident and his
positive tests for meth, THC and amphetamines
recorded in the medical notes from
Bunbury Hospital, I wrote to the applicant's solicitor on 7 December 2021
seeking additional information
in relation to his drug use. The applicant
responded by statement dated 20 December 2021 advising he commenced
Naltrexone approximately
two weeks before the incident to assist him to become
sober. He said he had no drugs or smoking equipment on his person when he
entered the premises prior to or following the offence. There was no record in
the police documents of any drug or smoking paraphernalia
in the applicant's
possession at the time of the offence and I was therefore satisfied with his
explanation such that
of the Act did not operate to prevent me
from making an award.
assist in determining the extent of the psychological injury allegedly suffered
by the applicant in the incident, I obtained a
copy of the medical notes from
Margaret River Medical Centre to see whether a copy of the mental healthcare
plan or any correspondence
from the psychologist was available. Contained in
those documents was a handwritten letter from Katrina Yates to the applicant's
doctor stating the applicant had attended on 16 July 2016 but had not
booked another appointment since. Clinical psychologist, Zish
Rosenback-Ziembinski, wrote to the applicant's GP on 19 June 2019 advising
him he had seen the applicant that day and he had decided
to attend on a regular
basis. It was recorded he had been referred to this psychologist two years
previously and he saw him only
once on that occasion. On the prior occasion he
was described as virtually mute but presented differently on this occasion
communicating
his experience clearly and intelligently. He said the applicant
made three more appointments which he did not attend but relayed
to Zish he had
made some positive changes in his life since and was keen to persevere with
Mr Rosenback-Ziembinski
further reported to the applicant's GP on 4 July 2019 he consulted with the
applicant on 23 May 2017, 30
August 2018, 19 June 2019 and
3 July 2019. He said on his second visit he observed the applicant to be
extremely anxious and found
it difficult to talk about himself. He spoke of the
offence but could not provide details. He eventually did so on his last visit.
He reported the applicant found talking about the offence very traumatic.
Following the offence he had recurring nightmares of being
attacked for several
months which restarted four to five months before he reattended the
psychologist. He considered himself to
be overprotective, vigilant and anxious,
but reluctant to seek treatment.
Procedural Fairness
the application was submitted by the applicant in person by email attaching the
application and stating if any additional
information was required, to contact
the applicant. Confirmation of receipt of the application was sent to the
applicant on 19 May
2019 advising him the OCIC would be in contact if
further information was required. The application was subsequently rejected by
letter dated 17 June 2019 on the basis it had been submitted incomplete as
it did not contain a statement of events, statement of
impact, reports relating
to treatment, details of the claimed future treatment or evidence of loss of
earnings. The applicant emailed
on 24 February 2020 advising his medical
report had been received and asked for this claim to be finalised. The medical
not provided by him to the OCIC.
letter dated 26 February 2020, the OCIC advised the applicant his claim
could not be finalised as the additional information requested
OCIC’s letter dated 17 June 2019 had not been received and he was
asked to obtain all supporting information and submit
it to the OCIC along with
the medical report.
applicant subsequently instructed solicitors A & E Legal and by letter dated
29 March 2021 they wrote to the OCIC advising
they acted for the applicant
and the information requested would be submitted once received. By letter dated
1 April 2021, the applicant’s
solicitors asked for copies of
information the applicant had already provided to the OCIC and by letter dated
7 April 2021, the OCIC
asked the applicants solicitors to provide a written
authority from the applicant to do so. The applicant's solicitors provided
unsigned authority and accordingly the OCIC wrote to the solicitors on
8 April 2021 asking for a signed copy to be provided. This
document was
received on 13 April 2021 following which a copy of the application form,
being the only document the applicant had
submitted in support of his
application, was provided to the applicant's solicitors by letter dated
14 April 2021.
letter dated 7 September 2021, the applicant’s solicitor resubmitted
the application, enclosing additional documents in
support including a victim
impact statement, police report, medical records from Margaret River Hospital,
Bunbury Hospital and Margaret
River Medical Centre and a medical report from
Zish Siembinski. They also provided an outline of submissions regarding the
No indication any additional information would be forthcoming was
foreshadowed. The resubmitted application was therefore accepted
on the basis it
was a complete application and the OCIC began to investigate and process the
claim and in due course based on the
documents submitted the claim was
the course of the investigation, it became apparent the applicant was involved
in drugs at or near the time of the offence,
which has been addressed above.
Once it was determined there was no impediment to an award being made, the
matter was assessed.
review of the evidence I was satisfied the applicant suffered physical injuries
by way of stab wounds described above. These
were sutured and appeared to have
healed without incident. I was also satisfied he suffered psychological injury.
The evidence provided
led me to conclude the psychological element of his
injuries was limited as he did not engage with the medical care providers in
form of extended or intense treatment in this regard. Having considered all of
the information available me, I awarded the applicant
$12,500 compensation for
his injuries.
applicant claimed damage for personal items in the offence, primarily clothing
which he said was covered in blood. I awarded
the sum of $475 for those
personal items. The applicant also claimed future psychological treatment but I
had no evidence to satisfy
me future treatment was required for the effects of
the offence and in any event, the applicant had shown a reluctance to engage
psychological treatment as evidenced from the information provided. I therefore
awarded the applicant the total of $12,975 for
his injury and losses arising
from the offence.
applicant was also an offender in an incident on 31 December 2014 whereby
he was convicted of assault occasioning bodily harm
in the Magistrates Court at
Margaret River. He was found guilty following trial on 23 September 2015.
The victim in that matter
made a claim for compensation for injuries he suffered
in that incident. Compensation was awarded (in application CIC 2892/2017)
that applicant on 29 August 2019 by me in the sum of $10,531.05. Pursuant
of the Act and in particular
of the Act, the Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) applied for a compensation reimbursement order against
the applicant in relation to
that offence. On 21 January 2020 a
Compensation Reimbursement Order was made pursuant to section 52 of the Act
ordering the applicant
pay the Department $10,531.05 by lump sum payment
forthwith. No payments had been made by the time the applicant's claim was
and pursuant to section 43 of the Act, that amount was offset against
the compensation award made in this application.
Therefore, the sum of $10,531.05 was deducted from the award
assessment of $12,975 and I awarded the sum of $2,443.95 be paid to the
applicant and $10,531.05 to the State.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
C F Holyoak-Roberts, CHIEF ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (125 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter