URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/797.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
City of Stirling -v- Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees [2025] WAIRC 797; (19 September 2025)
AGAINST A DECISION OF THE COMMISSION IN MATTER NUMBER CR 29/2023 GIVEN ON 12
FEBRUARY 2025
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
CHIEF COMMISSIONER S J KENNER
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
WEDNESDAY, 2 APRIL 2025
DELIVERED :
19 SePTEMBER 2025
FBA 1 OF 2025
City of Stirling
Western Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees
ON APPEAL FROM:
Coram : COMMISSIONER T B WALKINGTON
[2024] WAIRC 00803
File No : CR 29 OF 2023
Law (WA) – Appeal against decision of the Commission – Dispute
referral for arbitration under s 44(9) –
City of Stirling Inside Workforce
Agreement 2019 – New State instrument under s 80BB – Principles
of interpretation of
industrial agreements considered – Meaning of
suitable alternative employment for the purposes of cl 10.4 – Matters
be taken into account – Jurisdiction of the Commission – Exercise of
judicial or arbitral power – Appeal upheld
Commission’s decision suspended – Matter remitted back to Commission
for further hearing and determination
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Fair Work Act 2009
Appeal upheld in
Representation:
Ms H Millar of counsel
Solicitors:
Shoreline Chambers
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Ammon v Colonial Leisure Group Pty Ltd
[2019] WASCA 158
(2019) 55 WAR
Australian Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers’ Union,
Western Australian Branch v Eurest (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2003] WAIRC 09979
(2003) 83 WAIG 4157
Broadlex Services Pty Ltd v United Workers’ Union
[2020] FCA 867
(2020) 296 IR 425
Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia v Hot Tuna Pty Ltd
(1988) 27 IR
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Limited v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
Cranswick v Burswood Resort (Management) Limited
[2003] WAIRC 10340
84 WAIG 887
Crewe and Sons Pty Ltd v Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union of
Western Australia
(1989) 69 WAIG 2623
Director General, Department of Justice v The Civil Service Association of WA
[2025] WAIRC 00146
(2025) 105 WAIG 428
House v The King (1936) 55 CLR 599
Minister for Corrective Services v Western
Australian Prison Officers’ Union of Workers
[2024] WAIRC 00758
104 WAIG 1843
The Australian Chamber of Manufacturers and Derole Nominees Pty Ltd (Clothing
Trades Award 1982(1))
[1990] AIRC 980
(1990) 140 IR 123
The Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union of Employees, West
Australian Branch v Public Transport Authority of Western Australia
[2014] WAIRC
(2024) 94 WAIG 800
United Voice WA v The Director General, Department of Education
[2014] WAIRC
(2015) 95 WAIG 13
United Voice WA v The Minister for Health
[2012] WAIRC 01090
(2012) 93 WAIG
Reasons for Decision
THE FULL BENCH:
parties to this appeal were at the material times, bound by an industrial
agreement, the
City of Stirling Inside Workforce Agreement 2019
application as a new State instrument under
Relations Act 1979
(WA). A dispute arose between the parties following the
appellant’s decision in early 2023 to restructure its Community Safety
Business Unit. A consequence of that decision was that the Parking
Services team, comprising the position of Parking and Information
Officer, would
cease and that position would be abolished. Ms Cerinich, a member of the
respondent, was a Parking Information Officer
and as a consequence of the
appellant’s decision, which also affected three other employees, triggered
the terms of cl 10 –
Employment Security and Redundancy of the
. Specifically, cl’s 10.4, 10.5, 10.6 and 10.7 dealt
with suitable alternative employment, re-deployment, transfer to lower
duties and redundancy payment respectively. These provisions of the
provided as follows:
Suitable Alternative
10.4.1 When a position is no longer required due to operational reasons, the
City shall make every effort to establish whether there
is suitable alternative
employment available for the substantive incumbent and offer such employment to
the individual(s) concerned.
10.4.2 Suitable alternative employment refers to a position of similar
classification, salary and status to the employee’s former
employee’s skills, qualifications, abilities and experience may also be
considered with regard to the requirements
of the position and the practicality
and cost of any retraining requirements.
10.4.3 If suitable alternative employment is not available, the employee may
be considered for redeployment or apply for a transfer
to lower paid duties,
otherwise redundancy terms may apply in accordance with clause 10.7.
Redeployment
10.5.1 Where no suitable alternative employment has been identified, the City
may consider the affected employee(s) for redeployment.
10.5.2 The employee(s) may not be required to meet all the criteria for the
position and shall be assessed on their ability to acquire
all the competencies
of the position within a reasonable period of time.
Salary Maintenance
In the event that an employee agrees to be redeployed to a position within
the City that is of a lower level of salary than the salary
paid to the
employee, then the employee shall have their salary maintained for a period of
two (2) years after which the employee’s
salary shall be adjusted to that
of the new position.
The City, where appropriate, shall provide a redeployed employee with
competency based training to enable the employee to acquire
the necessary skills
and competencies to carry out the functions of their position.
Transfer to Lower Paid Duties
Where a role is no longer required and no suitable alternative employment or
redeployment opportunities have been identified, the
City may consider an
application from an employee affected by this change for a transfer to lower
paid duties.
Where the City accepts this application, the employee shall be offered the
salary applicable to those lower paid duties and may no
longer be eligible for
redundancy payment, in accordance with clause 10.7.5. However, the City will
pay the difference between the
ordinary time rate applicable to the new position
and the employee’s former ordinary rate of pay for a period equivalent to
the same period of notice the employee would have been entitled to if the
employment had been terminated.
Redundancy Payment
10.7.1 An employee whose employment is terminated by reason of redundancy is
entitled to the following amount of redundancy pay in
respect of a period of
continuous service:
Period of Continuous Service
Redundancy Payment
Less than 1 year
3 weeks’ pay
1 year but less than two years
4 week’s pay
2 years or more
3 week’s pay per year on a pro rata basis for every year of service
up to a maximum of 52 weeks
10.7.2 An employee who is 50 years of age or more at the time of redundancy
shall be entitled to an additional eight (8) weeks’
pay provided that the
total amount payable under 10.7.1 and 10.7.2 is capped at 52 weeks’
10.7.3 The above package shall be additional to all other entitlements owing
to the employee.
10.7.4 For the purposes of this clause, continuity of service shall be the
same as defined in Regulation 5 of the Local Government
(Long Service Leave)
Regulations regarding service to the City, as amended from time to time.
10.7.5 Application may be made to the FWC for variation of the applicable
redundancy package where the City has obtained other acceptable
employment for
the employees or cannot pay the relevant amount stipulated in clause 10.7.1.
issue in the present case was whether Ms Cerinich was offered suitable
alternative employment for the purposes of cl 10.4 and
whether, ultimately, she
should be provided with a redundancy payment. Ms Cerinich was initially
offered an alternative position
of Ranger, and later several other alternative
positions, including the position of Community Patrol Officer.
application was made by the respondent under s 44 of the
compulsory conference. Whilst some issues referred in the application are not
relevant for present purposes, the material
issue was the ‘Redundancy
Dispute’, dealing with the offers of various positions made by the
appellant to Ms Cerinich
as suitable alternative employment. The
respondent contended that none of the offered positions were suitable
alternative employment
and accordingly, that Ms Cerinich should be paid a
redundancy payment under cl 10.7 of the
a result of the compulsory conference proceedings, the dispute between the
parties could not be resolved. The dispute was referred
for hearing and
determination under s 44(9) of the
. A number of questions were
posed for determination by the Commission. Relevantly for present purposes,
that part of the s 44(9)
referral dealing with the redundancy payment issue
was in the following
Entitlement to redundancy payment
the role of Community Patrol Officer, suitable alternative employment under
cl 10.4 of the
City of Stirling Inside Workforce Agreement
the answer to question 1 is ‘yes’, is Ms Cerinich entitled
an offer of suitable alternative employment made under cl 10.4 of the
Stirling Inside Workforce Agreement 2019
paid a redundancy payment under cl 10.7 of the
City of Stirling Inside
Workforce Agreement 2019
the answers to question 2 is ‘yes’, does
section 80BE(2)
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) apply so as to give the Western
Australian Industrial Relations Commission the power under cl 10.7.5 of the
City of Stirling Inside Workforce Agreement 2019
to vary the applicable
redundancy package the Respondent is required to pay to Ms Cerinich under
clause 10.7.1?
the answer to question 1 is ‘no’, is Ms Cerinich entitled to a
redundancy payment under clause 10.7 of the
City of Stirling Inside Workforce
Agreement 2019
short, the respondent at first instance contended that the Community
Patrol Officer was not suitable alternative employment for
the purposes of
cl 10.4 of the
, and accordingly, Ms Cerinich was
entitled to a redundancy payment under cl 10.7 of the
behalf of the appellant, it was contended that having regard to the proper
interpretation of cl 10.4, that the position of Community
Patrol Officer
was suitable alternative employment for the purposes of the
Accordingly, the entitlement to a redundancy payment under cl 10.7 of the
did not arise.
The Commission’s decision
to Question 1, that being whether the position of Community Patrol Officer was
suitable alternative employment under cl 10.4 of
learned Commissioner answered that question in the negative. In reaching that
conclusion, she found and concluded that:
common ground between the parties, the test to apply to whether employment is
‘suitable alternative employment’
is an objective and not a
subjective test:
United Voice WA v The Minister for Health
WAIRC 01090
(2012) 93 WAIG 261
at 264 per Kenner C (as he then was);
Australian Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers’ Union,
Western Australian Branch v Eurest (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2003] WAIRC
(2003) 83 WAIG 4157
at 4160 per Harrison C;
Cranswick v Burswood
Resort (Management) Limited
[2003] WAIRC 10340
(2003) 84 WAIG 887
Harrison C at 896;
(b) Adopting
the objective test, an employee is not able to reject an alternative employment
offer on an unreasonable basis:
The Australian Chamber of Manufacturers
and Derole Nominees Pty Ltd (Clothing Trades Award 1982(1))
[1990] AIRC
(1990) 140 IR 123
matter before her, there was no evidence of a classification assessment of the
relevant positions that were offered to
Ms Cerenich. The question of
classification is based on an assessment of work value including duties,
qualifications required, skills,
abilities and experience of an employee to
undertake a position. A conclusion on classification involved an assessment of
work value,
and differences in work value between various positions;
undertaking such an assessment, the positions of Parking and Information Officer
and Community Patrol Officer were not similar
and accordingly the
classifications of the two positions were not similar;
(e) That the
salary of the Parking and Information Officer position was less than the
Community Patrol Officer position, reflecting
the differences in their
classifications, and work value and accordingly, the positions were not similar
in these respects;
(f) That the
status of the positions, given the reporting lines in the appellant’s
organisational structure were similar and
this supported a conclusion that the
positions were similar in this respect; and
(g) In relation
to training, the Community Patrol Officer required possession of a Certificate 2
in Security Operations which Ms Cerinich
did not possess and she would be
required to undertake training to obtain it, which would not suit her personal
circumstances.
Accordingly,
for the foregoing reasons the learned Commissioner concluded that the position
of Community Patrol Officer was not suitable
alternative employment for the
purposes of cl 10.4 of the
and the answer to Question 1
was ‘no’. The learned Commissioner did not find it necessary to
deal with a related issue
raised by the respondent at first instance, that being
whether the reference to ‘refers’ in cl 10.4.2 enables factors
other than those set out in the sub-clause to be taken into account.
her conclusions in relation to Question 1, it was unnecessary for the learned
Commissioner to answer Questions 2 and 3 in the
s 44(9) referral.
to Question 4, that being if the answer to Question 1 was no, whether
Ms Cerinich was entitled to a redundancy payment under cl
10.4 of the
, the learned Commissioner found and concluded as
analogously with the decision in
Broadlex Services Pty Ltd v United
Workers’ Union
[2020] FCA 867
(2020) 296 IR 425
in relation to
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) the appellant’s decision
to no longer require a position to be performed constituted a repudiation of a
contract of employment
and led to termination of employment. This was because
an affected employee’s refusal to continue in employment constituted
acceptance of a repudiation by the employer on the grounds of redundancy and the
employment would be terminated;
(b) That on 3
June 2023, Ms Cerinich accepted the appellant’s repudiation of her
contract of employment because of the abolition
of her position; and
(c) That in
Crewe and Sons Pty Ltd v Amalgamated Metal Workers and
Shipwrights Union of Western Australia
(1989) 69 WAIG 2623
United Voice WA v The Director General, Department of Education
[2014] WAIRC 01361
(2015) 95 WAIG 13
, that the matter arising in
Question 4, involved the declaration of an existing entitlement based on past
events, thus constituting
the exercise of judicial and not arbitral power, which
was beyond the Commission’s jurisdiction.
learned Commissioner made orders in accordance with her answers to Questions 1
to 4 above.
appellant now appeals against the learned Commissioner’s decision as to
her answers to Question 1 and Question 4. The grounds
of appeal are as
Commissioner erred in law in making the Question 1 Decision as she applied a
subjective test notwithstanding she recognised she
was required to apply an
objective test.
Particulars
(a) The Commissioner finds at paragraph [41] of the Reasons for Decision that
the test to be applied in assessing whether an alternative
position is
‘suitable alternative employment’ under the 2019 Agreement is an
objective one.
(b) The Commissioner, at paragraph [41] of the Reasons for Decision cites the
Full Bench of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission decision of
Australian Chamber of Manufacturers and Derole Nominees Pty Ltd – Clothing
Trades Award 1982(1)
[1990] AIRC 980
[1990] 140 IR 123
Derole Nominees Decision
However, the Commissioner wrongly applied the Derole Nominees Decision by
stating the objective test set out in that decision is
‘an employee is not
able to reject an alternative employment opportunity on an unreasonable
basis’ (see paragraph [41]
of the Decision).
(c) The Commissioner, having held an objective test is to be applied,
erroneously applied a subjective test by taking into account
and placing weight
on factors such as that Ms Cerinich ‘would struggle’ to
complete relevant training ‘in the circumstances
of caring for two young
(paragraph [70]) and because she lacked the motivation to undertake required
training (paragraph [71]).
Commissioner erred in law by exceeding her jurisdiction in making the Question 1
Decision and, instead, ought to have limited
her determination to what was
agreed by the parties in the schedule to the
Memorandum.
Particulars
(a) Section 44(9) of the IR Act permits the Commission to hear and determine
a question, dispute or disagreement as agreed to by the
(b) Section 46 of the IR Act permits the Commission to interpret a clause in
an industrial agreement.
(c) The parties to the Application agreed the questions to be determined by
the Commission under section 44(9) of the IR Act and these
were set out in the
schedule to the Memorandum.
(d) Question 1 did not ask the Commissioner to interpret the text of clause
10.4.2 of the 2019 Agreement.
(e) The Commissioner, at paragraphs [51] and [52] of the Reasons for
Decision, finds Question 1 of the Memorandum requires ‘the
Commission to
decide if the [CPO] role is suitable alternative employment under cl 10.4.2 of
the [2019] Agreement’ in accordance
with the ‘text of the clause and
the factors listed within the clause’.
(f) The text of clause 10.4.2 of the 2019 Agreement sets out the factors to
be applied in determining whether a role is suitable alternative
employment.
Those factors are whether the position being considered is a ‘similar
classification, salary and status’
to the redundant position.
(g) The Commissioner erroneously ignored the text of clause 10.4.2 by
considering factors not listed in clause 10.4.2 of the 2019
Agreement such as
work value, role scope, responsibilities, reporting lines, visibility, focus,
compliance activities and stakeholder
engagement requirements between the two
roles being considered (at paragraphs [57] – [66]).
(h) By considering factors outside of clause 10.4.2 of the 2019 Agreement in
deciding whether the CPO Role was suitable alternative
employment, the
Commissioner answered a different question to Question 1.
(i) The Commissioner interpreted the term ‘refer’ in clause
10.4.2 of the 2019 Agreement in paragraphs [73] - [78] of
the Reasons for
(j) The Commissioner erred in exercising her jurisdiction under section 44(9)
of the IR Act by determining a question which was not
the question she has been
asked to decide and by interpreting a clause in an industrial agreement.
Commissioner erred in law by making the Question 1 Decision which is an exercise
of a judicial power and, instead, ought not to
have interpreted clause 10.4.2 of
the 2019 Agreement in making her
Particulars
(a) The Commissioner’s powers under section 44 of the IR Act are
arbitral, not judicial.
(b) The Commissioner recognises ‘a claim for the interpretation of an
Agreement is an exercise of judicial power’ at paragraph
[99] of the
(c) The Commissioner, at paragraph [100] of the Reasons for Decision, cites
the Full Bench decision of Full Bench in
Crewe and Sons Pty Ltd v AMWSU
(1989) 69 WAIG 2623
Crewe and Sons
) and in so doing recognises that
‘in the course of a section 44 matter, the Commission is entitled to
interpret a document
before it’ but ‘the recourse of interpretation
removed from the arbitral process is not authorised by section 44’.
(d) The Commissioner interprets the terms ‘refer’ and
‘classification, salary and status’ in clause 10.4.2
of the 2019
Agreement in reaching the Question 1 Decision.
(e) The Commissioner erroneously ignores the limits of her jurisdiction and
the Crewe and Sons decision in respect of the exercise
of arbitral power by
making the Question 1 Decision in circumstances where it was not necessary or
open to her to interpret the terms
for the purpose of answering Question 1.
Commissioner erred in law by making the Question 4 Findings which are an
exercise of a judicial power and, instead, ought not
to have made the Question 4
Particulars
(a) The Commissioner’s powers under section 44 of the IR Act are
arbitral, not judicial.
(b) The Commissioner, in outlining the task required to answer Question 4
recognises the ‘giving of decisions in the nature
of adjudication upon
disputes as to the rights or obligations arising from the operation of laws upon
past events or conduct’
is a judicial determination at paragraph [102] of
the Decision, citing the Full Bench in
United Voice WA v The Director
General, Department of Education
(2015) 95 WAIG 13
United Voice
(c) In the same paragraph, the Commissioner refers to the finding in the
United Voice WA decision that a tribunal (such as the Commission)
arbitral powers may only form a view or opinion on a matter as a stop to
‘arriving at the ultimate conclusion’
but this view or opinion
‘does not bind the parties and cannot operate as a binding declaration of
(d) The Commissioner’s ultimate finding in relation to Question 4 is
that she is unable to answer Question 4 because it is ‘beyond
the power of
this Commission’.
(e) Nonetheless, between paragraphs [91] to [95] of the Reasons for Decision
the Commissioner purports to make a number of judicial
determinations regarding
legal entitlements arising out of past events. Namely, the Commissioner
purported to find:
(i) the City’s decision to no longer require a position to be performed
led to the termination of [Ms Cerinich’s] employment
because it was a
repudiation of the employment contract ([91]);
(ii) Ms Cerinich ‘accepted the repudiation of her employment
contract’ ([95]);
(iii) there had been a ‘redundancy repudiation’ ([92]);
(iv) Ms Cerinich was entitled to the redundancy payment under the 2019
Agreement on the basis the City has not applied to the Commission
to reduce the
redundancy payment ([94]);
(together the
Question 4 Findings
(f) The Commissioner erroneously ignored the limits of her jurisdiction by
making the Question 4 Findings.
Commissioner erred in law and fact by finding (as part of the Question 4
Findings) that a declaration by an employer that an employee’s
redundant amounts to a repudiation of that employee’s employment contract
by the employer, notwithstanding there is
no law or fact to support this
Particulars
(a) The Commissioner ‘adopts similar reasoning to that in the case of
Broadlex Services Pty Ltd v United Worker’s Union
[2020] FCA 869
Broadlex Decision
) in finding that ‘the City’s decision to
no longer require a position to be performed leads to termination of employment
because it is a repudiation of the employment contract’ at paragraph [91]
of the Reasons for Decision.
(b) The Commissioner erred by accepting a submission from the WASU, at
paragraph [82] of the Reasons for Decision, that Katzmann J
in the Broadlex
Decision held ‘an employer’s declaration of redundancy under section
119 of the [Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)(
)] is a repudiation of the
employment contract’.
(c) Section 119 of the FW Act creates an entitlement to redundancy pay on the
happening of two causally connected events. One is the
termination of the
employee’s employment at the employer’s initiative. The other is the
termination of the employee’s
employment because the employer no longer
requires the job done by the employee to be done by anyone.
(d) The Commissioner failed to distinguish the entitlement to redundancy pay
created by section 119 of the FW Act to the entitlement
to redundancy pay
created by clause 10.4 of the 2019 Agreement. The entitlement to redundancy pay
under clause 10.4 only arises if
the City has complied with all of its
obligations that precede termination on redundancy grounds and which are
designed to maintain
the employment of employees whose role has been made
(e) The Commissioner failed to identify the Broadlex Decision concerns the
question of whether the employee in that case was entitled
to redundancy pay
under section 119 of the FW Act given her employment continued on a part-time
basis after termination of her full-time
contract and so the first event
required by section 119 of the FW Act did not occur.
(f) The Commissioner failed to distinguish the facts in the Broadlex Decision
from the facts in the Application which included:
(i) Ms Cerinich’s full time employment contract dated 22
January 2014 remained on foot;
(ii) Ms Cerinich employment remained on foot given she was on approved leave
and was not due to return from leave until January 2024;
(iii) the City was making every effort to find a role for Ms Cerinich in
accordance with its obligations under clause 10.4.1 of the
2019 Agreement
to ensure the continuation of her employment.
(g) Contrary to the Commissioner’s findings at paragraph [82] of the
Reasons for Decision, the Broadlex Decision does not state
or imply that an
employer’s declaration of redundancy under section 119 of the FW Act alone
is a repudiation of an employee’s
employment contract.
appellant seeks orders that:
(a) The appeal
(b) That the
decision in relation to Question 1 be quashed and be replaced with the answer
(c) That the
decision in relation to Question 2 be quashed and be replaced with the answer
Question 4 findings (contained at [91]-[95] of the learned Commissioner’s
reasons for decision are beyond the power
of the Commission to
Approach to the determination of the appeal
appellant submitted that the learned Commissioner’s decision was a
discretionary decision and thus the well-established
approach in
(1936) 55 CLR 599 at 504-505 and
Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Limited v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
has application. On the other hand,
the respondent submitted that the answers to Question 1 and Question 4 involve
the correctness
standard of appellant review.
distinction between the deferential standard, applicable to an appeal from a
decision involving a discretionary decision, or the
correctness standard, was
discussed in
Ammon v Colonial Leisure Group Pty Ltd
[2019] WASCA
(2019) 55 WAR 366.
Minister for Corrective Services v Western
Australian Prison Officers’ Union of Workers
[2024] WAIRC 00758
(2024) 104 WAIG 1843
, the Full Bench referred to these issues and observed at
[16]-[19] as follows:
, the matter at first instance was a claim based on private
nuisance, with the need to establish that the use or enjoyment of the
plaintiff’s land or rights conferred under it, were interfered with
substantially and unreasonably: at [119]. On the appeal,
an issue arose as to
whether the approach in
House v The King
should apply. The Court
of Appeal referred to the decision of Gageler J (as his Honour then was) in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 92 ALJR 713
, in particular at [48]-[49] where his Honour
course of High Court authority since
Warren v Coombes
has accordingly
proceeded on a consistent understanding of how the line of demarcation is to be
drawn between those of a primary
judge’s conclusions which attract the
correctness standard of appellate review reaffirmed in that case and those which
the deferential standard applicable to appellate review of an exercise
of judicial discretion. Without excluding the potential for
considerations to affect the standard of appellate review in a particular
category of case, the understanding provides a principled
least the principal distinction.
line is not drawn by reference to whether the primary judge’s process of
reasoning to reach a conclusion can be characterised
as evaluative or is on a
topic on which judicial minds might reasonably differ. The line is drawn by
reference to whether the legal
criterion applied or purportedly applied by the
primary judge to reach the conclusion demands a unique outcome, in which case
correctness standard applies, or tolerates a range of outcomes, in which
House v The King
standard applies. The resultant line is not
bright; but it is tolerably clear and workable.
to the issue at hand, the Court of Appeal went on to conclude on this point as
follows at [128]-[129]:
submissions that the deferential standard is applicable in the present appeal
should be rejected. As Gageler J made
, and as the
High Court has recently emphasised, the deferential standard does not apply
whenever minds may reasonably differ on a
question or the question may be
characterised as evaluative. Although the question of whether there has been a
substantial and unreasonable
interference with the beneficial use of Mr
Ammon’s land is evaluative in nature, it involves the application of a
legal standard,
in respect of which there is only one uniquely correct outcome.
The character of the finding is more like a finding of negligence,
estoppel (the touchstone of which is the question of
unreasonableness), rather than the exercise of a judicial discretion.
Gageler J’s nomenclature, the correctness standard rather than the
deferential standard is to be applied to an appellate
review of whether, on
primary facts agreed or found by the trial court, there is a substantial and
unreasonable interference with
the beneficial use of premises so as to
constitute an actionable nuisance. That is consistent with the approach taken
by this court
appellant submitted that analogously with
, in this case, the
decision of his Honour as to whether there was a contravention of cl 71.1 of the
, involved, on the proper interpretation of the
, only one correct answer. His Honour’s discretion was not
exercised at large, such that there were a range of possible outcomes.
prefer the appellant’s approach to this issue. The decision of the
learned Industrial Magistrate, whilst involving an element
of discretion in his
assessment of the reasonableness of Mr Paterson’s claim for sick leave,
made in the context of a legal
standard, that being the correct construction of
the relevant provisions of the
, leads to only one correct
answer. Accordingly, the correctness standard applies to the determination of
the appeal. Insofar as
the decision of the learned Industrial Magistrate turned
on his interpretation of the
, it is for the Full Bench to
decide for itself, the correct interpretation.
our view, the correctness standard and not the deferential standard of appellate
review applies to the present appeal. This is
because in relation to Question
1, the essential issue for determination was whether, having regard to
cl 10.4 of the
, properly construed, the position of
Community Patrol Officer was suitable alternative employment. This involved the
application
of the criterion set out in the
which would lead to
a ‘unique outcome’, or put differently, only one legally permissible
answer, rather than a range
of possible answers, applying the discretionary
standard. The same approach would apply to the answer to Question 4, in the
that it was held by the Commission that it had jurisdiction to determine
the matter. Insofar as the decision of the learned Commissioner
turned on her
interpretation of the
, it is for the Full Bench to decide for
itself, the correct interpretation.
Grounds 1 and 2
Contentions
is convenient to deal with these two grounds together. The thrust of the
appellant’s submissions in relation to these grounds
fell into three broad
themes. First, the appellant contended that the learned Commissioner failed to
have regard to relevant considerations
and took into account irrelevant
considerations. As to the former, the appellant submitted that the learned
Commissioner correctly
identified at [51] and [52] of her reasons (see AB338)
the relevant factors specified in cl 10.4.2 of the
included factors relevant to the position, being the need for a similar
classification, salary and status. The learned Commissioner
also referred to
factors relevant to the person of skills, qualifications, abilities and
experience.
the appellant contended that the learned Commissioner then proceeded, from [55]
of her reasons and onwards, to consider a
range of factors extraneous to those
set out in cl 10.4.2. These included the work value of the two positions,
and a detailed consideration
of the position descriptions for each position. It
was submitted that nothing in the language of cl 10.4.2 supported this
Factors analysed incorrectly on the appellant’s argument
included matters such as the content and scope of the tasks of the
position; the
responsibilities and expectations on employees occupying the position; the
purpose of the position; qualifications
required and the skills and abilities
needed for each position.
appellant also submitted, although somewhat speculatively, that the reason for
this erroneous approach on its case, may have been
the learned
Commissioner’s observation at [56] of her reasons (see AB338), that there
was no evidence of a classification assessment
for each of the positions. As to
this, the appellant submitted that if this was so, this observation overlooked
the content of the
at Annexure 1.1, to the effect that the
classifications in the
had been subject to a process of
classification evaluation, adopting the Mercer Job Evaluation System (see
AB594). On this basis,
the appellant contended that regardless of the reason for
it, the learned Commissioner’s consideration of the additional work
and other factors was in error. This error led to an incorrect conclusion that
the classification levels of 4 and 5 respectively
for the Parking and
Information Officer position and the Community Patrol Officer
position, were not similar.
to the issue of salary similarity, the appellant submitted that the learned
Commissioner did not, as required by cl 10.4.2, refer
to the salaries for
the respective positions, which uncontroversially were $68,612.55 for the
Parking and Information Officer and
$71,495.88 for the Community
Patrol Officer. The appellant submitted that the only reference to salary
was the learned Commissioner’s
conclusion at [65] of her reasons (see
AB340), that the salary of the Parking and Information Officer position was
less than that
of the Community Patrol Officer position, which reflected
the difference in work value of the two positions, and on that basis, the
positions were not similar.
Considering
this, the appellant contended that the learned Commissioner did not undertake
the task required by cl 10.4.2 to consider
if the actual salaries
themselves, irrespective of other factors, were similar. It was submitted that
the conclusion of the learned
Commissioner that the ‘positions are not
similar’ did not discharge the obligation on the Commission to compare the
themselves.
third theme advanced by the appellant as to these grounds was that despite
acknowledging at [41] of her reasons (see AB336), that
the test to apply in
determining suitable alternative employment was an objective test, she then, in
determining the matter, applied
subjective factors in her assessment of the
suitable alternative employment issue. This involved Ms Cerinich’s
views as to her capacity to undertake training given her personal
circumstances, referred to at [70]-[71] of the learned Commissioner’s
reasons (see AB340). In this respect, the appellant contended that the learned
Commissioner erred.
respondent on the other hand, contended that the learned Commissioner did not
err in the manner contended by the appellant. As
to the terms of cl 10.4.2
, it was submitted by the respondent that the learned
Commissioner did consider the relevant factors that she was obliged to take
account. The respondent contended in short that the process of comparing
classifications for the purposes of determining whether
they are similar, must
be one of substance, rather than to just compare the classification levels
themselves. To do the latter on
the respondent’s submissions, would be a
barren exercise and not one of assistance to the Commission in determining
1 in the s 44(9) referral. The respondent contended that the
learned Commissioner, with the positions classified at levels 4 and
respectively, sought to determine if the differences in the classifications
meant that the positions were similar. According to
the respondent’s
argument, this necessarily required the Commission to consider the substance of
the classifications, in terms
of work value, duties and the requirements of the
respective positions.
respondent further contended that in the absence of evidence of a process of
classification of both positions, then it was appropriate
for the learned
Commissioner to embark on the examination of the positions that she did.
to the issue of salary, the respondent submitted that the learned Commissioner
found that the differences in salary reflected the
classification differences
for the two positions. This was said to be a ‘substantive
consideration’ of salary. However,
we must say, it is not entirely clear
as to why this is so.
as to the issue of whether the learned Commissioner did not consider the issue
of suitable alternative employment objectively,
the respondent contended that
her reasons at [71], dealing with the issue of the practicality of retraining of
Ms Cerinich, did consider
the matter objectively. It was common ground
that for Ms Cerinich to undertake the Community Patrol Officer
position, she would
need to obtain a Certificate II in Security Operations.
The respondent contended that the learned Commissioner considered the evidence
on this issue and whether it would be, viewed objectively, fair given
Ms Cerinich’s circumstances, for her to be required to
undertake this
training. The respondent contended that this approach was consistent with the
decision in
Derole Nominees
. In any event, even if this were not
so, and the learned Commissioner erred in this respect, the respondent submitted
that the error
would not be of sufficient moment to undermine the learned
Commissioner’s conclusions overall as to the suitable alternative
Consideration
construction of cl 10.4 of the
was important in the
determination of the issues arising on these grounds of appeal. We will turn to
meaning of the terms of an industrial instrument is a question of law. The
Commission may, in the exercise of its powers under
s 44 of the
in arbitration proceedings, interpret an industrial agreement, award or other
instrument for the purposes of determining the matter
in dispute. Such a course
does not involve the exercise of judicial power:
United Voice
. This is so, as long as the Commission does not engage in
bare interpretation, or purport to make binding declarations of right,
purport to enforce the instrument.
have set out the relevant provisions of the
above. The clause
set out rights and entitlements of the parties to the
circumstances of organisational change at the appellant, that may have led to
positions being no longer required. It is trite
that in matters of the
interpretation of an industrial instrument such as the
provisions should be construed as a whole and in context. In
Minister for
Corrective Services
in relation to the approach to the interpretation of
industrial instruments, the Full Bench said at [20] as follows:
the extent that the appellant contended that the learned Industrial Magistrate
erred in his interpretation of the Agreement, the
approach to be adopted is well
settled. Recently in
Western Australian Prison Officers’ Union of
Workers v Minister for Corrective Services
[2024] WAIRC 00139
104 WAIG 322
, the Full Bench observed at [34]:
was no contest as to the relevant principles to apply in the interpretation of
industrial instruments. In
Fedec v The Minister for Corrective
[2017] WAIRC 00828
(2017) 97 WAIG 1595
Smith AP (as her Honour
then was) and Scott CC observed at [21] to
Interpreting an industrial agreement -
general principles of interpretation
approach that is to be applied when interpreting an industrial agreement is well
established. This is:
(a) Industrial agreements are usually not
drafted with careful attention to form by persons who are experienced in
drafting documents
that have legal effect.
(b) The task of construction of an industrial agreement is to be approached
in a way that allows for a generous construction:
City of Wanneroo v
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362.
(c) Industrial agreements are made for industries in light of the customs and
working conditions of each industry and must not be
interpreted in a vacuum
divorced from industrial realities:
George A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v
[1929] AR (NSW) 498
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
(378 - 379)
(French J).
general principles that apply to the construction of contracts and other
instruments also apply to the construction of an industrial
agreement. In Re
Harrison; Ex parte Hames
[2015] WASC 247
, Beech J said [50] -
The general principles relevant to the proper construction of
instruments are well-known. In summary:
(1) the primary duty of the court in construing an instrument is to endeavour
to discover the intention of the parties as embodied
in the words they have used
in the instrument;
(2) it is the objectively ascertained intention of the parties, as it is
expressed in the instrument, that matters; not the parties’
intentions. The meaning of the terms of an instrument is to be determined by
what a reasonable person would have understood
the terms to mean;
(3) the objectively ascertained purpose and objective of the transaction that
is the subject of a commercial instrument may be taken
into account in
construing that instrument. This may invite attention to the genesis of the
transaction, its background and context;
(4) the apparent purpose or object of the relevant transaction can be
inferred from the express and implied terms of the instrument,
and from any
admissible evidence of surrounding circumstances;
(5) an instrument should be construed so as to avoid it making commercial
nonsense or giving rise to commercial inconvenience. However,
it must be borne
in mind that business common sense may be a topic on which minds may differ;
(6) an instrument should be construed as a whole. A construction that makes
the various parts of an instrument harmonious is preferable.
If possible, each
part of an instrument should be construed so as to have some operation
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[35] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan & Kiefel JJ);
The State of Western Australia
[2014] WASC 99
Red Hill Iron Ltd v
API Management Pty Ltd
[2012] WASC 323
[106] - [112];
(Mandurah) Pty Ltd v Ryom Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 28
[55] (Martin CJ, Pullin
& Murphy JJA agreeing)).
These general principles apply in the construction of an industrial agreement
Director General, Department of Education v United Voice WA
[2013] WASCA
[18] - [20] (Pullin J, Le Miere J agreeing), [83] (Buss J)). The industrial
character and purpose of an industrial agreement is part
of the context in which
it is to be construed (
Amcor Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining &
Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
[2] (Gleeson CJ and McHugh
Director General v United Voice
[81]; see also
Amcor v CFMEU
66 (Kirby J), 129 - 130 (Callinan J)).
these principles, the following observations made by Pullin J in
General, Department of Education v United Voice WA
[2013] WASCA 287
[18] - [19] should be added:
The Agreement has to be
construed to determine what the intention of the parties was at the time the
Agreement was entered into. This
has to be determined by ascertaining what a
reasonable person would have understood the words of the Agreement to mean
taking into
account the text, the surrounding circumstances known to the parties
and the purpose and object of the transaction:
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
; (2004) 219 CLR 165 [40];
Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 218 CLR 451
Surrounding circumstances may only be taken into account if the ordinary
meaning of the words used by the parties is ambiguous or
susceptible of more
than one meaning:
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New
South Wales
[1982] HCA 24
(1982) 149 CLR 337
[2012] WASCA 60
is apparent from cl 10.1, and the terms of cl 10 of the
read as a whole, that the focus of the clause was primarily on
the preservation of employment as far as is practicable. On a fair
the clause, redundancy was the last option to consider, with the initial focus
on the finding of a suitable alternative
position, redeployment and a transfer,
before the option of redundancy arose. The key provision for present purposes
was cl 10.4
– Suitable Alternative Employment.
was not in dispute at first instance that as a result of the appellant’s
decision to restructure its Community Safety Business
Unit, the position of
Parking and Information Officer, then occupied by Ms Cerinich, was no
longer required, due to operational reasons.
Accordingly, cl 10.4.1 of the
was engaged. This obliged the appellant to establish whether
suitable alternative employment was available and if so, to offer it
Ms Cerinich. The
informed the reader as to what was
suitable alternative employment, by the terms of cl 10.4.2. This required
the appellant to be
satisfied of the factors relevant to the position, being a
similar classification, with a similar salary and of a similar status
employee’s position determined to no longer be required. In addition to
these matters, the appellant could but did
not have to, also take into account
factors specific to the individual person. These included the person’s
skills, their qualifications,
their abilities and their experience. These
characteristics of the employee were to be considered consistent with what the
alternative
position required. The practicality and costs of additional training
was a relevant consideration.
United Voice WA v The Minister for Health
[2012] WAIRC 01090
(2012) 93 WAIG 261
Kenner C (as he then was) observed that the approach to
determining whether an offer of employment is ‘suitable alternative
employment’ is to be assessed objectively (at [32] citing and applying
Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia v Hot Tuna Pty Ltd
(1988) 27 IR 226).
If this was not so, and the approach was subjective, in
terms of a position only being suitable from the perspective of the employee,
then, as was observed by the Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission in
Derole Nominees
‘this would give an employee
an unreasonable and uncontrollable opportunity to reject the new employment in
order to receive
redundancy pay: the exemption provision would be without
practical effect’.
we have noted above, there seemed to have been no dispute at first instance that
the meaning of ‘suitable alternative employment’
cl 10.4.2 of the
was to be considered objectively. Also,
as Kenner C (as he was then) observed in
Minister for Health
will be suitable alternative employment in each case, is a matter for the
content of the parties’ agreement. It is for
the parties to delineate
what the scope of the issues to be determined are when assessing whether a
position is or is not, suitable
alternative employment. Accordingly, each case
will turn on its own circumstances, having regard to the particular terms of the
instrument concerned.
this case, it is the content of cl 10.4.2 that was relevant. Notably, even
if suitable alternative employment was not available,
then cl 10.4.3 of the
made it clear that the further options of re-deployment or
transfer, were to be considered prior to the final option of redundancy.
was a qualification to the various attributes of a position as specified in cl
10.4.2. That was that they had to be ‘similar’.
As a matter of
ordinary meaning this means ‘
. Having a marked resemblance or
likeness; of a like nature or kind...’(Shorter Oxford English Dictionary).
Clause 10.4.2 required
that the positions had similar specified characteristics,
rather than requiring that there be ‘similar positions’. This
important matter of emphasis in the interpretation of cl 10.4.2. As to
‘classification’, this must be taken to
have meant the assigned
class of work to be performed by the employee under the
is the key issue. The meaning of ‘classification’ in this sense, is
well settled in industrial parlance. It means
‘the category into which an
employee fits for the purpose of determining that employees’ wages and
conditions under his
or her contract of employment, as well as influencing other
matters such as union eligibility’:
Australian Labour Law Reporter
Australia Ltd, 1977) Vol 2 at 31-770.
this case, it appeared to not be in dispute that the Parking and Information
Officer position was classified at Level 4 in accordance
with Annexure 1.1
– Minimum Rates of Pay for Employees of the
corresponding classification of the Community Patrol Officer position was Level
5, carrying a higher rate of pay. That the
levels of classification in Annexure
1.1 were intended to be the relevant ‘classification levels’ for the
purposes of
, was made clear by Annexure 1 – Minimum
Rates of Pay of the
. This provided at 1 that:
to clause 11, all employees will be paid the minimum wage for their
classification set out in Annexures 1.1 to 1.5.
was confirmed by cl 11.1 of the
which provided that
‘Employees will be paid in accordance with Annexure 1’.
Additionally, and relevantly for present
purposes, in Annexure 1.1 under the
classification tables, appeared the following:
classification level of each employee is determined using the Mercer Job
Evaluation system for evaluating and classifying positions.
Employees may
wish to refer to the descriptors contained in the
Local Government Industry
as a point of reference.
In the event of
a dispute about the appropriateness of an employee’s classification level
the dispute resolution process in
Clause 7 of this Agreement will be
In dealing with
any dispute the employer will, where requested, provide the relevant employee,
union and tribunal with the relevant
material provided by Mercer and utilised by
the Human Resources Business Unit to evaluate the affected position or
In dealing with
any dispute, regard will be had to the principle that positions should not be
classified at a level lower than that
which would apply under the
Government Industry Award 2010
supports the conclusion that for the purposes of the
, a process
of classification of positions covered by it was based on an established job
evaluation methodology. For the purposes
of Annexure 1.1 of the
, there appeared to be no dispute at first instance as to the
classification of the two relevant positions for comparison purposes,
and Level 5 respectively. In our view, absent any evidence to the contrary,
there was no basis upon which consideration
needed to be given to matters
extraneous to the content of the
, when considering what were
the ‘classifications’ of two or more positions, contained in the
. The parties to the
had turned their minds to
the classification of positions and this meaning was to be adopted for the
purposes of cl 10.4.2. If there
was any dispute about matters of
classification, the
in Annexure 1.1 as above, provided a
mechanism for it to be resolved.
with the above, the ‘salary’ was plainly to be construed as the
salary payable for the respective positions
as classified and as set out in the
. In Annexure 1.1, for each classification level, there were,
apart from Level 1, three increments from 1 to 3, with the lowest at
highest at 3. The fact that the salary comparison for the positions was also to
be based on what was specified in the
, was also consistent as a
matter of construction, with confining the question of classification to that
also specified in Annexure
to the meaning of ‘status’ for the purposes of cl 10.4.2, we
see no reason to give it other than its ordinary and natural
meaning. This
means the ‘
... position of a person as determined by his
membership of some class of persons legally enjoying certain rights or subject
limitations ...
Position or standing in society, a
profession or the like’ (Shorter Oxford English Dictionary). The meaning
of the other matters
specified in cl 10.4.2 relating to the person, were
self-evident as a matter of construction in our view. It was only once
was enlivened, and that both cl 10.5
and cl 10.6 had been complied with, and an employee’s employment was
terminated, would
the entitlement to redundancy have arisen under
also seemed to be some dispute at first instance as to the meaning of
‘refers’ in cl 10.4.2. Again, we see no reason
to give this
word other than its ordinary meaning. It means ‘
. To trace (back),
assign, attribute, impute (something)
a person or thing as the
ultimate cause, origin, author or source.
. To assign
thing, or class of things, as being properly included or comprehended in this;
to regard as naturally belonging, pertaining, or
having relation
attach or attribute
... (Shorter Oxford English Dictionary). For the
purposes of cl 10.4.2, a position was to be considered ‘suitable
alternative
employment’ if it had the attributes set out in the
sub-clause. Notably, the draftsperson of the sub-clause did not use the
‘includes’, suggesting that a range of other factors relevant to a
position, may be considered. Accordingly, we
consider there was no scope to go
beyond the matters specified in cl 10.4.2, when construed consistent with
reading the terms of
as a whole.
the approach to the interpretation of cl 10.4.2 that we consider should be
preferred, the learned Commissioner was, respectfully,
in error in engaging in
the examination that she did of a range of factors not specified in
cl 10.4.2 for comparative purposes.
As to the two attributes of
classification and salary, the terms of the
that we have
referred to above, contained the information necessary for the parties and for
the Commission to determine whether both
the classification (as Levels 4 and 5
respectively) and the salaries (at $68,612.55 and $71,495.88 respectively) were
to the issue of salary, the learned Commissioner did not undertake any
comparison of these salaries payable for the two positions,
cl 10.4.2. The learned Commissioner did not approach this task as was
required by cl 10.4.2. What it required was a consideration
of the actual
salaries payable for both positions, and a view formed as to whether they were
similar or not. As referred to above,
the learned Commissioner found the salary
for the Parking and Information Officer position was less than the salary for
the Community
Patrol Officer position. But no comparison was made of the actual
salaries for each position. A finding that a salary is ‘less’
another does not answer the question posed by cl 10.4.2 of the
. A lesser salary may be similar or it may not be. A salary
that is far less is unlikely to be similar. The learned Commissioner
to the conclusion that the classifications of the two positions were not
similar, without specifically addressing the
similarity or otherwise, of the
salaries for the two positions.
to whether the approach the learned Commissioner took to determining the issue
of suitable alternative employment for the purposes
of cl 10.4.2 involved
subjective considerations, we tend to the view that considering matters such as
Ms Cerinich’s motivation
for undertaking training for the position of
Community Patrol Officer, involved matters personal to Ms Cerinich. The
focus of cl
10.4.2 in this respect, was on the ‘practicality and cost
of any retraining requirements.’ Viewed objectively, this
would involve
the time and expense to undertake training. A relevant consideration would be
whether the training would be made available
during ordinary working hours and
was able to be accommodated by the employer, on this basis, without loss of
income for an employee.
If retraining would be required over an overly lengthy
period of time and at great cost to the employer, then the view may be reached
that objectively, such a requirement would not be reasonable.
a circumstance such as the present matter, where it appears that the required
training, as referred to by the learned Commissioner
in her reasons at [70]-[71]
(see AB340) involved Ms Cerinich’s assessment of practicality, having
regard to her personal circumstances,
then we think the conclusion is open that
subjective considerations played a part in the learned Commissioner’s
determination.
Where it appears that the required training was to be provided
by the employer at its cost and during working hours, (see [69] AB340),
difficult to see what other factors may impact on this consideration, which do
not involve subjective factors particular to the
employee, including whether the
employee wanted to undertake the training or not. A circumstance such as this
would ‘give
an employee an unreasonable and uncontrollable opportunity to
reject the new employment in order to receive redundancy pay’:
Derole Nominees
Accordingly,
we would uphold these grounds of appeal.
to this ground, the appellant contended that the learned Commissioner embarked
upon the bare interpretation of cl 10 of the
result, engaged in the exercise of judicial as opposed to arbitral power. The
distinction between arbitral and judicial
power was recently considered by the
Full Bench in
Director General, Department of
Justice v The Civil Service Association of WA (Inc.)
[2025] WAIRC 00146
(2025) 105 WAIG 428.
In this case, the Full Bench said at [75]-[77] as
is trite to observe that the
distinguishes between the exercise of
judicial power, by way of enforcement, and the exercise of arbitral power.
Section 46, enabling
the Commission to make bare declarations as to the meaning
of the terms of awards or industrial agreements, s 83 regarding the
enforcement
of entitlement provisions by the Court and the power of the Full
Bench under s 84A to enforce the
and certain kinds of orders of
the Commission, are examples of the former. Section 44, read with s 23 of
, enabling the Commission to conciliate and arbitrate disputes in
relation to industrial matters, is an example of the latter.
the dividing line between the exercise of judicial power by way of enforcement
and the exercise of arbitral power is sometimes
a fine one, it has been
repeatedly held by the Full Bench that the terms of s 44 of the
should not be read down. This was first considered in
Crewe and Sons
Pty Ltd v Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union of Western Australia
(1989) 69 WAIG 2623
at 2626. The determination of whether judicial or
arbitral power is sought to be invoked will often turn on what is the
of the dispute before the Commission:
distinction between judicial and arbitral power was also considered by the Full
United Voice WA
. In this matter, Smith AP (Beech CC and
Kenner C agreeing) observed at [95]-[100] as
[95] The difference between an exercise of
judicial power and arbitral power was explained by Isaacs and Rich JJ in
The Waterside Workers’ Federation of Australia v J W Alexander Ltd
[1918] HCA 56
(1918) 25 CLR 434
[T]he judicial power is concerned with the ascertainment, declaration and
enforcement of the rights and liabilities of the parties
as they exist, or are
deemed to exist, at the moment the proceedings are instituted; whereas the
function of the arbitral power in
relation to industrial disputes is to
ascertain and declare, but not enforce, what in the opinion of the arbitrator
ought to be the
respective rights and liabilities of the parties in relation to
each other.
Re Ranger Uranium Mines Pty Ltd; Ex parte Federated
Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of Australia
[1987] HCA 63
(1987) 163 CLR 656
the High Court put the distinction more simply:
The purpose of the Commission’s inquiry is to determine whether rights
and obligations should be created. The purpose of a court’s
inquiry and
determination is to decide whether a pre-existing legal obligation has been
breached, and if so, what penalty should
attach to the breach.
[97] Accordingly a judicial function arises when the resolution sought is
ascertainment of legal rights and obligations as opposed
to the creation of new
rights and obligations. In reclassification proceedings the Commission usually
is called upon to exercise
arbitral power; that is to create a bundle of new
rights and obligations. The Industrial Magistrate’s Court acting under
83(1) and s 83(4) of the Act is conferred with judicial power to
determine whether an award, industrial agreement or order has been
Crewe and Sons
the Full Bench quashed an order by the
Commission that an employer pay three of its employees annual leave loading
prescribed by the
Metal Trades (General) Award No 13 of 1965
. The order
was made under s 44 of the Act. In a unanimous decision of the Full Bench
they observed that:
(a) it was established in
Mt Newman Mining Co Pty Ltd v Transport
Workers Union of Australia, Industrial Union of Workers, Western Australian
(1984) 64 WAIG 1075
that the Commission does not have any
enforcement or recovery
of wages under an award;
(b) the power and duty to enforce orders and awards is conferred separately
in the Act by separate express provisions upon the Full
Bench (s 84A) and the
Industrial Magistrate (s 83) (2626).
[99] The Full Bench in
Crewe and Sons
referred to the decision
of the High Court in
Re Cram; Ex parte The Newcastle Wallsend Coal Co Pty
[1987] HCA 29
(1987) 163 CLR 140
in which the High Court held that
the making of a binding declaration or right is the exercise of judicial power.
The Full Bench
then summarised the principles enunciated by Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ in
as follows (2627):
(1) A claim for payment of wages due and payable by an employer to an
employee is a claim for the enforcement of an existing legal
(2) A claim for the enforcement of a provision in an award for the payment of
wages to an employee is also a claim for the enforcement
of an existing legal
(3) Claims for the enforcement of existing legal rights necessarily invoke
the exercise of judicial power.
(4) The Court held that there was no jurisdiction in the Board to determine
or enforce a legal right to payment of wages on the part
of employees in respect
of a past period during which they had been stood down or refused work or to
enforce the provisions of an
award regulating the right to payment of wages for
such a period.
(5) Thus, the authority was denied the power of judicial determination which
included, to use the words of Kitto J. in Aberdare Collieries
‘the giving of decisions in the nature of adjudications upon disputes
as to rights or obligations arising from the operation
of the law upon past
events or conduct’.
(6) The making of a binding declaration of right is an instance of the
exercise of judicial power.
It stands outside the arbitral function.
But there is no substance in the suggestion that an industrial tribunal
cannot interpret laws, awards and other legal instruments.
A tribunal could not
discharge its arbitral functions if it were unable to form an opinion on a
matter of interpretation. The formation
of views and opinions on matters of
interpretation in arbitral proceedings does not of itself amount to a
of judicial
power (see Cessnock Collieries Case
and Australian Coal and Shale Employees’ Federation Case
at page 174 and
Key Meats Pty
[1982] HCA 12
(1982) 148 CLR 582
at 596-597)
(our underlining).
[Put in the context of the
Industrial Relations Act
(W.A.) it would not
necessarily amount to an intrusion on the
(7) Indeed, a tribunal may find it necessary to form an opinion as to the
existing legal rights of the parties as a step in
ultimate conclusions on which the tribunal bases the making of an award intended
to regulate the future rights of the parties
[see Aberdare Collieries Case
]. Of course, the formation of such an opinion does not bind
the parties and cannot operate as a binding declaration of rights.
(8) Despite the reference by Kitto J. in Aberdare Collieries Case
to ‘the distinction between a power of arbitral decision in
respect of the future and a power of judicial determination of existing
and obligations’, the arbitral function includes the determination of a
dispute relating to past transactions, events
and conduct. Commercial
arbitration often involves the determination of such a dispute and so does
industrial arbitration.
[100] Thus, it is clear that the Commission when exercising an arbitral
function is not prohibited from interpreting industrial instruments.
necessarily follows that whilst a Commissioner may not make a binding
declaration of the rights and obligations of parties under
an industrial
instrument, it is open to the Commission to make a binding determination of
future rights and obligations.
answering Question 1 in the
referral, as to whether the
position offered to Ms Cerinich was suitable alternative employment for the
purposes of cl 10.4.2, the
learned Commissioner necessarily had to
interpret the terms of cl 10.4.2, as a step along the way in forming a view
as to how Question
1 should be answered, in light of the facts of the case. This
did not involve a bare declaration as to the meaning of cl 10.4.2,
consistent with the decision of the Full Bench in
ground of appeal is not made out.
Grounds 4 and 5
is convenient to deal with these two grounds together.
noted above, the learned Commissioner answered Question 4 to the effect that it
ved the exercise of judicial power and was
beyond the Commission’s jurisdiction (see [104] reasons AB347). The
question posed
referral was not one involving the
determination of future rights by arbitration, but involved the seeking of a
declaration of existing
rights and entitlements, based on then existing or prior
events, applying the terms of cl 10 of the
. Accordingly,
the learned Commissioner’s conclusion that she reached at [104] of her
reasons was ultimately correct. The question
posed did not involve matters of
industrial fairness or policy, or whether as an exercise of discretion, in
accordance with equity,
good conscience or the substantial merits of the case, a
remedy should be granted. It was not a question as to whether Ms Cerinich
was treated unfairly. The question posed did not involve the process of
arbitral interpretation, in order to achieve an outcome
that was industrially
fair or industrially just.
question to be asked in cases such as the present, as was the case in
Department of Justice
, is what was the essential nature of the
dispute raised by Question 4? Put another way, in terms of the summary by
the Full Bench
of the relevant legal principles set out above in
at [99] of that decision, what was the essential nature of the
claim before the Commission? The question posed involved a bare declaration
to whether or not Ms Cerinich was entitled, as a matter of legal right, to
a redundancy payment in accordance with cl 10.7, of
is beyond doubt that an entitlement to a redundancy payment under cl 10.7
involves an ‘entitlement provision’ as
defined in s 7 of the
. An application to enforce an entitlement
provision is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the court under s 83(3)
the basis that the claim in Question 4 was in essence, a claim for a bare
declaration as to an entitlement under the
, the Commission had
no jurisdiction to embark on a consideration of the question. Consideration of
whether a circumstance is a ‘Redundancy’
for the purposes of the
definitions in cl 10.2(b) of the
, involves the question,
as a matter of fact or a matter of mixed fact and law, whether an
employee’s employment is terminated
in the circumstances set out in
cl 10.2(b). A finding as to the termination of an employee’s
employment for these purposes,
is a necessary finding to be made in order to
trigger the entitlement to a redundancy payment under cl 10.7 of the
. No further step is needed.
the present circumstances, whilst the learned Commissioner purported to embark
upon a consideration of these matters in connection
with a bare claim for a
declaration as to an entitlement provision under the
no jurisdiction to do so. Any such findings and conclusions reached were beyond
the Commission’s jurisdiction to
make. However, given that the learned
Commissioner answered Question 4 in the order by determining that the answer to
it was beyond
the Commission’s jurisdiction, that conclusion was correct.
In terms of the order, as opposed to the learned Commissioner’s
for decision, ultimately, as set out below, there is nothing for the Full Bench
to correct. This ground is not made out.
Orders to issue
parties were in dispute as to orders that should be made by the Full Bench in
the event that the appeal is upheld. The appellant
contended that if the Full
Bench upholds the appeal in relation to the learned Commissioner’s
findings in relation to Question
1, and the answer should be
‘yes’, then the Full Bench should go on to consider for itself the
two issues raised in Question
2, which has been set out earlier in these
reasons. The appellant contended that whilst expressed separately as (a) and (b)
s 44(9) referral, Question 2 should ultimately be read as a single
one as ‘is an employee entitled to reject an offer of suitable
alternative
employment made under clause 10.4 and be paid a redundancy payment under
cl 10.7 of the
City of Stirling Inside Workforce Agreement 2019
The appellant submitted that the answer to this question should be
the other hand the respondent submitted that it would be more appropriate in the
event that the appeal against the Question 1 finding
is upheld, that the
decision be suspended and the questions remitted to another Commissioner to
answer, in light of the conclusions
of the Full Bench. It was also contended by
the respondent that given the Commission at first instance did not consider it
to answer Question 2, and therefore no appeal from the answer to
such a question is before the Full Bench, then the appellant’s
ought be refused. As to Question 4, the respondent submitted that the
orders sought by the appellant should not be made
because ultimately, the
learned Commissioner concluded that Question 4 was beyond the
Commission’s power to answer.
is not open for the Full Bench under s 49(5) of the
, to both uphold
an appeal and quash a part of a decision, and otherwise vary another part of it
as was the appellant’s contentions
The Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union of Employees, West
Australian Branch v Public Transport Authority of Western Australia
[2014] WAIRC 00534
(2024) 94 WAIG 800.
Question 1 issue, the Full Bench has
concluded that the learned Commissioner erred in her approach to cl 10.4.2
in relation to ‘suitable alternative
employment’. Given the extent of the evidence and issues arising at first
this is not a case where it would be appropriate for the Full Bench to
exercise its powers under s 49(5)(b) to uphold the appeal
and to decide for
itself whether the alternative employment offered to Ms Cerinich was
suitable alternative employment, by varying
the decision, having regard to
s 49(6)(a) of the
. It would be appropriate to
suspend the operation of the Commission’s
decision and remit the case to the Commission otherwise constituted for further
and determination on this issue, in accordance with these reasons for
to Question 2, given that the learned Commissioner did not find it necessary to
consider that question, it would not be appropriate
for the Full Bench to answer
it. The answer to Question 2 will ultimately depend on the answer to
Question 1 on remittal. There
was also, necessarily, no challenge to
Question 2 on the appeal as it was not answered. Similarly, as to Question 4,
that question
was not ultimately answered and formed no part of the order. It
is the order of the Commission that is the ‘decision’
purposes of an appeal under s 49(2) of the
, when read with the
meaning of ‘decision’ in s 7 of the
. The reasons for
decision are not the Commission’s decision for these purposes.
accordingly.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (245 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter