URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/159.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MRN -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 159 (30 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 159
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 15 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND 1106 of 2022
law - Application for bail pending appeal against conviction - Whether
exceptional reasons for granting bail exist - Whether
ground of appeal strongly
Legislation:
(WA), sch 1
cl 1, cl 3,
and Community Services Act 2004
s 101(1)(b)
Procedure Act 2004
Application
Representation:
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
is an application for bail pending appeal, dated 24 September 2025,
pursuant to cl 4A of
of sch 1 to the
Bail Act 1982
Introduction
appellant and her husband were each charged in the District Court on one
indictment with two offences, contrary to
s 101(1)(b)
Children and Community Services Act
(WA), of failing to protect a child (in this case, their daughter,
whom I will call 'B' in these reasons) from harm during a period
between on or
Relevantly to the appellant, she was charged with counts 3 and 5.
Count 3 related to failing to provide B with adequate nutrition
and medical
attention. Count 5 related to failing to provide B with adequate
emotional, social, and functional development.
appellant and her husband stood trial before Black DCJ and a jury between
21 October 2024 and 20 November 2024 on the charges.
This was the
third time the case had been listed for
It had been listed for seven days. On 20 November 2024, the appellant
and her husband were convicted as charged. They were each
subsequently
sentenced to terms of immediate imprisonment.
appellant and her husband have both appealed against their convictions. The
present proceedings involve only the appellant.
appellant relies on three grounds of appeal, as set out in her appellant's case
filed 18 September 2025. As will be seen, this
application concerns only
respondent's answer is due to be filed on 6 November 2025.
appeal has not yet been listed for hearing. As things currently stand, the
appeal is not likely to be heard until March or
her summing up to the jury, the learned trial judge gave a 'nutshell' summary of
the parties'
What follows is derived from this summary.
was common ground that on 7 April 2021, B presented to Perth Children's
) in a severely
malnourished state. She was, at that time, just short of her
17th birthday. For her age, she was grossly underweight,
and her growth
had been stunted. Her pubertal development was significantly delayed. She was
at risk of severe illness, infection,
bone fractures, cardiac arrest, refeeding
syndrome, and death. Her malnourishment was caused by inadequate and
insufficient food
and nutrition.
broad issue for the jury to determine in respect of count 3 (and
count 2, for the appellant's husband) was not whether B was
malnourished
but, rather, how she came to be in that state.
State's case was that the reason for her state was that the appellant and her
husband, in the years leading up to B's admission
to hospital, had failed to
ensure that she received adequate nutrition. The State alleged that the
appellant and her husband, together
and individually, failed not only to provide
her with adequate nutrition, but also to provide her with proper, sufficient and
medical care and treatment in relation to her malnourishment.
State did not allege that the appellant and her husband had intentionally
deprived their daughter of nutrition and proper medical
care and attention.
Rather, the State's case was that they were reckless about those things.
the appellant and her husband conducted separate defences for counts 2
and 3, there were some common themes. They both
alleged that B was not
necessarily malnourished for the entire period pleaded in the indictment. They
said, in effect, that they
saw no reason to be concerned, having regard to what
they knew about their daughter's size when she was younger; her genetics; her
behaviour, in terms of what she ate and did not eat; and her capacity to perform
in high‑energy activities, such as ballet.
Essentially, they did not
think that anything was wrong. If anybody told them something was wrong with B,
they did not think that
the concerns made a lot of sense, or accorded with what
they believed to be true. In essence, they said that they did not realise,
'until it was too late', that their daughter was malnourished. By this point, B
was in hospital and under treatment.
respect of count 5 (and count 4, for the appellant's husband), the
State's case was that when B presented to PCH on 7 April 2021,
with severe social, emotional, and functional developmental delays. The State's
case was that she looked, dressed, and
behaved like a child far younger than her
almost 17 years. She was found to have low adaptive function, particularly
around self‑care
skills. Essentially, the State's case was that B
demonstrated a lack of understanding and appreciation of how to live in the
as compared to other children of her age.
respect of both the allegations of malnourishment and lack of care, and of B's
lack of understanding of, and appreciation for,
the outside world, the State's
case was that those things were obvious to the appellant and her husband.
defence case put by the appellant and her husband in respect of counts 4
and 5 was that B was not emotionally, socially, and
functionally
underdeveloped for her age. They alleged that the State failed to provide or
adduce sufficient evidence to show that
B was, in fact, underdeveloped in the
ways alleged by the State. Further, even if B was underdeveloped, neither the
appellant nor
her husband were aware of this. They denied that they were
consciously trying to keep B as 'a little child'.
Honour emphasised, in her nutshell summary of the respective cases at trial,
that the State's case was that neither the appellant
nor her husband set out to
cause B harm. The State's case was not that they intentionally caused her any
kind of harm or intentionally
ignored the harm, or intentionally and wilfully
acted in the way that they did. The State's case was that they were reckless as
to the risk of harm that was obvious and apparent to
The present application
appellant submits that the exceptional reason why she should be granted bail in
this case is the strength of ground 1 of the
appeal. Ground 1 is
expressed as
trial judge erred by refusing the appellant's application for an adjournment and
ruling the trial proceed in her absence pursuant
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
essence, by this ground, the appellant submits that the learned trial judge
erred in exercising the discretion in
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
proceed in the appellant's absence on 31 October and 1 November 2024.
The appellant claims that her trial fundamentally
miscarried when the judge
refused the appellant's application to temporarily adjourn the trial due to the
appellant's illness, instead
ruling that the trial could proceed in her physical
absence, but while she was in a remote room and able to watch the proceedings
via video‑link.
appellant submits that ground 1 is more than reasonably arguable. The
appellant submits that the ground is so strongly arguable
that she would suffer
an injustice by being kept in custody prior to the hearing of her appeal.
respondent opposes the application. The respondent submits that ground 1
does not have sufficient merit to constitute an exceptional
reason why the
appellant should be released on bail pending her
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act
which deals with an accused's presence at trial in a superior court, is,
relevantly, as follows:
(1) In this section, unless the contrary intention appears
proceedings
includes proceedings under
, at trial, and under the
Bail Act 1982
Evidence Act 1906
Sentencing Act 1995
Young Offenders Act 1994
(2) This section applies whether an accused is being tried alone or with
(3) Proceedings that relate to an accused must take place in his or her presence
section 140
Sentencing Act 1995
(4) The court may order proceedings that relate to an accused to proceed in the
accused's absence if it is satisfied -
(a) that the accused's interests will not be prejudiced by his or her absence;
(b) that to do so will not be contrary to the interests of
(5) This section does not prevent a court from allowing an accused to be present
before the court by means of a video link or audio
link or from taking evidence
from an accused by either such means.
The factual background surrounding ground 1
the commencement of the second week of the trial, it was clear that the trial
would proceed beyond its scheduled conclusion.
The State case had not concluded
and it was apparent that it would not conclude for some time. On the morning of
Tuesday, 29 October
2024, defence counsel for the appellant advised the
learned trial judge that the appellant was 'feeling rather unwell and she may
need to take a short‑notice comfort
The trial proceeded but, at about 12.00 pm, defence counsel made an
application to adjourn the proceedings for the day due to the
appellant's
illness. Her Honour granted the adjournment, acknowledging 'there is
nothing we can do about it. The [appellant] is
Her Honour adjourned the trial to 9.30 am on Wednesday,
30 October 2024.
30 October 2024, the appellant failed to
Defence counsel for the appellant informed the learned trial judge that the
appellant was seeing her doctor that afternoon, and that
as soon as he was
provided with a medical certificate, he would forward it to the court.
Her Honour said that, unless the court
received a medical certificate by
5.30 pm, she would issue an arrest warrant for the appellant. The trial
was then adjourned to
9.30 am on Thursday, 31 October 2024.
in the late afternoon or early evening of 30 October 2024, before
5.30 pm, the appellant's doctor provided two medical certificates,
were sent to the learned trial judge.
the commencement of proceedings on Thursday, 31 October 2024, the
appellant's trial counsel read into the transcript the contents
of one or other,
or both, of the medical certificates. According to the appellant's
(a) the appellant presented to the doctor in an acutely unwell state, suffering
from gastrointestinal illness, with vomiting, diarrhoea
and high fever;
(b) the doctor recommended symptomatic relief and rest, and certified that the
appellant would be unfit to attend court proceedings
from 30 October to
1 November 2024, inclusive;
(c) the appellant would need to rest and rehydrate over the next 48 hours
to expedite her recovery, and she would not recover 'for
a few days';
(d) the appellant was likely to remain symptomatic, with fever, possible
confusion, concentration and focus issues, weakness and
fatigue, and recurrent
vomiting; and
(e) the doctor did not believe that the appellant would be able to understand
proceedings to the best of her
doctor diagnosed food poisoning with a differential diagnosis of infective
gastroenteritis, which could be contagious.
counsel expressed 'grave concerns' as to the appellant's ability to adequately
follow proceedings. He also raised the possibility
that she might have a
contagious illness. He submitted that the appellant was unwell and would not be
able to sit through proceedings
that day or 'possibly tomorrow'. He applied to
adjourn the trial until at least the following day, leaving open the possibility
of a further adjournment for that day also.
hearing from defence counsel, the learned trial judge confirmed with the
prosecutor that she intended to adduce the evidence‑in‑chief
witness, Denise McNab. Ms McNab is a social worker who works at the
Child Protection Unit at PCH. Through Ms McNab, the State
wished to tender
records kept by PCH in relation to B. Ms McNab had some personal
involvement with B, and her evidence‑in‑chief
comprised not only the
records of PCH, but also some of her own observations of B and the appellant.
The State had disclosed to
the defence, before trial, all of the hospital
documents. The State had also provided the defence with a witness statement by
learned trial judge refused the application of the appellant's counsel to
adjourn the proceedings. The learned trial judge gave
oral reasons for her
her oral reasons for decision, the learned trial judge referred to 'an
overwhelming public interest that this trial is to be able
to go through to
completion'. Her Honour expressed concern that the trial had overrun, and
that she had been told that the trial
would 'go way over time, maybe as long as
a couple of weeks over time'.
learned trial judge acknowledged the fundamental importance that an accused
receives a fair trial, and that they be able to follow
proceedings.
Honour said that it was necessary for her to evaluate and consider 'the
particular stage at which the trial [was] at'.
Honour noted that the State intended to adduce evidence from a witness
(Ms McNab) whose evidence had been the subject of disclosure
and was 'well
known to the [appellant]', and that she assumed that the appellant had already
given her lawyers instructions concerning
it. Her Honour said that, in
these circumstances, the appellant would need to provide 'minimal input'. The
situation was different
to that which would have confronted the appellant had
she been required to give instructions concerning other witnesses to be called
by the State, notably Tania Shillington or Michelle Doepel, who were
B's ballet teachers and who had observed her health and demeanour
over time. In
that case, her Honour said the appellant would have been 'in no fit state
to be able to instruct her lawyer'. However,
in the circumstances, it was not
necessary to adjourn the trial as requested by the appellant's trial
her Honour ruled that the trial could proceed with the
examination‑in‑chief of Ms McNab (but not the
cross‑examination),
with the appellant not physically present in the
courtroom, but instead present in a remote room. As to this arrangement,
The [appellant] is entitled to be present at the trial but it does not mean she
has to be seen at all times by the jury. I have
made arrangements with the
court staff to have a room available for the [appellant]. Custody are able to
accommodate this. This
room will be a room where the [appellant] is able to
watch all proceedings at all times. She will have a video up, and she will
able to hear and watch the proceedings. No camera will be on her. There will
be no sound for her.
And if the [appellant] needs to leave while I'm making this ruling, she can do
so, if you'd rather vomit just outside the door.
That way the [appellant], to the extent she is ill, will be able to manage the
matter. If there is any evidence given by the witness
today that is unexpected
by [defence counsel] and for which he does not already have instructions, then
of course, [defence counsel]
can raise that. [Defence counsel] will be free to
have breaks as often as he needs to take instructions, but to ensure as much
as possible to the defence, I intend to allow the additional
Firstly, the [appellant] will not be required to remain in custody today. In
other words, when there is a luncheon break, as long
as she is in the company of
one or both of her counsel, she will be free to leave the room and go to any
other place that she needs
to be. She may choose to stay in that room.
Secondly, I will permit both lawyers to have their phones and computers
available to contact her at all times. Counsel can arrange
to have a computer
with her if they wish to, or alternatively, she will be allowed to have her
mobile phone on and she can instruct
her lawyers throughout the course of the
day as needed.
Furthermore, if she simply wants to tell her lawyers anything in person, she
will simply need to text or ask the custody officer
to get a message through to
the court and I will immediately adjourn proceedings so that one or both of her
lawyers may go and meet
with her at any time. I will provide any other measures
that are needed throughout the course of today to ensure fairness.
I wish to make it abundantly clear the reason for this ruling. I have [an]
obligation to balance all interests, as I have said.
I do not wish to in any
way let the desire for expediency of this trial overwhelm the need for the
[appellant] to have a fair trial.
It seems to me because of the unique and fortunate timing of this particular
witness that we can continue in this way without any
unfairness, in my view,
being caused to the [appellant]. The [appellant] can literally position herself
in whatever position she
is best to be in as she listens to the evidence, as I
say, all of which should be completely familiar to her and well known to
So that is my ruling. What I will also say is this. We'll get through
[the State's] case today hopefully with this witness.
further discussions between the learned trial judge and the appellant's trial
counsel, the prosecutor informed the trial judge
that the State had 'grave
concerns about continuing to proceed in terms of ensuring that [the appellant]
The prosecutor told the trial judge that she did not oppose the application to
adjourn 'because at this point the fairness of the
trial for [the appellant and
her husband] really has to be
paramount'.
learned trial judge said that she completely understood the prosecutor's
position. Her Honour acknowledged that proceedings
may reach a point where
they need to be
Honour said that the ruling she had given was only for the purposes of the
application made by the appellant's trial counsel
that morning, and that, if the
appellant's position worsened, a further application could be made and would be
considered 'on its
courtroom and told by her Honour that the appellant was 'genuinely
and that she should not be prejudiced because she was not present in the
Honour explained to the jury
[W]hat I have ordered is this, [the appellant] is sitting in a different room
that she has full video access to the trial, so she
can hear it and she can
monitor proceedings at all times. You will notice that [co‑counsel], who
assists [defence counsel],
is not here. That is because she is over near [the
appellant], less she has any matters she wants to raise with her
I've already indicated to [defence counsel] he can call for any time he needs a
break, if he wants to go and speak to her.
the presence of the jury, the learned trial judge then confirmed with the
prosecutor that she intended to call Ms McNab, and that
her evidence 'is
largely related to the content of various notes and documents coming from the
time at which [B] was in
and that the materials to which Ms McNab would refer had already been
provided to the appellant and her
Honour then confirmed with defence counsel that if he considered that he could
not fairly conduct the trial on the appellant's
behalf, he could raise the
matter with
approximately 10.15 am on 31 October 2024, Ms McNab was called,
sought, and was given, a short adjournment to see the
counsel informed the learned trial judge that the appellant
was unwell and had
not been able to follow what was happening in the courtroom, and that the
appellant was 'kind of half dozing
counsel applied to adjourn the trial on the basis that the appellant was unable
to follow the evidence, and that he and his
co‑counsel were not able to
get 'any meaningful instructions from [the
appellant]'.
Defence counsel sought an adjournment until midday on 1 November 2024.
Honour granted the application to adjourn. Her Honour said that the
appellant was not fit
She adjourned the trial until 11.00 am on 1 November 2024. She
ordered the appellant to answer her bail at
trial resumed in the absence of the jury at 10.32 am on 1 November
2024. Defence counsel requested that the appellant return
to the remote room.
At this point, the trial judge told defence counsel that another remote room,
closer to the courtroom, would
resume her examination‑in‑chief.
the proceedings to allow defence counsel 'to check in with
After the jury retired, her Honour commented to defence counsel that the
appellant appeared 'much better than yesterday', but she
was 'still clearly not
well'. Her Honour then referred to
Criminal Law (Mental Impairment) Act
(WA) concerning the circumstances in which an accused person may be
unfit to stand trial. Her Honour said that the appellant was
fit to stand
trial because of six circumstances, being as
It seems to me that ..., in circumstances where the following factors are
present: one, the witness is giving evidence only in chief;
two, the evidence
has been previously disclosed; three, the [appellant] is represented by two
counsel who are experienced, one who
I consider, and you'll be pleased to know
this, to be highly experienced; four, the nature of the matters that will occur
today therefore
are largely matters of objection and therefore legal matters,
which you'll be better equipped to do than the [appellant]; five, the
you will have the weekend to have the [appellant], when she's feeling better, to
be able to go through the transcript and
therefore provide you with any further
instructions; and six, able to therefore properly instruct you before you're
expected to cross‑examine.
I consider, at the moment, that she is not therefore unfit to stand trial, even
if she is less than her full health. So, even if,
as I understand it from the
information given to me, she is sleepy, she is still unwell, she may not be
taking notes at the same
level as she would normally do. It seems to me that
because it's a Friday, it is very different than if I was making this ruling
Thursday. So that's my present view[.]
counsel applied to adjourn the trial for the
on the basis that the appellant had apparently been asleep for a large part of
the day, had vomited and that, at one point, she had
to leave the remote room to
Defence counsel said that the appellant's eyes were closed and that she was not
following the evidence, and had been reported to
look dazed and have little idea
of what was going
learned trial judge dismissed the application. The learned trial judge observed
that the appellant's physical state appeared
to be 'considerably better' than it
had been the day
In all of those circumstances I consider that the accused is able to fairly
proceed to trial today notwithstanding her medical state.
It is unfortunate
that she is unwell but I do not consider that the unwellness is of such a state
as to deprive her of a fair trial.
learned trial judge said that she would continue to monitor the appellant, and
she expected that she would be updated if there
was any further
approximately 12.14 pm on 1 November 2024, the jury returned and
Ms McNab resumed her evidence‑in‑chief. At some
stages in her
evidence on 1 November 2024, Ms McNab referred to some of her own
notes and observations of 8 April 2021, and of the
appellant's demeanour in
a meeting on that day.
approximately 4.20 pm on 1 November 2024, Ms McNab, who was still
in examination‑in‑chief, completed her evidence
for the day.
the jury retired, her Honour observed that the appellant had 'picked up
enormously', and that she had been 'writing things,
awake and going
learned trial judge said that she observed 'all afternoon, [the appellant] seems
to have been actively
participating'.
4 November 2024, after the weekend, the appellant presented at the
District Court, apparently recovered from her illness. The
trial proceeded
with the appellant in the dock, and no further application to adjourn was
Legal principles applicable to an application for bail
pending appeal
legal principles relevant to an application for bail pending appeal are well
settled and do not require detailed repetition.
For present purposes, it is
sufficient to say this much.
of sch 1 to the
provides that an appellant who is in custody awaiting the disposal of
appeal proceedings shall only be granted bail if the court
is satisfied that
exceptional reasons exist, and it is proper to do having regard to the
provisions of cl 1 and cl 3 of
it is said that the exceptional reasons for a grant of bail are that a ground or
grounds of appeal are strongly arguable, it
must be borne in mind that, at this
stage, the opportunity to conduct a comprehensive consideration of the materials
is relatively
limited, and any assessment of the grounds can only be
preliminary. Thus, where it is suggested that a ground or grounds have strong
prospects of success, that will generally need to be readily apparent without
the benefit of detailed argument or
the appellant establishes that exceptional reasons exist, the State does not
suggest that a grant of bail would be inappropriate,
having regard to the
provisions of cl 1 and cl 3 of
of sch 1 to the
, although the precise terms
of any grant of bail are not agreed.
The appellant's submissions
appellant's primary submission is that she ceased to have a fair trial as soon
as the learned trial judge ruled that the trial
should proceed in her physical
absence from the courtroom on 31 October and 1 November 2024, because
her exclusion, without her consent,
was in breach of 'the statutorily enshrined
and common law right [for an accused] to be physically present throughout the
appellant further submits that the proceedings were effectively a nullity
because the appellant was in no fit state to instruct
her lawyers on
31 October 2024, and, for at least some of the time, on 1 November
appellant contends that, having regard to the appellant's unfitness, the learned
trial judge erred in not acceding to her counsel's
applications for an
adjournment on both 31 October and 1 November
The respondent's submissions
respondent submits that, having regard to
Criminal Procedure Act
stipulation in subsection (3) that the trial (being a 'proceeding' within
the definition in subsection (1)) must take place
in the accused's
presence, was, having regard to the procedure adopted by the learned trial judge
on 31 October and 1 November 2024,
complied with. The State submits
that the procedures adopted by the learned trial judge did not prejudice the
appellant's interests,
nor were they contrary to the interests of justice, and
that her Honour was permitted to take the steps she did by
subsection (5),
which allows an accused to be present before the court by
means of a video‑link.
respondent also submits that there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that
the appellant was, in fact, unable to follow
the proceedings, or that she was so
unwell that the proceedings should have been adjourned.
respondent further submits that, even if the appellant was, for some period on
31 October and 1 November 2024, asleep or unable
to follow the
proceedings, the appellant was at all times able to observe and hear the
proceedings. There is nothing before this
court that is capable of showing that
the appellant was, in fact, prejudiced in the conduct of her trial or how any
short periods
of inattention could have reasonably affected her
Disposition
became evident in the hearing before me that ground 1 as argued by the
appellant's counsel raises issues which were not squarely
raised in the ground,
or in the written submissions in support of the ground, or which, if raised,
were not analysed in any real
Criminal Procedure
stipulates that the trial of an accused in a superior court must take
place in that person's presence. Even if (favourably to the
appellant) I
assume, for present purposes, that 'presence' in subsection (3) means
physical presence in the courtroom, such a right
cannot be absolute, having
regard to the text of subsections (4) and (5).
appellant's submissions assume that the learned trial judge was statutorily
prohibited from allowing the proceedings on 31 October
and 1 November
2024 to be conducted with the appellant not physically in the courtroom but in a
remote room, which was connected
to the courtroom by way of video‑link,
without the appellant's consent.
this assumption is legally correct depends upon a consideration of the proper
construction of subsections (3), (4) and (5)
questions raised have not been previously examined by this court, and, as things
presently stand, I do not have the benefit
of considered submissions on the
point. While I acknowledge, without criticism of counsel for the appellant,
that he made oral submissions
before me on the construction of
were, with respect, 'off the cuff' and not comprehensive.
potentially raises other issues of importance. Assuming the learned trial judge
had the power to do what she did on 31
October and 1 November 2024,
did she err in the exercise of the power, having regard to all of the
circumstances of the case, or
should she have temporarily adjourned the trial as
sought by defence counsel? In the circumstances of the case, did the
appellant's
physical absence from the courtroom, in isolation or together with
anything done by the trial judge, including her Honour's refusal
temporarily adjourn, amount to a material irregularity in the trial?
as the appellant alleges that, at times on 31 October and 1 November
2024, she was unable to properly follow proceedings
or give instructions to her
counsel, or was temporarily absent from the trial because she was out of the
remote room to be sick,
what evidence is there to establish any of these things?
What regard should be given to the learned trial judge's observations on
have referred to the legal principles relevant to this application. Given the
issues raised by ground 1 that I have referred to,
and the nature of the
submissions on those issues, I am unable to conclude, at this point, that the
ground has such strong prospects
of success as to amount to exceptional reasons
for a grant of bail pending appeal.
fact that I have reached this conclusion at a relatively early stage in the
appeal should not be understood to mean that the
ground is without prospects of
success. It is true, as the appellant argues, that it is unusual, to say the
least, for a criminal
trial in a superior court to proceed in the physical
absence of the accused. Where this occurs without misconduct by the accused,
requires good reason. After full argument before a coram of three judges, it
may be that the ground is made out, but, at the
risk of repeating myself, on the
basis of the arguments and analysis so far put to the court, I am unable to
conclude that ground
1 has sufficient merit to justify a grant of bail
pending appeal.
these reasons, I ordered that the application for bail pending appeal against
conviction filed 24 September 2025 be
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Mazza
30 OCTOBER 2025
The appellant's husband was also charged with one count of uttering a forged
record with intent to defraud, contrary to s 473(1)(b)
Criminal Code
(WA) (count 1). He
pleaded guilty to that charge on the first day of trial.
ts 3302 - 3305.
Section 140
Criminal Procedure
concerns circumstances which are not applicable to this case.
Snook v The State of
Western Australia
[2024] WASCA 56
Appellant's case, par 31.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter