URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WILKINS -v- FOSSA [2025] WADC 66 (1 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
WILKINS -v- FOSSA
[2025] WADC 66
JEYAMOHAN DCJ
23 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
1 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
APP 28 of 2025
HARRY WILKINS
MICHELLE ISABELLA FOSSA
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MAGISTRATE HUSTON
File Number :
MC/CIV/RO/PER/7221/2024
Appeal from Magistrates Court -
Restraining
(WA) - Whether learned magistrate erred in applying
s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) in not
granting an adjournment - Whether appellant was denied procedural fairness -
Litigant in person - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings) Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Ms L J Fernandez
Solicitors:
Hammond Legal
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Kobelt
[2019] HCA 18
Binningup Nominees Pty Ltd v Mirvac (WA) Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 130
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
Frigger v Frigger
[2023] WASCA 103
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Jones v Darkan Hotel
[2014] WASCA 133
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[2021] WASCA 176
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 65
Neil v Nott
[1994] HCA 23
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR
(2016) 331 ALR 550
Rowe v Stoltze
[2013] WASCA 92
Saunders v The Public Trustee
[2015] WASCA 203
Sethi v Bhavsar
[2020] WASCA 52
Smart v Power
[2019] WASCA 106
Sovereign Grange Pty Ltd v A V Truck Services Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2017] WASCA
Taciak v Lyons
[2012] WADC 61
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
Woodley v Woodley
[2018] WASCA 149
[2024] WADC 84
Zerjavic v Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 40
Introduction
23 December 2024, the respondent, Michelle Isabella Fossa, was granted
an interim family violence restraining order (FVRO) against
the appellant,
Harry Richard Wilkins (Interim
24 April 2025, the respondent obtained a final FVRO against the appellant
(Final FVRO).
13 May 2025, the appellant filed an application to set aside the
Final FVRO.
set aside application was listed for hearing on 14 May 2025 before
Magistrate Huston (Application).
order made on 14 May 2025, Magistrate Huston made orders in the
Application in the following terms
(Decision):
Leave Refused to continue the Application of the Person Bound to Set-Aside the
Final Order made 24 April 2025 (insufficient explanation
of reason for not
attending).
notice of appeal filed 3 June 2025, the appellant appeals the Decision.
The appellant filed an amended notice of appeal on 15
the reasons which follow, the appellant has not satisfied me that he was denied
procedural fairness during the hearing on 14
May 2025 and has not otherwise
established any of his grounds of appeal. The appeal should be dismissed.
Legislative framework
final order hearing is defined in s 3(1) of the
Restraining Orders
(WA) (ROA) to mean a hearing fixed under s 33(1),
s 40(3), s 41(4) or s 43A(7)(b).
Section 42(2)
of the ROA provides that:
(2) If a respondent does not attend a final order hearing and the applicant does
attend, the court -
(a) if it is
satisfied that the respondent was -
(i) in the case of a hearing fixed under section 33, notified of the
hearing; or
(ii) in the case of a hearing fixed under section 40(3)(c), 41(4) or
43A(7)(b), served with a summons requiring the respondent to
is, subject to subsection (3), to hear the matter in the absence of the
respondent; or
(b) otherwise, is to adjourn the hearing.
Section 43(1)
of the ROA provides that subject to s 42, a court may make a
final order of the type, and with the terms, the court
considers appropriate, at
a final order
Section 43A
of the ROA deals with the circumstances in which a decision made under
s 42 of the ROA in default of appearance may be
Section 43A(1) provides that for the purposes of the section respondent, in
respect of a decision to dismiss an application
in default of appearance of the
applicant means the person who was the respondent at the final order hearing at
which the decision
was dismissed.
Section 43A(2)(b)
of the ROA provides that:
Where the court -
(b) has made a restraining order under section 42 in default of appearance
of the respondent, that respondent may within 21 days
of the order being
served on the respondent,
or such further period as
the court may allow at a hearing fixed under subsection (3), apply to the
court, in the prescribed form
setting out the grounds of the application, to
have that decision set aside.
13 May 2025, the appellant filed an application to set aside the
Final FVRO.
Section 43A(3) of the ROA provides that:
(3) On receiving an application under subsection (2) the registrar is to
fix a hearing, to be held in the absence of the other party
to the proceedings,
at which, subject to subsection (4), the
(a) where the application was made out
of time, is to grant leave for the person to continue the application out of
time if satisfied
that there was a reasonable excuse for not commencing the
application within the time allowed; and
(b) after taking into account the grounds of the
application, is to -
(i) adjourn the hearing of the matter to allow the other party to oppose the
matter if satisfied that the person who made the application
may have had a
reasonable cause not to attend the hearing at which the application was
dismissed, or the restraining order made;
(ii) dismiss the application.
to s 64 of the ROA, a person aggrieved by the decision of a court to 'make
any other order in relation to a final order',
may appeal that decision in
accordance with this section. Section 64(2) provides that if the decision
was made by the Magistrates
Court, the appeal is to be made in accordance
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(MCCPA) unless subsection (6a)(a) applies.
Proceedings in the Magistrates Court
23 December 2024, the respondent, was granted an FVRO against the appellant
(Interim FVRO).
The respondent appeared in person at the hearing on 23 December
30 December 2024, the appellant, lodged an objection to the
Interim FVRO
(Objection).
order of the Magistrates Court made on 18 February 2025,
the matter was adjourned to a mention hearing on 13 March
respondent was represented by counsel at the hearing on 13 March 2025. The
appellant appeared in
for the respondent noted that the shuttle conference on 18 February 2025
did not go ahead as the respondent had indicated
that 'he was not given
appropriate
of the Magistrates Court made on 13 March 2025, the matter was
adjourned to 8 April 2025 for shuttle
conference.
shuttle conference scheduled for 8 April 2025 did not take place and by
order of a learned registrar made on 18 March 2025 was
vacated and
adjourned to a mention hearing on 8 April
parties were represented by counsel at the hearing on 8 April 2025 before
Magistrate Randazzo and were present at the
At that hearing, the learned magistrate adjourned the matter to a final
order hearing on 24 April
adjourning the matter, the learned magistrate
HIS HONOUR:
... This application is adjourned to not before 9.30 am
on 24 April 2025 for a final order hearing. However, it is only for
only, and no witnesses are required. A notice of hearing is to be
given to the applicant, person protected, and the respondent,
person bound.
The respondent, person bound, Mr Wilkins remains bound by the order.
But in any event, I note that Mr Wilkins also seeks to have some legal
final order hearing proceeded before Magistrate Oliver on 24 April
2025. The respondent was represented by counsel. The appellant
appear at the final order
24 April 2025, the respondent obtained a Final FVRO against the
13 May 2025, the appellant filed the Application to set aside the
Final FVRO.
The appellant, in his grounds of application to set aside stated as
After reading the Applicants Affidavit on the 8 April 2025 I have been
unwell and I have attended the Illawara Medical Centre and
Beattie has seen me and explains in a letter the stress I have experience[d] has
been a contributing factor for missing
my hearing date.
14 May 2025, the Application was heard before Magistrate Huston. The
appellant appeared in
learned magistrate sought the appellant's reasons for not attending the final
order hearing on 24 April
heard from the appellant, the learned magistrate determined that he was not
satisfied that there were reasonable grounds
for the appellant having missed the
hearing on 24 April 2025 when the order was made
order made on 14 May 2025, Magistrate Huston made orders refusing
leave to continue the Application (insufficient explanation
of reason for not
attending).
Appeal to the District Court
appeal was commenced by notice of appeal filed 3 June 2025. This was
within the required 21 days from the date of the
Decision was in respect of the making of an order in relation to a final
order, the appeal is within the appellate jurisdiction
District Court.
The appellant filed an amended notice of appeal dated 15 July 2025.
respondent took part in this appeal.
District Court must decide the appeal on the material and evidence that was
before the learned
magistrate.
court can give leave to admit other evidence, but only in exceptional
circumstances.
such application was brought and the appeal proceeded to hearing on the material
and evidence that was before the learned magistrate.
appeal is by way of a 'reconsideration of the evidence' that was before the
magistrate.
court does not hear afresh all of the
the appeal is to be undertaken by way of
a re-hearing.
an appeal by way of re-hearing, ordinarily, and absent further evidence or a
relevant change in the law, the court can exercise
its appellate powers only if
satisfied that there was an error on the part of the primary court; the power is
to be exercised for
correction of
be a material error of law, fact, discretion or other miscarriage of
so, the appeal court must conduct a 'real review' of the evidence given at
first instance and of the primary decision-maker's
reasons for decision to
determine whether there has been an appealable
onus is on the appellant to demonstrate the existence of an appealable
sufficient for the appellant to satisfy the court that a decision other than
that made by the magistrate was correct and
preferable.
Grounds of appeal
appellant initially brought the appeal on the grounds augmented in the
attachment to the notice of appeal dated 3 June 2025.
These grounds being
as follows:
the appellant was unable to participate in the hearing due to a medical issue,
which presvented him from presenting his case.
there is a lack of evidence supporting any claims of violence, and the
respondent has provided false information in his affidavit,
and the restraining
order is unwarranted.
the appellant possesses evidence that demonstrate he has had minimal contact
with the respondent for many years.
there are no records indicating a history of violence, and evidence of such
has not been submitted.
the appellant believes that the restraining order was made as a result of
ongoing family court proceedings regarding parenting
arrangements.
Amended grounds of appeal
order of this court made 24 June 2025, the appellant was granted leave to
file an amended notice of appeal by 15 July 2025.
amended notice of appeal dated 15 July 2025, the appellant brings this
appeal on the following five grounds:
magistrate erred by failing to give proper regard to the evidence that was
adduced by the appellant and that it established pursuant
to s 43A(3)(b)(i)
that the applicant may have had a reasonable cause not to attend the
hearing on 24 April 2025 at which the restraining
order was made a final
order (Ground 1).
magistrate was operating on a misunderstanding that there had been a shuttle
conference and implicit in that misunderstanding
was that the appellant had
attended a shuttle conference when in fact the shuttle conference did not take
place, and on 8 April 2025
the matter was listed for a final order
directions hearing only (no witnesses) on 24 April 2025
(Ground 2).
magistrate failed to afford the applicant the latitude that should have been
afforded to a litigant in person and thereby denied
the applicant procedural
fairness (Ground 3).
magistrate failed to afford the applicant procedural fairness in refusing to
adjourn the hearing pursuant to s 67(1)(b) in circumstances
evidence supported the granting of such an adjournment (Ground 4).
magistrate erred by not properly applying s 43A(3)(b)(i) in that the
magistrate should have been satisfied that the applicant
may have had a
reasonable cause not to attend the hearing at which the restraining order was
made and after taking into account the
grounds of the application adjourned the
hearing to allow the other party to oppose the matter
(Ground 5).
respondent's notice of intention dated 23 June 2025 indicated that the
respondent will argue that the primary court's decision
should be upheld on the
grounds relied on by the primary court in its decision for the following
the appeal was filed out of time in circumstances where the Final FVRO was
made on 24 April 2025 and the time limit for filing
an appeal expired on
15 May 2025 (ie 21 days after the date of the Final FVRO being
extension of time has been sought and/or obtained for the filing of this appeal.
appellant was represented by counsel at the hearing of this appeal on
23 September 2025. The respondent was self-represented.
Both parties
filed written submissions which they relied on in addition to oral submissions
made at the hearing of the appeal.
At the hearing of the appeal, the respondent
did not press the issue of the appeal having been filed out of time and
otherwise responded
to the grounds of appeal as they appeared in the appellant's
amended notice of appeal.
Issues for determination
grounds of appeal are numbered differently in the appellant's outline of
submissions. In determining the issues, I have adopted
the numbering
against the corresponding ground as it appears in the amended notice of appeal.
completeness, I note that during the course of the hearing of this appeal,
counsel for the appellant raised an additional submission
in respect of the
duration of the hearing on 14 May 2025. Counsel for the appellant
confirmed that this was not an additional ground
of appeal that is being raised
and one which the appellant does not wish to have considered for the purposes of
the appeal which
in any event would need to be the subject of an application for
leave. In any event, a review of the transcript does not support
contention raised.
following issues arise for determination:
the learned magistrate err in not properly applying s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the
ROA (Grounds 1 and 5)?
the learned magistrate operating on a misunderstanding of fact
(Ground 2)?
the learned magistrate deny the appellant procedural fairness (Grounds 3
1 and 5 - Did the learned magistrate err in not properly applying
s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
appellant submits that the learned magistrate's exercise of discretion
miscarried in the sense identified in
House v The
because the learned magistrate failed to take into account or to give proper
regard to the evidence adduced by the appellant at the
hearing on 14 May
2025. The appellant points to the following:
8 April 2025, the appellant applied for and received the respondent's
affidavit affirmed 23 December 2024 filed in
the Magistrates
Court on 23 December 2024 in support of
(Fossa Affidavit).
the hearing on 14 May 2025, the appellant told the learned magistrate
(a) after reading the Fossa Affidavit he felt
'so overwhelmed' and it turned the appellant's 'world upside down' and that
he was 'highly
affected' by the accusations against him and felt 'so overly
stressed' that he began 'making multiple mistakes';
(b) that he was a person who was 'always on time' but after reading the Fossa
Affidavit he turned up to work late, missed a Family
Court hearing and did
not even know he had missed the final order hearing until he received
a text message from the court saying
that the VRO will be standing;
(c) that his memory loss was due to stress, and produced the letter from
Dr Fiona Beattie dated 6 May 2025 (Beattie Letter).
appellant submits that his reasons for failing to appear at the final order
hearing were adequately explained and adequate medical
evidence was adduced to
support a finding by the learned magistrate that the appellant had a reasonable
explanation for not attending
the final order hearing. The appellant further
submits that by not adequately taking the appellant's medical evidence into
the learned magistrate did not give sufficient weight to that
consideration which amounts to an error. The appellant submits that
have been given the opportunity to provide further medical evidence in support
of the Application.
appellant submits that the learned magistrate erred in failing to be satisfied
that the appellant had a reasonable explanation
for not having attended the
hearing on 24 April 2025 when the Final FVRO was made. The appellant
submits that he satisfies the criteria
appellant submits that all that was required for an adjournment of the hearing
on 14 May 2025 pursuant to s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the
ROA was for the
learned magistrate to be satisfied that the appellant may have had a reasonable
cause, and that is to 'the civil
standard of proof'. The appellant submits that
in providing the Beattie Letter and his 'evidence' at the hearing as to why
not attend the hearing on 24 April 2025, he satisfied
s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the ROA and the matter ought to have been adjourned. The
appellant did not otherwise advance any submissions on the proper statutory
construction to be applied to the word 'may' in s 43A(3)(b)(i)
of the ROA.
appellant submits that the learned magistrate erred by not properly applying
s 43A(3)(b)(i) of the ROA and that the appellant
has suffered a miscarriage
of justice.
respondent submits that the appellant had lodged the Objection to the FVRO on
30 December 2024 and that the matter had progressed
for a significant
amount of time in the Magistrates Court prior to the Final FVRO. The
respondent noted that the appellant had obtained
legal representation prior to
the Final FVRO hearing on 24 April 2025. The respondent submits that
the learned magistrate, having
considered the Application, the appellant's oral
evidence and the Beattie Letter, was ultimately not satisfied that the appellant
had reasonable grounds not to attend the hearing on 24 April 2025
and made a decision consistent with s 43A(3)(b) of the ROA in refusing
leave for the appellant to continue with the Application. The respondent
further submits that the learned magistrate's decision
was based on the correct
application of s 43A of the ROA with no good evidence found to grant an
adjournment and no miscarriage of
justice has occurred.
Disposition
a review of the manner in which the 14 May 2025 hearing proceeded, it is
evident that the learned magistrate sought the appellant's
reasons for not
attending the hearing on 24 April
HIS HONOUR:
Well, a final family violence restraining order was made on
24 April. Today is 14 May, so you're just inside the 21 days
don't have to explain to me why it is that you've left it so long to
make the application, but you still have to explain to me why
it is that you
didn't attend the hearing on 24 April. Notice was provided to you for the
hearing, and you didn't attend, and the
order was made on a regular basis. So
I'm looking at your application.
learned magistrate proceeded to refer to the appellant's grounds as set out in
the Application which included the Beattie
HIS HONOUR:
... the applicant's affidavit on 8 April 2025,
I have been unwell and I have attended the Illawarra Medical
Centre, and a Dr Fiona
Beattie has seen me and explains in a letter the
stress I have experienced has been a contributing factor for missing my
Well, I don't see any letter. You might have it with you, but why didn't you
let the court know that you were having some difficulties,
and why didn't you let the court know that you were seeing a doctor,
and why didn't you let the court know on the day that you were
having those
difficulties? Because court is a really busy place
... there's a fair bit for you to explain to me today before you be given leave.
Have you got the letter from Dr Beattie?
copy of the letter of Dr Fiona Beattie of the Illawarra Medical Centre
dated 6 May 2025 referred to in the appellant's grounds
in support of the
Application was produced to the learned magistrate at the hearing on 14 May
2025 and marked as an
learned magistrate thereafter sought the appellant's reasons for not attending
HIS HONOUR:
I will see that. But you were notified of the hearing. You
had lodged an objection. There had been a shuttle conference, so you've
been involved in the proceedings since the order was made interim on
23 December. You were served and you lodged your objection,
and there were
various hearings and orders made. Just for the transcript, this letter wasn't
attached to the application. I'm just
looking at it for the first time. And
it's dated 6 May, which is well after the hearing on 24 April. I will
just read the letter:
Today was the first time meeting Harry
The letter indicates, which is 6 May, which is at that stage 12 days
after the hearing. I've taken note of the letter. It will
stay with the court
now and be marked as an exhibit. But those other things I asked you,
why not let the court know, why not contact
the court to say that
you are feeling stressed, seeking an adjournment, engage a lawyer?
Why not do those
HIS HONOUR:
The question is a very straightforward one, and it's what
the legislation requires of you.
WILKINS, MR:
HIS HONOUR:
It can require you to go on oath, but I'm just accepting
that what you're telling me is factual. Why didn't you come to the court
day when the order was made final? You had notice of that hearing. Or why
didn't you contact the court to indicate that you
were having difficulties or a
medical episode? It wasn't until two weeks later, or 12 days later that you
actually saw Dr Beattie.
But the issue is you didn't attend court, you
were notified of the hearing, and you need to explain why it is that you didn't
to court, or at least notify the court that you were having difficulties.
That's the issue for today, not the contents of the affidavit.
WILKINS, MR:
HIS HONOUR:
Not the other issues. Why didn't you - you've been
attending everything you've said. You knew of the hearing and you didn't
The legislation requires me to hear from you as to why it is that you
didn't. That's what I'm asking you today.
the appellant submits both by appellant's counsel at the hearing of the appeal
and in the appellant's written submissions, the
appellant put to the learned
magistrate that whilst 'he thought he was okay' after reading the respondent's
affidavit, 'it turned
his world upside down, the accusation' as a result of
which the appellant was 'missing everything, like turning up late to work'.
the hearing of the Application, the appellant put to the learned magistrate
WILKINS, MR:
... I - so I was so overly stressed, I actually didn't even
know that I had missed the court date until I got a text message from
saying that the VRO will be standing. So I was so overwhelmed that - and I also
missed my family hearing, which I've been
to numerous hearings for the
Family Court.
I've never, ever missed them, and I also missed that, and so that's when
I went and saw the doctor, and I've realised that I'm -
I'm actually highly
- I have been so highly affected by it. I'm telling myself I'm okay.
It's very unusual behaviour for me. I'm
always on time, always -
I've always - but it was just way over the top for me, the - what I read,
and I want to - and, of course,
I don't - I want to stand up for myself and, you
know - but, yes, I - I was highly - highly affected by that.
So, yes, there is actually no reason for me to - other than - I've been making
multiple mistakes, you know, also missing the Family
Court as well. Even though
I had had those dates, I'm - yes, I've been highly affected, and that's why
there was such a late going
to the doctor, because I'm telling myself, 'I'm
okay, I'm okay'. Obviously, when I went and saw her, I said, 'This is very
behaviour for me. I'm not - like, you know, I don't normally
behave like this,' and - - -
heard from the appellant, the learned magistrate determined that he was not
satisfied that there were reasonable grounds for
the appellant having missed the
hearing on 24 April 2025 when the order was made
reaching his determination, the learned magistrate
HIS HONOUR:
Mr Wilkins, I'm not
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for you having missed the hearing on
24 April when the order was made
final. You've been involved in these
proceedings for quite some time. You've had legal advice from the
Community Legal Centre that
you indicated. The content of the affidavit
may well have been something that caused you some surprise, but the records of
proceedings indicate that you've had an involvement right from the point
of lodging your objection, which was 30 December 2024, and
been a number of hearings, a number of orders made, and you were notified of the
hearing, you knew about the hearing,
you didn't attend the hearing, and you
had the opportunity to contact the court or send a lawyer along on your behalf
to indicate
that you wouldn't be attending for the reasons you've given.
I'm just not satisfied that that's a reasonable explanation for you not having
attended the hearing on 24 April when the order was
made final. You were
well aware and ought to have been well aware from having had legal advice that
if you didn't attend the hearing
that day it would be made final, and the letter
that you provided from your doctor, which was 12 days after that
hearing, doesn't
demonstrate to the court the position you were in on
24 April. You knew what was expected. You needed to be at court.
If you weren't at court, the legislation makes it clear that the order would be
made final. That's the way the Parliament has drafted
the laws, and I'm
dismissing your application to have the order that was made final set aside.
You can still bring an application
to have the order cancelled or varied, but it
was regularly entered. You knew you had court that day. No provision of any
information
to the court on the day why it was that you weren't attending. The
court is an incredibly busy jurisdiction, particularly with restraining
It wasn't new to you. You had been involved in the proceedings for some time.
Your application is dismissed.
my review of the transcript of the hearing on 14 May 2025, the learned
magistrate accepted the Beattie Letter into evidence and
received oral
submissions from the appellant, who was self-represented at that hearing. The
Beattie Letter says
met with the appellant on 6 May 2025 for the first time.
appellant has been known to the Illawarra Medical Centre in the past.
appellant has explained to Dr Beattie the high level of stress that he has
been under related to his Family Court issues, as well
as the most recent VRO
and the affidavit that he 'received from his ex-partner'.
this consult, Dr Beattie can appreciate that the appellant has been under a
huge amount of stress and generally feeling overwhelmed.
periods of high stress it is a known side affect that people's usual working
memory can become impaired.
Dr Beattie believes that is why he missed the initial VRO hearing as well
as Family Court hearing.
is no medical certificate provided certifying the appellant as being unfit to
attend the hearing on 24 April 2025.
appellant's reliance on
is misplaced. In brief
concerns an appeal to this court in respect of a
matter involving two separate applications to set aside a final violence
restraining
, a matter which 'has a tortuous
Ms Taciak failed to appear at the hearing of an application for a violence
restraining order as a result of which the interim violence
restraining orders
were made final.
Ms Taciak deposed that she was unable to attend court on the day as she was
restricted to her hospital bed and attached a copy of
the medical
certificate. The medical certificate was undated and made no mention at all
that Ms Taciak was confined to a hospital
and provides no confirmation
whatsoever that Ms Taciak was in
was successful in obtaining an adjournment pursuant to s 43A(3)(b)(i) in
respect of one of the applications made pursuant
to an incorrect court
was thereafter adjourned on three further occasions. Ms Taciak in the
meantime, made another application to set aside
the final violence restraining
order using the correct court form. The original application was heard and in
circumstances where
Ms Taciak failed to appear, the application was
dismissed with costs. Ms Taciak then appealed that decision to this
dismissing the appeal, Bowden DCJ relevantly
In my opinion, a medical report proffered to the court should specifically refer
to the date the patient has advised the doctor they
are required to appear in
court, when the doctor was first approached to provide the report, the medical
condition that causes the
patient to be unable to attend the court, the date of
the onset of that condition, how long it is likely to last and an
acknowledgement
within the report that the doctor is aware the report is to be
produced to the court.
fact that the learned Chief Magistrate in respect of one of the
set aside applications in
adjourned that matter having
been satisfied pursuant to s 43A(3)(b)(i), does not establish that the
learned magistrate in the present
matter erred in not adjourning the hearing on
14 May 2025.
respondent filed the Fossa Affidavit in support of her application
resulting in the granting of the Interim FVRO. The appellant
involved in the matter since the filing of the Objection on
30 December 2024 following the granting of the Interim FVRO.
of the procedural history of the matter establishes that at the hearing on
8 April 2025 before Magistrate Randazzo, the
appellant, who was
legally represented at the time, was told that the matter would be proceeding to
a final order hearing on 24 April
2025. No evidence has been adduced by
the appellant explaining the reason for his non-attendance at the hearing on
24 April 2025
other than the Beattie Letter, which as the learned
magistrate observed, was obtained some 12 days after the date of the final
is it evident to me that there is any error in the learned magistrate's
reasoning. The submissions do not in substance raise
an issue of appellate
intervention on the basis that in making the Decision, the learned magistrate
erred in the exercise of his
discretion in the sense outlined in
my view, the learned magistrate did not err in reaching his Decision.
grounds of appeal have not been established.
Ground 2 - Was the learned magistrate operating on a
misunderstanding of fact?
submissions are made in this regard and appear from Ground 2 in the amended
notice of appeal, and somewhat differently, in Ground
appellant's outline of
submissions.
the appellant submits that the learned magistrate was operating on a
misunderstanding that there had been a shuttle conference
and implicit in that
misunderstanding was that the appellant had attended a shuttle conference when
in fact the shuttle conference
did not take place, and on 8 April 2025 the
matter was listed for a final order direction hearing only (no witnesses) on
as appears from the appellant's outline of submissions and appellant's counsel's
submissions at the hearing of the appeal,
the appellant submits that the
learned magistrate 'mistook' the facts when he stated that the content of the
affidavit may well have
been something that caused the appellant 'some
Relevantly:
HIS HONOUR:
The content of the affidavit may well have been something
that caused you some surprise, but the records of these proceedings indicate
that you've had an involvement right from the point of lodging your objection,
which was 30 December 2024, and there have been a
number of hearings,
a number of orders made, and you were notified of the hearing, you knew about
the hearing, you didn't attend
the hearing, and you had the opportunity to
be attending for the reasons you've given.
appellant submits that had the learned magistrate not mistaken the facts then he
would have been satisfied that the appellant
had a reasonable explanation
for not having attended the hearing on 24 April 2025 when the
Final FVRO was granted.
appellant submits that the content of the Fossa Affidavit did not cause the
appellant to be surprised but rather 'overwhelmed',
'stressed' and 'highly
affected'. In making these submissions, reliance was placed on the
Beattie Letter and the appellant's submissions
at the 14 May 2025
hearing which the learned magistrate 'accepted as being factual' without
requiring the appellant to 'go on
Disposition
my review of the transcript, the learned magistrate said 'There had been a
shuttle conference' in the context of narrating the
procedural history of the
shuttle conference scheduled for 8 April 2025 did not take place and by
order of a learned registrar made on 18 March 2025 was
vacated and
adjourned to a mention hearing on 8 April
do not consider this to amount to a material error of fact.
can it be inferred that by the use of the words 'some surprise' the learned
magistrate in some way failed to have regard to the
appellant's explanation for
not having attended the hearing on 24 April 2025. The learned magistrate
observed that the content of
the Fossa Affidavit 'may well have been
something that caused' the appellant 'some surprise'. Regard has to be had to
the learned
magistrate's observations as a whole and meaning cannot be
attributed to the words 'some surprise' in isolation, and in a way that
said, somehow establishes that the learned magistrate diminished the appellant's
explanation for not having attended the hearing
on 24 April 2025.
the extent that it is otherwise being alleged that the learned magistrate made
some factual error in overlooking the matters the
appellant says are relevant to
be inferred by the learned magistrate's use of the words 'some surprise', I have
reviewed the transcript
of the hearing of the Application and such a contention
has no merit and is not supported.
ground of appeal has not been established.
Grounds 3 and 4 - Did the learned magistrate deny the appellant
procedural fairness?
appellant relies on the Beattie Letter and submits that the learned
magistrate erred in failing to approach the evidence of that
letter with the
flexibility that should be afforded to an unrepresented litigant and therefore
denied the appellant procedural fairness.
appellant submits that on a fair assessment of the evidence, had the learned
magistrate been dissatisfied with the evidence of
Dr Beattie, the appellant
should have been afforded the opportunity to obtain and adduce further evidence
which would have included
the opportunity for Dr Beattie to 'elaborate on
her opinion'. The appellant submits that in failing to do so, the learned
denied the appellant procedural fairness.
The appellant as a litigant in person
a litigant in person, the appellant was entitled to some leniency in relation to
compliance with the court
was required to approach the documents in which he articulated his case with
some flexibility.
The court needed to be astute to ensure that, in a poorly expressed or
unstructured document in which he set out his case, there
was no viable
case which, with appropriate amendment or permissible assistance from the court,
could be put into proper
A 'frequent
consequence of self-representation is that the court must assume the burden of
endeavouring to ascertain the rights
of parties which are obfuscated by their
own advocacy'.
'abiding difficulty' faced by a court dealing with a litigant in person is 'the
tension between the duty of a ... judge to ensure
a fair and just trial and the
requirement that the court maintain a position of neutrality and impartiality as
between the
court also needs to ensure that any latitude given to one party as a litigant in
person does not deprive the other of their
right to procedural fairness and a
fair hearing.
balance is ordinarily struck by limiting the assistance given to a litigant in
person to that which is necessary to overcome,
so far as is reasonably
practicable, the procedural disadvantages a litigant in person faces by reason
of not being legally
was observed by the Court of Appeal in
a self-represented litigant is subject to the practice and procedure of
the court as much as any other
Disposition
this regard, I have considered the specific issues raised by counsel for the
appellant and the submissions made on behalf of the
appellant that the learned
magistrate failed to afford the appellant procedural fairness. As part of my
analysis, I have also had
regard to the following submissions made by the
respondent:
learned magistrate prompted the appellant on where to stand and how to begin,
accepted the late medical letter, and repeated clear
questions to focus on
the legal issue under s 43A (ie why the appellant did not attend the
hearing on 24 April 2025).
learned magistrate explained the purpose of the questions and rephrased the
questions in layman terms.
review of the transcript of the hearing on 14 May 2025 before the learned
magistrate does not support that the appellant was 'cut
short' during the
principles of procedural fairness were summarised by the Court of Appeal in
is axiomatic that a court is obliged to accord procedural fairness to a
to say that a court is obliged to afford procedural fairness is only the first
step of analysis. The second step is to identify
the content of the
requirements of procedural fairness. The second step is what is critical in
most cases.
sometimes expressed in terms referring to a necessity for a hearing, the
fundamental requirement of procedural fairness is
(relevantly for present
purposes) that a party is given a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in
other words, to present their case
by evidence, information and submissions.
requirements of procedural fairness are not fixed or immutable. Procedural
fairness is directed to avoid practical injustice,
and what is necessary to
avoid practical injustice will depend upon the circumstances. The application
of the requirements of procedural
fairness to a court requires analysis of the
procedures of the court, and the legislation and rules which govern them.
Court of Appeal in
then referred to MCCPA s 13 noting
that it 'provides relevantly, that in dealing with cases, the court is to ensure
that cases are
dealt with justly, which includes ensuring that cases are dealt
with efficiently, economically and expeditiously, and that the court's
judicial and administrative resources are used as efficiently as
observed by Gething DCJ (as his Honour then was) in
this principle applies to applications under the ROA.
content of procedural fairness also needs to be understood having regard to the
nature of the
proceedings.
is in this overall context that the question arises as to whether the appellant
was afforded procedural fairness by the learned
magistrate at the hearing on
14 May 2025. From the review of the manner in which the hearing proceeded
on 14 May 2025, it is evident
that the learned magistrate:
the matter being called, invited the self-represented litigant to the bar table
and explained the preliminary process of appearing
in court (ie name, purpose of
appearance).
to the appellant that the hearing on 14 May 2025 was to be a leave hearing.
Went on to explain to the appellant that this
meant that the appellant would
need to obtain leave of the court to continue with the Application.
to the appellant that he would need to provide the court with an explanation as
to why he did not attend the 24 April 2025
hearing in circumstances
where notice of that hearing had been given.
the appellant's position a number of times during the course of the hearing as
to why he did not attend the 24 April 2025 hearing
circumstances.
looked at the Application, observed that the Beattie Letter was not
included, asked the appellant for a copy and proceeded
to admit the
Beattie Letter into evidence as an exhibit.
the appellant to explain why he did not at least notify the court that he was
having some difficulties, stressed, seeing a doctor
and required an
adjournment of the final order hearing of 24 April 2025 in circumstances
where he knew of the hearing.
the appellant to explain why he had not engaged a lawyer.
as being factual' a number of matters put by the appellate during the course of
the hearing without requiring the appellant
to 'go on oath'.
have also had regard to the procedural history of the matter leading up to the
hearing on 14 May 2025.
the appellant had been participating in the proceedings from the time of lodging
the Objection on 30 December 2024 and by
the time of the hearing on
8 April 2025, had been present, with the benefit of counsel, when it was
made clear by the presiding magistrate
at that hearing that the hearing on
24 April 2025 was to be the final order
between that time and the appellant attending the appointment with
Dr Beattie on 6 May 2025 (having by that stage obtained
Fossa Affidavit dated 23 December 2024 on 8 April 2025), and
thereafter filing the Application on 13 May 2025, the appellant
opportunity to produce to the court the evidence and materials he sought to rely
on at the Application on 14 May 2025.
whilst the appellant appeared in person at the 14 May 2025 hearing, at that
hearing, the appellant produced to the court
the evidence and materials he
sought to rely on in support of the Application being the Beattie Letter,
which was accepted into evidence
that having considered these matters, and the appellant's submissions during the
course of the 14 May 2025 hearing, the
learned magistrate reached the
Decision. A trial judge's duty does not extend to
self-represented litigant as to how his or her rights should be exercised.
timing of the appellant's request for the Fossa Affidavit, which had been
part of the lower court file since 24 December 2024,
resulted in the
appellant on his submission being privy to the affidavit's contents on
8 April 2025. This was put by the appellant
to the learned magistrate at
the hearing on 14 May 2025, and the learned magistrate accepted into
evidence and marked as an
Beattie Letter which the appellant placed reliance on in this
my review of the transcript, it does not seem to me that the appellant was
denied the opportunity to make submissions in respect
of any of these matters.
Ultimately, the learned magistrate was not satisfied that there were reasonable
grounds for the appellant
having missed the hearing on 24 April 2025 having
had regard to the submissions of the appellant and the Beattie Letter.
my view, on the basis of both a review of the transcript of the hearing on
14 May 2025, and the materials in the lower court file,
the appellant
has not satisfied me that the appellant was denied procedural fairness in
relation to the Decision.
ground of appeal has not been established.
the reasons which I have set out above, the appeal should be dismissed.
will hear from the parties on the question of costs.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
1 OCTOBER 2025
Magistrates Court
lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024 (MB), pages 45 -
MB, pages 74
Section 42,
MB, pages 45
of Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024, 23 December 2024
(23 December 2024 ts), page 1; MB, page
Transcript of Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024, 13 March
2025 (13 March 2025 ts), page 1; MB, page
2025 ts 2 - ts 3; MB, pages 9 -
Transcript of Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024, 8 April
2025 (8 April 2025 ts), page 1; MB, page
2025 ts 4; MB, page
2025 ts 4; MB, page
of Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024, 24 April 2025 (24
April 2025 ts), page 1; MB, page
Transcript of Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/7221/2024, 14 May 2025
(14 May 2025 ts), page 1; MB, page
2025 ts 2; MB, page
2025 ts 4; MB, page
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(WA) (MCCPA)
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) (ROA) s
64(1)(b)(iii).
s 40(4)(a).
MCCPA s 40(4)(b), s
District Court Rules 2005
(WA) (DCR) r
Smart v Power
[2019] WASCA 106
[100] (judgment of the court)
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
[13] - [14]
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron & Hayne JJ) (
Coal and Allied
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
[23] (Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow & Hayne JJ) (
Saunders v The
Public Trustee
[2015] WASCA 203
[84] (Mitchell J, with whom Buss JA
Coal and Allied
[23] (Gaudron, McHugh,
Gummow & Hayne JJ);
Saunders v The Public Trustee
[2015] WASCA
[84] (Mitchell J, with whom Buss JA & Beech J
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[124] (judgment of the court) (
Nominees Pty Ltd v Mirvac (WA) Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 130
[460] (judgment
of the court)
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
90 ALJR 679
(2016) 331 ALR 550
[43] (judgment of the court) (
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
[2019] HCA 18
[47] (Kiefel CJ & Bell J);
Jones v Darkan Hotel
[2014] WASCA 133
[31] (judgment of the
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, 505 (Dixon, Evatt &
McTiernan JJ).
MB, pages 38 -
2025 ts 4; MB, page
(182) - (183) [28] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow & Hayne
May 2025 ts 2; MB, page
2025 ts 2 - ts 3; MB, pages 24 -
2025 ts 3; MB, page
2025 ts 3 - ts 4; MB, pages 24 -
2025 ts 4; MB, page
14 May 2025 ts 4; MB, page
2025 ts 4; MB, page
Taciak v Lyons
Appellant's outline of submissions filed 10 September 2025, pars
(inclusive).
14 May 2025 ts 5; MB, page
2025 ts 5; MB, page
2025 ts 3 - ts 4; MB, pages 25 -
2025 ts 3; MB, page
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
[10] (judgment of the
Wentworth v Rogers
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
537 (Kirby P with whom Hope & Samuels JJA agreed);
(Pritchard J).
Sethi v Bhavsar
[2020] WASCA 52
[27] (reasons of the court)
Neil v Nott
[1994] HCA 23
[1994] HCA 23
(1994) 68 ALJR 509
[1994] HCA 23
, 150 (judgment of the court);
Zerjavic v Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 40
(judgment of the court)
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
[47] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Nettle, Gordon & Edelman JJ);
Woodley v Woodley
[2018] WASCA
[76] (judgment of the court);
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier
Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 65
[51] (judgment of the
Defendi v Szigligeti
[2019] WASCA 115
[45] - [48]
(references omitted) (
); See also:
Davie v Manuel
[2024] WASCA 21
[87] - [91] (
[2023] WASCA 103
[38] - [41] (judgment of the court)
Sovereign Grange Pty Ltd v A V Truck Services Pty
[2017] WASCA 142
[63] (reasons of the court) (
Rowe v Stoltze
[2013] WASCA 92
[51] (Newnes JA,
with whom Pullin JA & Murphy JA agreed)
[2024] WADC 84
[189]; see also
2025 ts 4; MB, page
2025 ts 4; MB, page 25.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter