URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2010/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PG and KRL [2010] WASAT 30 (25 February 2010)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2010] WASAT 30
MS F CHILD (MEMBER)
13 NOVEMBER 2009
DELIVERED :
25 FEBRUARY 2010
FILE NO/S :
GAA 2622 of 2009
GAA 2621 of 2009
Represented Person
Catchwords:
Guardianship and
administration ­ Application for the appointment of a guardian
and an administrator - Conflict between family
and friends of the represented
person - Diagnosis of dementia - Existing enduring power of attorney - Wishes of
the represented person
- Need for independent decision­maker to decide
where the represented person should live
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
State Administrative Tribunal
Public Advocate appointed limited guardian
Application
for the appointment of an administrator dismissed
Representation:
Applicant : Mr R McDonald
Represented Person : Self-represented
Solicitors:
Applicant : William Hughes
Represented Person : Self-represented
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE
Summary of Tribunal's decision
1 The Public Advocate was appointed the limited
guardian of an elderly woman whose capacity to make personal decisions was
2 The Tribunal decided that an independent guardian was needed because,
although the woman had a supportive network, conflict had
arisen among her close
friends and the donees of her enduring power of attorney as to what decisions
were appropriate for her. Some
of the friends disputed that the woman's
capacity to make decisions was impaired. The conflict which had arisen was
distressing
to her and, in the judgment of the Tribunal, she required an
independent guardian to advocate for her interests in any decision made
where she was to live.
3 The application before the Tribunal for the appointment of an
administrator was dismissed. The woman had executed an enduring
attorney in 2006 and there was no evidence this was not working effectively to
manage her finances. The Tribunal decided
there was no need for an
administration order to be made.
The applications
4 These reasons relate to determinations of the
Tribunal of applications filed in October 2009 regarding KRL (represented
An application for the appointment of a guardian for the represented
person was submitted by PG, (applicant), who is her accountant
and one of the
donees of her enduring power of attorney (EPA).
5 The represented person is a widow, has no children, and her brothers and
sisters reside outside Western Australia. In March 2006,
appointed her accountant and a niece as the donees of her EPA.
6 The appointment of a guardian was said to be required for the represented
person because she was in hospital and there was a need
for decisions about
medical treatment for her.
7 The application was treated as an application for the appointment of an
administrator as well. In the course of the submissions
in respect of the
application, it is clear that the applicant believed that the EPA made in favour
of herself, and a niece of the
represented person, should continue to operate.
No substantive issues were raised in relation to the management of the
represented
person's finances, and at the conclusion of the hearing, the
application for the appointment of an administrator was dismissed as
Tribunal found that there was no need for the order to be made.
8 At the time of the hearing, the represented person was in a
care­awaiting placement facility, having been discharged from
There was a disagreement as to whether the represented person should move into
residential care or should return to her
own home with support services. It was
reported that the represented person had expressed differing views about this
issue to those
within her network and a dispute had arisen between them, in
particular, her friends and neighbours and the donees of her EPA.
9 The hearing of the applications was attended by the represented person,
the applicant, her niece, friends and close supportive
neighbours of the
represented person, and representatives of the Public Advocate. The
Public Advocate had, at the request of the
Tribunal, undertaken an
investigation of the applications. At the start of the hearing, at the request
of the solicitor for the
applicant, the Tribunal member spoke with the
represented person, with only the Public Advocate's representatives
10 Brief oral reasons were delivered at the conclusion of the hearing and
these written reasons are produced pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) at the request of the
Legislation
11 To appoint a guardian for the represented person,
the Tribunal must be satisfied that the represented person is a person for whom
such an order can be made.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) (GA Act) provides that a guardian may be appointed for someone who is
incapable of looking after their own health and safety,
unable to make
reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to their person, or in need
of oversight, care or control in the
interests of their own health and safety,
or for the protection of others and is in need of a guardian. These provisions
are subject
to s 4 of the GA Act which sets out the principles which
the Tribunal must observe in all proceedings commenced under the
13 The principles provide that the primary concern of the Tribunal must be
the best interests of the represented person; that every
person shall be
presumed to be capable of looking after their own health and safety and of
making reasonable judgments in respect
of matters relating to their person,
managing their own affairs and making reasonable judgments in respect of matters
relating to
their estate until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the
Tribunal. The principles include that orders should not be
made if the needs of
the person in respect of whom the application had been made, could, in the
opinion of the Tribunal, be met by
means less restrictive of that person's
freedom of decision and action. Any order made should be in terms that impose
restriction possible in the circumstances on the person's freedom of
decision and action. In considering any matter under the GA
Tribunal is bound to attempt to ascertain the wishes of the person as expressed
or gathered from that person's previous
14 To determine the suitability of any proposed guardian, the desirability
of preserving supportive relationships of the represented
person, the
compatibility of the proposed guardian with the represented person and any
administrator of that person's estate, the
wishes of the represented person and
whether the proposed guardian will be able to perform the functions vested in
them must be taken
into account by the Tribunal (s 44(2) of the
Evidence and material before the Tribunal
15 The represented person's general practitioner,
Dr F, reported that the represented person had been a patient at his
practice since
2002 and that in July 2009 she had fallen, fracturing her
right hip, and had subsequently 'developed osteomyelitis of her left great
as a result of arterial insufficiency'. The doctor went on to say that:
... [The represented person] recently underwent an amputation procedure at
[deleted] Hospital ... She also has advanced osteoarthritis
of her knees.
She is quite frail, prone to falls and has some memory and mild cognitive
impairment as a result of dementia. CT scanning of her
brain shows an old
occipital cerebrovascular accident. I do not consider that she is fully capable
of looking after her own health
and safety.
Earlier this year (the represented person) had considerable support from a
neighbour as her self­care was not satisfactory.
The Aged Care Assessment
Team attempted to organise a community assistance program but this was
confounded by (the represented person)
expressing interest initially then
declining when the carers went to see her. I suspect this is a result of her
memory impairment.
I do not think she can reliably make judgements regarding
her optimal care and safety. She now requires hostel placement or alternatively
24 hour care at home.
I believe she does need a guardian.
geriatrician, notes in a medical report dated 12 November 2009, that
the represented person has 'impaired executive function
and capacity to make
informed decision'. He states her condition is a 'progressive' one.
17 The professional evidence about the represented person's capacity was
challenged by her friends, including Mr C, who says that
represented person was in hospital for the surgery on her toe, he had spoken to
Dr G, a surgeon, and he reported that the
doctor's opinion had been that
the represented person was able to make medical decisions. Mr C commented
that the represented person's
general practitioner did not have a good
relationship with the represented person and, as such, his assessment of her was
The report of Dr H was also challenged because it was said that
he assessed the represented person following her hip operation when
she had been
given a general anaesthetic. She had also been on a powerful antibiotic,
morphine, and a mixture of other medications
following the amputation of her
toe. Mr C's perception was that the represented person was perfectly
normal and he had perfectly
normal, lucid conversations with her. He described
her as always being a little indecisive as that was her nature.
18 Ms A, a friend and neighbour, reported a conversation that she had
had with Dr W, a doctor who had briefly assessed the represented
the hospital prior to the operation and who had said, 'If you are happy we'll go
ahead with the operation to amputate the
toe'. The represented person had said
she was, and Dr W had said he would send his therapist to reassess her.
There is no report
of Dr W before the Tribunal, but the social worker from
the hospital reported that:
[The represented person] presents as being pleasantly confused with
short­term memory loss. A mini­mental state exam was
conducted by the
[name deleted] Hospital Occupational Therapist on 6/11/09; (the represented
person) scoring 19/30 (23 or less denotes
cognitive impairment). Cognitive
deficits were primarily noted in the area of recall.
applicant noted that shortly after the amputation of the represented person's
toe, there had been discussion about her discharge
from hospital and she had
been advised that it would be some weeks before the represented person would be
well enough to return home.
The applicant had undertaken some investigation of
options, including services at home and cleaning. The applicant said that the
represented person had been given the option of going home or going into a
hostel. She was told that if she went home, she would
need '24/7' care. The
applicant reported that the represented person had declined to go home on that
20 It was reported that an Aged Care Assessment, conducted in
January 2009, had assessed the represented person as eligible for low
(or hostel level) residential care and for a community aged care package. Her
niece confirmed that while in hospital, the
doctors had said that the
represented person could return home with 24 hour care or else she should
be in hostel care.
21 Although it was generally agreed by the participants in the hearing that
the represented person did need some assistance to live
at home, her reported
decision not to return home was disputed by her friends and neighbours in their
written submissions prior to
the hearing and at the hearing itself. The
attention of the Tribunal was drawn to a statutory declaration made by the
represented
person on 29 October 2009, while still in hospital, that
she wished to return to her home with services.
22 The applicant states that in relation to consent to the amputation of the
represented person's toe, she had varied in her views
from day to day, on one
day agreeing to the surgery and the next deciding that she did not want to go
ahead with it. In the end,
the represented person is reported by the applicant
to have asked her to make the decision for her and the applicant had signed the
consent form at the hospital when requested to do so.
23 The applicant says that in the past, the represented person asked her to
make sure she was looked after into the future and she
agreed to do so. The
niece said that when asked, the represented person had said she was happy to
have the applicant as her guardian.
24 The representative of the Public Advocate (Public Advocate)
submitted that the report of Dr H should be considered in light of
specialist qualifications, and the report of Dr F, in light of his personal
on that evidence, the
represented person is a person for whom a guardianship order can be made. The
Public Advocate submitted that
there was a need for an order to be made
because of the 'pressure' the represented person was under in relation to the
personal decisions
in the context of a diagnosis of dementia, and a past history
of 'oscillation' in making decisions. The Public Advocate submitted
the functions in any guardianship order made should include authority to decide
where the represented person should live and
the represented person's access to
services and medical treatment. The Public Advocate submitted that medical
treatment decision­making
should be included in the functions given to the
guardian as there may have been some misunderstanding that the attorneys had the
power to make medical decisions on behalf of the represented person under the
EPA, but that this was not correct.
Wishes of the represented person
25 At the request of the solicitor for the
applicant, the represented person was interviewed alone, with the Tribunal
the representatives of the Public Advocate present.
26 The represented person acknowledged her health difficulties, and when the
medical evidence was put to her that her memory was
not as good as it once was,
she acknowledged this, saying, 'Of course this is what I have said to my niece.
We don't stand still'.
In relation to the hearing and the matters raised, in
particular the decisions to be made about accommodation, the represented person
said, 'I can't bear this business of argument and nonsense. I say it is
argument and nastiness'. When it was said that everyone
was very concerned for
her, she responded, 'They have all been wonderfully kind and good, but they have
twisted me and I don't know
where I am'. Later she said:
I don't like being pushed around, told what to do ­ well, when I
say 'told what to do', I don't mind being told, but I don't
like it when people,
you know, are a little bit yucky'.
27 The represented person
would not indicate who was being a bit pushy with her. Later, she said, 'I
don't want to hurt my friends
by saying something I shouldn't say or doing
something. I just want a quiet life for them and for me'. In relation to the
she said, 'Get it all over and done with. It's sickening, but I don't
like hurting people'. Later on, she reiterated, 'People are
very good. They
have done what they can. I don't like hurting people'. And later to the
Tribunal member she said, 'So I just felt
maybe I should leave it in your hands
to do what you think the best'. She found the facility in which she was staying
unpleasantly
noisy, but she had not complained.
Reasons of the Tribunal
28 Although the capacity evidence is challenged,
the only direct medical evidence before the Tribunal is that of the reports of
H and Dr F, and their evidence is consistent that the represented
person's capacity to make decisions about her person is impaired.
29 The challenge to the general practitioner's evidence is on the basis that
the represented person had complained to her friend
that her doctor did not
properly appreciate her situation and treated her in a cursory manner. However,
Dr F is reported to have
been the represented person's doctor for some
years and, from the letter produced to the Tribunal, it is clear that he had
consideration to the personal circumstances of the represented person in
relation to her care needs at home. The evidence of the
geriatrician, Dr H,
that the represented person's executive functioning, her judgment, is impaired
is also challenged by her friends.
Although it is accepted that the assessment
by Dr H may have occurred at a time when the represented person was
recovering from
an acute illness, his evidence about the impairment of the
represented person's capacity is considered in the light of his specialty
assessment and care of elderly patients) and is the most recent evidence. It is
consistent with that of her long­term
doctor and the reported findings of
the assessment by the occupational therapist. No other medical reports are put
before the Tribunal.
The reported views of the surgeon and Dr W cannot be
given much weight, especially considering the referral for, and subsequent
occupational therapist's (OT) assessment, and the consent for, the amputation
being sought from the attorney.
30 Based on the reports of Dr F and Dr H and the OT assessment
which are before the Tribunal, I find that the represented person
is a person
who is in need of oversight and care in the interests of her own health and
safety, and she is therefore a person for
whom a guardianship order can be
31 The Tribunal accepts the submissions of the Public Advocate that the
represented person is in need of a guardian to make decisions,
not only because
she has what Dr H described as an impairment of executive functioning, but
because she is under pressure because
of the gravity of the decision before her
to return to her own home or to enter residential care. This was apparent in
her own statements.
32 The Tribunal accepts that all of the network of people around the
represented person are well intentioned and are all very concerned
interests. All want what is best for the represented person and have tried to
convey to the Tribunal and to others what
she has expressed to them.
33 Although the represented person expressed to the Tribunal and to the
Public Advocate's representative her gratitude for the support
friends and family, it is apparent from her comments noted above that she is
distressed by the conflict.
34 It is accepted by the Tribunal that the represented person may have
indicated to different people differing views as to what was
her preference in
relation to a return home or the acceptance of services to remain at home or
entry to a hostel. The Tribunal notes
the statutory declaration made by the
represented person and accepts the submission of the Public Advocate that
some caution should
be exercised in placing too much reliance on the durability
of the statements, given the circumstances surrounding the declaration
made. It is clear that many friends of the represented person do not accept
that she has an impairment of her memory and her
judgment and, consequently,
they rely on what the represented person says and have started to doubt the
motivations of the others.
The friends now fear the attorneys are not acting in
the best interests of the represented person or are making decisions against
wishes. The breakdown in the relationships in a previously supportive network
is not in the interests of the represented person,
especially because of the
obvious emotional impact it has had on her.
35 Unfortunately, the challenging decision before the represented person,
whether she enters residential care or returns home with
services, has caused a
fracture in what has been an otherwise supportive network. Because of the
conflict between those closest
to her, an independent guardian is required to
make the decision about where the represented person should live.
36 The guardian also needs the function to consent to medical treatment on
behalf of the represented person as her own judgment is
impaired, and although
the applicant, as the represented person's attorney, gave consent to the
amputation of her toe, that authority
is not within the power and this informal
arrangement is not consistent with the provisions for consent to medical
treatment as provided
in the GA Act.
37 In respect of consent to services, the represented person is noted by
Dr F to have refused services. However, it is also reported
requires 24 hour care to live safely in her own home. A trial of living at
and the guardian needs
this authority, in the best interests of the represented person, to facilitate
her return to living in the
community if possible.
38 The applicant, who is a long­term friend and the accountant of the
represented person, and the represented person's niece,
propose their joint
appointment as guardians. The applicant and the niece are the donees of the
represented person's EPA executed
in 2006, at a time when no issue is raised
that they have worked effectively to manage a number of matters for the
represented person since their appointment. The choice of
them as attorneys is
suggestive of trust being placed in them by the represented person. Despite
this background, in the current
circumstances, the appointment of the applicant
and the niece as guardians is not appropriate, because of the conflict that has
between them and the network of friends of the represented person who
have played a significant supportive role in her life and will
likely continue
to do so. There now exists a degree of distrust between the attorneys and the
friends and this is not conducive
to the resolution of the question of where the
represented person should live.
39 An independent guardian will have the opportunity to arrange a further
assessment of the represented person's capacity to express
a consistent wish
regarding this matter, given the reported inconsistency in the views she has
expressed to date. In the judgment
of the Tribunal, the circumstances of the
represented person require an independent decision­maker so that all the
parties can
have confidence in the final decision so that they can work
cooperatively to support the represented person in that decision. For
reason, the appointment of the Public Advocate as limited guardian is made
for a period of six months.
40 In respect of the application for the appointment of the administrator,
the Tribunal was not satisfied that an administration
order should be made.
41 The attorneys had been appointed by the represented person pursuant to an
EPA she executed in 2006. No real objection was raised
to the way that the
attorneys had managed the finances of the represented person. The suggestion
that the represented person had
changed her mind and intended to revoke the EPA
did not persuade the Tribunal that an administration order should be made or
the arrangements put in place by the represented person should be
interfered with. Having considered the available medical evidence,
doubt as to whether the represented person was capable at the time when she was
in hospital when she was said to have
wished to revoke the EPA. In any event,
the EPA was not revoked by the represented person. The represented person had
also at other
times expressed her satisfaction with the attorneys.
42 The position of the applicant was that only if there were questions
raised about the operation of the EPA did the attorneys seek
their appointments
as administrators. Since no real issue was taken with the operation of the EPA
by the friends of the represented
person (other than the authority did not
extend to health or lifestyle matters), the Tribunal considered that the EPA
represented
a less restrictive alternative for the management of the represented
person's finances and, therefore, that the represented person
was not in need of
an administrator of her estate.
43 It was clear from the submissions that the applicant did not intend that
an administration order should be made in place of the
EPA, but that this was
only the position put in the alternative. The Tribunal dismissed this
application, noting that other parties
are entitled to bring applications for
the appointment of an administrator for the represented person's estate should
they consider
that the EPA was not operating in her best interests.
44 The Tribunal makes the following orders:
Public Advocate of Level 1, Hyatt Centre, 30 Terrace Road,
East Perth, Western Australia be appointed limited guardian of the
represented person with the following functions:
(a) to decide
where the represented person is to live, whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live;
(c) subject to Div 3 of
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, to consent to any treatment or health care of the
represented person; and
(d) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
Tribunal approves delegation by the Public Advocate of her functions as guardian
of the represented person to an officer or employee
employed in the Office of
the Public Advocate.
order is to be reviewed by 13 May 2010.
application for the appointment of an administrator is dismissed.
I certify that this and the preceding [44] paragraphs comprise the
reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
___________________________________
MS F CHILD, MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter