URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2006/110.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jjb & Erb [2006] WASAT 110 (5 May 2006)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2006] WASAT 110
MS F CHILD (MEMBER)
9 FEBRUARY 2006
DELIVERED :
FILE NO/S :
GAA 2236 of 2005
GAA 2238 of 2005
Represented Persons
Catchwords:
Guardianship and administration – Need for orders
Section 119
not operative for consent to treatment where spouse
incapable – Enduring Powers of Attorney – Obligations on donees of
enduring power of attorney appointed jointly and severally – Wishes of
donors – Existing enduring powers of attorney
not operating to protect the
interests of the donors – Need for an administration order –
Enduring power of attorney
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Applicant appointed limited guardian and plenary
administrator
Enduring power of attorney revoked
Representation:
Represented Persons : N/A
Solicitors:
Represented Persons : N/A
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE
Summary of the Tribunal's decision
1 The granddaughter of an elderly married couple applied for orders from the
State Administrative Tribunal under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(WA) (GA Act).
2 Both members of the elderly couple, who were residents of a nursing home,
were diagnosed as suffering from dementia and were unable
to make decisions
3 The couple had appointed their son and their daughter-in-law, jointly and
severally, under enduring powers of attorney signed
in 2001. There was evidence
before the Tribunal that the donees of the enduring powers of attorney had
transferred $250 000
to themselves
and had mortgaged the previously
unencumbered property of the couple prior to its sale.
4 It was apparent from the medical evidence before the Tribunal, that the
elderly man was hospitalised at the time, suffering dementia
and not capable of
making a gift of his property. There was also doubt whether his wife was
capable at the time of the transfer
of the funds, because of the medical and
other evidence of the circumstances existing at the time.
5 Following the death of the son, the granddaughter applied to the Tribunal and
was appointed administrator and guardian for her
grandparents. The Tribunal
found that there was a need for formal orders for both guardianship and
administration for both members
of the elderly couple. There was a need for a
guardian as each was incapable of giving consent to treatment of the other. The
found there was a need for administrators to be appointed for the
management of their estates, even though there were existing powers
of attorney
in favour of their daughter-in-law, which as joint and several appointments
continued after the death of the son.
6 The enduring powers of attorney were revoked by the Tribunal as it was clear
on the evidence before the Tribunal that the joint
donees had not discharged
their obligations under the GA Act, to maintain records of all transactions and
to protect the interests
of the elderly couple. The Tribunal determined that it
was inappropriate that their daughter-in-law continue to play a role in relation
to the management of their estates.
7 The granddaughter was appointed administrator to manage and protect her
grandparent's estates, and to attempt to recover funds
inappropriately disbursed
by the donees. She was appointed limited guardian of each to consent to medical
Applications
8 The written reasons for decision in these matters are provided at the request
of the applicant under
State Administrative Tribunal Act
9 These reasons relate to applications before the Tribunal for the appointment
of a guardian and an administrator for both JJB and
ERB, an elderly married
couple who both have a diagnosis of dementia and who at the time of the hearing,
were resident in an aged
care facility.
10 The applications are made by their granddaughter (the applicant) pursuant to
Guardianship and Administration Act
(WA) (GA Act).
11 The applications were heard together. Neither JJB nor ERB attended the
hearing as the medical evidence provided stated that
it would be detrimental to
their health for them to attend as they both have severe dementia and agitation,
and could make no contribution
to the hearing.
12 The applicant attended as did her father, GA, (the son-in-law of JJB and
ERB), HS, the brother of ERB, and SB, the daughter-in-law
of JJB and ERB and the
donee of their enduring powers of attorney (the donee). The donee was
represented at the hearing by Mr B
Wotherspoon
13 To protect the privacy of the JJB and ERB, names of all parties will be
anonymised in these reasons, consistent with the practice
of the Tribunal in
proceedings brought under the GA
Legislation
14 Before a guardian can be appointed under s 43 of the GA Act, the
Tribunal must be satisfied that one or all of the matters
subsection 43(1)(b) apply to that person. That provision states that the
Tribunal must be satisfied that the person
the subject of an application
"(i) incapable of looking after his own health and
(ii) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to
(iii) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of his own
health and safety or for the protection of others ..."
15 Even where the Tribunal is satisfied in relation to any of the above
elements, it must also be satisfied that the person is in
need of a guardian
(s 43(1)(c)).
16 Before an administrator may be appointed under s 64, the Tribunal must
be satisfied that the person is unable, by reason
disability, to make
reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to all or any part of his
estate; and is in need
of an administrator
of his estate.
17 Section 43 and s 64 of the GA Act, for the appointment of a
guardian and administrator respectively, are expressly
the GA Act, which
dealing with the proceedings commenced under this Act the State Administrative
Tribunal shall observe the principles set out
in subsection (2).
(2) (a) The primary concern of the Tribunal shall be the best interests of
any represented person, or of a person in respect of whom
an application is
(b) Every person shall be presumed to be capable of —
(i) looking after his own health and safety;
(ii) making reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
(iii) managing his own affairs; and
(iv) making reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the State Administrative
(c) A guardianship or administration order shall not be made if the needs of
the person in respect of whom an application for such
an order is made could, in
the opinion of the State Administrative Tribunal, be met by other means less
restrictive of the person's
freedom of decision and action.
(d) A plenary guardian shall not be appointed under section 43(1) if the
appointment of a limited guardian under that section
be sufficient, in the
opinion of the State Administrative Tribunal, to meet the needs of the person in
respect of whom the
application
(e) An order appointing a limited guardian or an administrator for a person
shall be in terms that, in the opinion of the State Administrative
impose the least restrictions possible in the circumstances on the person's
freedom of decision and action.
(f) In considering any matter relating to a represented person or a person in
respect of whom an application is made the State Administrative
Tribunal shall,
as far as possible, seek to ascertain the views and wishes of the person
concerned as expressed, in whatever manner,
at the time, or as gathered from the
person's previous actions."
18 Section 44(2) of the GA Act provides guidance as to the question of
suitability for appointment of a person as guardian,
the desirability
of preserving existing relationships, the compatibility of the proposed
appointee with any appointed administrator,
the wishes of the represented person
and whether the proposed appointee will be able to perform the functions vested
in him or her.
19 There may be no need for the appointment of a guardian to consent to medical
treatment for a person who is incapable of giving
consent, if there is someone
in the life of the incapable patient who can give consent recognised under
s 119(3) of the GA Act.
If there is such a person, he or she may give
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the incapable person without the need
a formal order.
20 Section 119 provides:
"(1) If in the opinion of a
practitioner a person presented to him for treatment
(a) is in need of urgent treatment;
(b) is incapable of consenting to the proposed treatment
(c) is at the time of presentation a person for whom a guardian could be
appointed under this Act,
the practitioner may provide the treatment if the person referred to in
subsection (3) consents to it.
(1a) A practitioner may provide treatment under subsection (1) without
the consent of the person referred to in subsection (3)
in the opinion
of the practitioner it is not practicable to obtain that consent.
(2) If in the opinion of a practitioner a person presented to him for
(a) is in need of treatment that is not urgent treatment;
(b) is incapable of consenting to the proposed treatment
(c) is at the time of presentation a person for whom a guardian could be
appointed under this Act,
the practitioner may provide the treatment if the person referred to in
subsection (3) consents to it.
(3) For the purposes of subsections (1) and (2), the person who may consent
to treatment is the first in order of priority of the
following persons
(a) a guardian of the person needing the treatment;
(b) the spouse or de facto partner of the person needing the treatment;
(c) a person who, on a regular basis, provides or arranges for domestic
services and support to the person needing the treatment but
does not receive
remuneration for doing so;
(d) a person who is the nearest relative (other than the spouse or de facto
partner) of the person needing the treatment and who maintains
a close personal
relationship with the person needing the treatment;
(e) any other person who maintains a close personal relationship with the
person needing treatment
(f) a person prescribed in the regulations.
(3a) For the purposes of subsection (3) a person is to be regarded as
maintaining a close personal relationship with the person needing
the treatment
if the relationship is maintained through frequent personal contact and a
personal interest in the welfare of the person
needing the treatment.
(4) In this section
'practitioner' in relation to medical treatment means a medical practitioner
within the meaning of the
Medical Act 1894
, and in relation to dental
treatment means a dentist registered under the
Dental Act 1939
'urgent treatment' means treatment that in the opinion of the practitioner
concerned is urgently needed
(a) to save the life of the person needing the treatment;
(b) to prevent serious damage to the health of the person needing the
(c) to prevent the person needing the treatment from suffering or continuing
to suffer significant pain or distress."
21 The GA Act sets out the obligations of donees who accept appointment under
an enduring power of attorney. Whether appointed
donees have met these
obligations is a relevant consideration in the determination of whether any
existing enduring power of attorney
executed by a proposed represented person
can operate as a less restrictive alternative to the making of an administration
for that person.
22 Specifically s 107 provides:
"(1) The donee of an
enduring power of attorney
(a) shall exercise his powers as attorney with reasonable diligence to
protect the interests of the donor and, if he fails to do so,
he is liable to
the donor for any loss occasioned by the failure;
(b) shall keep and preserve accurate records and accounts of all dealings and
transactions made under the power
(c) subject to section 109(2), may not renounce a power during any period of
legal incapacity of the donor
(d) shall, if the donee becomes bankrupt, report that bankruptcy to the State
Administrative Tribunal.
Penalty applicable to paragraph (b): $2 000."
Evidence and material before the Tribunal
Previous application for intervention by the donees of the
enduring powers of attorney
23 The Tribunal absorbed the jurisdiction and functions of the former
Guardianship and Administration Board (the Board) in January
files previously held by the Board are now in the possession of the
24 On the material before the Tribunal, it seems that JJB and ERB both executed
enduring powers of attorneys on 12 September 2001.
The son of the
couple (now deceased) and their daughter-in-law were appointed jointly and
severally as donees. The enduring powers
of attorney were in the form to come
into force from the date of execution.
25 On 1 May 2003, the son of JJB and ERB applied to the Board under
s 109 of the GA Act for orders varying the power
and seeking
direction in
respect of the enduring power of attorney executed by JJB.
26 The application form submitted to the Board by the son states that the
reason for the application was the "wish to borrow money
on my parents
] behalf to maintain their home".
27 In response to a question in the application form regarding informing the
donors of the application, the applicant son responded
"[n]o ... They have lost
the capacity to understand". In a letter dated 30 April 2003, the
applicant son states "[m]y
[m]other has
severe dementia and my father has severe
Alzheimers [
28 The letter proposes that $30 000 be borrowed on behalf of JJB and ERB
to effect repairs on their property. Later, in a
11 June 2003 to the Board, the applicant son refers to his application
and states that his parents "have both
deteriorated
rapidly". It refers to an
admission of his father to hospital after a period of wandering and a police
"Both he and my Mother have no recollection of this. My Mothers [
loss of reality and her fear of being put into a nursing home is affecting her
judgment in not accepting the severity of danger
29 The file also contains medical and allied health reports regarding both JJB
30 A letter from the donee, dated 8 July 2003, states in part "I
fully support the application made by my husband ..."
31 The letter notes concern about "a fast deterioration in their condition.
[JJB] is now unable to make any decisions for himself
and ... [ERB] is
struggling also with this responsibility".
32 The documents from the file including the application, file notes,
correspondence and a report of a social worker from the Department
Rehabilitation and Aged Care were tabled at the hearing of the current
applications. The relevance of the material from this
earlier application
before the former Board will be discussed later in these
33 In respect of the issue of the current capacity of JJB and ERB, there is no
conflict among those at the hearing that both are
incapable of making decisions
in relation to their persons or in relation to their estates.
34 Reports were provided to the Tribunal by Dr MJ, who notes that he has known
JJB and ERB for two years, and both are suffering
from dementia and are
incapable of managing their affairs both in relation to their personal living
situation, health care and financial
decision-making.
35 In respect of JJB, Dr JM described a diagnosis of "probable Alzheimer's
36 A report from the director of nursing of the aged care facility in which JJB
lives states that he had been admitted there from
Selby Lodge, a
psycho-geriatric facility.
37 In respect of ERB, Dr MJ states that the diagnosis is "[d]ementia –
query – Alzheimer's" and "there's been a
decline". The
director of nursing notes, "[c]ognitive decline, anxiety, Alzheimer's disease,
admitted from Selby Lodge,
unable to converse sensibly".
38 Medical reports on the file of the former Board relate primarily to JJB but
also refer to ERB.
39 Other medical evidence was provided by the applicant in the course of the
hearing, including discharge summaries from Selby Lodge
dated April 2004,
for both JJB and ERB.
40 Based on all the medical evidence, I find that both JJB and ERB are persons
for whom administration and guardianship orders can
Need for a guardianship order
41 The applicant states that there is a need for the appointment of a guardian
for the purposes of giving consent to medical treatment
of both JJB and ERB.
42 Although the applicant describes the couple as being in reasonably good
health, other than their cognitive impairments, she considers
that there is a
need for certainty about future decisions regarding medical treatment. She
states that she is a registered nurse
and has the necessary experience to make
medical decisions for her grandparents. She states she has regular contact with
of the aged care facility where they live.
43 The donee does not support the appointment of a guardian for JJB or ERB, as
she considers that there is no need for the appointments.
It is submitted that
prior to his death, the son gave consent to medical treatment and the health
care of his parents, and this
informal decision-making should continue and that
should future health issues arise for JJB or ERB, any decisions can be made
by their relatives, including the donee and the applicant.
44 Counsel argued that if informal decision-making could not occur, then
s 119 of the GA Act provides a mechanism by which
to treatment
could be obtained if necessary. The operation of s 119 was said to provide
a less restrictive alternative
to the appointment
of a guardian.
45 Having considered the position of JJB and ERB, and all of the evidence, I
consider that even if it was a lawful less restrictive
alternative to the
proposed guardianship orders, the proposed informal arrangement of joint
decision-making by family members is
unlikely to operate effectively because of
the apparent breakdown in the relationships between the donee and the other
the family present at the hearing.
46 In respect of the submission by counsel regarding the operation of
s 119 of the GA Act, I consider that s 119 cannot
situation of either member of this couple.
47 As set out above, the GA Act provides in s 119(3) the persons who may
give consent for a patient who requires treatment
consent to it.
48 The section provides that the person who may consent is the first in order
of priority of those in the list. The first in the
order of priority in the
list is a guardian. The second is the spouse of the person needing treatment.
49 Both JJB and ERB have a spouse but that spouse, because of his or her own
disability, is unable to give consent to treatment
on behalf of the other.
Although the spouse is the first in order of priority of persons under
s 119(3), each is unable to
that role. Because of the language of
the section, it is not possible to go beyond the first in the order of persons
as it applies in a particular case.
50 As there is no person able to give lawful consent to medical treatment for
JJB and ERB under s 119 of the GA, there is,
statutory sense of
s 43(1)(c) a need for a guardian for each of them.
51 While the donee did not consider that there was a need for an order if an
appointment was to be made, she proposed a joint appointment
of herself with the
applicant. The applicant did not support a joint appointment.
52 Because of the manifest deterioration in the relationship between the donee
and the applicant, a joint appointment was considered
inappropriate and not in
the best interests of JJB and ERB.
53 In relation to the suitability of the applicant for appointment the donee
described the applicant during the hearing as a "wonderful
person" who had been
an "excellent granddaughter" to JJB and ERB, and that she supported her making
decisions for them (transcript
54 The appointment of the applicant as guardian to give consent to medical
treatment of JJB and ERB was supported by the other family
Need for an administration
55 The applicant states that following the death of the son of JJB and ERB in
November 2005, family members had become concerned
JJB and ERB were managed.
56 The applicant states that information about the finances had not been
forthcoming from the donee immediately following the son's
death, and what was
known by family members from the donee about transactions undertaken by the son
had concerned her and prompted
her application for appointment as administrator
for the estates of JJB and ERB.
57 In response to the application, the donee's submission is that while it is
accepted that both JJB and ERB are suffering from
dementia and are incapable of
making reasonable decisions in respect of their estates, there is no need for
the appointment of administrators
as both JJB and ERB executed enduring powers
of attorney in 2001, in which they both appointed their son and daughter-in-law,
donee, as joint and several attorneys.
58 The submission is that the enduring powers of attorney express the
intentions of JJB and ERB for the management of their estates
while they were
both capable of expressing that wish, and provide a less restrictive alternative
which meet the needs of JJB and
ERB for management of their financial affairs
and as such, the Tribunal may not appoint administrators for them.
59 The donee did not accept that she had failed to provide information about
the management of the estates and stated that the sudden
death of the son of JJB
and ERB, her husband, and the impact this had had on her and her children, had
not been acknowledged by the
other family members.
60 Copies of the enduring powers of attorney executed by JJB and ERB are before
the Tribunal.
61 Both the applicant and HS suggested in the course of the hearing that the
signature on the enduring power of attorney was not
that of JJB.
62 It is not necessary to deal with this issue for the purpose of these
reasons, as both enduring powers of attorney were revoked
for other reasons.
The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Tribunal accepted the enduring
powers of attorney of JJB and ERB
as validly executed and witnessed instruments
by which each appointed the donee and her late husband as joint and several
63 It is accepted that the authority of the donee is not "invalidated" by the
death of the other donee.
64 The further submission at the hearing by the applicant, is that the donees
have not acted appropriately under the enduring powers
of attorney by making a
gift of $250 000 of the funds of JJB and ERB to themselves, and by mortgaging
their property prior to its
sale. She also raises the possibility that the
donees of the enduring powers of attorney have not accurately stated the asset
of JJB and ERB in declarations made by them to Centrelink and for
assessment of the nursing home fees, and as such, the donees may
have breached
obligations and have incurred liabilities for the estates of JJB and ERB for
overpayments of pension and underassessment
of nursing home fees.
65 The applicant states the donees borrowed money secured by mortgage on the
property of JJB and ERB in October 2003, at a
when they were in
Selby Lodge, a psycho-geriatric facility, and not expected to return to
their home to live. Documents
at the hearing by the applicant
included "[d]ischarge letters" for both JJB and ERB from Selby Lodge with
dates for each
as 5 September 2003 and discharge dates of
14 April 2004. The applicant states, and the reports
of the director
of nursing confirm,
that both JJB and ERB were admitted to the nursing home
where they now reside from Selby Lodge.
66 A settlement statement, dated 7 May 2004, for the settlement of
the sale of the property of JJB and ERB was provided
to the hearing
donee. It refers to the sale price $550 000 and the discharge of mortgage
to the Challenge Bank
in the amount of $100 229.38.
67 The donee confirmed the mortgage and states that the loan was obtained so
that her husband could "... renovate their house so
that he could keep them
cared for in there and then that changed because of their decline and then it
was going to be our house ..."
(transcript page 30).
68 When asked what the loan monies had been used for, the donee states that she
didn't know, but later said that some of the money
had been used for renovations
of the property (transcript page 31). The applicant challenges this saying
that she didn't see
evidence of any improvements made to the house. The
written submission for the donee does not refer to the mortgage or the
disbursement
of loan monies.
69 The lack of certainty and clarity in the evidence of the donee regarding the
disbursement of the loan monies suggests that the
funds were not applied to
repair or renovation of the property of JJB and ERB, and I accept the evidence
of the applicant in this
70 In relation to the $250 000 said to be gifted by JJB and ERB to the
donee and her late husband, the written submission made
behalf of the donee
"The house was sold so that [JJB] could receive appropriate care in a nursing
[ERB] also moved into the
ERB was capable of looking
after herself and making her own decisions. Around
this time, [ERB] had said to [the son] that he could have 250,000 of the
from the sale. Our client recalls [ERB] saying to [the son] on
numerous occasions in 2004 that he could have 250,000 because [JJB]
longer needed it and because it would be better that he had the money now which
he was to receive under [JJB] and [ERB]'s
wills rather than leave it sitting in
the bank. We are instructed that [ERB] had capacity to gift the money at that
time. In response
to his mother's comments and with her authorisation, [the
son] transferred $250,000 of the sale proceeds to
71 The donee's evidence in the hearing is that $250 000 was transferred
into a bank account in her name alone as her husband
not have a bank
account. From there it was transferred into the mortgage account in both their
72 The $250 000 "gifted" was part of the proceeds of sale of the jointly
owned property of JJB and ERB. The written submission
does not refer to or
address the question of the capacity of JJB to make the gift of the jointly
owned funds and all the medical
and other evidence including that of the donee
herself appears to support the view that he was not capable at the time the
were transferred.
73 The applicant considers that ERB also would not have been capable of making
this gift at the time of the transfer of the funds.
The contemporaneous medical
evidence provided by the applicant and the material available from the former
Board's file tends to
support the view of the applicant.
74 It was submitted for the donee that the financial affairs of JJB and ERB
were managed entirely by the son during his lifetime.
It was said that the
donee never used the power of attorney in any way to deal with the financial
affairs of JJB or ERB. It was
said, that as she never used the power, she
herself had never kept records and she had no knowledge of the financial
75 She states she "had nothing to do with the bank accounts" (transcript
page 39). It was submitted by counsel that she had
on her husband
to manage the estates as she "trusted him" (transcript page 5). Later,
when questioned about the disbursement
loan funds obtained, she stated that
"I was never allowed to know" (transcript page 31). The donee persisted in
her statements
the hearing that she had not been involved in any of the
financial dealings but this is inconsistent with the other evidence both
relation to the receipt of funds and in relation to resident's agreements
apparently signed by her. Whatever the true position,
she accepted the role of
donee and the obligations under s 107 of the GAA Act arise from her
acceptance of that role. It was
by counsel that the obligations arise
for both donees (transcript page 28).
76 The submission of the donee that she continues in her role as donee to
provide for the future management of the financial affairs
of JJB and ERB cannot
be sustained. On the one hand she states she should continue as she was
appointed by JJB and ERB, on the other
she states that she never acted in the
role of attorney and appears to accept no responsibility for the management of
the affairs
of JJB and ERB during the period the enduring powers of attorney
have been in effect. From her evidence, it appears she is not familiar
day to day financial arrangements involved in the management of their
77 Having considered all of the evidence submitted, including the donee's own
evidence regarding the past management of the estate
under the stewardship of
the donee and her late husband, I consider there is a need for administration
orders to be made for both
JJB and ERB.
78 I accept that the enduring powers of attorney reflected the wishes of JJB
and ERB regarding the future management of their affairs
when they appointed the
donee and her late husband jointly and severally as donees. In doing so, JJB
and ERB placed great trust
in their son and the donee to manage their affairs
diligently and to protect their interests. It is clear from the evidence that
their estates have been diminished significantly during the period of the
stewardship of the donees.
79 It is in the best interests of JJB and ERB that an administrator be
appointed for each of them and while this may not be consistent
with the wishes
expressed at the time of execution of their enduring powers of attorney, the
Tribunal is bound to make orders in
the best interests of the donors consistent
with their protection from financial abuse.
80 The applicant submits, and I accept, that she should be appointed
administrator for both JJB and ERB to preserve what is left
in the estates and
to attempt to recover funds inappropriately dispersed by the donees.
81 She is appointed limited guardian to consent to treatment of both JJB and
82 The Tribunal makes the following
1. KLW be appointed plenary administrator of the estate of JJB and ERB with all
the powers and duties conferred by the Act.
2. The enduring power of attorney dated 12 September 2001, by which
JJB and ERB appointed DJB and SMB to be his attorneys,
be revoked.
3. This order is to be reviewed by
9 February 2011.
I certify that this and the preceding [82] paragraphs comprise the reasons for
decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
___________________________________
MS F CHILD, MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter