URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BT (pseudonym initials) -v- LG (pseudonym initials) [2025] WADC 72 (14 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
BT (pseudonym initials) -v- LG (pseudonym initials)
JEYAMOHAN DCJ
2 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
14 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
APP 37 of 2025
BT (pseudonym initials)
LG (pseudonym initials)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MAGISTRATE KEANE
File Number :
MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025 & MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025
Appeal from Magistrates Court -
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA) - Final Violence Restraining Order in place - Whether
exceptional circumstances exist to warrant the grant of leave to adduce
additional evidence - Appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings) Act
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Kobelt
[2019] HCA 18
Binningup Nominees Pty Ltd v Mirvac (WA) Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 130
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
(1944) 68 CLR 571
Charisteas v Charisteas
[2021] HCA 29
(2021) 273 CLR 289
Chin v Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2011] WASCA 110
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
De Alwis v The State of Western Australia [No 2]
[2015] WASCA 42
Defendi v Szigligeti
[2019] WASCA 115
Ebner v The Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
Frigger v Frigger
[2023] WASCA 103
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
Hastings v Cassells
[2025] WADC 49
Ibrahim v The Honourable Justice Carolyn Martin
[2012] WASC 338
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South Wales Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
Jones v Darkan Hotel
[2014] WASCA 133
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[2021] WASCA 176
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 65
MTI v SUL [No 2]
[2012] WASCA 87
Murray v Feast
[2023] WASC 273
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
Nugawela v American Express Australia Ltd
[2016] WADC 170
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics Ltd
[2021] WASCA 25
R v Kelly; Ex parte Hoang van Duong
(1981) 28 SASR 271
Rankilor v Circuit Travel Pty Ltd
[2013] WASCA 148
Re JRL; Ex parte CJL
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR 342
Reynolds v Rayney
[2023] WASCA 144
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
(2016) 331 ALR 550
Rowe v Stoltze
[2013] WASCA 92
Sampey v Doherty
[2024] WASCA 105
Saunders v The Public Trustee
[2015] WASCA 203
Shilkin v Taylor
[2011] WASCA 255
Smart v Albuquerque
[2011] WASCA 231
Smart v Power
[2019] WASCA 106
Smart v Prisoner Review Board (WA)
[2012] WASC 48
TAH v The Public Advocate
[2024] WADC 71
Tobin v Dodd
[2004] WASCA 288
Total Value Auto & Finance Pty Ltd v Small
[2004] NSWSC 1040
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
Wise v Keilo Jane Wise as Executrix of the Estate of Audrey Vera Wise
Woodley v Woodley
[2018] WASCA 149
Wreford v Castleyheard Pty Ltd [No 3]
[2024] WASCA 2
[2024] WADC 84
Zerjavic v Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 40
Introduction
notice of appeal filed 17 July 2025, the appellant appeals against the
decision of Magistrate Keane made on 18 March 2025 granting
respondent a final family violence restraining order (FVRO) in
Magistrates Court proceedings MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025 against the
the reasons which follow, leave to appeal out of time is allowed, leave to
adduce the additional evidence is not granted and
the appeal is otherwise
Proceedings in the Magistrates Court
parties applied for a FVRO against the other, the subject of the following
proceedings before the lower court:
Magistrates Court
proceeding MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025 (BT Application)
Magistrates Court
proceeding MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025 (LG Application)
applications were the subject of a final determination before the
learned magistrate at the hearing on 18 March 2025.
The procedural
history in respect of each of the applications can be
summarised as follows.
MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025 (BT Application)
6 February 2025, the appellant was the applicant for a FVRO against the
respondent.
6 February 2025, the appellant was granted an interim FVRO against the
respondent (844/2025
Interim FVRO).
On 7 February 2025, the respondent, lodged an objection to the
Interim FVRO (844/2025
Objection).
application dated 7 February 2025, the respondent applied to vary the
844/2025 Interim FVRO to allow the respondent to enter and
remain in the
family home (844/2025
Variation Application).
MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025 (LG Application)
7 February 2025, the respondent was the applicant for a FVRO against the
(LG Application).
On 7 February 2025, the respondent was granted an interim FVRO
against the respondent (870/2025 Interim FVRO) following a hearing
application.
12 February 2025, the appellant lodged an objection to the
Interim FVRO (870/2025
Objection).
Hearing on 18 March 2025
applications proceeded to final hearing on 18 March 2025 before
Magistrate Keane, with the 870/2025 Application being by way
cross-application to the appellant's 844/2025 Application.
parties appeared in person at the hearing on 18 March 2025, with the
respondent having the assistance of an interpreter for
the purposes of the
hearing. The transcript of the hearing of both applications forms part of the
870/2025 MB.
learned magistrate determined as follows on 18 March 2025
(Decision):
BT Application be dismissed and restraining order
final FVRO (Final FVRO) be granted in respect of the LG Application
pursuant to s 60(2) of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(ROA) in favour of the
respondent.
Appeal to the District Court
appeal is brought pursuant to
Magistrates Court
(Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(WA) (MCCPA) which provides that
an appeal from a judgment in a civil case before the Magistrates Court
lies to the District Court.
to s 64 of the ROA, a person aggrieved by the decision of a court to 'make
any other order in relation to a final order',
may appeal that decision in
accordance with this section. Section 64(2) provides that if the decision
was made by the Magistrates
Court, the appeal is to be made in accordance
of the MCCPA unless s (6a)(a) applies.
appeal was commenced by notice of appeal filed 17 July 2025 and leave is
required to proceed with the appeal.
Section 40(3)
provides that unless
leave is given, appeals must be commenced within 21 days after the date of
judgment. As the Decision was in
respect of the making of an order in relation
to a final order, the appeal is within the appellate jurisdiction of the
District Court.
respondent intends to take part in this appeal.
District Court must decide the appeal on the material and evidence that was
learned magistrate.
The court can give leave to admit other evidence, but only in exceptional
circumstances.
such application was brought and the appeal proceeded to hearing on the material
and evidence that was before the learned magistrate.
appeal is by way of a 'reconsideration of the evidence' that was before the
magistrate.
court does not hear afresh all of the
the appeal is to be undertaken by way of
a rehearing.
an appeal by way of rehearing, ordinarily, and absent further evidence or a
relevant change in the law, the court can exercise
its appellate powers only if
satisfied that there was an error on the part of the primary court; the power is
to be exercised for
correction of
be a material error of law, fact, discretion or other miscarriage of
so, the appeal court must conduct a 'real review' of the evidence given at
first instance and of the primary decision-maker's
reasons for decision to
determine whether there has been an appealable
onus is on the appellant to demonstrate the existence of an appealable
sufficient for the appellant to satisfy the court that a decision other than
that made by the magistrate was correct and
preferable.
Grounds of appeal
notice of appeal filed 17 July 2025, the appellant appeals against the
grounds of appeal appear variously in the notice of appeal; the appellant's
affidavit in support of application for leave to
appeal out of time sworn
17 July 2025 (First BT Affidavit); the appellant's affidavit in
support of application for leave to adduce
additional evidence sworn
18 August 2025 (Second BT Affidavit); and are further augmented in the
appellant's outline of submissions
dated 5 August 2025.
had regard to each of the matters raised, the grounds can be summarised as
Intimidating
conduct by the learned magistrate (Ground 1).
of relevant evidence (Ground 2).
rushed despite complexity of matter (Ground 3).
conclusion by the learned magistrate (Ground 4).
of witness testimony (Ground 5).
and adversarial treatment (Ground 6).
made without proper evidentiary foundation (Ground 7).
without reasoned explanation (Ground 8).
and interests of justice (Ground 9).
the respondent's notice of intention dated 24 July 2025,
the respondent submits that the primary court's Decision should be upheld
on the grounds relied on by the primary court in circumstances where the
appellant's grounds of appeal lack merit and there is no
error of fact or law in
the Decision.
appellant relies on the matters deposed to in the appellant's affidavits and on
the appellant's outline of submissions.
respondent relies on the matters deposed to in her affidavit sworn
25 August 2025 (LG Affidavit).
Correspondence with the court
completeness, I note subsequent to the hearing of the appeal on 2 September
2025 being concluded the court received correspondence
from the parties.
letter from the court dated 30 September 2025, both parties were informed
in writing that in circumstances where both parties
are self-represented, the
court has addressed procedural queries raised by the parties but, that as the
hearing of the appeal is
otherwise concluded, it would not be appropriate for
either party to correspond with the court about matters of substance in respect
of the hearing of the
Administrative query regarding Exhibits 1 and 2 in the 844/2025 MB
the hearing of the appeal and by correspondence to the court, the appellant
raised an administrative query regarding the referencing
of exhibits by the
Magistrates Court in lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025.
Specifically, the appellant indicated that Exhibits
1 and 2 in the 844/2025
incorrect and contain 'deleted exhibits' that were never tendered at the final
hearing on 18 March 2025; and
the correct exhibits are as follows: Exhibit 1 -
child's properties; Exhibit 2 - USB - return home from police
index of documents of 844/2025 MB describes Exhibit 1 as
'Incident Reports x 3 and Exhibit 2 as 'Department of Education -
of No Results receipt.pdf'. Each of Exhibits 1 and 2 listed,
thereafter contain a series of documents which appear under each Exhibit
number several pages in
exhibits are listed in lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025. The appellant
takes issue with the description of Exhibits 1
and 2 in the index of documents
to lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025.
on my review of the lower court transcript of the hearing on 18 March 2025,
the exhibits tendered correspond with the description
submitted by the
appellant. That is, Exhibit 1 is tendered as 'USB Breaking Child's
Property' and Exhibit 2 is tendered as 'USB
Return Home After Police
review of the transcript indicates that there was extensive exchange as between
the learned magistrate and the appellant about
the content of Exhibits 1
and 2 and that the USB's were played during the course of the lower court
hearing on 18 March 2025 and
tendered into evidence as Exhibits 1 and
my review of the transcript, I can see that Exhibit 1 is said to contain
video and photographic recordings of the respondent and
the parties' child and
are said to go to the respondent's conduct. By way of
HER HONOUR:
So what do you have recordings of?
So there is an incident. She deliberately damaged a child's
property. She throw - - -
HER HONOUR:
She deliberately damaged your child's
Yes. And, also, there are other photos - yes, photos and images.
So the video folder - so there's names listed. So I'm submitting
the document
with 10 additional evidence regarding photos and the videos listed. One of them
is breaking properties.
HER HONOUR:
Is the file called Breaking Property?
Breaking Child's Property and Breaking Home Property. There are
images and also video. Yes, that's the video.
HER HONOUR:
So what do you say happened with that video, [BT]?
Yes. Respondent is yelling at me that is with something, then
starting to become very angry, just smashing the child's books from
from the bar area because she thinks that I didn't put that properly and didn't
tidy it up, which I did. She was just
very angry on the day, then threw all the
child's stuff on the floors. My child is organising herself. I was just
sitting quietly
on the sofa, just when the - when she has become less angry and
starting to collect, I was really shocked.
is said to contain a video of the respondent having gone to the
Mirrabooka Police Station.
Relevantly:
That's the first time she make a false police report.
HER HONOUR:
28 August or October?
My apologies. It's October.
HER HONOUR:
So were you made the subject of a police order, were you?
Did you get a police order against you?
Yes, I did.
HER HONOUR:
Was the police order in place at the time you made the
I haven't - the police haven't come yet. So she said she got the
police order. So the police who served the order haven't come
HER HONOUR:
You're saying that footage shows her saying to you, 'The
police are going to give you an order'?
Yes. She said - - -
HER HONOUR:
Is it that she went to the police station?
Yes, your Honour.
HER HONOUR:
All right. That video is exhibit
admissibility of this evidence was not a matter that was determined by the
learned magistrate.
appellant had, in my view, ample opportunity to produce to this court the
evidence and materials he sought to rely on, or seek
the time of the court to
allow him this time. This issue was not raised by the appellant prior to the
hearing of the appeal including
during the programming of the appeal to
hearing when the parties appeared before a registrar of this court on
19 August 2025.
in raising the matter during the hearing of the appeal, did the appellant, seek
to adjourn the hearing of the appeal to allow
enquiries to take place with
the Magistrates Court about the description of the exhibits and the
documents included in the 844/2025
MB against Exhibits 1 and 2. The appellant
did not act on this opportunity.
and in any event, having reviewed the transcript of the hearing on 18 March
2025 and the appellant's submissions and answers
in response to the
learned magistrate as to the nature of the evidence said to be contained in
the USB's that formed part of Exhibits
1 and 2, it is not clear to me that
the evidence would have advanced the appellant's grounds of appeal in any
meaningful way.
Litigant in person appeal
parties were self-represented at the hearing of the appeal on 2 September
2025. Having had regard to the lower court file and
noting that the respondent
appeared with an interpreter at the hearing on 18 March 2025, both
parties were expressly given the opportunity
to adjourn the hearing of the
appeal to the extent they were of the view that either of them were of the view
that the assistance
of an interpreter would be required. Both parties did not
act on this opportunity and confirmed that they were minded to proceed
hearing of the appeal.
the appellant is a litigant in person in the appeal, he is entitled to some
leniency in relation to compliance with the court
I approach the documents in which he articulates his appeal with some
flexibility.
I need to be astute to ensure that, in a poorly expressed
or unstructured document in which he sets out his case, there is no viable
case which, with appropriate amendment or permissible assistance from the court,
could be put into proper
the same time, I also need to ensure that any latitude given to the appellant as
a litigant in person does not deprive the respondent
of her rights to procedural
fairness and a fair
Issues arising for determination
grounds of appeal can be categorised into the following issues for
determination:
to appeal out of time.
to adduce additional evidence.
there a denial of procedural fairness because the learned magistrate did
not give the appellant sufficient opportunity to present
his case? (Grounds 3
there a denial of procedural fairness because the learned magistrate did
not give the appellant sufficient opportunity to adduce
evidence? (Grounds 2
the learned magistrate biased? (Grounds 1, 4, 6, 7, 8 and
Leave to appeal out of time
appeal cannot be commenced more than 21 days after the date of judgment,
unless the District Court gives leave to do
The last date
for filing a notice of appeal was 8 April 2025.
appellant's notice of appeal was filed on 17 July 2025 and was therefore filed
out of time. The appellant in the First BT Affidavit
deposed to the
reasons for the delay in the filing of the notice of
delay was only short and there was no prejudice to the respondent, leave to
proceed with the appeal is granted.
now turn to the substantive issues for determination in this
Leave to adduce evidence
appellant seeks leave to adduce the following:
incident report (No 050225220019175) dated 5 February 2025.
Respondent's
sworn Family Court Financial Statement (Form 13) filed by the
respondent in the Family Court of Western Australia on
NAATI-certified English translation of an audio recording of a telephone
conversation between the respondent and a third party recorded
18 November 2024 (NAATI Translation).
set of NAATI-translated WeChat messages between the appellant and the
various persons said to be related to the respondent dated
and December 2024 (NAATI WeChat).
appellant submits that this evidence is directly relevant and probative of key
issues in dispute in the FVRO proceedings, including
in respect of the
respondent's credibility and the cultural context in which certain actions are
said to have occurred.
have had regard to the appellant's submissions and documents in support of
the application for leave including the matters set
out in the First BT
Affidavit and the transcript of the hearing before the lower court on
18 March 2025. The errors alleged to have
been made by the
learned magistrate, on a review of the transcript of the hearing on
18 March 2025 as against the submissions put
by the appellant, go to the
following: First, the learned magistrate's determination not to admit into
evidence the NAATI Translation
and the NAATI WeChat. Secondly, the
learned magistrate not being persuaded by the appellant's submissions in
respect of the police
incident and the respondent's financial
circumstances. As to the respondent's financial position, the appellant seeks
leave to adduce
the Financial Statement to establish inconsistency in
the evidence of the respondence. The appellant submits that this goes to
respondent's credibility.
Disposition
the hearing of an appeal a party must not adduce evidence that was not adduced
in the primary court except with leave of the
to admit additional evidence should not be used to rectify perceived weaknesses
in a case already
Ordinarily, a court will refuse to admit new evidence on appeal unless the court
is satisfied that the new evidence will have led
to a different outcome if it
had been led in the court
appellant has not advanced, in any meaningful way, where the evidence sought to
be adduced, sat in respect of the appeal before
this court.
exceptional circumstances have been established by the appellant as to why it
should be permitted and the production of the 'new'
evidence (ie
the police incident report dated 5 February
2025 and the respondent's Family Court Financial Statement filed
15 March 2025), could
not, in my view lead to a different outcome for the
appellant if he had let it in his original application.
and for completeness, I observe as follows.
that whilst the police incident report dated 5 February 2025 was not before
the lower court in the form of an exhibit, matters
the subject that police
incident, which the appellant now seeks leave to adduce as additional evidence,
was put to the learned magistrate
by the appellant at the hearing on
18 March 2025.
Relevantly:
On 5 February, which is the first day, she took a red
card, which she want to [name redacted] before I come into the school. She
already promised the police - the police called me on the day, they - they say I
should take [name redacted] on the 5th. Then there
become a very embarrassing
moment in the school, and [LG] - we've been called to the police - called to the
principal's office, the
principal asking what's happening. She said I - she got
two police order against me. She got a family restraining
order application
against me. She - essentially, say I'm a - a bad guy in
front of the principal. That's very humiliating. I told principal there
prior arrangements through police I taking the - the child on the day.
HER HONOUR:
All right. She told you all - the school about all of these
things, and it resulted in a very embarrassing incident for you with
principal at the school. Is there anything else, [BT]?
And the - the principal called the police - a (indistinct) of
police - - -
HER HONOUR:
No. I - I'm not asking for more details about that
incident. Is there any other behaviour - - -
that the learned magistrate, having heard from the appellant as to the
appellant's reliance on the NAATI Translation and
NAATI WeChat at the
hearing on 18 March 2025, determined that this evidence was not to be
admitted on the basis of
Yes. Your Honour, the - the biggest thing is she - she has
ulterior motive. She - I got a recording for that. She - she said
calling a friend, she said multiple times, 'I want to get someone' to kick
me out of the house. 'So I - I want to get
someone,' I think. Later on,
she did this through police. She used false police report to remove - remove me
from the house. So
what she did. So the - the - the recordings has been
translated. So I would like to - the honourable court to accept the
recordings.
HER HONOUR:
What recordings? Are they on this USB?
That's primarily speaking in Chinese, so - so - - -
HER HONOUR:
All right. Well, can you hand me the transcript, please.
Has this been verified?
It has - it has been NAATI translated.
HER HONOUR:
All right. This is a really long translation. So I've
just read - all right. I can't see. I'm up to the next lot of conversations.
I can't see where she is falsely saying - she's saying that she will falsely
call you to police to get you out of the house. You
might need to take me to
that page, because this is pages and pages, [BT].
HER HONOUR:
- - - that you say indicates she has fabricated these
allegations against you or called the police - sorry, pass - could you just
that back. Thank you - please direct me to it. - - -
Yes. On the first page, she says, 'I'm going to buy my mum a
ticket to get her over here'.
HER HONOUR:
Yes. I saw that.
'But the case is that I need to get him out of here first.
Otherwise, he's going to attend this place after (indistinct) so she
essentially
want to get her mum from China, and then get police kick me out the house. So
just her - - -
HER HONOUR:
But that doesn't mean that she doesn't think you should be
kicked out of the house. It doesn't mean that it's false. Yes, it's
clear that she wants you out of the house, and she has applied to have you have
- taken out of the house. But where is it
that that - that she's making
things up to do that?
in respect of the NAATI
Your Honour, I would like to present evidence from family members,
which is a translation from respondent's grandparent - grandpa
- and also her -
her cousin.
HER HONOUR:
Well, family members messaging you?
I messaged them to get in support, because in - - -
HER HONOUR:
You messaged her family to get support for yourself?
They are very supportive, your Honour. So they all think the same
way as I'm thinking. She got - - -
HER HONOUR:
So what - but you've messaged her family members, and
they're supporting you?
They support me, because they think - - -
HER HONOUR:
All right. Move on, please, [BT]
Because they thinking - - -
HER HONOUR:
No. You cannot say what other people
had regard to these 'alleged errors' in the context of the appellant's
application for leave to adduce additional evidence,
I am of the view that there
are no exceptional circumstances that exist to indicate that the discretion
should be exercised to allow
the production of the evidence of the same alleged
behaviours that pre-date the learned magistrate's decision, nor, for 'new
Importantly, none of the reasons submitted by the appellant, nor the
evidence itself, enlivens the discretion for me to permit the
any event, the materials the appellant now seeks to adduce do not assist the
court in determining whether the learned magistrate
made an error of the
nature contended for. The appellant's decision to apply to produce those
materials reveals no exceptional circumstances.
my view therefore, leave should not be granted to produce any of the additional
evidence the subject of this application.
to admit additional evidence in respect of this appeal is
Was there a denial of procedural fairness because the learned magistrate
did not give the appellant sufficient opportunity to present
his case? (Grounds
appellant's submissions refer to the conduct of the learned magistrate
during the hearing on 18 March 2025 and the manner in
proceedings were conducted. Relevantly, the appellant submits that the
learned magistrate rushed the hearing in a manner
prejudicial to the appellant and contrary to the interests of justice.
support of this, the appellant points to the following:
the learned magistrate insisted that the hearing conclude that day stating
that she would not be available again until November.
the learned magistrate was dismissive of the appellant's concerns about the
truncated hearing time.
another magistrate had estimated the matter would require four or five
the learned magistrate denied the appellant procedural fairness by
repeatedly yelling at the appellant during the presentation
of his evidence
without valid reason and that this conduct was intimidating.
respondent submits that the appellant was given full opportunity to present his
case and that evidence does not demonstrate that
the appellant was deprived of
the opportunity to present his case.
Disposition
grounds rely on a failure to accord proper procedure to the appellant.
as follows:
What is appropriate in terms of natural justice depends on the circumstances of
the case and they will include, inter alia, the nature
of the enquiry, the
subject-matter, and the rules under which the decision-maker is acting
this respect the expression 'procedural fairness' more aptly conveys the notion
of a flexible obligation to adopt fair procedures
which are appropriate and
adapted to the circumstances of the particular case.
term natural justice generally refers to the requirement that a party to
proceedings be given a fair hearing. This normally
requires that each party be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case or to answer the case
against them, by evidence
What is necessary to satisfy the requirement that a party be given
a reasonable opportunity to present their case cannot be determined
abstract but only in the context of the particular case under
principles of procedural fairness were summarised by the Court of Appeal in
is axiomatic that a court is obliged to accord procedural fairness to a
to say that a court is obliged to afford procedural fairness is only the first
step of analysis. The second step is to identify
the content of the
requirements of procedural fairness. The second step is what is critical in
most cases.
sometimes expressed in terms referring to a necessity for a hearing, the
fundamental requirement of procedural fairness is
(relevantly for present
purposes) that a party is given a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in
other words, to present their case
by evidence, information and
submissions.
requirements of procedural fairness are not fixed or immutable. Procedural
fairness is directed to avoid practical injustice,
and what is necessary to
avoid practical injustice will depend upon the circumstances. The application
of the requirements of procedural
fairness to a court requires analysis of the
procedures of the court, and the legislation and rules which govern
Court of Appeal in
then referred to MCCPA
that it 'provides relevantly, that in dealing with cases, the court is to ensure
that cases are dealt with justly, which includes
ensuring that cases are dealt
with efficiently, economically and expeditiously, and that the court's
judicial and administrative
resources are used as efficiently as
observed by Gething DCJ (as his Honour then was) in
principle applies to applications under the ROA.
content of procedural fairness also needs to be understood having regard to the
nature of the
proceedings.
is in this overall context that the question arises as to whether the appellant
was afforded procedural fairness by the learned
magistrate at the hearing
on 18 March 2025. As observed earlier, as a litigant in person, including
at the hearing on 18 March 2025,
the appellant was entitled to some
leniency in relation to compliance with the court rules.
'abiding difficulty' faced by a court dealing with a litigant in person is 'the
tension between the duty of a ... judge to ensure
a fair and just trial and the
requirement that the court maintain a position of neutrality and impartiality as
between the
court also needs to ensure that any latitude given to one party as a litigant in
person does not deprive the other of their
right to procedural fairness and a
fair hearing.
balance is ordinarily struck by limiting the assistance given to a litigant in
person to that which is necessary to overcome,
so far as is reasonably
practicable, the procedural disadvantages a litigant in person faces by reason
of not being legally
observed by the Court of Appeal in
a self-represented litigant is subject to the practice and
procedure of the court as much as any other
matter proceeded to a full day hearing on 18 March 2025.
learned magistrate explained in detail the court's hearing process and
evidentiary threshold to be met to both
HER HONOUR:
But before we have a break - just take a seat. I just
am going to explain something to both of you in terms of how the hearing
proceed today. So I have just explained to you the order of who will
go first. And for each of you, as I say, there are two
purposes to your
case. One is to say why you should get an order against the other person.
And then the other part is to say why
you should not have an order
against you. So you need to be aware that you are both an applicant
and a respondent - to put it another
way, an applicant and a
defendant, defending against the application being made against you.
If you wish the court to take something into account, it needs to be in the form
of evidence. So anything you tell me from where
you are seated now, that
is not evidence. That is giving me information. That is making an argument or
a submission. Evidence
comes, really, in two main forms. It's what
witnesses say in the witness box and it's any exhibits you may have. So if you
screenshots of messages or you have photographs or recordings of video or
telephone messages, whatever that may be. Do not wait
until the end for me
to say, 'Would you like to sum up? Tell me what your position is', and then
you start telling me all of these
extra things and there are extra things you
want to show me.
If you want me to take it into account, if you want the court to take it into
account, you need to lead it as part of your evidence.
You also need to give
the opposing side an opportunity to respond to any challenges you make against
their evidence or what they
say. So if you say that someone is lying, you need
to say to them, 'You are lying, aren't you? This is not what happened.
It happened
this way. You didn't say this. You actually said this.'
You need to give the other person an opportunity to respond and to explain
themselves, if they are able to explain themselves.
... And it means that there might be less weight given to what you say because I
haven't heard from the other person for their view
as to that challenge. So you
can't ambush the other person.
So that is something you need to think about when you're asking questions of any
witnesses from the other side. And I'm explaining
all of this to you because
you don't have lawyers.
So I will be required to make findings as to whether people are telling the
truth or they are lying, whether certain things did or
did not happen. Those
findings can be used in other courts. So it could be used, for example, in the
Family Court. As I say, there
are processes to be able to do that. But the
reason I'm explaining this is because sometimes people would prefer not to have
between different courts and just to deal with things separately.
And, again, the reason I'm explaining that is if either of you
do wish to offer
a conduct agreement order, that offer is made on what's known as a without
admissions basis. What it means is you
agree to be bound by an
heard from both parties, the learned magistrate gave the appellant the
opportunity to 'sum' up his case, explaining
HER HONOUR:
[BT], this is now your opportunity to sum up your case. It
is not to give further evidence. So take a seat, [LG]. [BT], what
wish to say, if you wish to say anything, to sum up your case as to why you say
I should grant your application and I should
dismiss [LG]'s
application.
learned magistrate, having heard the appellant restate his position, again
gave the appellant the opportunity to sum his
HER HONOUR:
Because you managed to get her moved out of the house, and
you had care of the child. [BT], you are not giving evidence. Is there
anything further you wish to say in summing up your case?
In so doing, the learned magistrate, invited the appellant to put forward
by way of closing submissions, any further matter for the
HER HONOUR:
You've already said that, [BT]. You've said that many, many
times. You've said that it was all designed to get you out of the
house, to put
her in a better position for the Family Court, so that she could live in
the house, she could get her mum to move in,
that she could pursue her
relationship with her boyfriend. You've said all of that. Is there
anything else, [BT]?
Given the past time with my child, and she already actively
seeking for rental property - she's nearly to getting a property with
income. I don't believe her income is that low. Her income is more
than double - - -
HER HONOUR:
[BT], you have said all of these things.
If possible - I just feel like one-day trial is not enough.
HER HONOUR:
All you've said, [BT], is that she's a liar.
She is a liar.
HER HONOUR:
No. Other than the false allegations - you say that she has
made false allegations against you. I have asked you more than once
the hearing to tell me what it is that she's doing that you require protection
from. False allegations, her threatening self-harm.
Well, you're not together
any more. It's not a suggestion that she has continued to threaten
self-harm. And in fact, there's two
occasions, one of which seems to be when
you've confronted her about an alleged affair, but other than that, you've not
things to say that she has engaged in family violence towards you,
other than the big setup, the false allegations.
So what is the ongoing risk? I've been asking you about that, and you are still
not telling me what that is. All you're saying
is, she's a liar.
So, [BT], what else is there?
If I've been - so allegation regarding to sexual assault, I can be
sentenced up to five years if be committed. She made the - -
HER HONOUR:
You're not being charged. There's no - there's no charge.
There's no prosecution. Yes. You've said that she has made false allegations.
Move on, [BT].
There's no more questions.
HER HONOUR:
Well, there are no questions. It is closing submissions.
appellant, in my view, was given ample opportunity to produce to the court the
evidence and materials he sought to rely on.
fact that the appellant does not like the result following the hearing of the
FVRO applications does not mean that he has been
denied natural justice or
procedural fairness. As noted in
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics
[T]he question of whether there has been a failure to comply with the rules of
natural justice is not answered by reference to the
outcome of the exercise
of the relevant power. The principles of natural justice are not concerned with
the merits of a particular
exercise of power, but with the procedure that must
be observed in its exercise. The focus of attention must therefore be on the
position as it stood before the impugned decision is taken.
on my review of the transcript of the hearing, it is not evident to me that the
learned magistrate rushed or prevented BT
from saying everything he wanted
to aside from matters determined by the learned magistrate to be irrelevant
and therefore not admissible,
or where the learned magistrate
determined that the submission being put to the court could not be advanced any
on a review of the transcript, is the appellant's assertion that the
learned magistrate 'repeatedly yelled at him during the
presentation of his
evidence, without valid reason' in any way supported.
appellant has not satisfied me that he was denied procedural fairness by the
learned magistrate. In my view, the appellant had
sufficient opportunity
to present his case.
grounds of appeal have not been established.
Was there a denial of procedural fairness because the learned magistrate
did not give the appellant sufficient opportunity to adduce
(Grounds 2 and 5)
appellant submits that he was denied procedural fairness because he was not
given sufficient opportunity to adduce evidence,
including witness testimony,
and that witness testimony was excluded. Further, that the
learned magistrate disregarded the appellant's
version of events and failed
to take into account cultural differences in assessing the evidence that was
before the lower court.
way of summary, the appellant submits that the learned magistrate erred in
fact and law for the following reasons:
evidence did not support the findings in respect of the final FVRO.
reliance on 'subjective impressions and demeanour'.
the respondent's evidence-in-chief in making adverse findings against the
not afford the appellant a fair opportunity to test the respondent's
evidence-in-chief through cross-examination.
to admit evidence that was unfavourable to the respondent.
to consider material, probative and unchallenged evidence that supported the
appellant's case (ie school and home incident
of 4 and 5 February
to consider all relevant and admissible evidence before making findings
including matters directly relevant to the appellant's
allegations and
to provide the appellant a fair opportunity to present and rely upon
in making adverse findings as to the appellant's credibility which were not
supported by the objective evidence and were based
on speculative
in fact by placing undue weight on evidence (ie hiking group message
in failing to properly consider the evidence (ie identity of the WeChat
respondent submits that contrary to the appellant's submissions, a review
of the transcript of the hearing shows that all evidence
was considered, that
the court's discretion was properly exercised and that the
learned magistrate ultimately found that the appellant's
evidence was
inconsistent and unreliable. It is the respondent's submission that there is no
error of law on the part of
the learned
magistrate.
Disposition
the purpose of an appeal by way of rehearing, it is necessary for the appellant
to establish that there has been a legal, factual
or discretionary error.
of appeal which assert errors arising out of findings on the basis of the
assessment of the credibility of witnesses and
the absence of supporting
evidence are grounds which assert an error of fact.
Court of Appeal in
Wise v Keilo Jane Wise
discussed the approach to be taken by appellate courts when there are
allegations of errors of
remaining grounds of appeal allege errors of fact. The approach to be
taken by an appellate court in respect of such allegations
has been mentioned a
number of times recently in this Court. The principles were summarised in
Sampey v Doherty
. The court said that the proper approach to be
taken on appeal involving allegations of factual errors made by the trial judge
as follows:
(a) An appellant who challenges a primary
judge's finding of fact must demonstrate that the finding was wrong,
not merely that an
alternative finding was open.
(b) The principles of appellate restraint do not apply only to credibility
based findings. Appellate restraint in relation to interfering
with a primary
judge's findings applies when a finding is likely to have been affected by
impressions the judge has formed about
the credibility and reliability of a
witness as a result of seeing and hearing the witness give evidence.
(c) Where an assessment of the reliability of a witness involves the kind of
issues and the approach to fact finding that apply to
the assessment of the
credibility of a witness, an appellate court will not interfere with
a primary judge's finding of fact, unless
the finding is demonstrated to be
(i) by reference to incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony;
(ii) because the finding is glaringly improbable or contrary to compelling
inferences; or
(iii) because the primary judge failed to use, or has palpably misused, his
or her advantage as the primary judge.
(d) The nature and extent of a primary judge's advantage over an appellate
court informs both what must be demonstrated to establish
error in the primary
judge's findings and the extent of appellate restraint in relation to those
findings. For example, there is
a distinction between a finding based on the
credibility of a witness and a finding based on inferences drawn from undisputed
or facts as found. Accordingly, the nature of the challenged finding
and the process of reasoning by which the finding was made
affect what must be
demonstrated in order to establish appellable error.
(e) The principle of appellate restraint is derived from the 'natural
limitations' of the appellate process and the degree of 'comparative
advantage' or 'relative advantage' possessed by a primary judge as a result of
the primary judge having seen and heard the witnesses.
Those advantages have
been described as many and varied and may vary from case to case.
(f) Where a primary judge's finding concerns an issue involving impression or
judgment, the primary judge's 'comparative advantage'
or 'relative advantage' in
making that finding should be given 'proper weight'.
appellant's grounds of appeal and submissions in respect of this issue appear
variously in the notice of appeal, the First BT
and Second BT Affidavit and the appellant's submissions. They are
voluminous, repetitive and at times difficult to follow.
The theme that
emerges from the grounds and assertions in respect of this issue can be
characterised as follows:
the learned magistrate erred in fact in failing to consider the evidence;
in placing undue weight on the evidence; and in making
findings not supported by
the evidence.
the learned magistrate erred in making adverse findings as to the
appellant's credibility.
the learned magistrate erred in preferring the respondent's evidence.
the appellant was not given the opportunity to cross-examine the
my review of the transcript of the hearing on 18 March 2025,
in reaching her determination, the learned magistrate heard from
two applicants and also received many exhibits, photographs, screenshots,
videos, copies of email correspondence, and a screenshot
of a bank account.
Once the evidence had been adduced, the learned magistrate was
entitled to use it in her determination. By way
of example, the
learned magistrate was not persuaded that the Western Australia Police
reports the appellant sought to rely on do
more than record what the appellant
said to the Western Australia Police.
Relevantly:
Yes. Your Honour, can I say something before proceed?
HER HONOUR:
Yes, with great respect to the court, I don't think I gave
enough evidence in the previous session. I've been asking for giving
police report. I want the court to accept that for the evidence -
as evidence.
HER HONOUR:
[BT], the police report records what you have said to the
But that could - - -
HER HONOUR:
So the allegations that you have made. So it confirms that
you've made those allegations. It confirms that you have told them
information. What else does the police report contain that you say is relevant
to my determination of whether or not to grant
your application or [LG]'s
application?
Yes, but there are clear contradictions and inconsistencies
between her affidavits and police reports. So that's why it's - - -
HER HONOUR:
Of what she says or of what you say?
What she says.
HER HONOUR:
Well, then you can put that to her in
cross-examination.
with respect to the appellant's reliance on the WeChat messages, for the reasons
observed above, it was open to the learned
magistrate to determine that
this evidence was not to be admitted on the basis of
was no error in the learned magistrate's observations about these
appellant called his mother as a witness and sought to rely on a translated
written statement given by the appellant's father
who was not present at the
to the appellant's other witness, the appellant's mother, having ascertained
from asking the appellant what the intended evidence
was this witness, the
learned magistrate determined that the evidence was not relevant to
application:
HER HONOUR:
What is this witness going to give evidence about, [BT]?
So regarding the behaviour of the respondent as a - - -
HER HONOUR:
What behaviour?
Disrespectful for parent and causing her to admit to hospital
twice. Going - - -
HER HONOUR:
You to go to hospital twice?
My mum went to hospital twice because of her abusive behaviour
from the - verbally abusive behaviour from - - -
HER HONOUR:
Well, what relevance has that got to do with her behaviour
towards you?
HER HONOUR:
I'm just going to let you know right now, [BT], if this
gets into irrelevant areas, I will not be hearing the evidence further.
proceed to ask questions.
The - it's happening during the time that - - -
HER HONOUR:
It doesn't matter. [BT], this is about whether
a restraining order should be granted for your protection. I accept that
want to say that [LG] is such a terrible person, that she's awful
to all sorts of people, but that's the most that really could be
said from it,
if you establish that. The fact that she may have been terrible to your mother
has very little, if any, relevance
to whether or not you need to be protected
HER HONOUR:
So because of an argument with your mother in front of you,
you say you need to be protected from [LG]. Because you got so upset
mum was upset. Is that what you're telling me?
Yes. Her behaviour will be continuing because she has even
disrespected my mum, who has been helping us for a long time. She's
HER HONOUR:
From when? When did this all occur?
HER HONOUR:
HER HONOUR:
So what relevance has that got to do with needing a
restraining order now, when - is there any allegation that [LG] is pursuing
parents, is continuing to harass them to try to get to you?
HER HONOUR:
Around 2023.
HER HONOUR:
No, [BT]. I do not see how that is relevant to all of the
things that you've been describing, really, since about October of last
to the appellant's submission that there was a big cultural difference in China
and Australia, the learned magistrate accepted
HER HONOUR:
Well, I've got to tell you, [BT] - and I will take into
account cultural differences in assessing the evidence that is given by anyone
who's from a culture outside of Australia in my assessment of these applications
- but I can tell you right now, in Australia, with
what you are saying, that is
not going to be the case, that having an affair would justify some of the
behaviours that you're talking
understanding of family violence, and how it's considered by the courts, may be
different here than it is back in China, and so I've tried to explain that,
in telling you what family violence can be. So you say
you messaged her family
members, and they're supportive of you. Move on
HER HONOUR:
But I do accept that there could be misunderstandings as to
language when English is not the first language of either of the applicants,
that there may be matters, even as [BT] said at one point, that could be lost in
translation, and that perhaps in giving their evidence
both [BT] and [LG] may
have at times used words that they would otherwise not have used or said things
in a way that could be viewed
to not quite accurately convey the meaning because
of the difficulties with language.
I accept that. I also accept that there may be cultural differences at play and
that that may impact upon the way upon which each
of the parties has acted and
also how they have given evidence about their conduct and the conduct of others
involved in this matter,
particularly the respective respondents; that is, the
opposing party. So I accept that that is all relevant in terms of differences
language and culture.
But ultimately, in terms of the applications, I am to assess them by our legal
and community standards. And so, on many occasions,
[BT] referenced how things
are done in China, how things may be viewed in terms of extramarital affairs,
the involvement of other
family members, and it may very well have been the case
that in those instances [BT] believed he was not only acting appropriately,
that he was doing the best for the relationship.
reaching her determination, the learned magistrate formed a view as to
the nature and relevance of the evidence sought to be adduced
HER HONOUR:
After asking [BT] about what the evidence of - intended
evidence was of those witnesses, I struggled to see that there was any
and it really seemed to me to be broadening matters in circumstances
where I repeatedly tried to remind [BT] as to what I needed
to determine in this
case and what he should focus his attention on in pursuing his application and
defending the application from
to the credibility of the appellant as a witness,
the learned magistrate is entitled to determine what to make of a
evidence, including in respect of any inconsistencies in the evidence
presented to the court.
Relevantly:
HER HONOUR:
That is, I'm not to speculate about matters that are not in
evidence. I'm to consider only the evidence that has been presented
court. [BT] has placed a great deal of reliance on what he
says are inconsistencies in [LG]'s evidence. Inconsistencies
between a witness's evidence and other evidence, including objective evidence.
That is, a witness may be contradicted
by evidence other than their own, perhaps
the evidence of another witness or an exhibit, or there could be internal
inconsistencies.
finding the appellant to be lacking in credibility,
the learned magistrate
HER HONOUR:
I did not find [BT] to be an honest witness. Ifound that
[BT] withheld information and at times gave misleading accounts until he
pressed. This included being asked questions such as who he sent various
things to, whether they were photographs or videos.
[BT] was very careful to
limit his answers and then to suggest he thought he was really only being asked
or a particular time when it was clear that [BT] had
engaged in conduct that was much broader than what he first admitted to.
So [BT] was, in my view, evasive in that respect.
learned magistrate did not rely on every part of the evidence of the
respondent in reaching her Decision. As was observed by
Gillan DCJ in
Any trier of fact is entitled to accept the whole of a witness' evidence,
to reject the whole of a witness' evidence or to accept
some of a witness'
evidence. A great many things might impact on an assessment of a witness'
credibility, for example, inconsistencies
in a witness' evidence or prior
inconsistent statements, inconsistencies between witnesses, embellishments of
evidence but whether
those inconsistencies in fact impact on the credit is a
matter for the trier of fact. Further, even evidence which is accepted may
be given little weight in the decision which is reached.
learned magistrate was entitled to put aside some of the respondent's and
the appellant's evidence.
to the assertion that the learned magistrate did not afford the appellant a fair
opportunity to test the respondent's evidence-in-chief
cross-examination, it is apparent from the transcript that the learned
magistrate on several occasions explained to the appellant
when he would be able
to cross-examine the respondent and what this would
]: Okay. I still got opportunity to cross-examine but - - -
HER HONOUR:
She has not given evidence yet and so you will be able to
cross-examine her and say, 'Did you tell police this? Well, that's not
isn't it? You told police this, but you've also said this.
It - one of them's a lie. You're lying'. Whatever it is, you can
that to her.
I can still use the police report as evidence, even I was
being cross-examined - actually, when I cross-examine her, I can use that?
HER HONOUR:
But, if you're talking about something that she has said to
police, you can't give evidence about that anyway. It's what she has
police. So you can cross-examine her about that.
Okay. And also I mentioned in the court hearing in the morning
that she actually lied to the court in the first hearing. She's talking
regarding - I sent her a text message regarding her return to home. And also, I
take [child of BT and LG] to her by myself.
Both of them are false statements -
misstatements in her court appearance. I have - - -
HER HONOUR:
You can ask her about that - - -
a general rule, a court should not place an arbitrary time limit on
cross-examination. However, there may well be situations in
which 'it might be
reasonable and proper at some stage of a cross-examination to impose a time
the present case, it is apparent from a review of the transcript that the
respondent was the subject of cross-examination by the
appellant. There is
nothing to suggest that the appellant did not have sufficient opportunity to
cross-examine the respondent.
disallowing the statement of the appellant's father,
the learned magistrate observed that witnesses needed to be present at
hearing for the purposes of
cross-examination.
accepting the respondent's evidence, the learned magistrate observed that
the appellant was somewhat of a disadvantage as the
respondent had not been
cross-examined about this. However, the learned magistrate observed
HER HONOUR:
In respect of [LG]'s evidence about [BT]'s conduct, a great
deal of it had already been by admitted by [BT], but further evidence
in the course of the first part of [LG]'s evidence, the evidence-in-chief,
and [BT] was at somewhat of a disadvantage because
he hadn't been
cross-examined about this. But he said - made statements to the court, where it
was clear he wasn't disputing the
evidence that was presented, and indeed
provided an explanation for it.
the learned magistrate observed that the respondent was cross-examined
extensively on what was said to be inconsistencies
in her account and
HER HONOUR:
Again, trying to make it clear to [BT] that he should
consider the way in which he was running his case, the evidence that he was
giving, and what he was choosing to focus on in respect of [LG], I consider
that [BT]'s cross-examination of [LG] to be, to some
extent, a perpetration of
his family violence towards her.
grounds of appeal, and the submissions contained in them, rely on a re-agitation
of the issues before the learned magistrate.
The question for the
learned magistrate's consideration was then whether either the appellant or
the respondent had, on the evidence
the learned magistrate did accept,
satisfy here that there had been an act of personal violence and that a FVRO
should be made.
In reaching her Decision, the learned magistrate found
that there was a sufficient basis to grant the respondent a FVRO against the
appellant in a situation where the respondent was experiencing family
am of the view, and having had regard to the principles expressed by the Court
of Appeal in
that they do not establish that the learned magistrate's findings of fact
were wrong:
(a) by reference to incontrovertible facts or
uncontested testimony;
(b) because the findings were glaringly improbable or contrary to compelling
inferences; or
(c) because the primary judge failed to use, or has palpably misused, his
advantage as the primary judge.
appellant has not established any denial of procedural fairness in the manner in
which the learned magistrate allowed him to
adduce evidence.
grounds of appeal have not been established.
Was the learned magistrate biased? (Grounds 1, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
appellant's contentions as to bias concern the perceived behaviour of the
learned magistrate towards the appellant (ie raised
voice, asking
harsh questions, acting unfairly as if advocating for the respondent, formed
conclusions before hearing all of the
evidence, unfairly said the appellant's
application had no real basis, 'wrongly' blamed the appellant for leaving the
without housing, the final FVRO was too harsh in its scope and
duration, the final FVRO unfairly restricts the appellant's contact
child, ignored the appellant's claims about false police reports, ignored the
appellant's loses in work and business).
Disposition
'central element in the system of justice administered by our courts is that it
should be fair and this means that it must be open,
impartial and
even-handed'.
decision which is tainted by bias is a breach of procedural fairness which
is in turn an error of law justifying the decision being
was observed by Solomon J in
Judicial intervention during the examination of a witness, or the conduct of a
judicial officer during a trial generally, may ground
a reasonable apprehension
of bias or prejudgment. That is an issue that goes to the heart of the trial
process. A judicial officer,
or jury as the case may be, must be and must appear
to be impartial. That requirement is fundamental to fairness, and can be
in the adage that justice must be done and must be seen to be done.
It is necessary that every person, and especially an accused
person, is treated
without bias or prejudgment, actual or apprehended.
the present appeal, the appellant has not specified whether what is alleged is
actual or apprehended bias. Much of the submissions
put by the appellant in
respect of this ground centres on the perceived treatment of the appellant and
the appellant's case by the
learned magistrate which the appellant contends
amounts to bias. I have considered both actual and apprehended bias against the
appellant's
submissions.
test for actual bias was summarised by Newnes JA in
Chin v Legal
Practice Board of Western
Where a party contends that actual bias exists, the applicant must show that the
mind of the decision-maker is so committed to a
conclusion already formed as to
be incapable of alteration, whatever evidence or arguments may be presented:
Minister for Immigration and Multi Affairs v Jia Legeng
; (2001) 205 CLR 507, 532 [72]. Actual bias will exist where the
decision-maker has prejudged the case against the applicant, or
acted with such
partisanship or hostility as to show that the decision-maker had a mind made
up against the applicant and was not
open to persuasion in favour of the
applicant: see
[36], [72]. Such an allegation must be
'distinctly made and clearly proved':
was observed by Quinlan CJ in
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics
A determination as to actual bias in the form of prejudgment requires assessment
of the state of mind of the judge in question, ordinarily
on the basis of what
the judge had said and done. The onus of demonstrating actual bias lies upon the
party asserting the actual
bias and it is a heavy onus.
have reviewed the transcript of the hearing on 18 March 2025, as well
as the appellant's submissions and observations on the transcript.
review of the case as a whole, the appellant has not satisfied me that the
learned magistrate was actually biased in the
manner described in
. The learned magistrate, correctly, sought to confine
the evidence to the issues in dispute.
establish that there is a reasonable apprehension of bias, the appellant
would need to point to what it was that led the magistrate
to decide the case
other than on its factual or legal merits. He would then need to identify the
connection between the evidence
of apprehended bias and how that caused the
tribunal to deviate from deciding the case on the
principles were recently summarised by the Court of Appeal in
Reasonable apprehension of bias will be established if a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the relevant judicial
officer might not
bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the question he or she is required
to decide. In applying this principle
it is necessary to identify what is said
might lead the judicial officer to decide a case other than on its legal or
factual merits
and to articulate a logical connection between the matter and the
feared deviation from the course of deciding the case on its merits.
reasonableness of the apprehension may then be assessed.
The test is objective and the fair-minded lay observer is someone who is aware
that the person who is being observed is a professional
judicial officer whose
training, tradition and oath or affirmation require him or her to discard the
irrelevant, the immaterial and
the prejudicial. However, the fair-minded lay
observer is cognisant of human frailty and understands that information and
consciously and conscientiously discarded might still sometimes have a
subconscious effect on even the most professional of
decision-makers.
judging whether there is a reasonable apprehension of bias, it should be
assumed that the lay observer would base his or her opinion
on a fair assessment
of the judicial officer's conduct in the context of the trial as a
McLure P observed in
De Alwis [No 2]
, in the context of
dealing with an assertion of bias, it 'will often be necessary with
a self-represented litigant for a trial judge
to intervene in order to stop
irrelevant matters being raised and to prevent unnecessary delays
or disruptions'.
That is in part what occurred in the present hearing. The fact that the
learned magistrate made rulings against the appellant does
not provide a
basis for a reasonable apprehension that the learned magistrate did not
bring an impartial or unprejudiced mind to
bear on those matters and other
my review of the case as a whole, I do not consider that a 'fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend' that the learned
magistrate had not
brought an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the issues the
magistrate had to decide. Rather,
as I said in relation to actual
bias, it would have been apparent to a fair-minded lay observer that the
learned magistrate was trying
to confine the evidence to the issues in
dispute, and then to engage with the appellant to seek to understand the issues
perspective. There is no arguable basis in the manner in which the
learned magistrate conducted the trial for an allegation of actual
or apprehended bias.
ground of appeal has not been established.
Conclusion and final orders
follows from what I have found above that I have considered each of the
appellant's grounds of appeal and find none of them made
out. For the reasons
which I have set out above, leave to appeal is allowed, leave to adduce evidence
is refused and the appeal should
otherwise be dismissed.
appropriate final orders are:
to appeal out of time is allowed.
to adduce evidence is refused.
appeal be dismissed.
will hear from the parties as to
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
14 OCTOBER 2025
Magistrates Court
lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/844/2025 (844/2025 MB), pages 1 -
844/2025 MB,
pages 18 - 19.
844/2025 MB, page
844/2025 MB,
pages 47 - 48.
Magistrates Court lower court file MC/CIV/PER/RO/870/2025 (870/2025 MB), pages 1
870/2025 MB,
pages 19 - 20.
870/2025 MB, page
2025 transcript of proceedings (18 March 2025 ts); 870/2025 MB, pages 138 -
844/2025 MB,
pages 62 - 63.
870/2025 MB, pages 48 -
s 64(1)(b)(iii).
s 40(4)(a).
District Court Rules 2005
Smart v Power
[2019] WASCA 106
[100] (judgment of the court)
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR 194
[13], [14] (Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron & Hayne JJ) (
Coal and Allied
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
[23] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow
& Hayne JJ) (
Saunders v The Public
[2015] WASCA 203
[84] (Mitchell J, with whom Buss JA & Beech
Coal and Allied
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[124] (judgment of the court) (
Nominees Pty Ltd v Mirvac (WA) Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 130
[460] (judgment
of the court).
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR 550
[43] (judgment of the court) (
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
[2019] HCA 18
[47] (Kiefel CJ & Bell J);
Jones v Darkan Hotel
[2014] WASCA 133
[31] (judgment of the
from the court dated 16 September 2025 and 2 October
Universal Serial
Exhibit 1, pages 130 - 150; Exhibit 2, pages 151 - 152; 844/2025
18 March 2025 ts 19 and ts 22; 870/2025 MB, pages 156 and
18 March 2025 ts 17 - ts 19; 870/2025 MB, pages
18 March 2025 ts 17; 870/2025 MB, page,
18 March 2025 ts 18; 870/2025 MB, page
18 March 2025 ts 19; 870/2025 MB, page
18 March 2025 ts 21 - ts 22; 870/2025 MB, pages 158 -
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
[10] (reasons of the
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
, 536 - 537
(Kirby P), 543 (Hope JA, with whom Samuels JA agreed);
Smart v Prisoner
Review Board (WA
[2012] WASC 48
[10] (Pritchard
Ibrahim v The Honourable Justice Carolyn Martin
[2012] WASC 338
[21] (Beech J);
Tobin v Dodd
[2004] WASCA 288
[15] (EM Heenan J,
with whom Murray & Le Miere JJ
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
[47] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Nettle, Gordon & Edelman JJ) (
[2018] WASCA 149
[76] (judgment of the court)
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier Lawyers Pty
[2014] WASCA 65
[51] (judgment of the court)
First BT Affidavit, pars 4(a) - 4(e)
TAH v The Public Advocate
[2024] WADC 71
[112] (Gething DCJ);
Nugawela v American Express Australia Ltd
[2016] WADC 170
(Bowden DCJ).
Shilkin v Taylor
[2011] WASCA 255
18 March 2025 ts 43; 870/2025 MB, page
18 March 2025 ts 34 - ts 35; 870/2025 MB, pages 171 -
18 March 2025 ts 39 - ts 40; 870/2025 MB, pages 176 -
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
(1944) 68 CLR 571
, 589 (Rich J);
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South Wales Crime
[2009] HCA 49
(2009) 240 CLR 319
[54] (French J); see also
[88] (Gummow & Bell JJ), [141] - [146] (Heydon J). See also
Rowe v Stoltze
[2013] WASCA 92
[51] (Newnes JA, with whom
Pullin & Murphy JJA
Rankilor v Circuit Travel Pty Ltd
[2013] WASCA 148
v Szigligeti
[2019] WASCA 115
[2024] WADC 84
[189]; see also s 72(1)(a) of the
Frigger v Frigger
[2023] WASCA 103
Zerjavic v Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 40
(judgment of the court)
2025 ts 9 - ts 10; 870/2025 MB, pages 146 -
2025 ts 141; 870/2025 MB, page
2025 ts 143; 870/2025 MB, page
2025 ts 144 - ts 145; 870/2025 MB, pages 281 -
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics Ltd
[2021] WASCA 25
Wise v Keilo Jane Wise as Executrix of the Estate of Audrey Vera
[2025] WASCA 98
2025 ts 62 - ts 63; 870/2025 MB, pages 199 -
2025 ts 34 - ts 35; 870/2025 MB, pages 171 -
2025 ts 78 - ts 79; 870/2025 MB, pages 216 -
2025 ts 40; 870/2025 MB, pages
2025 ts 149; 870/2025 MB, pages
2025 ts 146; 870/2025 MB, page
2025 ts 147 - ts 148; 870/2025 MB, pages 284 -
2025 ts 148; 870/2025 MB, page
Hastings v Cassells
[2025] WADC 49
2025 ts 63; 870/2025 MB, page
Kelly; Ex parte Hoang van Duong
(1981) 28 SASR 271
, 273, cited with
approval in:
Total Value Auto & Finance Pty Ltd v Small
[53] (Campbell
2025 ts 145 - ts 160; 870/2025 MB, pages 282 -
2025 ts 155; 870/2025 MB, page
2025 ts 156; 870/2025 MB, page
2025 ts 151; 870/2025 MB, page
Sampey v Doherty
[2024] WASCA 105
JRL; Ex parte CJL
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR
, 350 (Mason
Charisteas v Charisteas
[2021] HCA 29
(2021) 273 CLR 289
Wreford v Castleyheard Pty Ltd [No 3]
[2024] WASCA 2
Murray v Feast
[2023] WASC 273
[176] (references omitted)
Chin v Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2011] WASCA 110
[5] (Newnes JA) (
). See also
Albuquerque
[2011] WASCA 231
[9] (judgment of the court);
[2012] WASCA 87
[13] (judgment of the
(Quinlan CJ) (references
Ebner v The Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337
[39] - [40], adopting the principles discussed in
referring to
Reynolds v Rayney
[2023] WASCA 144
[28] - [36]
(judgment of the
De Alwis v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 42
[70] (McLure P, with whom Buss & Mazza JJA agreed)
De Alwis [No
De Alwis [No 2]
MTI v SUL [No 2]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (586 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter