URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/126.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHEEMA and SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASAT 126 (11 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
ASSOCIATIONS INCORPORATION ACT 2015
CHEEMA and SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025]
MR E CADE, MEMBER
5-12 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
11 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CC 137 of 2025
JASKIRAN KAUR CHEEMA
First Applicant
RAJINDER SINGH BASSI
Second Applicant
PUSHPINDER SINGH
Third Applicant
RANI KAUR SAMRA
Fourth Applicant
BALJIT KAUR SIDHU
Fifth Applicant
DALJIT SINGH DHILLON
Sixth Applicant
PARAMJIT KAUR TUR
Seventh Applicant
ROWINDERJEET KAUR
Eighth Applicant
SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
FILE NO/S :
CC 138 of 2025
BALDEV SINGH BAGGA
First Applicant
LAKHBIR SINGH SIDHU
Second Applicant
DIDAR SINGH CHEEMA
Third Applicant
AMRITPAL SINGH
Fourth Applicant
SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
FILE NO/S :
CC 139 of 2025
DEVRAJ SINGH
SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
FILE NO/S :
CC 154 of 2025
AMARJIT SINGH PABLA
SIKH ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA (INC)
Incorporated association - Dispute regarding
whether membership in an incorporated association ceased and whether purported
of membership should be rescinded and membership reinstated - Failure
by association to comply with rules relating to expulsion of
Allegation that decision of committee to expel member was motivated by improper
purpose - Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction
to determine whether committee
motivated by improper purpose - Proper construction of
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
Constitution
of association
imposes maximum number of members of association - Whether association capable
of participating in mediation in good
faith where reinstatement of membership is
not possible
Legislation:
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
Associations Incorporation Regulations 2016
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Each applicant in each of the applications is
Representation:
CC 137 of 2025
First Applicant
Second Applicant
Third Applicant
Fourth Applicant
Fifth Applicant
Sixth Applicant
Seventh Applicant
Eighth Applicant
Solicitors:
First Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Second Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Third Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Fourth Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Fifth Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Sixth Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Seventh Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Eighth Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Rekhraj Legal
CC 138 of 2025
First Applicant
Second Applicant
Third Applicant
Fourth Applicant
Solicitors:
First Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Second Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Third Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Fourth Applicant
Equitas Lawyers
Rekhraj Legal
CC 139 of 2025
Solicitors:
Equitas Lawyers
Rekhraj Legal
CC 154 of 2025
Solicitors:
Equitas Lawyers
Rekhraj Legal
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Aiton Australia Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 996
(1999) 153 FLR 236
Bejawn v The Sikh Association of Western Australia Inc
[2023] WASC 152
City of Wanneroo -v- Tah Land Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC 249
Kavanagh and Pine Valley Pistol Club Incorporated
[2020] WASAT 11
Kavanagh and Pine Valley Pistol Club Incorporated
[2020] WASAT 60
Prowse v McIntyre
[1961] HCA 79
(1961) 111 CLR 264
Strzelecki Holdings Pty Ltd -v- Cable Sands Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 222
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
broad terms, each of the applicants in proceedings CC 137 of 2025,
CC 138 of 2025, CC 139 of 2025 and CC 154 of 2025 say they
member of SAWA who is in dispute with the Sikh Association of Western Australia
SAWA, the Association
the respondent
) as, on various dates in
2024 and 2025, the Association invalidly purported to expel them from the
Association and has refused their
proper request to reinstate their membership.
applicants say each purported expulsion was invalid as it was not made in
accordance with the rules of the Association (which
are known as the
Constitution
of the Sikh Association of Western Australia Inc. (SAWA) [2018
Edition]' (the
Constitution
applicant consequently applies to the Tribunal under
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
) for orders
against SAWA.
orders sought by the applicants in CC 137 of 2025, CC 138 of 2025
and CC 139 of 2025 are:
order that [his or her] expulsion is rescinded; and
declaration that [he or she] is restored as a member of SAWA.
order sought by the applicant in CC 154 of 2025 is:
applicant seeks an order that the Show-Cause Notice is invalid.
broad terms, SAWA asserts that each of the applicants have been properly
expelled in accordance with the
Constitution
and that any dispute they may have
had with the Association as to their expulsion has been finally resolved in
accordance with its
rules. The respondent says that as a consequence each
applicant is no longer a member of the Association and so cannot bring to
Tribunal an application under s 182 of the AI Act. Accordingly, SAWA seeks
orders from the Tribunal dismissing each of the applications.
the reasons the Tribunal will now give, the Tribunal finds that each applicant
in each proceeding has not been lawfully expelled
as a member of the Association
in accordance with the
Constitution
, and so each applicant remains a member of
the Association.
4 April 2025 this Tribunal made an order pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) that proceedings
CC 137 of 2025, CC 138 of 2025, CC 139 of 2025 and
CC 154 of 2025 are to remain as separate proceedings but
be heard and determined together, and evidence in one proceeding is to be
evidence in the other proceeding.
final hearing of these proceedings was held over five days commencing 5 August
2025. Following the final hearing, each of the
parties provided the Tribunal
with written closing submissions.
the consent of each of the parties the following documents were marked as
exhibits and accepted into evidence by the Tribunal
during the course of the
final hearing:
DESCRIPTION
Pages 301 - 832 and 1490 - 1629 in the combined hearing bundle for CC of
137 of 2025
The combined hearing bundle in CC of 138 of 2025
The combined hearing bundle in CC 139 of 2025
The combined hearing bundle in CC 154 of 2025
Witness statement of Rowinderjeet Kaur inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
Witness Statement of Jaskiran Kaur Cheema inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
Witness Statement of Pushpinder Pal Singh inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
Witness Statement of Paramjit Kaur Tur inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
Witness Statement of Baljit Kaur Sidhu inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
Witness Statement of Baljit Kaur Sidhu inclusive of all the relevant
annexures filed in CC 137 of 2025
further document was tendered by the applicants in each proceeding and marked
for identification by the
DESCRIPTION
Chronology created by the Applicant
following persons gave oral evidence at the final hearing:
Rowinderjeet
Kaur Cheema;
Kaur Sidhu;
Singh Dhillon;
Singh Bassi;
Singh Bagga;
Singh Sidhu;
Singh Cheema;
Singh Pabla;
Singh Bejawn; and
parties also provided the Tribunal with the following written submissions with
respect to each of the proceedings:
for Application;
for Respondent's Application to Dismiss;
Applicants'
Outline of Submissions in Response to Respondent's Interim Application;
Applicant's
Statement of Issues, Facts and Contentions;
Applicants'
Amended Statement of Issues, Facts, and Contentions;
Applicants'
Outline of Closing Submissions; and
Respondents'
Written Submissions.
the circumstances of each of the applicants in each of the proceedings is
unique and must be determined separately, the circumstances
surrounding the
purported expulsion of each applicant in CC 137 of 2025,
CC 138 of 2025 and CC 139 of 2025 is broadly similar and
extent can be considered collectively.
order to ensure accuracy the Tribunal will in these reasons refer to all persons
by their full
CC 137 of 2025
applicants in CC 137 of 2025 are:
Kaur Cheema - First Applicant;
Singh Bassi - Second Applicant;
Singh - Third Applicant;
Kaur Samra - Fourth Applicant;
Kaur Sidhu - Fifth Applicant;
Singh Dhillon - Sixth Applicant;
Kaur Tur - Seventh Applicant; and
Rowinderjeet
Kaur - Eighth Applicant.
Matters not in dispute
the purposes of the applications before the Tribunal all parties accept that
SAWA is an Association which is incorporated under
parties are also in agreement that SAWA and its members are subject to rules as
set out in the
Constitution
Constitution
is compliant with
Sch 1 of the AI Act and the management committee of SAWA is known as the
Executive Committee or
Relevant to
this matter the composition and terms of office of EXCO is set out in
r 10.1 and the quorum at all EXCO meetings (which
shall not be less than
50% of the total EXCO membership) is set out in r 10.2.3(c). Importantly
for these applications, r 10.2.3(e)
is in the following
Each member of the EXCO has a deliberative vote and any question arising at an
EXCO meeting must be decided by a majority vote.
If there is a tie, the person
presiding the meeting has a casting vote in addition to his personal
deliberative vote.
undisputed documentary evidence shows and the
Tribunal is satisfied and it finds the following facts in CC 137 of 2025:
the 2023/2024 financial year each applicant in CC 137 of 2025 was
a life member of SAWA.
9 March 2024 the EXCO
to issue SCL [show cause letters] to SAWA Members who had defaulted SAWA
Constitution
, ensure there is transparency and if there is any breach of
constitution. i.e Abuse of membership register, office/cctv room break-in,
changing of bank details, false report to police, false report to DMIRS CIV
1266/2023, CC1894/2022, CC921/2021, grant application
final report, this to show
SAWA members on transparency and enforce of SAWA
Constitution
and by laws.
In total 20 SAWA members will receive SCL on their breaches on
Constitution
which is detrimental, affect community harmony and tarnish the good name of
16 March 2024 each of the applicants in CC 137 of 2025 were given notices under
r 8.2(b) & r 8.2(c) of a proposal to expel
them from the Association. The
parties during the hearing referred to the notices given under r 8.2(b) & r
, and the Tribunal will refer to them as such in this decision.
Each of the show-cause notices were in substantially the same terms.
way of example, the show-cause notice dated 16 March 2024 given by email,
post and registered post to Rowinderjeet Kaur, the
eighth applicant, is as
Defaulting SAWA
Constitution
and Detrimental Conduct
SAWA is writing to you based on recent events occurred in SAWA, in which you
were involved with 10 other EXCO members (2023) defaulting
Constitution
which is viewed conduct detrimental to the interests and good name of SAWA.
This letter is sent to you based on procedure per
section 8.2
, with respect
to Suspension and Termination/Expulsion.
Following are the disputes,
failure to adhere to the SAWA
Constitution
in the removal of the sitting SAWA
President, as outlined in
section 10.4
f(i) of the constitution, is a matter of
significant concern. Despite the receipt of a notification on February 7, 2023,
for a 'Special General Meeting' from Bennett Law, the prescribed
constitutional procedures for the President's removal have not been
unauthorized alteration of the SAWA Banking signature by removing the sitting
SAWA President's signature, in contrary to 17.2
c & 17.3e of the SAWA
Constitution
, is a serious violation. This was facilitated through the
submission of unauthorized EXCO minutes of the meeting to BankWest, resulting
the removal of the President's signature and subsequently causing the SAWA
banking account to be 'locked.' This situation rendered
the SAWA bank accounts
inoperable, impeding its ability to fulfill financial commitments during this
Participating,
narrating and presenting a false narrative to both the Police and the Department
of Mines, Industry Regulation and
Safety (DMIRS) with the intent to harm,
humiliate the President and Secretary of SAWA and tarnish the good name of SAWA,
is a serious
matter. It is commendable that both government departments have
concluded their investigations, finding no wrongdoing as claimed
in the false
Participating,
narrating and presenting a fake narrative to
Constitution
Review Team on removal
of President, contrary of 10.3.1, President Chair '
preside all
a Treasurer without President knowledge and Secretary participation and
appointing him for dual role, contrary of SAWA
Constitution
. Appointing Vice
President as President without calling for SGM and dual role, contrary of SAWA
Constitution
security personal and preventing SAWA President to participate in EXCO meeting
on 5 Feb 2023, in contrary to SAWA
Constitution
10.3.1 ' ...
preside at all
meeting and functions unless delegated otherwise.'
SAWA view is, you have participated and acted unlawfully, an action viewed
detrimental to the very existence of SAWA.
You are required to explain your action on each of the 6 listed defaults.
In accordance with
section 8.2
b of the SAWA
Constitution
, you are hereby
granted a period of 28 days to avail yourself and provide an explanation for
your actions as mentioned above.
SAWA hereby give you notice to attend a meeting on 27 April 2024 at 1:00pm at
Canning Vale Sikh Temple - Office upstairs in which
we will follow the procedure
section 8.2
, with respect to suspension & termination/expulsion.
SAWA President 2023- 2024
Sdr Harbhajan Singh Bejawn
24 April 2024, the Secretary posted a notice on the SAWA website titled 'SAWA
membership Application
Announcement'.
effect of this notice was that EXCO had resolved to discontinue the use of its
membership waiting list and was now calling for
those interested in applying for
membership to submit an electronic membership application by 8 May 2024.
various dates prior to 27 April 2024, written submissions in response to the
show-cause notices were sent to EXCO by each of the
applicants.
EXCO minutes dated 27 April 2024 show that on 27 April 2024 the EXCO
was constituted by 13 of the 16 officers of the Association
respect to each of the applicants the written submissions of each applicant was
read and in each case the EXCO unanimously
resolved to 'execute the power
provided in 8.2d(ii) and
EXCO minutes dated 5 May 2024 shows on that date EXCO was again constituted by
13 of the 16 officers of the Association, that
Harbhajan Singh Bejawn was
'excluded due to conflict' and that 'based on evidence and submission' that EXCO
unanimously resolved
to expel the applicants from the
Association.
13 May 2024, each of the applicants in CC 137 of 2025 were given a notice under
r 8.2(f) purporting to expel them as members of
the Association. Each notice
was in substantially the same terms. By way of example, the notice dated 16
March 2024 given by email,
post and registered post to Rowinderjeet Kaur, the
eighth applicant, is as
Defaulting SAWA
Constitution
and Detrimental Conduct - EXPULSION
With reference to the meeting held by SAWA EXCO on 27 April 2024 in response
to SAWA Show cause notice issued on 16 March 2024.
EXCO confirm that SAWA had given you ample time to attend the meeting on 27
April 2024 or submit written statement (13 April 2024),
as per SAWA
Constitution
8.2b. SAWA provided you with 42 days which is more than sufficient
time to understand the gravity of this matter and make attempt
to clarify the
matter in Show Cause Notice.
SAWA is writing to you based on the decision made with regards to your Show
Cause Letter. The reasons for SAWA's decision are as
follows: you have
defaulted on clauses 10.2.3d (v), 10.3.1, 10.3.7 (a) and 10.4f(i) of the
association's constitution. Additionally,
you were involved in unauthorized
SAWA EXCO meetings, and were involved in a collective decision to provide false
information to
the police and the department of mines.
SAWA regret to inform you that, after careful consideration, EXCO has decided
to terminate your SAWA membership effective immediately.
This decision was made
based on your failure to adhere to SAWA
Constitution
which was deemed
detrimental to the well being of SAWA.
SAWA understand that this may come as disappointing news, EXCO want to
express gratitude for your past support and contributions towards
Association of Western Australia. However, it has become necessary to enforce
membership policies in order to maintain the
integrity, effectiveness while
maintaining serenity of Sikh Association of Western Australia.
SAWA President 2023 - 2024
Sdr Harbhajan Singh Bejawn
various dates between 16 May 2024 and 19 May 2024 each of the applicants in CC
137 of 2025 wrote to the Secretary to request mediation
under r 22. While
each of these requests is different in form, it is not in dispute each was in
substance a request made under r
8.2(g) by a member who is expelled from the
Association requesting the matter to be referred to the Trustees under r
By way of example, the request to engage in mediation made by Rowinderjeet Kaur,
the eighth applicant, is as
Defaulting SAWA
Constitution
and Detrimental conduct – Expulsion
I wish to acknowledge receipt of the letter dated 13 May 2024 signed by the
President of the Sikh Association of Western Australia
(SAWA). I would like to
provide you with notice that I do not admit to any of the purported
contraventions alleged in the 13 May
Letter and do not agree that expulsion of
my membership from SAWA is permitted pursuant to Rule 8.2 of the SAWA
Constitution
In light of the above, I would like to exercise my right pursuant to Rule
8.2.g of the SAWA
Constitution
to have this matter referred to the SAWA Trustees
for mediation in accordance with Rule 22 of the SAWA
Constitution
. The following
is an excerpt of Rule 8.2.g of the SAWA
Constitution
for your reference:
A member whose membership is suspended or who is expelled from the
Association may, within 14 days after receiving notice of the Committee's
decision under subrule (6), give written notice to the secretary requesting the
matter to be referred to the Trustees for mediation
This letter is made without prejudice and does not limit in any way my
ability to avail myself of other avenues of appeal or remedies
that may be
available to me.
21 May 2024, the Secretary confirmed receipt of each of the applicants' requests
for mediation.
this email the Secretary stated:
The SAWA Executive Committee
acknowledges receipt of your email and has noted your request to transfer the
matter under
Rule 8.2(g)
and Rule 22 of the SAWA
Constitution
The SAWA Executive Committee will contact the SAWA Trustees and will update
you in due course.
8 June 2024, the EXCO posted a notice on the SAWA website advising it had
approved the admission of 30 new ordinary members and
20 new associate
members. It is not in dispute that with the admission of these 50 new members
that the number of SAWA members reached
500, which is the maximum permitted
number of members under the
Constitution
16 June 2024, the Secretary notified the Trustees he had received 'requests from
18 expelled members to transfer this matter to
the Trustees, as per
... requesting the matter be referred to the Trustees for mediation under
notice requested the Trustees to '... set up a mediation meeting as per
... starting from Rowinderjeet Kaur ...'.
25 June 2024 the Trustees invited Rowinderjeet Kaur, the eighth Applicant, and
the EXCO to a mediation to commence at 10.00 am
on 6 July 2024 at the SAWA
invitation acknowledged the mediation was held pursuant to a request made under
r 8.2.(g) and that the mediation would be conducted
in accordance with r 22.
The invitation required each party to the mediation to give the Trustees a
written statement of the issues
to be considered at the mediation at least 5
days before the mediation takes place, that is by 30 June 2024, and by that same
to confirm their attendance at the mediation.
28 June 2024, the applicants' solicitor wrote to EXCO stating,
relevantly:
now have instructions to issue a notice of commencement of grievance procedure
to the Executive committee (
) pursuant to clause 21.3(a) of the
Constitution
. That notice will be issued in the coming
Accordingly,
we expect that the grievance procedure will "overtake" (or at least progress
alongside) the mediation process, and that
it is therefore appropriate that any
proposed mediations pursuant to clause 8.2(g) of the SAWA
Constitution
postponed, to enable our clients to exercise their rights under clause 21.3 of
Constitution
2 July 2024, the applicants' solicitor wrote to the Secretary requesting the
mediation scheduled to commence at 10.00 am on 6 July
2024 be postponed 'to a
later date'.
4 July 2024, the Trustees wrote to the applicants' solicitor to 'confirm that
the mediation Meetings schedule[d] for Saturday 7
July 2024 [sic] @ 10:00
am (Rowinderjeet) ... [is] hereby postponed, as requested by
same day the applicants' solicitor wrote to the Secretary to say '[t]hank you
for your email confirming that both scheduled
mediations have been postponed
until further notice. We will be in contact in due course regarding the
grievance procedure, on behalf
of our clients
collectively'.
5 July 2024, the President wrote to the applicants' solicitor stating, in
your clients had given notice under sub-rule 8.2 g. of the SAWA
Constitution
requesting the matter be referred to SAWA Trustees, SAWA EXCO have referred the
matter to the SAWA Trustees. We understand that
the SAWA Trustees have
commenced this process and will be contacting your clients progressively to
attend mediation meetings.
We do not agree that the grievance procedure under
applies to your
client's situation. Rule 21.1 provides that the procedure set out in this rule
applies to disputes between "members"
or between "one member" and the
Association. Your clients are not members of the Association ...
12 August 2024, the applicants' solicitors wrote to the EXCO purporting to 'give
notice of commencement of the grievance procedure
pursuant to clause 21.3 of the
Constitution
Constitution
)' and requesting that EXCO '[p]ursuant to
clause 21.3(b) ... the Executive Committee (
) ... convene a
meeting within 28 days to consider and determine the dispute'. The notice
states that the dispute in issue is the
purported expulsion of each of the
applicants from the
Association.
21 August 2024, the President wrote to the applicants' solicitors again stating
it did not accept that the grievance procedure
under r 21 was available to the
applicants, and while SAWA will proceed with the mediation process requested by
the applicants under
r 8.2(g) and r 22 it will defer the holding of these
mediations until after the SAWA annual general meeting scheduled to be held
September 2024 when '[t]he newly elected SAWA Executive Committee & Trustees
will address the matter following the completion
of the handover process in line
Constitution
6 September 2024 the applicants' solicitors wrote to the EXCO inviting the
Association to 'reconsider your position and convene
a meeting pursuant to r
21.3(b) of the
Constitution
. Please confirm you will do so by no later than
5.00 pm on Friday 13 September
13 September 2024 the Secretary wrote to the applicants' solicitors to say 'SAWA
has just concluded AGM and new EXCO been appointed
on 7 Sep 2024. This matter
will be tabled in our next EXCO
31 October 2024 the Secretary wrote to the applicants. Although a copy of this
letter is not in Exhibit 1, an email which refers
to the letter is within
Exhibit 1 and the applicants and the respondent both refer to this letter in
later correspondence. The Secretary
in an email dated 21 November 2024
described the 31 October 2024 letter
Lastly, to clarify a key issue, the letter issued to you on
aimed to confirm your interest in proceeding under
mediation as
re-initiate
. The mediation process was previously halted due to
correspondence received from
. SAWA requires clear assurance
that no such external intervention will disrupt the mediation process moving
Your prompt response to the above matters will enable us to progress
appropriately.
if not all of the applicants responded to SAWA's letter dated 31 October 2024 by
mid-November 2024 to confirm their willingness
to engage in
example, on 18 November 2024 Rowinderjeet Kaur wrote to the EXCO requesting
the Association, within 7 days, provide her with
a date for mediation under r
21 November 2024 the Secretary wrote to those who had not responded to its
letter of 31 October 2024 asking if they were still
willing to engage in
mediation and also stating that:
SAWA require an explicit
undertaking from you confirming that all legal actions and external
interferences will cease. This is critical
to ensuring that mediation proceeds
in a manner that is unbiased and free from intimidation or undue influence.
Once this outstanding point, as referenced in letter paragraph 2...
this juncture ......detrimental to this process
, is addressed, the EXCO
will involve the Trustees and seek their approval to proceed with the mediation
letter dated 21 November 2024 appears to have been sent to Didar Singh Cheema
and Gurdarshan Singh Kailley, neither of whom are
applicants in CC 137 of
or around 22 November 2024 the applicants' changed solicitors. On 22 November
2024 the applicants' new solicitors wrote to the
EXCO to say it understood the
letter dated 21 November 2024 required each of the applicants to give an
'explicit undertaking' ...
'that all legal actions and external interferences
will cease' before it will proceed to schedule mediations with the applicants.
This letter then requested 'you provide us with a response progressing the
mediation of our clients' matters by
no later than 5.00 PM AWST on Friday,
13 December 2024
' and '[i]f no satisfactory response is received within
the timeframe set out above, our clients will be forced to conclude that SAWA
has refused to proceed with the mediation of their matters and act
accordingly'.
13 December 2024 the President wrote to the applicants' new solicitors to
re-confirm whether your clients are keen to proceed with mediation under Rule 22
of the SAWA
Constitution
. This constitutes the second invocation of
any further delays would impede the resolution process. To facilitate effective
mediation, it is imperative that all ongoing
legal proceedings and external
interventions are stayed.
19 December 2024 the applicants' new solicitors wrote to the EXCO to
was expressly made clear at paragraph 6(b) of our Previous Correspondence, our
clients are willing and able to participate in the
mediation of their matters.
This position could not have been made more clear, and we note that it was not
acknowledged in the portion
of your Response purporting to refer to it. Your
Response therefore asks a question which the Previous Correspondence
is apparent that the true reason for delay in our clients' matters progressing
to mediation is the unrealistic and unreasonable
conditions SAWA baselessly
demands be met. In the absence of any other explanation, it therefore appears to
our clients that SAWA
has no intention of proceeding to mediation, but rather
intends to obstruct and obfuscate the process with the end and intent of
prolonging the prejudice that our clients have suffered by being rendered unable
to exercise rights they would otherwise enjoy, including
voting rights.
the process of mediation of our clients' matters is not advanced
immediately and with all haste
our clients will take
your conduct of their matters as obstruction of, and refusal to participate in,
the mediation process and rely
on this and other correspondence as evidence
before the State Administrative Tribunal in proceedings under the
Associations Incorporation Act
on the basis that the
mediation process will have been exhausted by your
...(original emphasis)
12 January 2025, the President wrote to the applicants' new solicitors to
SAWA acknowledges and welcomes the indication that your clients are now willing
and able to participate in the mediation process.
The Executive Committee has therefore agreed to recommence the mediation
process, and the Trustees will be informed accordingly. While
your clients may
retain the right to pursue legal recourse, it is important to note that such
actions cannot proceed concurrently
with the mediation process for obvious
Please also further note that SAWA has never denied your clients right to
legal representation. Our only concern has been the contradictory
expressed by your clients' previous lawyers to the effect that the proper
procedure is to invoke the provisions of
Constitution
, which we did not accept. It is this issue which has caused the delay in
implementing the mediation process under
As your clients now appear to accept that the
mediation process is
the correct format in which this dispute may be resolved, we see no further
'legal impediment' to these internal
dispute resolution proceedings
14 January 2025, the applicants' new solicitors wrote to the EXCO to
to proceed urgently to mediation
clients are ready and willing to attend a mediation of their matters, and have
been ready and willing to do so since at least
22 November 2024. As you will
appreciate, the limiting factor on our clients' matters is the speed at which
you and the rest of the
Exco take actual steps to arrange for mediation.
will further appreciate that all parties involved are eager to resolve the
matter quickly, given the amount of time that has passed.
such, our clients require:
(a) that you and the Exco move with all
haste to schedule the mediation of our clients' matters in a single combined
session; and
(b) that, accordingly, within 7 days of the date of this letter you provide
us with the following details:
(i) the date, time, and location of the mediation of our clients' matters in
a single combined session;
(ii) the name (or names) of the mediator (or mediators); and
(iii) which members of the Exco will be in attendance with authority to
resolve the matter.
20 January 2025, the President wrote to the applicants' new solicitors to
relation to mediation, it is important to clarify that, according to the
Constitution
, mediation must occur between the individual member(s) and the
EXCO, with the Trustees serving as mediators. Each party is required
a written statement to the Trustees for review. This approach is embedded in the
Constitution
to ensure confidentiality, transparency, and consistency while
fostering an impartial and fair resolution process.
The proposal for group mediation, as suggested in your letter, is not aligned
Constitution
. Such an approach would undermine confidentiality,
jeopardize transparency, deviate from established procedures, and set an
unattainable
precedent. It would also impose undue stress on the Trustees,
potentially hindering their ability to act impartially. Any deviation
prescribed process would compromise the integrity of SAWA and erode the trust
and fairness that our
Constitution
is designed to uphold.
SAWA remains committed to following the
Constitution
and ensuring that all
processes, including mediation, are conducted in a manner that serves the
best interests
of the Association and its members.
The SAWA Executive Committee (Exco) will coordinate with the SAWA Trustees to
determine suitable dates to promptly resume the mediation
involving Rowinderjeet
Kaur and Harmeek S. Kamboj. This mediation was previously postpone at the
request of WH Law and accepted by
the SAWA Trustees. Following this, the
schedule for all remaining mediation sessions will be finalized. It is important
that both the SAWA Exco and Trustees are run by dedicated volunteers
committed to upholding the SAWA
Constitution
5 February 2025, the applicants' new solicitors wrote to the EXCO to
our clients provide you with a final opportunity to schedule the mediation of
our client's matters and demonstrate that you and
the Exco are, as repeatedly
averred, willing to provide our clients with an opportunity to resolve their
matters by mediation as
required by the SAWA constitution.
deal with this matter expeditiously, our clients propose that their mediations
be dealt with in the following manner:
(a) individual
mediations take place consecutively with a quorum of 3 trustees, with
multiple mediations taking place on the same day
(b) each individual mediation take
no more than 30 minutes per
(c) as part of each individual mediation, the quorum of trustees is to
make a clear recommendation to the Exco
(which need not be
disclosed to our clients) as to whether the Exco should:
(i) agree to reinstate the member in question effective from the date of that
member's expulsion; or
(ii) not agree to do so; and
(d) mediations take place on Saturdays and Sundays with a
minimum of 6
mediations scheduled for each weekend
such that the mediations for all
of our clients take place over the course of 3 consecutive weekends.
clients require that by no later than 5.00 PM AWST on Friday 14 February 2025,
you provide us with the following:
schedule of
setting out the date, time, and location of the mediations of
each our clients' matters over the course of 3 consecutive weekends
above, with the
first mediations to occur no later than 1 March
(being slightly less than 1 year since our clients were issued with
their show-cause notices);
names of the trustees forming the quorum of mediators
for each of our clients' mediations; and
which members of the Exco will be in attendance
authority to resolve the matter.
are instructed that should the above not occur by 5.00 PM AWST on 14 February
2025 our clients will conclude that the mediation
process under SAWA's rules has
failed or been frustrated as a result of your conduct, with the result that
their matters cannot be
resolved, and proceedings will be commenced in SAT
without further warning.
13 February 2025, the President wrote to the applicants' new solicitors to
welcomes the decision to proceed with individual mediation. This approach has
been communicated to the Trustees, who are fully
aligned and supportive of the
However, we have a significant concern regarding the proposed mediation
schedule. Allocating only 30 minutes per individual is, in
our view, inadequate,
based on insights from previous mediations. As SAWA is entirely managed by
volunteers, including the EXCO and
Trustees, who are actively engaged in
operational matters, particularly on weekends, a more practical approach is
To ensure that all parties receive fair and adequate time for mediation, we
propose the following schedule:
The first two
mediations will each be allocated a full day, scheduled over two Saturdays.
Once progress is
observed and participants are familiar with the process, we will transition to a
more structured schedule, with two
expelled members per Saturday.
Based on this
approach, the mediation process is expected to take approximately eight weeks in
Furthermore, SAWA wishes to highlight the four weeks of lost
time caused by the previous group mediation proposal. This delay could
avoided had the SAWA
Constitution
been adhered to, and had there been
transparency and disclosure regarding expelled members you no longer represent.
To prevent further
setbacks, we strongly urge you to cease imposing deadlines
and allow the natural process-which SAWA has successfully implemented-to
without unnecessary external constraints.
We wish to reiterate and place on record that any delay in the mediation
process so far has been as a direct result of the legal advice
your clients have
sought and obtained in the past. The Association has always been ready, able and
willing to organize the mediation
process in accordance with the rules. You will
no doubt appreciate the sheer number of mediations limits the time within which
entire exercise can be accomplished for the reasons explained above and
previously.
Additionally, we emphasize that the month of March and April is dedicated to
SAWA's core objectives (Sikh New Year, Sikh Heritage
and Sikh Vaisakhi
Celebration events), including religious prayers and functions, sporting
activities, cultural events, and engagements
with dignitaries and community
We appreciate your cooperation and look forward to a fair, transparent, and
effective mediation process.
The SAWA Executive Committee (Exco) will coordinate with the SAWA Trustees to
determine suitable dates to promptly resume the mediation
involving Rowinderjeet
Kaur and Harmeek S. Kamboj. This mediation was previously postponed at the
request of W&H Law and accepted
by the SAWA Trustees. Following this, the
schedule for all remaining mediation sessions will be finalized. It is important
that both the SAWA Exco and Trustees are run by dedicated volunteers
committed to upholding the SAWA
Constitution
24 February 2025, the applicant's commenced proceeding CC 137 of 2025.
28 February 2025, the Trustees invited Rowinderjeet Kaur, the
eighth applicant, to a mediation to commence at 2.00 pm on
9 March 2025, Rowinderjeet Kaur, the eighth applicant, participated in a
mediation with the EXCO which was held before four Trustees.
At the conclusion
of the mediation the EXCO, at an emergency meeting attended by 12 of the
16 officers of the EXCO, 'unanimously
agreed to uphold the decision
stated in the expulsion letter dated 13 May
28 April 2025, the applicants' new solicitors wrote to the respondent's
solicitor stating it had received notification that the
respondent proposes
to hold a mediation on 3 May 2025. The applicants' new solicitors
the circumstances your client is functus officio. The purported mediation is a
nullity. The purported mediation is in any event
exactly that which is not now
open to your client because the proceedings in SAT are in its review
SAT Act. The only forum for any mediation is in
SAT on 11 June 2025.
29 April 2025, the respondent's solicitor wrote to the applicants' new solicitor
and stated:
client will continue to arrange mediation dates for all the other applicants in
the above matters, as they are obliged to do,
under the provisions of rule 8.2.g
and rule 22.1 of the association's constitution.
take note that our client (and/or the management committee) has never, at any
stage, abandoned its responsibilities under the
rules of the association,
despite contrary assertions made by your clients.
client's position is that mediation before the tribunal can proceed in parallel
with the association's internal mediation process
and that our client is not
functus officio
in the circumstances.
also believe that these proceedings invoke the original jurisdiction of the SAT
and not its review jurisdiction. We are therefore
unclear as to the reason you
have indicated in paragraph 3 of your aforesaid letter, that the proceedings
before the SAT are in its
review jurisdiction, quoting ss 26 and 31 of the SAT
1 May 2025, the Trustees wrote to Pushpinder Singh, the third applicant,
inviting him to attend a mediation under r 8.2.(g) and
commence at 3.00 pm on 10 May 2025 at the SAWA office, with the mediation to be
conducted in accordance with r 22.3. The
invitation requested the third
applicant provide both confirmation of his attendance at the mediation and a
written statement of
issues by 5 May 2025.
5 May 2025, the third applicant forwarded a written submission to the
submission responded to various matters raised in the show-cause notice but also
stated that based on legal advice from his
new solicitors that 'the matter is
now in SAT's review jurisdiction and accordingly the mediation is not open to
SAWA', and that
that he would not attend the mediation scheduled to take place
on 10 May 2025.
third applicant did not attend the mediation on 10 May 2025 which proceeded in
his absence in the presence of the Trustees and
the EXCO. The mediation did not
result in EXCO agreeing to rescind the expulsion of the third applicant and
restore his
membership.
8 May 2025 the Trustees wrote to Jaskiran Kaur Cheema, the first applicant,
inviting her to attend a mediation to commence at 3.00
pm on 17 May 2025. On 12
May 2025 Jaskiran Kaur Cheema wrote to the Secretary advising that she will not
attend the mediation.
21 May 2025 the Trustees wrote to Daljit Singh Dhillon, the sixth applicant,
inviting him to attend a mediation to commence at
3.00 pm on 7 June
21 May 2025 the Trustees wrote to Rajinder Singh Bassi, the second applicant,
inviting him to attend a mediation to commence at
3.00 pm on 31 May
applicants contend that to fully understand their dispute with SAWA it is
necessary to also consider certain other events that
took place in 2022 and
2023. These events, the applicants say, are that:
24 September 2022 the SAWA annual general meeting took place at which the
following persons were elected as officers of the Association
for the 2022/2023
financial year:
Singh Bejawn as President;
Singh Amar as Assistant Secretary;
first applicant as Vice-President;
second applicant as Assistant Treasurer; and
third to eighth applicants as EXCO members.
January 2023 and February 2023 the first to eighth applicants as members of EXCO
(with others) voted in favour of removing
Harbhajan Singh Bejawn as
the basis of a genuine good faith belief that Harbhajan Singh Bejawn had been
properly removed as President a majority of the remaining
EXCO members carried
on SAWA's ordinary business.
17 March 2023 Harbhajan Singh Bejawn brought an action in the Supreme Court of
Western Australia against SAWA and the members of
the EXCO which was given the
matter number CIV 1266 of 2023.
16 May 2023 her Honour Justice Seaward decided in
CIV 1266 of 2023 that the proper process for the removal of
Harbhajan Singh Bejawn
as President had not been followed and made declarations
to the effect he had not been lawfully removed as President of SAWA in
Constitution
and that he remained the President of
16 August 2023 her Honour made orders as to the costs in CIV 1266 of 2023
to the effect that:
is to pay Harbhajan Singh Bejawn costs of the originating summons to be taxed on
a party-party basis if not agreed;
Singh Bejawn is to pay 80% of SAWA's costs of the costs application to be taxed
if not agreed; and
Singh Bejawn is to pay 100% of the costs of the second to twelfth defendants in
CIV 1266 of 2023.
her Honour denied Harbhajan Singh Bejawn's application:
his costs to be paid personally by the second to twelfth defendants;
costs on an indemnity basis; and
a special costs order.
Matters in dispute
applicants assert:
effect of her Honour's orders is that Harbhajan Singh Bejawn is to pay some of
SAWA's costs as well as being personally liable
to his solicitors, which latter
amount was in the 2023/2024 financial year transferred by SAWA in contravention
of a resolution of
the Association to Harbhajan Singh Bejawn's personal bank
a consequence, Harbhajan Singh Bejawn who was again voted to the office of
President of SAWA in the 2023/2024 financial year, was
motivated to expel them
because they had voted to remove him as President in February 2023 and because,
if they were officers of
the Association, that they would be unlikely to approve
a resolution to reimburse him from SAWA funds for his personal legal costs;
4 July 2025 Amarjit Singh Pabla, the applicant in CC 154 of 2025
lodged with the Tribunal his witness statement in CC 154 of 2025.
In paras 6 to
9 of this witness statement Amarjit Singh Pabla
8 June 2024, I learnt that SAWA had admitted 30 new ordinary members and 20 new
associate members.
understand that a copy of these membership admission announcements forms
document 22 of the Applicants' bundle of documents filed
in matter number
CC/137 /2025 before the Tribunal on 24 April 2025.
list of new SAWA members made me concerned because I knew that many of the new
members were family or friends of the SAWA executive
and Manveer Singh's announcement had specifically announced the
discontinuance of the old system of a membership waiting list without
any information on what decision-making process would be replacing it.
noticed that several of the new members were friends or family of the current
SAWA Exco. I have summarised my observations in the
Applications:
Total numbers of applications received
Incomplete applications (Invalid)
Successful applications (Associate)
Successful applications (ordinary)
Unsuccessful applications
Member/Category
Observations
Member passed away
respondent denies these assertions and says:
Singh Bejawn declared a conflict of interest and did not vote on the resolution
to expel the applicants' from SAWA;
Singh Bejawn declared a conflict of interest and did not vote on the resolution
to reimburse him from SAWA funds for his
personal legal costs;
EXCO resolution to reimburse Harbhajan Singh Bejawn from SAWA funds for his
personal legal costs was not in contravention of a
resolution of the
Association; and
the time the mediations were held by the Trustees there was at least one, if not
several, vacant membership positions.
The applicants' contentions in CC 137 of 2025
of the applicants in CC 137 of 2025 contends:
matters relied upon in the show-cause notice and the notice which purported to
expel them from SAWA did not allege, as required,
a contravention of the rules
of the Association with the consequence each of the show-cause notices and the
expulsion notices is
notice which purported to expel them from SAWA was not issued within the time
required under the
Constitution
with the consequence each of the expulsion
notices is invalid;
matters relied upon in the notice which purported to expel them from SAWA was
motivated by an improper purpose in that the decision
was inconsistent with the
duties contained in
and s 46 of the AI Act with the consequence
each of the expulsion notices is
the time of each of the mediations held by the Trustees under r 8.2(g) and r 22
it was not open to the EXCO to resolve to rescind
the applicants' expulsions
from the Association and reinstate their membership of the Association, as at
the date of each of these
mediations the number of members of the Association
was the maximum number permitted under the
Constitution
consequence each mediation is
a consequence of the failure to give each of the applicants access to a valid
mediation under r 8.2(g) and r 22 and in failing
to permit them to have access
to the grievance procedure under r 21, the applicants have exhausted the dispute
resolution processes
Constitution
and their dispute with the
Association is incapable of being resolved under the rules of the Association.
Consequently, the applicants
now apply to the Tribunal under s 182 of the
AI Act for the resolution of their disputes with the Association.
The respondent's contentions in CC 137 of 2025
respondent submits that the Tribunal is not possessed of jurisdiction under s
182 of the AI Act to resolve the applicants' dispute
with the Association.
is because the respondent asserts that it has done everything required of it
Constitution
with the consequence that the expulsion of the applicants
from the Association is a valid decision which is resolved under the rules
the Association. As a consequence, the applicants are not now members of the
Association and their applications should be
enabling Act under which these applications are brought is the AI Act, in
this case, s 182 of the AI Act. An application under
s 182 of the AI Act is
within the original jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Section 182 is in the
following terms:
(1) If a dispute cannot be resolved under the procedure provided for as required
by Schedule 1 Division 1 item 18 -
(a) the incorporated association concerned; or
(b) a member of the association involved in the dispute; or
(c) a former member expelled from the association involved in the
may make an application to the State Administrative Tribunal to have the dispute
determined by that Tribunal.
(1A) An application by a former member must be made within 6 months of the
expulsion of the person from the incorporated association.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) prevents the State Administrative Tribunal
from exercising its powers to refer the dispute, or any
aspect of it, for
(3) In a proceeding under subsection (1), the State Administrative Tribunal
may make orders giving such relief as the Tribunal considers
appropriate,
including one or more of the following orders -
(a) an order giving directions for the observance
of the rules of the incorporated association by any person who has an obligation
to observe those rules;
(b) an order declaring and enforcing the rights and obligations of members or
former members of the incorporated association between
themselves;
(c) an order declaring and enforcing the rights and obligations between the
incorporated association and any member, members, former
member or former
members of the association.
limits of the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by s 182 of the AI Act is
discussed by Senior Member Aitken in
Kavanagh and Pine Valley Pistol Club
Incorporated
[2020] WASAT 11
Kavanagh No. 1
in the Tribunal's view, an application can be made under s 182(1) of the AI
Act if an incorporated association contends that
the membership of a person who
has been a member of the incorporated association has ceased, but that person
disputes that their
membership has ceased because they contend that the
incorporated association has not complied with its rules. In that situation,
will be necessary for the Tribunal to determine the issue of whether the rules
(properly construed) have been complied with before
the Tribunal can determine
whether it has jurisdiction to deal with the dispute under s 182(1) of the
AI Act. If the Tribunal determines
that the incorporated association did not
comply with its rules and that the membership of the person has not ceased then
make a declaration under s 182(3)(c) of the AI Act declaring that
the person is still a member of the incorporated association and
decision to terminate their membership is void and of no effect. That being the
case, the person will, in fact, have been
a current member of the incorporated
association when they make the application under s 182(1) of the AI
182 of the AI Act does not give the Tribunal jurisdiction to deal with the
merits of whether a person's membership of an incorporated
association should
have been terminated; it only gives the Tribunal jurisdiction to determine
whether an incorporated association
has complied with its rules in making a
decision to terminate the membership.
Principles for the proper construction of the rules of an incorporated
association
Member Aitken of the Tribunal considered the principles for the proper
construction of the rules of an incorporated association
Kavanagh and
Pine Valley Pistol Club Incorporated
[2020] WASAT 60
Kavanagh No.
), cited with approval by her Honour Justice Seaward in
The Sikh Association of Western Australia Inc
[2023] WASC 152
In that decision, after considering certain authorities, the Senior Member
enunciated the principles for the proper construction
of the rules of an
incorporated association in the following terms:
rules of an incorporated association represent the terms of a statutory
contract, firstly between the members of the association
themselves and,
secondly between the members and the association.
principles applicable to the construction of the rules of an incorporated
association are an adaptation of the principles which
govern the construction of
commercial contracts.
principles, however, must be modified, in the manner outlined below, when the
Tribunal is construing the rules of an incorporated
association, for two
reasons. Firstly, the rules of an incorporated association have a public
dimension. Secondly, an incorporated
association is not a commercial operation
established with a view to generating profits, but rather is what may be
described as a
non-profit making organisation.
Tribunal must approach the construction of a particular rule of an incorporated
association, when read in the context of the rules
as a whole, with a degree of
flexibility. This means that the Tribunal should not make too much of
infelicities of expression in
the rules of an incorporated association, nor be
too quick to identify absurdity, illogicality or apparent inconsistencies.
rules of an incorporated association are a deemed contract, created by statute,
without the normal elements of a contract having
to be established.
The rules speak not only to the members of the incorporated association,
but also to third parties who might
consider becoming members. Accordingly, it
is important that the rules are capable of being construed by third parties by
to the text of the rules.
'surrounding circumstances', particularly those that are likely to be
well-known, not just to the members of the incorporated
association, but also to
relevant third parties, are part of the contextual considerations which can be
weighed by the Tribunal in
construing the rules of an incorporated association,
but restraint ought to be exercised in doing so.
Tribunal will respectfully adopt and apply these principles in order to properly
construct the
Constitution
The Sikh Association of Western Australia Incorporated (SAWA)
objects of SAWA are set out in r 5.
powers of SAWA are set out in r 6.
requirements for membership of SAWA are set out in r 7.
process of suspending membership and expelling members is set out in r 8.
Rule 8 is in the following terms:
SUSPENSION AND TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP
8.1 Cessation
Membership shall automatically cease upon a member's resignation, death or
non-payment of dues over 2 consecutive years.
8.2 Suspension and
Termination/Expulsion
committee may decide to suspend a member's membership or to expel a member from
the Association if -
member contravenes any of these rules; or
member acts detrimentally to the interests of the Association.
secretary must give the member written notice of the proposed suspension or
expulsion at least 28 days before the committee meeting
at which the proposal is
to be considered by the committee.
notice given to the member must state -
and where the committee meeting is to be held; and
grounds on which the proposed suspension or expulsion is based; and
the member, or the member's representative, may attend the meeting and will be
given a reasonable opportunity to make written
or oral (or both written and
oral) submissions to the committee about the proposed suspension or expulsion;
the committee meeting, the committee must -
the member, or the member's representative, a reasonable opportunity to make
written or oral (or both written and oral) submissions
to the committee about
the proposed suspension or expulsion; and
due consideration to any submissions so made; and
(i) whether or not to suspend the member's membership
and, if the decision is to suspend the membership, the period of suspension;
(ii) whether or not to expel the member from the Association.
decision of the committee to suspend the member's membership or to expel the
member from the Association takes immediate effect.
committee must give the member written notice of the committee's decision, and
the reasons for the decision, within 7 days after
the committee meeting at which
the decision is made.
member whose membership is suspended or who is expelled from the Association
may, within 14 days after receiving notice of the Committee's
decision under
subrule (6), give written notice to the secretary requesting the matter to be
referred to the Trustees for mediation
notice is given under subrule (7), the member who gives the notice and the
committee are the parties to the mediation.
the period a member's membership is suspended, the member -
any rights (including voting rights) arising as a result of membership; and
not entitled to a refund, rebate, relief or credit for membership fees paid, or
payable, to the Association.
a member's membership is suspended, the secretary must record in the register of
the member's membership is suspended; and
date on which the suspension takes effect; and
period of the suspension.
the period of the suspension ends, the secretary must record in the register of
members that the member's membership is no longer
procedure for resolving disputes between members or between members and SAWA
(known as the grievance procedure) is set out at
procedure for conducting a mediation is set out in r 22.
following terms:
22.1 Application
applies if written notice has been given to the secretary requesting the
matter to be referred to the Trustees for mediation-
member under
rule 8.2(g)
party to a dispute under rule 21.3(e)(ii)(B) or 21.4(c).
this rule applies, the matter must be referred to the Trustees for mediation.
22.2 Mediators:
Trustees shall act as
22.3 Mediation process
parties to the mediation must attempt in good faith to settle the matter that is
the subject of the mediation.
party to the mediation must give the Trustees a written statement of the issues
that need to be considered at the mediation at
least 5 days before the mediation
takes place.
conducting the mediation, the Trustees must -
each party to the mediation every opportunity to be heard; and
each party to the mediation to give due consideration to any written statement
given by another party; and
that natural justice is given to the parties to the mediation throughout the
mediation process.
Trustee cannot determine the matter that is the subject of the mediation.
mediation must be confidential, and any information given at the mediation
cannot be used in any other proceedings that take place
in relation to the
matter that is the subject of the mediation.
costs (if any) of the mediation are to be paid by the party or parties to the
mediation that requested the matter to be referred
to the Trustees.
22.4 If Mediation Results in Decision to Suspend or Expel Being Revoked
takes place because a member whose membership is suspended or who is expelled
from the Association gives notice under
rule 8.2(g)
the result of the mediation, the decision to suspend the member's membership or
expel the member is revoked, that revocation does
not affect the validity of any
decision made at a committee meeting or general meeting during the period of
suspension or expulsion.
Rules 5, 6, 7, 8, 21 and 22 as a whole and applying the principles for the
proper construction of the rules of an association
discussed above, the Tribunal
finds the effect of these Rules is that:
of SAWA is open to all persons over 18 years of age who are citizens of
Australia, who reside in Western Australia and
who declare that they are of the
Sikh faith: r 7.1.
are four classes of membership, which are, associate member (non-voting),
ordinary member (voting), life member (voting) and
honorary member (non-voting
unless invited to vote by the EXCO): r 7.3.
members are to become associate members except that the adult children and
spouses of life members may apply for ordinary membership
without the
requirement to commence as associated members: r 7.2.
members are able to apply for ordinary membership after 2 years. Ordinary
members are able to apply for life membership
after 2 years: r 7.3.
may decide to suspend a member's membership or to expel a member from SAWA in
accordance with the following procedure:
Secretary must give to the member written notice of the proposed suspension or
expulsion at least 28 days before the EXCO meeting
at which the proposal is to
be considered by the committee;
written notice must state:
and where the EXCO meeting is to be held;
grounds on which the proposed suspension or expulsion is based; and
the member, or the member's representative, may attend the meeting and will be
given a reasonable opportunity to make oral or
written (or both) submissions to
the committee about the proposed suspension or expulsion; and
must give 'due consideration' to any submissions so
decides (after a vote of a majority of EXCO members at a properly constituted
EXCO meeting held at least 28 days after written
notice is given) that the
grounds given are made out, that is that the member has contravened any of
the Rules, or that the member
has acted detrimentally to the interests of the
Association;
decision by EXCO to suspend a member's membership or to expel the member from
SAWA has immediate effect; and
must give the member written notice of the EXCO decision and the reasons for the
decision within 7 days after the committee meeting
at which the decision is
made: r. 8.2.
member whose membership is suspended or who is expelled from SAWA may, within 14
days after receiving notice of the EXCO decision
under r 8.2(f) give written
notice to the Secretary to be referred to the Trustees for mediation under
notice is given under r 8.2(f) both the member who gives the notice and the EXCO
are parties to the mediation: r 8.2(h).
members are in dispute with each other or a member is in dispute with the
Association then the parties may use the grievance procedure
set out in r 21,
which requires:
parties to the dispute must attempt to resolve the dispute between
themselves within 14 days after the dispute has come to the
attention of each
the parties to the dispute are unable to resolve the dispute between themselves
any party to the dispute may start the grievance
procedure by giving written
notice to the Secretary of:
parties to the dispute; and
matters that are the subject of the dispute;
28 days after the Secretary is given notice under the grievance procedure an
EXCO meeting must be convened to consider and
determine the dispute.
The Secretary must give to each party to the dispute written notice of the
EXCO meeting at which the dispute
is to be considered and determined at
least 7 days before the meeting is held, which notice must include:
and where the EXCO meeting is to be held; and
the member, or the member's representative, may attend the meeting and will be
given a reasonable opportunity to make oral or
written (or both) submissions to
the committee about the proposed suspension or
the EXCO meeting at which a dispute is to be considered and determined EXCO
to each party to the dispute or the party's representative a reasonable
opportunity to make written or oral submissions (or both)
to EXCO about the
must give 'due consideration' to any submissions so made; and
must then determine the dispute.
EXCO determines a dispute under the grievance procedure EXCO must give written
notice of its determination and the reasons for
the determination within 7 days
after the EXCO meeting at which the determination is made.
party to the dispute may, within 14 days after receiving notice of the EXCO
determination give written notice to the Secretary requesting
the matter to be
referred to the Trustees for mediation under r 22, and if this notice is given
then each party to the dispute is
a party to the mediation.
if the dispute is between a member and SAWA and any party to the dispute gives
written notice to the Secretary stating that
the party does not agree to
the dispute being determined by the EXCO and requests that the dispute be
referred to the Trustees for
mediation under Rule 22, then the EXCO must not
determine the dispute.
22 applies if a written notice has been given to the Secretary requesting the
dispute to be referred to the Trustees for mediation
under r 8.2(g) or r
21.3(e)(ii)(B) or r 21.4(c). If such a notice is given then:
Trustees shall act as mediators;
parties to the mediation must attempt in good faith to settle the matter that is
the subject of the mediation;
party to the mediation must give to the Trustees a written statement of the
issues that need to be considered at the mediation
at least 5 days before the
mediation takes place;
conducting the mediation the Trustees must:
to each party to the mediation every opportunity be heard; and
each party to the mediation to give due consideration to any written statement
given by another party; and
that natural justice is given to the parties throughout the mediation
Trustee cannot determine the matter that is the subject of mediation;
mediation must be confidential and any information at the mediation cannot be
used in any other proceeding that take place in
relation to the matter that is
the subject of the mediation;
costs (if any) of the mediation are to be paid by the party to the mediation
that requested the matter to be referred to the Trustees;
mediations takes place because a member whose membership is suspended or who is
expelled from the Association gives notice under
r 8.2(g) and as a result of the
mediation, the decision to suspend the member's membership or to expel the
member is revoked, then
that revocation does not affect the validity of any
decision made at a committee meeting or general meeting during the period of
suspension or expulsion.
The issues to be determined by the Tribunal
issues the Tribunal is required to determine are:
Constitution
require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by the
member of the
Constitution
and if so, did the notice allege a contravention by
the member of the
Constitution
the expulsion notice given to the member given within the time required under
Constitution
, and if it was not given within the time required, whether the
expulsion notice is invalid?
the Trustees permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance with
the request made by the applicants' solicitor's
on 28 June 2024 and, if so, when
should they have recommenced scheduling mediations?
the mediations held by the Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal valid mediations under r 8.2.(g)
at the date of a mediation held by the Trustees under r 8.2(g) and r 22 the
number of members of the Association was the maximum
number of members permitted
under the rules, was the EXCO participating in good faith to settle the
matter that is the subject of
the mediation?
the outcomes of the mediations held by the Trustees outcomes which resolved the
disputes between the applicants and SAWA?
the reasons explained by Senior Member Aitken in
at [90], the Tribunal is not permitted to determine the
merits of whether a person's membership of an incorporated association should
have been terminated, which in these proceedings does not permit the Tribunal to
determine the following matters:
the decision to give the show-cause notices to the applicants or the decision to
expel the applicants' from SAWA was motivated
by an improper purpose in that the
decision was inconsistent with the duties contained in
of the AI Act.
the EXCO resolution to reimburse Harbhajan Singh Bejawn in full, from SAWA funds
for his personal legal costs was in contravention
of a resolution of the
Association.
the applicants' were permitted to request access to the grievance procedure
under r 21 after the EXCO had purported to expel
the applicants as members of
the Association.
Consideration of CC 137 of 2025
Constitution
require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by
the member of the
Constitution
and if so, did the notice allege a contravention
by the member of the
Constitution
effect of r 8.2(a) is that the EXCO may decide to expel a member from the
Association if the member 'contravenes any' rules of
the Association, or,
if the member 'acts detrimentally to the interests of the Association'.
is not in dispute that on 9 March 2024 the EXCO resolved to issue show-cause
notices to around 20 members of the Association (which
includes the applicants
in CC 137 of 2025, CC 138 of 2025 and CC 139 of 2025), and that on 16 March 2024
the EXCO Secretary gave
a written show-cause notice to each of the applicants
that the EXCO was proposing they be expelled and that the proposal would be
considered by the EXCO at a meeting to be commence at 1.00 pm on 27 April 2024
at the upstairs office in Canning Vale Sikh Temple.
requires the show-cause notice to be given at least 28 days before
the EXCO meeting at which the proposal would be considered. It
dispute and the Tribunal finds that each of the show-cause notices complied with
this time requirement.
requires that the show-cause notices 'must state':
and where the committee meeting is to be held; and
grounds on which the proposed expulsion is based; and
the member or the member's representative may attend the meeting and be given a
reasonable opportunity to make written or oral
(or both) submissions to the EXCO
is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that each of the show-cause notices
complied with the requirements set out in r 8.2(c)i
and iii. The parties are,
however, in dispute as to whether the show-cause notices complied with
r 8.2(c)ii.
applicants assert that under r 8.2(a) the only grounds on which a member
may be expelled from the Association are grounds which
assert the member has
contravened any of the rules of the Association, or, if the member acts
detrimentally to the interests of the
Association. The applicants then
assert that the grounds set out in the show-cause notices issued by the
Secretary on 16 March 2024
are not grounds that allege a contravention of the
Constitution
major contraventions alleged in the show-cause notices issued to the applicants
are that the applicants participated as a member
of the EXCO to:
the President through a process other than the process authorised under r
the making of complaints to both Police and Department of Mines, Industry
Regulation and Safety
that the applicants knew to be false, with
the intention of harming and humiliating the then proper President and Secretary
the alteration of the SAWA banking signature by removing the authorities of the
then proper President and Secretary, contrary
to r 17.2(c).
to the show-cause notices are copies of the EXCO minutes and other documents on
which the grounds are said to be based.
applicants assert that none of these grounds allege a contravention by the
applicants of the
Constitution
Tribunal finds that grounds 1 and 3 above are allegations that the applicants
did, while a member of the EXCO, vote in favour
of resolutions which are
contrary to the
Constitution
(r 10.4(f) and r 17.2(c) respectively) and
that ground 2 does allege that the applicants have acted detrimentally to the
of the Association by making complaints to Police and DMIRS about the
then proper President and Secretary which were not substantiated
Tribunal therefore finds that that the show-cause notices given to the
applicants on 16 March 2024 do satisfy the requirements
set out in r 8.2(a)
and r 8.2(c)ii. However, the Tribunal, wishes to make clear that in making this
finding it is not making any
finding that the grounds alleged are substantiated
or are true.
Tribunal will therefore answer this question by finding that r 8.2(c)ii the
Constitution
does require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by the
member of the
Constitution
, and that the notices given to the applicants did
comply with this requirement.
Was the expulsion notice given to the member given within the time required
Constitution
, and if it was not given within the time required,
whether the expulsion notice is invalid?
states that the EXCO 'must' give the member written notice of a decision
to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the
decision is made. It is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the
written notice of the decision to expel
the applicants was given to each of them
by email on 13 May 2024.
applicants have questioned whether the EXCO decision to expel the applicants
from the Association was made at the EXCO meeting
on 27 April 2024 or
whether it was made at the EXCO meeting on 5 May 2024. The applicants contend,
also, that the reference in r
8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and r
8.2 (d) to 'the committee meeting' of the
Constitution
requires there to be
a single meeting at which the EXCO is to both consider the proposal to expel a
member and to make its decision
as to whether it is expel a member. In the
alternative, the applicants assert that whichever of these days the decision was
on that the notice was not given within the 7 days as required by r
respondent contends that the minutes of the 27 April 2024 EXCO meeting shows on
that day the EXCO was quorate and that it gave
the applicants an opportunity to
attend and make oral submissions (which was an opportunity that none of them
took) and to consider
the written submissions of the applicants to the EXCO
members (which was done by the submissions being read to the meeting). The
respondent then contends that in order to give 'due consideration' to the
submissions as required by r 8.2(d)ii it was permitted
to defer the making
of a decision as to whether to expel them to its meeting on 5 May 2024.
The respondent contends that the minutes
of the 5 May 2024 EXCO meeting
shows that the decision to expel the applicants was then made on that day. The
respondent then also
contends that the calculation of time for the purposes of r
8.2(f) should exclude Saturdays and Sundays, with the result that in
the period of time allowed for the giving of a notice under r 8.2(f) is 9
calendar days, with the consequence that the
notice was given within the time
required by the rule.
Tribunal finds that the minutes of the 5 May 2024 EXCO meeting shows that the
EXCO when quorate did expel the applicants as members
of the Association at its
meeting on 5 May 2024.
Tribunal also finds that as the words 'day' or 'days' is not defined in the
Constitution
and that it is not qualified by a preceding word such as 'business
day' or 'working day'. The Tribunal finds that the consequence
is that the word
should carry its ordinary legal meaning which is a period of 24 hours
reckoned from midnight to midnight and so
it will include any Saturday or Sunday
which falls within the 7 day period in
consequence of these findings is that the notice given to the applicants under r
8.2(f) was therefore not given 'within seven
days after' the meeting at which
the decision was made, but rather was given only within eight days after the
Tribunal then considered whether the reference in r 8.2(c)i &
r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d) to 'the committee meeting' necessarily
that there be a single committee meeting to both consider and determine
the proposed expulsion of a member. When considering
this issue, the
Tribunal considers that the primary purpose of r 8.2 is to provide procedural
fairness to a member who is proposed
to be expelled from the Association. As a
consequence, the Tribunal considers that
reference r 8.2(c)i & ii and 8.2(d) to 'the committee meeting' may not
necessarily require that there to be a single committee
meeting but that it may
in certain circumstances permit the EXCO to hold two meetings, provided that at
least the purpose of holding
the two meetings is to 'give due consideration' to
the submissions made by the applicants and that the EXCO is constituted by the
same officers on each occasion.
while it does appear from the minutes that the purpose of the two meetings was
to 'give due consideration' to the submissions
made by the applicants, the
minutes of the EXCO meetings on 27 April 2024 and 5 May 2024 also shows that the
EXCO was differently
constituted as Gurmeet Sing Sidhu was present on 27 April
2024 but was absent on 5 May 2024 and Gurdeep Singh was absent on 27 April
2024 but was present on 5 May 2024. Consequently, even if there was not
required to be a single committee meeting, the decision
of the EXCO made on 5
May 2024 to expel the applicants could not be a decision made at 'the meeting'
of the EXCO as is required by
r 8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d) as the
EXCO was not identically constituted at each of the two meetings.
Tribunal has now to consider whether the failure of the EXCO to meet the
requirements in r 8.2(f) that it 'must' give the member
written notice of a
decision to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the meeting at
which the decision is made and
the failure to meet the requirement in r 8.2(c)i
& r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d) as to 'the committee meeting' renders the
notices given to the applicants invalid.
considering whether the expulsion notices given to the applicants are invalid,
the Tribunal has considered the principles for
the proper construction of the
rules of an incorporated set out earlier in this decision.
Tribunal notes r 8.2 contains mandatory language, for example, in r 8.2(b)
that '[t]he Secretary must give the member written
notice of the proposed
suspension or expulsion at least 28 days before the committee meeting at
which the proposal is to be considered
by the committee'.
Tribunal also notes that expulsion is the most serious action that can be taken
against a member of an Association and that as
a consequence of expulsion a
person can no longer enjoy the benefits of membership and may also suffer damage
to their reputation.
these reasons the Tribunal considers that the rules governing the expulsion of a
member must be strictly followed for an expulsion
to be valid. As Campbell J of
the New South Wales Supreme Court observed in
McClelland v Burning Palms
Surf Life Saving Club
[2002] NSWSC 470
(2002) 191 ALR 759:
[109] ... So far as a member is concerned, he or she has the benefit of a deemed
covenant with each other member to observe all the
provisions of the rules,
which has as a consequence a contractual obligation on each member not to expel
any other member save in
accordance with the rules. As well, though, that
covenant has the consequence that someone in the position of Mr McClelland
with the other members that, if the procedures of the rules are
followed for an expulsion, he will be bound to treat that expulsion
effective one. These mutual contractual obligations are ones which would be cut
down or varied only to the extent to which
there was some contrary public policy
(meaning thereby a public policy of the type which can override contractual
obligations), or
if there was some equity which precluded the parties to the
contract from relying on their strict contractual rights
this case, the Tribunal finds there are no circumstances which would indicate
that the time period in r 8.2(f) should not be enforceable
according to its
clear meaning. This is because the time period set out in r 8.2(f) is a
reasonable time period, particularly so
as in this case the notices were
given by email rather than by post, and also because the enforcement of the time
period would not
result in an absurdity and nor would it defeat a purpose of the
Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds that the failure of the EXCO and/or Secretary to comply with
r 8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d)
through holding two differently
constituted meetings and the failure to comply with r 8.2(f) that it 'must'
give the member written
notice of a decision to expel a member to the member
'within 7 days after' the meeting at which the decision is made, each separately
renders the notices of expulsion given by SAWA to the applicants
Were the Trustees permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request made by the applicant's solicitor's
on 28 June 2024
and, if so, when should they have recommenced scheduling mediations?
feature of this proceeding is the very lengthy period of time it took for the
Trustees to schedule mediations with the applicants.
the purpose of considering this issue the parties do not dispute and the
Tribunal finds that the applicants various requests
for mediation under r 8.2(g)
and r 22 were each proper requests made within the time required by the
before any blame can be attached to the respondent the reasons for the delay in
scheduling the requested mediations requires
close consideration.
first reason for the delay is the omission in the
Constitution
to impose a
requirement that a mediation requested under r 8.2(g) and r 22 be held within
any particular period of time. This is
in contrast, for example, with the
requirement that a request by a party to a dispute under the grievance procedure
under r 21.3(b)
must, within 28 days, result in the convening of a committee
meeting to consider and determine the dispute.
second reason for the delay was that when the EXCO began on 25 June 2024 to
notify the applicants that it would commence the
holding of mediations on 6 July
2024 it was asked by the applicants' then solicitors on 28 June 2024 to postpone
the holding of the
mediations so as to allow the applicants to commence the
grievance procedure under r 21.
third reason for the delay was that when the applicants' then solicitors
requested the mediations be postponed they indicated
that it was their view that
'the grievance procedure will "overtake" (or at least progress alongside) the
mediation process'.
fourth reason is that the respondent in August 2024 indicated to the applicants'
then solicitors that it wished to delay scheduling
mediations until after the
Association's Annual General Meeting (
) was held on 7 September
fifth reason is that when the applicants on various dates in mid-November 2024
indicated to the respondent that they still wished
to engage in mediation, the
respondent indicated by correspondence dated 21 November 2024 that it would only
engage in mediation
with those applicants who gave 'an explicit undertaking from
you confirming that all legal actions and external interferences will
sixth reason is that when the respondent wrote to the applicants' new solicitors
on 12 January 2025 to retract its requirement
that mediation could only take
place on the giving of an undertaking to cease 'all legal actions and external
interferences', it
was apparent that it was not clear whether the applicants
maintained the view advanced by their former solicitors that the grievance
procedure under r 21 would 'overtake' or was required to 'progress alongside'
the mediation process.
seventh reason is that when the respondent and the applicants' new solicitors
exchanged correspondence in January and February
2025 that they could not agree
on the duration of the mediations (the applicants suggested one hour for each
mediation and the respondent
suggested three hours) or whether the mediations
should be held separately for each applicant (as suggested by the respondent) or
whether they could be held as a single mediation for all applicants (as
suggested by the applicants).
eighth reason is that when the respondent on 28 February 2025 began to commence
scheduling mediations with the applicants it
was advised by the applicants' new
solicitors on 28 April 2025, incorrectly, that these mediations were invalid as
the respondent
functus officio
'because the proceedings [CC 137 of
2025] in SAT are in its review jurisdiction. See
Tribunal considers that while the above events explain why it took the Trustees
a lengthy period of time to schedule mediations
with the applicants, it does not
excuse them from their duty under r 22 to ensure that the mediations
requested by the applicants
were held within a reasonable period of time.
the Tribunal notes that r 22 does not impose a requirement that mediation
requested under r 8.2(g) and r 22 be held within
any particular period of time,
it must be the case that in order to give efficacy to r 22 that a properly
requested mediation is
to be held within a reasonable period of
as to what would constitute a reasonable period of time for the Association to
hold a mediation can be found in other provisions
in the Rules relating to the
resolution of disputes, such as the 28 day period for the holding of a committee
meeting to consider
and determine a dispute under r 21.3(b) and the need for
certainty on the part of both the Association and a member as to whether
person is or is not a member of the Association which together show that this
should not be a particularly lengthy period of time.
Tribunal therefore finds that the Trustees did contravene r 8.2(g) and r 22
in that they failed to hold the mediations properly
requested by the applicants
within a reasonable time of the request with the consequence that the mediations
scheduled by the Trustees
commencing on 9 March 2025 are invalidly convened
mediations. For completeness, the Tribunal notes that no issue of waiver
or estoppel
arises from the applicants' solicitors request to postpone the
holding of mediations as by the date the request was made the reasonable
period of time inferred by the Tribunal for the holding of the mediations had
Tribunal therefore finds that the Trustees were not permitted to postpone the
holding of mediations in accordance with the request
made by the applicant's
solicitor's on 28 June 2024 as by that date the period of time in which the
properly requested mediations
should have been held had
Were the mediations held by the Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal valid mediations under r
8.2(g) and r 22?
the reasons set out above, the Tribunal finds the mediations purportedly
scheduled by the Trustees commencing on 9 March 2025
are invalidly convened
mediations, although this is not because the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal but because
the period of time in which the properly
requested mediations should have been held had by that time
If at the date of a mediation held by the Trustees r 8.2(g) and r 22 the number
of members of the Association was the maximum number
of members permitted under
the rules, was the EXCO participating in good faith to settle the matter that is
the subject of the mediation?
Tribunal makes the following findings relevant to the consideration of this
8 June 2024, the then Secretary posted a notice on the SAWA website that EXCO
had approved the admission of 30 new ordinary members
and 20 new associate
with the admission of these 50 new members the number of SAWA members was 500,
which is the maximum permitted number of members
under r 7.1(b);
the EXCO as it was constituted in March to June 2025 knew or can be inferred to
know both that SAWA is permitted under its
Constitution
to have at any one time
only 500 members, and that at 8 June 2024 it had reached the number of permitted
members of the Association;
on 4 July 2025 Amarjit Singh Pabla, the applicant in
CC 154 of 2025 lodged with the Tribunal his witness statement in
of 2025 which alleged that one of the members of the Association was
deceased, with the consequence this is the only evidence before
the Tribunal
which shows that the EXCO actually ever knew that there were any vacant
Consequently
the Tribunal concludes that as at the dates in March to June 2025 when each of
the mediations scheduled by the Trustees
was held the EXCO knew (or should have
known) that it could not rescind the purported expulsion of an applicant and
reinstate the
membership of an applicant as to do so would have had the
result that the number of members of the Association would then exceed
number permitted under r 7.1(b).
significance of this is that it raises the question as to whether the EXCO
attempted 'in good faith to settle the matter that
is the subject of the
mediation', as it was required to do under r 22.3(a) as a party to the
concept of mediating in good faith is well established in the law of contract
where it is considered certain and enforceable:
See, for example, the extensive
discussion of the meaning of the expression by the Court of Appeal in
Strzelecki Holdings Pty Ltd -v- Cable Sands Pty Ltd
observations of Einstein J in
Aiton Australia Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty
[1999] NSWSC 996
(1999) 153 FLR 236
referred to by Pullin JA in
at [155] - [156] as
...To my mind, but without being exhaustive, the essential or core content of an
obligation to negotiate or mediate in good faith
may be expressed in the
following terms:
(1) to undertake to subject oneself to the
process of negotiation or mediation (which must be sufficiently precisely
defined by the
agreement to be certain and hence enforceable);
(2) to undertake in subjecting oneself to that process, to have an open mind
in the sense of:
(a) a willingness to consider such options for the resolution of the dispute
as may be propounded by the opposing party or by the
mediator, as
appropriate;
(b) a willingness to give consideration to putting forward options for the
resolution of the dispute.
Subject only to these undertakings, the obligations of a party who contracts to
negotiate or mediate in good faith, do not oblige
nor require the
(a) to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of the
other party;
(b) to act otherwise than by having regard to self-interest.
the difference in the principles of construction between the rule of an
incorporated association and commercial contracts,
the Tribunal considers it
would be proper to alter the last words of Einstein J from 'self-interest'
to the 'objects of the association'.
question the Tribunal must determine is whether the requirement to negotiate in
good faith is certain and enforceable under the
Constitution
, and if so, whether
the EXCO was in contravention of the requirement placed on it under r 22.3(a)
'to attempt in good faith to settle
the matter that is the subject of the
mediation'.
the reasons given in
(as amended to suit the context of
an incorporated association) the Tribunal finds that the requirement under
r 22.3(a) is certain
and enforceable, that is, that the EXCO (and all other
parties to the mediation) must participate in a mediation by having an open
mind, which includes being willing to consider such options for the resolution
of the dispute as may be propounded by the opposing
the case of the applicants, the option put by them for the resolution of the
dispute is that their expulsions are rescinded and
their membership is
reinstated, which therefore requires that the EXCO be willing to consider such
actions. This would not be a
very controversial requirement in an association
which has no cap on the number of members or which does have a cap but has
vacancies to allow the reinstatement of a membership or memberships
as the case may be.
this case it was not possible for the EXCO to reinstate the membership of any of
the applicants as an outcome of the mediation
as the number of members at the
date of each of the mediations in March to June 2025 had, so far as EXCO
knew, reached the maximum
number of permitted members.
Consequently,
the Tribunal finds that as at the date of the mediations held by the Trustees
under r 8.2(g) and r 22 the number of
members of the Association was the maximum
number of members permitted under the rules, that the EXCO did not participate
faith to settle the matter that is the subject of the mediation.
this reason, the Tribunal finds that even if these mediations had been validly
scheduled mediations, the holding of a mediation
could not result in the
resolution of the dispute between the applicants and SAWA within the meaning of
s 182(1) of the AI Act.
Were the outcomes of the mediations held by the Trustees outcomes which resolved
the disputes between the applicants and SAWA?
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that the outcomes of the mediations
purportedly held by the SAWA Trustee under r
8.2(g) and r 22 of the SAWA
did not resolve the dispute between the applicants and the Association within
the meaning of s 182(1)
of the AI Act.
Conclusion in CC 137 of 2025
consequence of the Tribunal's findings in CC 137 of 2025 is that the applicants
were not expelled from the Association under
the procedure provided for in the
Constitution
and that they remain life members of the Association.
give effect to these findings the Tribunal will make the following orders under
s 182(3) of the AI Act:
order that the expulsion of each applicant is rescinded;
declaration that each applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of
SAWA in accordance with the
Constitution
declaration that each applicant remains a member of
CC 138 of 2025
applicants in CC 138 of 2025 are:
Singh Bagga - First Applicant;
Singh Sidhu - Second Applicant;
Singh Cheema - Third Applicant; and
Singh - Fourth Applicant.
Matters not in dispute
undisputed documentary evidence shows and the Tribunal is satisfied and it finds
the following facts in CC 138 of 2025:
the 2019/2020 to 2024/2025 financial years each applicant in
CC 138 of 2025 was a life member of SAWA.
19 September 2020 each applicant in CC 138 of 2025 was appointed under r 12 as a
Trustee for a term of 5 years.
20 March 2024 each of the applicants were given show-cause notices in differing
notices given to Baldev Singh Bagga, the first applicant, and Lakhbir Singh
Sidhu, the second applicant, alleged they had each
failed to adhere to r 10.3.3
in that each had been one of a number of persons who caused the SAWA office
locks to be changed and
that each was a signatory to emails sent to all SAWA
members on 9 September 2023, 16 September 2023, 30 September 2023, 10
2023 and 1 December 2023.
notice given to Didar Singh Cheema, the third applicant, contained the same
allegations made in the notices given to Baldev Singh
Bagga, the first
applicant, and Lakhbir Singh Sidhu, the second applicant, as well alleging he
had failed to adhere to r 22.3(e)
by distributing confidential minutes of a
mediation to persons who were not parties to the mediation.
notice given to Amritpal Singh, the fourth applicant, alleged he had failed to
adhere to r 10.3.3 in that he was a signatory to
emails sent to all SAWA members
on 9 September 2023, 16 September 2023, 30 September 2023,
10 November 2023 and 1 December 2023.
addition, each of the notices stated that 'You are required to provide an
explanation on why you have failed to adhere to
Constitution
', that under r
8.2(b) 'you are hereby granted a period of 28 days to avail yourself and provide
an explanation for your actions ...',
and that each applicant was given notice
to attend a meeting on 4 May at 12.00 pm, 1.00 pm, 2.00 pm and 3.00 pm
respectively to be
held at the upstairs office of the Canning Vale Sikh Temple
'with respect to suspension & termination/expulsion'.
13 May 2024 each of the applicants in CC 138 of 2025 were given a notice
purporting to expel them as members of SAWA. Each notice
gave reasons for the
decision to expel them as members of the
Association.
Singh Bagga, the first applicant, gave written submissions on 14 April 2024 and
27 April 2024 in which he stated that he was
not available to attend the meeting
scheduled for 4 May
that the other applicants also gave written submissions to the EXCO in response
to their show-cause
EXCO minutes dated 4 May 2024 shows the proposed meeting was held on that day,
the EXCO was quorate, that none of the applicants
attended the meetings, that
their respective written submissions were read by the EXCO and that in respect
of each applicant the
EXCO resolved to 'execute the power provided in 8.2d (ii)
and (iii)'.
EXCO minutes dated 5 May 2024 shows that on that day the EXCO was quorate
and that it resolved to expel each of the applicants
Association.
various dates between 17 May 2024 and 19 May 2024 each of the applicants in CC
138 of 2025 wrote to the Secretary to request mediation
Confirmation
of the receipt of these requests was given by the Secretary to the applicants on
21 May 2025.
than these matters, the chronology set out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025
is equally relevant to the applicants in CC
138 of 2025.
Matters in dispute
matters in dispute in CC 138 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set out
above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The applicants' contentions in CC 138 of 2025
applicants' contentions in CC 138 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set
out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The respondent's contentions in CC 138 of 2025
respondent's contentions in CC 138 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set
out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 138 of 2025
issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 138 of 2025 are, subject to the
difference in chronology set out above, effectively
the same issues to be
determined by the Tribunal in CC 137 of 2025.
Consideration of CC 138 of 2025
Constitution
require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by
the member of the
Constitution
and if so, did the notice allege a contravention
by the member of the
Constitution
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the
Constitution
the show-cause notices to allege a contravention by members of the
Constitution
in CC 137 of 2025 in the affirmative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicants in CC 138 of 2025.
Consequently,
the Tribunal must now determine whether the show-cause notices:
given at least 28 days before the EXCO meeting at which the proposal would be
considered, as required by r 8.2(b); and
they stated, as required by r 8.2(c):
(i) when and where
the meeting is to be held;
(ii) the grounds on which the proposed expulsion is based; and
(iii) that the member or the member's representative may attend the meeting
and be given a reasonable opportunity to make written
or oral (or both)
submissions to the EXCO about their proposed expulsion.
is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that each of the show-cause notices
complied with the requirements set out in r 8.2(c)i
and r 8.2(c)iii. The
parties are, however, in dispute as to whether the show-cause notices complied
with r 8.2(c)ii.
applicants assert that the grounds set out in the show-cause notices issued to
the applicants by the Secretary on 20 March 2024
are not grounds that allege a
contravention or contraventions of the
Constitution
indicated above, the major contraventions alleged against the applicants
Baldev Singh Bagga, the first applicant, and Lakhbir Singh Sidhu, the second
applicant, had failed to adhere to r 10.3.3 in that
they had been one of a
number of persons who caused the SAWA office locks to be changed and that they
were a signatory to emails
sent to all SAWA members on 9 September 2023,
16 September 2023, 30 September 2023, 10 November 2023 and 1 December
Didar Singh Cheema, the third applicant, had as well as the failing alleged
against Baldev Singh Bagga, the first applicant,
and Lakhbir Singh Sidhu, the
second applicant, also failed to adhere to r 22.3(e) by distributing
confidential minutes of a mediation
to persons who were not parties to the
mediation; and
Amritpal Singh, the fourth applicant, had failed to adhere to r 10.3.3 in that
he was a signatory to emails sent to all SAWA
members on 9 September 2023,
16 September 2023, 30 September 2023, 10 November 2023 and 1
December 2023.
10.3.3 requires the Secretary to 'keep, maintain and have custody of all books,
keys and records of SAWA'. The alleged contravention
of the rule is that one or
more of the applicants caused the SAWA office locks to be changed or has
attempted to change certain alarm
passcodes or had been a signatory to certain
emails sent to all SAWA members.
10.3.3 clearly imposes certain obligations only on the Secretary. The Tribunal
therefore finds that the only member who can
be in contravention of the rule is
the Secretary, and that it is not possible for a person who is not the Secretary
to ever be in
contravention of it. As at the time of the alleged
contraventions none of the applicants was the Secretary, it must therefore
that none of the applicants could ever be in contravention of r 10.3.3.
Accordingly, this ground does not constitute an allegation
that a member is in
contravention of the
Constitution
and therefore it cannot constitute a ground
which satisfies the requirements of r 8.2(a) and r 8.2(c)ii.
22.3(e) requires that a mediation held under r 22 'must be confidential'. It is
clear to the Tribunal that this rule imposes
a duty of confidentiality on the
Trustees who act as a mediator at a mediation under r 22. This would include,
but is not limited
to, a duty on a Trustee to maintain the confidentially
of all information and documents provided to them for the purpose of a mediation
or which are provided to them during a mediation or which contain a record of a
mediation. The Tribunal finds that a Trustee who
does not maintain the
confidentiality of a document given to them during a mediation or which contains
a record of a mediation would
therefore be in contravention of r 22.3(e).
Accordingly, a ground that alleges a Trustee has distributed a record of a
held under r 22 is therefore an allegation that the Trustee has
contravened the
Constitution
, and is therefore a ground which satisfies the
requirements of r 8.2(a) and r 8.2(c)ii.
well as these major contraventions, some of the applicants are also alleged to
have committed other contraventions such as being
a party to litigation against
SAWA in 2012 or to have been a party to litigation against another incorporated
association in 2018.
To the extent that these other allegations are contended
by the respondent to constitute a contravention the Tribunal finds that
conduct cannot and does not constitute a contravention of the
Constitution
Tribunal will therefore answer this question by finding that the show-cause
notice given to Didar Singh Cheema, the third applicant,
alleged that he had
contravened r 22.3(e) and so did allege a contravention of the
Constitution
that the show-cause notices given to Baldev Singh Bagga, the first applicant,
Lakhbir Singh Sidhu, the second applicant and
Amritpal Singh, the fourth
applicant did not.
consequence of this is that the show-cause notices given to Baldev Singh Bagga,
the first applicant, Lakhbir Singh Sidhu, the
second applicant and Amritpal
Singh, the fourth applicant are invalid while the show-cause notice given to
Didar Singh Cheema, the
third applicant is a valid show-cause
Was the expulsion notice given to the member given within the time required
Constitution
, and if it was not given within the time required,
whether the expulsion notice is invalid?
states that the EXCO 'must' give the member written notice of a decision
to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the
decision is made. It is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the
written notice of the decision to expel
the applicants was given to each of them
by email on 13 May 2024.
applicants have questioned whether the EXCO decision to expel the applicants
from the Association was made at the EXCO meeting
on 4 May 2024 or whether
it was made at the EXCO meeting on 5 May 2024. The applicants contend, however,
that the reference in r
8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d) to 'the
committee meeting' of the
Constitution
requires there to be a single meeting at
which the EXCO is to both consider the proposal to expel a member and to make
its decision
as to whether it is expel a member. In the alternative, the
applicants assert that whichever of these days the decision was made
on that the
notice was not given within the 7 days as required by r 8.2(f).
respondent contends that the minutes of the 4 May 2024 EXCO meeting shows on
that day the EXCO was quorate and that it convened
to give the applicants an
opportunity to attend and make oral submissions (which was an opportunity that
only one of them took) and
to provide the written submissions of the applicants
to the EXCO members (which was done by the submissions being read to the
The respondent then contends that in order to give 'due
consideration' to the submissions as required by r 8.2(d)ii it was permitted
defer the making of a decision as to whether to expel them to its next meeting
on 5 May 2024. The respondent contends that the
minutes of the 5 May 2024
EXCO meeting shows that the decision to expel the applicants was then made on
that day. The respondent
then also contends that the calculation of time for
the purposes of r 8.2(f) should exclude Saturdays and Sundays, with the result
that in this case the period of time allowed for the giving of a notice under r
8.2(f) is 9 calendar days, with the consequence that
the notice was given within
the time required by the rule.
Tribunal finds that the minutes of the 5 May 2024 EXCO meeting shows that the
EXCO was quorate and that the decision of the EXCO
to expel the applicants as
members of the Association was made by the EXCO at its meeting on 5 May 2024.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that as the word day for the
purposes of r 8.2(f) means a period of 24 hours reckoned
from midnight to
midnight and that it will include any Saturday or Sunday which falls within the
7 day period in r 8.2(f).
consequence of these findings is that the notice given to the applicants under r
8.2(f) was not given 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the decision was
made, but rather was given only within 8 days after the meeting at which the
decision was made.
Tribunal considers that the reference r 8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and
r 8.2(d) to 'the committee meeting' may not necessarily
require that there
is a single committee meeting but that it may in certain circumstances permit
the EXCO to hold two meetings, provided
that at least the purpose of holding the
two meetings is to 'give due consideration' to the submissions made by the
applicants and
that the EXCO is constituted by the same officers on each
Tribunal is satisfied that the purpose of the two meetings was to 'give due
consideration' to the submissions made by the applicants
and that the minutes of
the EXCO meetings on 4 May 2024 and 5 May 2024 show that the EXCO was
identically constituted on each occasion.
The Tribunal is therefore
satisfied that the EXCO was permitted to consider the proposals to expel the
applicants from the Association
at the two meetings it held on 4 May 2024 and 5
the Tribunal finds that for the reasons given above that the failure of the EXCO
and/or Secretary to comply with r 8.2(f)
that it 'must' give the member written
notice of a decision to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the
which the decision is made renders the notices of expulsion given by
SAWA to the applicants invalid.
Were the Trustees permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request made by the applicant's solicitor's
on 28 June 2024 and, if so,
when should they have recommenced scheduling mediations?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the Trustees were
permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request
made by the applicants' solicitor's on 28 June 2024 in the negative. This
answer is equally applicable to the applicants
in CC 138 of 2025.
the same reasons the Tribunal therefore finds that the Trustees were not
permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request
made on 28 June 2024 as by that date the period of time in which the properly
requested mediations should have been
held had passed.
Were the mediations held by the Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal valid mediations under r
8.2(g) and r 22?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the mediations held by the
Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal were
valid mediations in the negative. This answer is equally applicable to the
applicants in CC 138
these same reasons, the Tribunal finds the mediations purportedly scheduled by
the Trustees commencing on 9 March 2025 are invalidly
convened mediations,
although this is not because the applicants had commenced proceedings
in the Tribunal but because the period
of time in which the properly requested
mediations should have been held had by that time
If at the date of a mediation held by the Trustees r 8.2(g) and r 22 the number
of members of the Association was the maximum number
of members permitted under
the rules, was the EXCO participating in good faith to settle the matter that is
the subject of the mediation?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the EXCO was participating
in good faith to settle the matter that is the
subject of the mediation in
the negative. This answer is equally applicable to the applicants in CC 138 of
the same reasons set out above, the Tribunal finds that the EXCO did not
participate in good faith to settle the matter that
is the subject of these
mediations.
Were the outcomes of the mediations held by the Trustees outcomes which resolved
the disputes between the applicants and SAWA?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the outcomes of the
mediations held by the Trustees are outcomes which
resolved the disputes between
the applicants and SAWA in the negative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicants in CC
138 of 2025.
the same reasons set out above, the Tribunal finds that the outcomes of the
mediations purportedly held by the SAWA Trustee under
r 8.2(g) and r 22 of the
SAWA did not resolve the dispute between the applicants and the Association
within the meaning of s 182(1)
of the AI Act.
Conclusion in CC 138 of 2025
consequence of the Tribunal's findings in CC 138 of 2025 is that the applicants
were not expelled from the Association under
the procedure provided for in the
Constitution
and that they remain life members of the Association.
give effect to these findings the Tribunal will make the following orders under
s 182(3) of the AI
order that the expulsion of each applicant is rescinded;
declaration that each applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of
SAWA in accordance with the
Constitution
3. A declaration that
each applicant remains a member of SAWA.
CC 139 of 2025
applicant in CC 139 of 2025 is Devraj Singh.
undisputed documentary evidence shows and the Tribunal is satisfied and it finds
the following facts in CC 139 of 2025:
the 2023/2024 financial year the applicant in CC 139 of 2025 was
a life member of SAWA.
20 March 2024 the applicant in CC 139 of 2025 was given a show-cause
applicant gave a written submission to the EXCO responding to his respective
show-cause notice on 3 May 2024.
EXCO minutes dated 4 May 2024 shows that a meeting to consider whether to expel
the applicant as a member of the Association was
held on that day, the EXCO was
quorate, that the applicant's written submission was read by the EXCO and that
the EXCO resolved to
'execute the power provided in 8.2d(ii) and
EXCO minutes dated 5 May 2024 shows that on that day the EXCO resolved to expel
the applicant from the
Association.
13 May 2024 the applicant was given a notice under r 8.2(f) purporting to expel
him from the
Association.
18 May 2024 the applicant wrote to the Secretary to request mediation under r
8.2(g) and r 22.
Confirmation of the receipt of this request was given by the Secretary to the
applicants on 21 May 2025.
than these matters, the chronology set out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025
is equally relevant to the applicant in CC
139 of 2025.
Matters in dispute
matters in dispute in CC 139 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set out
above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The applicant's contention in CC 139 of 2025
applicant's contentions in CC 139 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set
out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The respondent's contentions in CC 139 of 2025
respondent's contentions in CC 139 of 2025 are effectively the same matters set
out above with respect to CC 137 of 2025.
The issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 139 of 2025
issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 139 of 2025 are, subject to the
difference in chronology set out above, effectively
the same issues to be
determined by the Tribunal in CC 137 of 2025.
Consideration of CC 139 of 2025
Constitution
require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by
the member of the
Constitution
and if so, did the notice allege a contravention
by the member of the
Constitution
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the
Constitution
the show-cause notices to allege a contravention by members of the
Constitution
in CC 137 of 2025 in the affirmative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicant in CC 139 of 2025.
Tribunal must now determine whether the show-cause notice:
given at least 28 days before the EXCO meeting at which the proposal would be
considered, as required by r 8.2(b); and
as required by r 8.2(c) it stated:
and where the meeting is to be held;
grounds on which the proposed expulsion is based; and
the member or the member's representative may attend the meeting and be given a
reasonable opportunity to make written or oral
(or both) submissions to the EXCO
is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the show-cause notice given to the
applicant complied with the requirements set
out in r 8.2(c)i and r 8.2(c)iii.
The parties are, however, in dispute as to whether the show-cause notice
complied with r 8.2(c)ii.
applicant asserts that the grounds set out in the show-cause notice given to the
applicant by the Secretary on 20 March 2024
are not grounds that allege a
contravention or contraventions of the
Constitution
indicated above, the major contravention alleged against the applicant are:
President of SAWA in 2020 he failed to action an AGM motion to disburse $60,000
and that due to this failure SAWA was required
to respond to an application made
by members of SAWA to this Tribunal, contrary to r 21.3(e)(ii) and 21.4(c);
President of SAWA in 2021 he failed to take reasonable steps to hold the 2021
AGM within the time required by the
Constitution
, contrary to r 13.2(a);
the 2021 AGM he failed to 'intervene and take corrective action' when he was
informed the returning officer was using a voter
list which contained errors and
so he prevented certain members from attending, participating and voting at the
2021 AGM, contrary
to r 10.2.1(b) and r 14(a).
21.3 deals with how the SAWA grievance procedure is to be commenced. Rule
21.3(e)(ii) requires the Secretary to do certain
things when requested to do so
under the grievance procedure. The alleged contravention is that when the
applicant was President,
he failed to action an AGM motion to disburse $60,000.
Putting aside the difficulty with this allegation being that the President
SAWA is not able to disburse SAWA funds without a resolution of the EXCO, there
can only be a contravention of r 21.3(e)(ii) by
a member who is at the relevant
time the Secretary. This applicant was not the Secretary at the relevant time,
so he cannot ever
be in contravention of this rule.
13.2(a) requires SAWA to hold its AGM 'within 3 months of the close of each
financial year by issuing not less than 21 days
prior written notice ...
specifying the date, time, venue and agenda'. While no doubt the President has
an important role in managing
the business of the Association, he or she must
act through the EXCO and at least with respect to issuing a notice to members
act unilaterally through his or her position as President. Accordingly,
as the President is not by virtue of his or her office required
to issue the
notice required by r 13.2(a) the applicant cannot ever be contravention of this
10.2.1(b) requires that the '[s]ecretary shall
provide to the RO [returning officer] a complete list of voting members prior to
close of nominations for election'. The only member therefore who can
contravene r 10.2.1(b) is a member who is at the relevant
time the Secretary.
As this applicant was not the Secretary at the relevant time, he cannot ever be
in contravention of this rule.
in effect limits attendance, participation and the right to vote at an AGM
to life members and ordinary members who are financial
and not under suspension.
Insofar as this rule imposes duties on any member of SAWA, it appears to impose
them under r 10.2.1 on
the returning officer appointed by the EXCO and on the
Secretary who is to provide the returning officer with the 'complete list
voters'. As this applicant was neither the returning officer not the Secretary
at the relevant time he cannot ever be in contravention
of this rule.
Tribunal will therefore answer this question by finding that the under r
8.2(c)ii the
Constitution
does require the show-cause notice to allege a
contravention by members of the
Constitution
, and that for the reasons given
above the notice did not comply with this requirement.
consequence of this is that the show-cause notice given to the applicant is
Was the expulsion notice given to the applicant within the time required under
Constitution
, and if it was not given within the time required, whether the
expulsion notice is invalid?
states that the EXCO 'must' give the member written notice of a decision
to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the
decision is made. It is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the
written notice of the decision to expel
the applicants was given to him by email
on 13 May 2024.
applicant has questioned whether the EXCO decision to expel the applicants from
the Association was made at the EXCO meeting
on 4 May 2024 or whether it
was made at the EXCO meeting on 5 May 2024. The applicant contends,
however, that the reference in r
8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and r 8.2(d)
to 'the committee meeting' of the
Constitution
requires there to be a single
meeting at which the EXCO is to both consider the proposal to expel a member and
to make its decision
as to whether it is expel a member. In the alternative,
the applicants assert that whichever of these days the decision was made
the notice was not given within the 7 days as required by r 8.2(f).
respondent contends that the minutes of the 4 May 2024 EXCO meeting shows on
that day the EXCO was quorate and that it convened
to give the applicant an
opportunity to attend and make oral submissions (which was an opportunity that
he took) and to provide his
written submissions to the EXCO members (which was
done by his submission being read to the meeting). The respondent then contends
that in order to give 'due consideration' to the submissions as required by r
8.2(d)ii it was permitted to defer the making of a
decision as to whether to
expel him to its next meeting on 5 May 2024. The respondent contends that the
minutes of the 5 May 2024
EXCO meeting shows that the decision to expel the
applicants was then made on that day. The respondent then also contends that
calculation of time for the purposes of r 8.2(f) should exclude Saturdays
and Sundays, with the result that in this case the period
of time allowed for
the giving of a notice under r 8.2(f) is 9 calendar days, with the
consequence that the notice was given within
the time required by the rule.
Tribunal finds that the minutes of the 5 May 2024 EXCO meeting shows that the
EXCO was quorate and that the decision of the EXCO
to expel the applicant as a
member of the Association was made by the EXCO at its meeting on 5 May 2024.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that for as the word day for the
purposes of r 8.2(f) means a period of 24 hours
reckoned from midnight to
midnight and so it will include any Saturday or Sunday which falls within the 7
day period in r 8.2(f).
consequence of these findings is that the notice given to the applicants under r
8.2(f) was not given 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the decision was
made, but rather was given only within 8 days after the meeting at which the
decision was made.
Tribunal also finds that the reference in r 8.2(c)i & r 8.2(c)ii and
r 8.2(d) to 'the committee meeting' may not necessarily
require there to be
a single committee meeting but that it may in certain circumstances permit the
EXCO to hold two meetings, provided
that at least the purpose of holding the two
meetings is to 'give due consideration' to the submissions made by the
applicants and
that the EXCO is constituted by the same officers on each
Tribunal is satisfied that it does appear from the minutes that the purpose of
the two meetings was to 'give due consideration'
to the submissions made by the
applicants and that the minutes of the EXCO meetings on 4 May 2024 and 5 May
2024 show that the EXCO
was identically constituted on each occasion. The
Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the EXCO was permitted to consider the
to expel the applicants from the Association at the two meetings it
held on 4 May 2024 and 5 May 2024.
the Tribunal finds that for the reasons given above that the failure of the EXCO
and/or Secretary to comply with r 8.2(f)
that it 'must' give to the member
written notice of a decision to expel a member 'within 7 days after' the meeting
at which the decision
is made renders the notices of expulsion given by SAWA to
the applicants invalid.
Were the Trustees permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request made by the applicant's solicitors'
on 28 June 2024
and, if so, when should they have recommenced scheduling mediations?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the Trustees were
permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in accordance
with the request
made by the applicants' solicitor's on 28 June 2024 in the negative. This
answer is equally applicable to the applicant
in CC 139 of 2025.
the same reasons, the Tribunal therefore finds that the Trustees were not
permitted to postpone the holding of mediations in
accordance with the request
made by the applicant's solicitor's on 28 June 2024 as by that date the period
of time in which the properly
requested mediations should have been held had
Were the mediations held by the Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal valid mediations under r
8.2(g) and r 22?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the mediations held by the
Trustees after the applicants had commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal were
valid mediations under r 8.2(g) and r 22 in the negative. This answer is
equally applicable to
the applicants in CC 139 of 2025.
the same reasons, the Tribunal finds the mediations purportedly scheduled by the
Trustees commencing on 9 March 2025 are invalidly
convened mediations, although
this is not because the applicants had commenced proceedings in the Tribunal but
because the period
of time in which the properly requested mediations should
have been held had by that time passed.
If at the date of a mediation held by the Trustees r 8.2(g) and r 22 the number
of members of the Association was the maximum number
of members permitted under
the rules, was the EXCO participating in good faith to settle the matter that is
the subject of the mediation
under r 22.3?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the EXCO was
participating in good faith to settle the matter that is the
subject of the
mediation under r 22.3 in the negative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicant in CC 139 of 2025.
the reasons, the Tribunal finds that that the EXCO did not participate in good
faith to settle the matter that is the subject
of the mediation.
Were the outcomes of the mediations held by the Trustees outcomes which resolved
the disputes between the applicants and SAWA?
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the outcomes of the
mediations held by the Trustees are outcomes which
resolved the disputes between
the applicants and SAWA in the negative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicant in CC
139 of 2025.
these same reasons set out above, the Tribunal finds that the outcomes of the
mediations purportedly held by the SAWA Trustee
under r 8.2.(g) and r 22 of the
SAWA did not within the meaning of s 182(1) of the AI Act resolve the
dispute between the applicants
and the Association.
Conclusion in CC 139 of 2025
consequence of the Tribunal's findings in CC 139 of 2025 is that the applicant
was not expelled from the Association under the
procedure provided for in the
Constitution
and that he remains a life member of the Association.
give effect to these findings the Tribunal will make the following orders under
s 182(3) of the AI Act:
order that the expulsion of the applicant is rescinded.
declaration that the applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of
SAWA in accordance with the
Constitution
declaration that the applicant remains a member of
CC 154 of 2025
applicant is CC 154 of 2025 is Amarjit Singh Pabla.
undisputed documentary evidence shows and the Tribunal is satisfied and it finds
the following facts in CC 154 of 2025:
the 2024/2025 financial year the applicant, Amarjit Singh Pabla, was a life
member of SAWA.
1 December 2024 the EXCO resolved to conduct inquiries to determine whether in
2019 and 2020 the applicant was authorised to submit
certain applications for
funding on behalf of
19 December 2024 the President sent to the applicant, Amarjit Singh Pabla, a
notice under r 8.2(a), r 8.2(b) & r 8.2(c) of
the EXCO's proposal to expel
him from the
Association.
is difficult to summarise this show-cause notice, which comprises eight pages
with 11 attachments comprising 47 pages some of
which contain corrupted
its best to fairly understand this show-cause notice, the Tribunal considers it
to allege that the applicant made a funding
submission to a Federal Member of
Parliament on SAWA letterhead in which he had 'failed to disclose' the
'direction of the ASG games'
and in which he had falsely represented himself
to be a member of the EXCO and that he did these things so as to 'de-fraud
the Commonwealth'.
As a consequence, the applicant is asked 'to justify your
with evidence
on the following breaches':
his election on 12 April 2019 as Secretary to Australian National Sikh Sports
and Cultural Council, Western Australia
(ANSSACC WA
) complied with
r 5(a), r 5(e), r 6(k), r 10.2.3(f), r 16(a), r 16(d) and r
he was authorised to use SAWA letterhead when submitting the funding application
to a Federal Member of Parliament;
ANSSACC WA was not itself submitting the funding application to a Federal Member
of Parliament;
your decisions took into consideration SAWA '
Best Interest
communication to Matt Keogh MP, while addressing the ASG utilizing SAWA
letterhead';
directed the applicant to make a funding application to a Federal Member of
Parliament on behalf of SAWA;
the funding application to a Federal Member of Parliament did not include the
Secretary's email address;
the SAWA bank account details were not included in the funding application;
the funding application made to a Federal Member of Parliament was an attempt to
remove SAWA from the ANSSACC WA as well as
to obtain 'seeding funds' for a 'new
Association'; and
the applicant was provided with the authority of the President when he
wrote to the Minister of Education on 13 December 2022.
show-cause notice concludes with the instruction the applicant is to attend a
meeting at the SAWA office at 10.00 am on 15 February
2025 at which the EXCO
will 'follow the procedure per
section 8.2
14 February 2025 the applicant gave his response to the show-cause notice to the
response alleged that the show-cause notice given to the applicant was intended
solely to punish him for an application he
had made to this Tribunal against
SAWA on 7 November 2024 and which he had withdrawn on 16 December 2024, and
that as a consequence
he was in dispute with SAWA and requested the use of the
grievance procedure under r 21. On that same day the applicant advised
he was unable to attend the meeting at 10.00 am on 15 February 2025 due to
an 'unavoidable medical appointment' being a
'dental health check' scheduled for
10.00 am on that day. As a consequence, the applicant's meeting was
re-scheduled to 10.00 am
on 22 February
21 February 2025 the applicant advised the EXCO he was unable to attend the
meeting on 22 February 2025 due to a 'medical condition'.
The applicant
provided the EXCO a medical certificate dated 17 February 2025 which stated the
applicant has 'a medical condition
and will be unfit for work from 17/02/25 to
inclusive'.
consequence the applicant's meeting was re-scheduled to 10.30 am on 8 March
25 February 2025 the Secretary wrote to the applicant by email advising him the
EXCO did not agree that it was in dispute with
the applicant and denied him
access to the grievance procedure under r 21.
7 March 2025 the applicant advised that he would not attend the meeting
scheduled for 8 March 2025 as he had now commenced an application
Tribunal (CC 154 of 2025) 'to seek an order that Show-Cause Notice is
EXCO minutes dated 8 March 2025 show that on 8 March 2025 the EXCO was
applicant's submission was considered and that by a majority vote the EXCO
resolved to expel the applicant from the Association.
13 March 2025 the applicant was given a notice under r 8.2(e) that he was
expelled from the
Association.
applicant did not request mediation under r 8.2(g) and r 22.
applicant contends that to fully understand his dispute with SAWA it is
necessary to understand that:
7 November 2024 the applicant had commenced a proceeding in the Tribunal against
SAWA (CC 796 of 2024) seeking, amongst other things,
orders to 'vacate the
membership list published' on 8 June 2024, and that he had withdrawn this
application on 16 December 2024 in
order to permit the grievance procedure under
r 21 to proceed;
instead of giving the applicant access to the grievance procedure under r 21 it
issued him with a show-cause notice; and
14 February 2025 the applicant sought access to the grievance procedure under r
21 which SAWA refused him access to on 25 February
Matters in dispute
applicant contends that the show-cause notice given to him on 13 March 2025
is invalid because it:
not in accordance with r 8.2(d); and
motivated by an improper purpose in that the decision was inconsistent with the
duties contained in
and s 46 of the AI Act.
respondent advances the same submissions it made in CC 137 of 2025 that the
Tribunal is not possessed of jurisdiction under s
182 of the AI Act to resolve
the applicant's dispute with the Association because it has done everything
required of it under the
Constitution
to properly expel the applicant from the
Association.
The issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 154 of 2025
issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 154 of 2025 are, subject to the
difference in chronology set out above, are effectively
the first two of the
issues to be determined by the Tribunal in CC 137 of
Consideration of CC 154 of 2025
Constitution
require a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by
the member of the
Constitution
and if so, did the notice allege a contravention
by the member of the
Constitution
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the
Constitution
a show-cause notice to allege a contravention by members of the
Constitution
CC 137 of 2025 in the affirmative. This answer is equally applicable to
the applicants in CC 154 of 2025.
Tribunal must now determine whether the show-cause notice given to the applicant
on 19 December 2024:
given at least 28 days before the EXCO meeting at which the proposal would be
considered, as required by r 8.2(b); and
as required by r 8.2(c) it stated:
and where the meeting is to be held;
grounds on which the proposed expulsion is based; and
the member or the member's representative may attend the meeting and be given a
reasonable opportunity to make written or oral
(or both) submissions to the EXCO
is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the show-cause notice complied
with the requirements set out in r 8.2(c)i. The
parties are, however, in
dispute as to whether the show-cause notices complied with r 8.2(c)ii & r
Tribunal has previously answered the question whether the only grounds on which
a member may be expelled from the Association
are grounds which assert the
member has contravened any of the rules of the Association, or, if the member
acts detrimentally to
the interests of the Association, in the affirmative.
This answer is equally applicable to the applicant in CC 154 of 2025.
applicant asserts that the grounds set out in the show-cause notices issued to
the applicant by the Secretary on 19 December
2024 are not grounds that allege a
contravention of the
Constitution
and nor does it allege the member has acted
detrimentally to the interests of the Association.
set out above, the show-cause notice given to the applicant on 19 December
2024 requires the applicant to give evidence to the
EXCO that he
contravene the rules of the Association without (except in relation to the
applicants' election as Secretary of the ANSSACC WA) stating
which rules it was
concerned with, and, that he was required to give evidence to show that
in the best interests of the Association. That is, the show-cause
notice reversed the requirement on the Association under r 8.2(a).
respect to the applicant's election as Secretary of the ANSSACC WA, it is
alleged that this election contraventions r 5(a),
r 5(e), r 6(k), r
10.2.3(f), r 16(a), r 16(d) and r 17.3(d).
5 states the objects of SAWA. Rule 5(a) is that SAWA is '[t]o serve as a
vehicle for the promotion and advancement of the aspirations
of the Sikh
community'. Rule 5(e) states SAWA is '[t]o provide and/or organise
recreational, sporting and social activities for
the Sikh community, including
in cooperation with other bodies sharing similar objectives'.
As these rules relate to the objects of the
Association the Tribunal finds that it is not possible for an individual member
to contravene
these rules.
6 sets out the powers and discretions conferred on SAWA. Rule 6(k) gives
SAWA the power '[t]o organise and/or participate in
activities and projects in a
joint venture or otherwise with other bodies sharing similar ideals and
objectives'. As this rule
relates to the powers of the Association, the
Tribunal finds that it is not possible for an individual member to contravene
10.2.3(f) requires an EXCO member to declare a direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in a 'contract/matter or proposed contract/matter
to be decided by the
EXCO' and then provides for a process to determine whether the EXCO member
should be permitted to take part
in any deliberations or decision with respect
to the contract or matter. While the Tribunal finds that it could be open to a
of the EXCO to be in contravention of this rule, it is not alleged that
the applicant was a member of the EXCO at the relevant time.
Accordingly, as
the applicant was not a member of the EXCO at the relevant time it is not
possible for him to have been in contravention
of r 10.2.3(f).
provides that '[a]ll committees and project teams of SAWA setup by the
EXCO shall be valid only for the term of that particular EXCO'.
Tribunal finds that while it would be open to a member of a SAWA committee or
project team to be in contravention of this
rule, it is not alleged that the
applicant was a member a SAWA committee or project team at the relevant time.
Accordingly, if the
applicant was not a member of a SAWA committee or project
team at the relevant time it is not possible for him to have been in
contravention
of r 16(a).
provides all project teams shall 'report to EXCO and shall operate in
accordance with the mandated terms and conditions and the direction
EXCO'. While the Tribunal finds that while it would be open to a member of a
SAWA project team to be in contravention of
this rule, it is not alleged that
the applicant was a member a SAWA project team at the relevant time.
Accordingly, if the applicant
was not a member of a SAWA project team at the
relevant time it is not possible for him to have been in contravention of r
17.3(d) requires outgoing members of the EXCO and any committee or project team
to transfer all 'relevant Books, Records, Keys'
and other such items to the new
EXCO or committee or project team within 14 days of ceasing to be part of
the EXCO or committee or project team. While the
Tribunal finds that it could be open to a member of the EXCO or committee or
team to be in contravention of this rule, it is not alleged that the
applicant was a member of the EXCO or committee or project team
at the relevant
time. Accordingly, if the applicant was not a member of a the EXCO or committee
or project team at the relevant
time it is not possible for him to have been in
contravention of r 17.3(d).
the reason that the show-cause notice given to the applicant on 19
December 2024 does not allege the applicant has contravened
any specific rules
of the Association, or, that he has acted in some specific way detrimentally to
the interests of the Association,
it is invalid.
Tribunal will therefore answer this question by finding that as r 8.2(c)ii
requires the show-cause notice to allege a contravention
by a member of the
Constitution
and that as the notice did not comply with this requirement, that
it is invalid.
Was the expulsion notice given to the member given within the time required
Constitution
, and if it was not given within the time required,
whether the expulsion notice is invalid?
states that the EXCO 'must' give the member written notice of a decision
to expel a member to the member 'within 7 days after' the
meeting at which the
decision is made. It is not in dispute and the Tribunal finds that the EXCO
made the decision to expel the
applicant on 8 March 2025 and that written notice
of the decision to expel the applicant was given to him by email on 13 March
consequence of these findings is that the notice given to the applicant under r
8.2(f) was given 'within 7 days after' the meeting
at which the decision was
made. However, because a valid decision to expel the applicant requires him to
have been given a valid
show-cause notice, the decision to expel him was
therefore an invalid decision.
Conclusion in CC 154 of 2025
consequence of the Tribunal's findings in CC 154 of 2025 is that the applicant
was not expelled from the Association under the
procedure provided for in the
Constitution
and that he remains a life member of the Association.
give effect to these findings the Tribunal will make the following orders under
s 182(3) of the AI Act:
order that the expulsion of the applicant is rescinded.
declaration that the applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of
SAWA in accordance with the
Constitution
declaration that the applicant remains a member of
CC 137 of 2025
Associations
Incorporation Act 2015
(WA) the Tribunal makes:
order that the expulsion of the First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third
Applicant, the Fourth Applicant, the Fifth Applicant,
the Sixth Applicant, the
Seventh Applicant and the Eighth Applicant is rescinded.
declaration that the First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third
Applicant, the Fourth Applicant, the Fifth Applicant, the
Sixth Applicant, the
Seventh Applicant and the Eighth Applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a
member of the Sikh Association
of Western Australia in accordance with the
Constitution
declaration that the First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third
Applicant, the Fourth Applicant, the Fifth Applicant, the
Sixth Applicant, the
Seventh Applicant and the Eighth Applicant remains a member of the Sikh
Association of Western Australia.
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
Tribunal makes:
order that the expulsion of First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third
Applicant and the Fourth Applicant is rescinded.
declaration that First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third Applicant and
the Fourth Applicant has not been lawfully expelled
as a member of the Sikh
Association of Western Australia in accordance with the
Constitution
declaration that the First Applicant, the Second Applicant, the Third Applicant
and the Fourth Applicant remains a member of the
Sikh Association of Western
CC 139 of 2025
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
Tribunal makes:
order that the expulsion of the applicant is rescinded.
declaration that the applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of the
Sikh Association of Western Australia in accordance
Constitution
declaration that the applicant remains a member of the Sikh Association of
Western Australia.
CC 154 of 2025
Associations Incorporation Act 2015
Tribunal makes:
order that the expulsion of the applicant is rescinded.
declaration that the applicant has not been lawfully expelled as a member of the
Sikh Association of Western Australia in accordance
Constitution
declaration that the applicant remains a member of the Sikh Association of
Western Australia.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MR E Cade, MEMBER
11 NOVEMBER 2025
The Tribunal
understands that followers of Sikhism are encouraged to adopt common middle or
last names with men encouraged to adopt
encouraged to adopt the name
was registered under a repealed Act on 13 August 1975, Exhibit 1, page 1416:
see also the AI Act:
s 190(3)(b).
Under r 4.1 'EXCO is the Executive Committee of SAWA'. The
Constitution
various places refers to
Constitution
the committee
. All parties accept that the words the
Constitution
and the Rules and EXCO and the committee are interchangeable and
nothing turns on which of these words is used. See also
Kavanagh No.
Exhibit 1, pages 197 - 203. Five documents were attached to this letter which
are at Exhibit 1, pages 204 -
1, pages 1274 -
pages 1282 -
1, page 240.
See, for example, the email of Pushpinder Singh dated 16 May 2024 at Exhibit 1,
page 1517 and Rowinderjeet Kaur, the eighth applicant,
dated 19 May 2024 at
Exhibit 1, page
1, page 1555.
Exhibit 1, page
1, page 1554.
Exhibit 1, page 1553 and page
Exhibit 1, pages 1492 -
1, page 1619.
Exhibit 1, page
1, page 1608.
Exhibit 1, page
1, pages 1497 -
1, pages 1504 -
1, pages 1506 -
1, page 1509.
Exhibit 1, page
example, Exhibit 1, pages 1577, 1578, 1580, 1586, 1587 and
1, page 1578.
Exhibit 1, pages 1565 and 1576.
pages 1510 -
1, pages 1514 -
1, pages 1611 -
1, page 1614.
Exhibit 1, pages 1615 -
1, pages 1616 -
1, pages 1623 -
1, page 1626.
Exhibit 1, page 1294 -
1, page 1311.
Exhibit 1, page
submission is erroneously dated 5 April 2025: Exhibit 1, pages 1308 -
1, page 1307.
Exhibit 1, page
1, page 1418.
Exhibit 4, page
Applicant's Outline of Closing Submissions, paras 9, 46 &
are appointed under r 12. Under r 12 there are not to be more than five
Trustees at any one time and three Trustees acting
together constitute the
quorum for the exercise of their functions and duties under the
Constitution
Rule 8.2.(f)
is referred in r 8.2(g) as r 8.2.6 but all parties accept that
nothing turns on this misnomer.
pages 1601 -
Windeyer J in
Prowse v McIntyre
[1961] HCA 79
(1961) 111 CLR 264
See, for example, the discussion as to implying a reasonable time term under a
contract and what constitutes a reasonable time in
City of Wanneroo -v-
Tah Land Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC 249.
The mediation
process in the Model Rules in Part 4 Division 4 of Schedule 2 of the
Associations Incorporation Regulations 2016
(WA) also does not impose a
requirement that mediation take place within any particular period of
Singh, the current Secretary, said in his oral evidence that there were
membership vacancies on the dates when the mediations
were held because even
though 50 new members were admitted on 13 May 2024 this still left seven
membership vacancies, but then gave
the contradictory evidence that with the
admission of 50 new members on 13 May 2024 there were then 500 members of the
Association.
As a consequence of the contradictory nature of Mr Singh’s
evidence the Tribunal finds it is not able to rely on his evidence
Exhibit 2, pages 43 - 46, 81 - 84, 86 - 89 and 127 -
2, pages 80, 85, 126 and
2, pages 546 -
1, pages 1280 -
1, pages 1280 -
1, page 1284.
Exhibit 2, pages 353 and
3, pages 41 - 44.
Exhibit 1, page
3, page 77.
Exhibit 3, page
4, pages 348 and
pages 355 -
4, pages 363 -
4, pages 433 -
4, page 438.
Exhibit 4, page
4, page 454.
Exhibit 4, page
4, pages 470 - 472.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter