URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/110.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ABDULLAH and CITY OF BELMONT [2025] WASAT 110 (10 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
ABDULLAH and CITY OF BELMONT
[2025] WASAT 110
MR R POVEY, MEMBER
8 AND 16 JULY 2025
DELIVERED :
10 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
DR 152 of 2024
SITI SHAHRIZAT ABDULLAH
First Applicant
AMIRAH ABDULLAH
Second Applicant
RAWS SHARIFF
Third Applicant
CITY OF BELMONT
Town planning - Development application -
Refusal - Hosted short-term rental accommodation - Unhosted short-term rental
accommodation
- Short-term accommodation - Holiday house - Residential amenity -
Character of the locality - Locational requirements of the planning
framework -
Whether there is a cogent reason to depart from local planning policy - Adverse
planning precedent - Orderly and proper
Legislation:
City of Belmont - Local Planning Scheme No.
, Sch 1, cl 1.7.1, cl 3.2, cl 3.4.2, cl 3.4.2(b)
Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
(WA), Sch 2, cl 1, cl
61(2)(eb), cl 61(9), cl 64, cl 67(2)(a), cl 67(2)(b), cl 67(2)(g),
cl 67(2)(m), cl 67(2)(n), cl 67(2)(t), cl
67(2)(w), cl 67(2)(y), cl
Planning and Development Act 2005
Residential Design Codes Volume
Short-Term Rental Accommodation Act 2024
Rental Accommodation Regulations 2024
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
Strata Titles Act 1985
Decision of respondent affirmed
Application for
review dismissed
Representation:
First Applicant
Second Applicant
Third Applicant
Mr J Algeri (as Planning Advocate)
Solicitors:
First Applicant
Second Applicant
Third Applicant
Altus Planning (as Agent)
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Boyd and Town of Vincent
[2007] WASAT 93
(2007) 52 SR (WA) 125
Clive Elliott Jennings & Co Pty Ltd v Western Australian Planning
[2002] WASCA 276
(2002) 122 LGERA 433
Coughlan and Shire of Augusta-Margaret River
[2022] WASAT 110
Hope and City of Joondalup
[2007] WASAT 8
Jasinski and City of Mandurah
[2020] WASAT 2
Maciejewski and City of Belmont
[2025] WASAT 47
Marshall v Metropolitan Redevelopment Authority
[2015] WASC 226
Nicholls and Western Australian Planning Commission
[2005] WASAT 40
(2005) 149 LGERA 117
Re Romato; Ex parte Mitchell James Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] WASCA 286
Sunbay Developments Pty Ltd and Shire of Kalamunda
[2006] WASAT 74
(2006) 150 LGERA 116
Tempora Pty Ltd v Shire of Kalamunda
(1994) 10 SR (WA) 296
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
case deals with a development application for a change of land use at No 52
Pearl Road, Cloverdale (
subject site
The applicants seek approval for a change of use of an existing grouped
dwelling to 'short term
accommodation'
proposed development
). The First Applicant, Mrs Siti Abdullah, owns the
two grouped dwellings on the parent lot and will reside at the other grouped
dwelling, No 52A Pearl Road (
) and, together with her
family, will manage the proposed development.
Previously,
in 2019, the City of Belmont (
) granted temporary development
approval for use of the subject site as 'short stay accommodation', allowing
accommodation of up to
Then, in September 2024, the City refused to grant further development
mediation and an invitation by the Tribunal, made pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
March 2025 the City refused the proposed development for four
regard for Clause 67 (2)(g) of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015
the site is contrary to Objective 4 (b) and Clause 8.1
of Local Planning Policy No.19.
regard for Clause 67 (2)(g) of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015
and Objective 4 (c) of Local Planning Policy No. 19,
the use would adversely impact the character and amenity of the surrounding
residential area or nearby residents.
regard for Clause 67 (2)(g) of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015
the use is contrary to Objective 4 (d) of Local
Planning Policy No.19.
regard for Clause 67 (2)(b) of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning
Schemes) Regulations 2015
, approval would be contrary to proper and orderly
planning, and would set an undesirable precedent.
applicants seek review of that decision pursuant to
and Development Act 2005
these reasons, I will firstly outline some further background, the final hearing
), briefly describe the subject site and proposed development,
the relevant locality and the planning framework, before turning to
consider and
determine the five issues which the parties agree arise in this proceeding.
the reasons that follow, I have determined 'the correct and preferable decision'
pursuant to s 27(2) of the SAT Act is to dismiss
the application for review and
affirm the decision of the City.
rental accommodation (
) in a form that uses existing residential
dwellings has, in a relatively short time, become a common type of tourist
accommodation
catering to the diverse needs of visitors to various parts of
has been an evolving planning and regulatory response to the emergence of this
amendments to Sch 2 of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Deemed Provisions
) and the introduction of the
Short-Term Rental
Accommodation Act 2024
its associated
regulations.
changes flow from an earlier 2019 report of a Parliamentary Inquiry into
Managing the impact of the rapid increase of Short-Term Rentals in Western
the publication, in November 2023, of the
Western Australian Planning
Commission - Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental Accommodation
WAPC Guidelines
Western Australian Planning
Commission - Position Statement: Planning for Tourism and Short-term Rental
Accommodation
WAPC Position Statement
this guidance, the City, in 2024, adopted
Local Planning Policy No 19 -
Short-Term Rental Accommodation
The hearing
hearing was conducted on 8 and 16 July 2025. At the commencement of the
hearing, together with the parties, I undertook a view
of the subject site,
including the interior of the proposed development, and its surrounds.
the end of the view, we passed No 23 Stanley Street, Belmont, which is the
subject of a recent decision by the Tribunal involving
a 'holiday house' in the
City. I refer to the decision of Member Lavery in these reasons as
Maciejewski
the hearing, I heard expert evidence from Mr Nicholas Reddy, a town planner,
called by the City. He is employed by the City in
the position of Senior
Planning Officer and prior to the hearing he filed a witness statement with the
Tribunal, which at the hearing
he adopted as his evidence-in-chief and he was
cross-examined.
applicants, who are self-represented, did not adduce any expert evidence.
Instead, they rely on their bundle of documents accepted
into evidence at the
cross-examined Mr Reddy.
Hearing 'de novo'
observed in
Jasinski and City of Mandurah
[2020] WASAT 2
, at [24] - [30], in the exercise of its review
function, the Tribunal deals with the matter in accordance with the general
set out in s 17 of the SAT Act. The Tribunal has, in accordance with
s 29(1) of the SAT Act, the same jurisdiction, functions and
discretions as
those of the City, as the original decision­maker.
the Tribunal is not limited to the statement of reasons given by the City, as
set out in s 27(3) of the SAT Act and may
take into account any additional or
new information that was not at the disposal of the City at the time the
decision was made, as
set out in s 27(1) of the SAT Act.
hearing is therefore 'de novo', as set out in s 27(1) of the SAT Act, and
is not confined to the matters and information that
were before the City at the
time of its decision to refuse the proposed development.
purpose of the review is to produce the 'correct and preferable decision at the
time of the decision upon the review', as set
out in s 27(2) of the
SAT Act and the powers of the Tribunal in s 29(3) of the SAT Act are
(a) affirm the decision; or
(b) vary the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision,
and, in any case, to make appropriate orders.
decision of the Tribunal is regarded as a decision of the City, as set out in s
29(5) of the SAT Act.
The subject site and proposed development
subject site, I find:
(a) is zoned 'Residential' under
Belmont Local Planning Scheme No 15
residential density coding of R20;
(b) has an area of 443m
and is the front strata lot
of two strata lots on the parent lot. The parent lot is rectangular in shape
with a frontage of 17.84
metres to Pearl Road, side boundaries of 61.16 metres
and an area of 1098m
(c) has been developed with a five bedroom grouped dwelling; and
(d) is located approximately 3 kilometres away from the nearest tourist
accommodation located on Great Eastern Highway.
proposed development, I find, is to:
(a) use the grouped dwelling
which is to be booked via short-stay accommodation providers;
(b) provide three car parking bays, including two in a double lock up
(c) have a three night minimum stay;
(d) accommodate a maximum of 12 guests at any one time by allowing for twin
sharing of the five bedrooms and the 'computer room',
which is also proposed to
be used as a bedroom for
(e) have one booking at a time, with no house sharing; and
(f) have a check-in time of between 2.00 pm and 6.00 pm and check-out by
management plan provides, among other things, that the owner of the subject site
will reside at No 52A and, together with her
family, manage the proposed
development.
The relevant locality
is no dissent, and I find, that the relevant locality in this case is as
identified by Mr Reddy in the aerial image at Attachment
2 of his witness
statement. This image shows the locality as the properties on both sides of
Pearl Road from Scott Street to Nos
41 and 42 Pearl Road as well as Nos
223, 225 and 227 Scott Street and Nos 425, 427 and 429 Belgravia Street, at
the rear of the subject
Reddy's evidence, which I accept, explains why he identifies this
I have defined the locality based on properties I consider likely to be impacted
by the proposal. I consider that the primary impacts
potentially arising from
the proposal relate to amenity impacts such as noise, traffic, parking and
access to the property, to the
extent the impacts go beyond those normally
expected in a residential setting.
observed at the view, land uses in the locality are residential with the
exception of a child care premises at No 50 Pearl Road
adjoins the north-western side boundary of the subject site. Mr Reddy
identifies that No 50 is approved to operate with a
maximum of 46 children and
is open between 6.30 am to 6.30 pm Monday to
will consider the impact of the proposed development on the amenity of the
locality later at Issue 4, commencing at [74].
The planning framework
relevant planning framework which I have considered in determining this
application includes:
(a) PD Act;
which incorporates the Deemed Provisions;
(c) LPP 19;
(d) WAPC Position Statement; and
(e) WAPC Guidelines.
Clause 67(2) of the Deemed Provisions
Deemed Provisions, at cl 67(2), provides a list of matters which a local
government, or the Tribunal as the decision-maker in
this case, is to have due
regard, to the extent those matters are relevant. Mr Reddy identifies the
relevant cl 67(2) matters, which
(a) the aims and provisions of this Scheme (including any planning codes that
are read, with or without modifications, into this
Scheme) and any other local
planning scheme operating within the Scheme area;
(b) the requirements of orderly and proper planning including any proposed local
planning scheme or amendment to this Scheme that
has been advertised under the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
other proposed planning instrument that the local government is seriously
considering adopting or approving;
(g) any local planning policy for the Scheme area;
(m) the compatibility of the development with its setting,
(i) the compatibility of the
development with the desired future character of its setting; and
(ii) the relationship of the development to development on adjoining land or
on other land in the locality including, but not limited
to, the likely effect
of the height, bulk, scale, orientation and appearance of the development;
(n) the amenity of the locality including the following
(i) environmental impacts of the
development;
(ii) the character of the locality;
(iii) social impacts of the development;
(t) the amount of traffic likely to be generated by the development,
particularly in relation to the capacity of the road system
in the locality and
the probable effect on traffic flow and safety;
(w) the history of the site where the development is to be located;
(y) any submissions received on the application;
(zb) any other planning consideration the local government considers
appropriate.
Issues for determination
the hearing, the parties agreed five issues arise for determination by the
Tribunal, being:
(1) What is the land use classification of the
proposed development under LPS 15?
(2) Is the proposed development consistent with the objective of the
Residential zone?
(3) Is the proposed development consistent with LPP 19, and if not, is there
a cogent reason to depart from the policy?
(4) Will the proposed development have an unacceptable impact on the amenity
of the locality?
(5) Will approval of the proposed development set an undesirable
will commence with Issue 1 and Issue 2 and then move to Issue 4, relating
to impact on amenity, as my findings to this issue will
be relevant to Issue 3
because amenity considerations are one of the assessment criteria and one of the
objectives of LPP
I will then
consider and determine Issue 3 and Issue 5 before determining the matter
Issue 1 - What is the land use classification of the proposed development under
applicants contend the proposed development is Hosted STRA as the First
Applicant will reside permanently at No
City classified the proposed development as 'short-stay
accommodation'
also contends 'that for the purpose of the Deemed Provisions the [proposed
development] falls under the Unhosted [STRA]
definition'.
City submits the applicants have incorrectly sought for the proposed development
to be classified as Hosted STRA, as defined
in the Deemed Provisions, and
submits it cannot be Hosted STRA
owner or occupier, or an agent of the owner or occupier, does not reside in the
dwelling to be used for STRA; and
(b) There is no ancillary dwelling on the same lot as the dwelling sought to
be used for STRA that the owner or occupier, or an agent
of the owner or
occupier will live in.
an attempt to address this difficulty, the applicants propose the City lodge a
caveat over No 52 and No 52A. The caveat would
provide that 'in the event that
either property is sold by the owner, the development approval for the change of
use to short term
accommodation at [No 52] will immediately cease in
observe that by cl 61(2)(ea) of the Deemed Provisions, Hosted STRA is exempt
from requiring development approval. If I were to
find as the applicants
contend, this would provide them an immediate remedy.
the differing positions of the parties it is, therefore, important to consider
and characterise the land use of the proposed
development. The power for the
Tribunal to characterise the land use of a development is well
Land Use definitions under LPS 15
15 at Sch 1 contains Land Use definitions. 'Short stay accommodation' is
... the accommodation of short stay guests providing on site facilities for the
convenience of guests and, management of the development,
where occupation by
any person is limited to a maximum of three months in any 12 month period,
and excludes any other use falling
within a use class specifically defined in
this scheme.
Definitions under the Deemed Provisions
Deemed Provisions
at cl 1 provides definitions for 'hosted short-term rental accommodation',
'short-term rental accommodation', 'short-term rental
arrangement' and 'unhosted
short-term rental accommodation'. These definitions, which need to be
considered together, are as follows:
hosted short-term rental accommodation
means any of the
following —
(a) short-term rental accommodation where the owner or occupier, or an agent of
the owner or occupier who ordinarily resides at the
dwelling, resides at the
same dwelling during the short-term rental arrangement;
(b) short-term rental accommodation that is an ancillary dwelling where the
owner or occupier, or an agent of the owner or occupier
who ordinarily resides
at the other dwelling on the same lot, resides at that other dwelling during the
short-term rental arrangement;
(c) short-term rental accommodation that is a dwelling on the same lot as an
ancillary dwelling where the owner or occupier, or an
agent of the owner or
occupier who ordinarily resides at the dwelling, resides at the ancillary
dwelling during the short-term rental
arrangement.
short-term rental accommodation
(a) means a dwelling provided, on a commercial basis, for occupation under a
short-term rental arrangement; but
(b) does not include a dwelling that is, or is part of, any of the following
(i) an aged care facility as defined in the
Land Tax Assessment Act 2002
section 38A(1)
(ii) a caravan park;
(iii) a lodging-house as defined in the
Health (Miscellaneous Provisions)
section 3(1)
(iv) a park home park;
(v) a retirement village as defined in the
Retirement Villages Act
section 3(1)
(vi) workforce accommodation.
short-term rental arrangement
means an arrangement under which
(a) a dwelling, or part of a dwelling, is provided for occupation by a person;
(b) the person occupies the dwelling, or part of the dwelling, for a period or
periods not exceeding a total of 3 months in any 12­month
unhosted short-term rental accommodation
means short-term rental
accommodation that —
(a) is not hosted short-term rental accommodation; and
(b) accommodates a maximum of 12 people per
The operation of the Deemed Provisions
Deemed Provisions have effect and may be enforced as part of each local planning
scheme, whether they are prescribed before or
after the scheme comes into
s 257B(3) of the PD Act provides that if a deemed provision that has effect as
part of a local scheme is inconsistent with
another provision of the scheme, the
deemed provision prevails and the other provision is to the extent of the
inconsistency of no
Is the proposed development Hosted STRA?
starting point is the definition of Hosted STRA in the Deemed
Provisions.
clear that part (a) of the definition is not applicable here as the owner or
occupier, or an agent of the owner or occupier,
will not reside at the same
dwelling as the STRA.
I will come to explain, I accept the uncontested expert evidence of Mr Reddy
that parts (b) and (c) of the definition are also
not met because there is no
ancillary dwelling in this
Deemed Provisions, at cl 1, give the term 'ancillary dwelling' the same meaning
as in the R-Codes. The R-Codes define 'ancillary
dwelling' as
... self-contained
on the same
as a dwelling which
may be attached to, integrated with or detached from the
is defined in the R-Codes which, in the case of a grouped dwelling,
... the area occupied by the
, together with any area allocated
(whether by way of a
strata title scheme
or otherwise) for the exclusive
use or benefit of that dwelling.
there is one dwelling on the subject site and no ancillary dwelling. This much
is accepted by the
applicants.
lodgement of a caveat, as the applicants propose, cannot, in my view, create an
'ancillary dwelling' or transform the proposed
development so it can lawfully be
classified as Hosted STRA.
the fact that the owner intends to reside at No 52A does not create an ancillary
dwelling and does not transform the proposed
development so that it can lawfully
be classified as Hosted STRA.
the hearing, the applicants concede the proposed development cannot meet the
definition of Hosted
but despite
this they continued to describe it that way. This was unhelpful. All I can
take from this is that, in their submission,
it will operate, in essence, in the
same way. However, in my view, this misses the point of correctly identifying
the land use.
the reasons given above, I am satisfied, and I find, the proposed development
does not meet the definition of Hosted STRA under
Provisions.
Is the proposed development a 'holiday house'?
applicants also submit the land use of the proposed development should be
considered a 'holiday house' because the grouped dwelling
at No 52 is 'a single
dwelling on one
explain, I do not accept this submission.
house' is defined in LPS 15 to
... a single dwelling on one lot used to provide short-term accommodation but
does not include a bed and breakfast.
definition of 'lot' in s 4 of the PD Act specifically does not include a lot as
Strata Titles Act 1985
(WA). Further,
cl 1.7.1 of LPS 15 requires, unless the context otherwise requires, words
and expressions used in the Scheme have
the same meaning as in the PD Act.
as the grouped dwelling at No 52 sits on a strata titled
it does not
sit on its own lot as the term 'lot' is defined in the PD Act and, it
follows, the proposed development does not meet
the LPS 15 definition of
'holiday house'.
What then is the land use of the proposed development?
Reddy's evidence is that the proposed development meets the land use definition
of 'short stay accommodation' under LPS
since September 2024, the Deemed Provisions include definitions of 'Hosted STRA'
and 'Unhosted
addressed the Hosted STRA definition and concluded it cannot be applied in this
Reddy accepts, later in his written evidence, that the proposed development may
meet the definition of Unhosted STRA under the
Deemed Provisions but, for
reasons he does not explain, he considers it more appropriate to apply the
'short stay accommodation'
land use definition of LPS
As mentioned,
the City also contends that, for the purpose of the Deemed Provisions, the
proposed development is Unhosted
though, and as Mr Reddy
of substance in terms of land use permissibility in this case turns on whether
the definition of Unhosted STRA is applied
instead of the LPS 15 'short
stay accommodation' definition. This is because the use is of similar character
and neither land use
is identified in the Zoning Table (
LPS 15. As a result, either land use is required to be treated as a use not
Unhosted STRA definition in the Deemed Provisions, in my view, more precisely
describes the proposed development and considering
s 257B(3) of the PD Act,
this definition should, in my view, be applied in this case.
the above, I am satisfied, and I find, the land use of the proposed development
is 'Use not listed - Unhosted STRA'.
because the proposed development does not meet the requirements in cl 61(2)(eb)
of the Deemed Provisions, it is not exempt
from the requirement to obtain
development approval. The Deemed Provisions, at cl 61(9), provides the
circumstances that development
approval is required for Unhosted STRA.
Considering these provisions, development approval is, I find, required for the
development. There is no evidence before me that suggests
Issue 2 - Is the proposed development consistent with the objective of the
Residential zone?
the proposed development, being a 'Use not listed - Unhosted STRA', is
consistent with the objective of the Residential zone
is relevant in this case
because of the use not listed provisions of LPS 15, which I will now
Use not listed provisions of LPS 15
respect to unlisted uses, cl 3.4.2 of LPS 15 provides:
If a person proposes to carry out on land any use that is not specifically
mentioned in the Zoning Table and cannot reasonably be
determined as falling
within the type, class or genus of activity of any other use category the local
government may:
that the use is consistent with the objectives of the particular zone and is
therefore permitted;
that the use may be consistent with the objectives of the particular zone and
thereafter follow the advertising procedures
contained in Clause 64 of the
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Schedule 2; or
that the use is not consistent with the objectives of the particular zone and is
therefore not permitted.
is one objective of the Residential zone which is set out in cl 3.2 of LPS
15 and provides:
The purpose and intent of the Residential Zone is to increase the population
base of the City of Belmont by permitting a mix of single
housing and other
housing types to reflect household composition and thereby increase the resident
population.
part of its original consideration, the City advertised the proposed development
consistent with the requirements of cl 3.4.2(b).
I observe this aligns
with cl 7 of LPP 19 which explains that where a defined STRA land use is not
provided for in Table 1 it will
be treated as a 'Use Not Listed' and advertised
accordingly.
opening submissions, Mr Algeri, agent for the City, identifies that this was the
City's position when it embarked on its planning
assessment, but submits 'the
ultimate decision of the respondent was that [the proposed development] wasn't
consistent with the objectives
of [the Residential]
accept this submission. This is because the City refused the development for
four reasons and these reasons, I observe,
do not include that the proposed
development is not consistent with the objective of the Residential
in closing submissions, Mr Algeri submits that because the proposed development
is not a residential land use and, therefore,
not a 'housing type', it will not
increase the residential population of the City and that a STRA use 'or, indeed,
any other form
of [STRA], does not meet the objectives of the [Residential] zone
as it is not a residential
also do not accept this submission, as I will explain.
observe that 'child care premises', such as the adjoining No 50, is an 'A' use
under Table 1 meaning it is a use not permitted
unless the local government has
exercised its discretion by granting development approval after advertising the
proposal in accordance
with cl 64 of the Deemed Provisions. A child care
premises is a non-residential use that may be approved in the Residential zone
with the exercise of discretion.
Considering
Table 1 further, I observe there are other non­residential uses capable of
approval in the Residential zone. Of
some relevance here is the inclusion
of 'Serviced Apartments' as a land use capable of approval in the Residential
zone. Its definition
expressly provides for 'self-contained short-stay
accommodation for
I do not accept the City's submission that Unhosted STRA is contrary per se, or
even in this case, to the objective of
the Residential zone simply because, as
the City submits, it is not a residential land use.
do, however, accept the uncontested evidence of Mr Reddy that the proposed
development may be consistent with the objective of
the Residential
as set out in
cl 3.4.2(b) of LPS 15. His evidence also aligns with the policy approach of LPP
19. At the hearing the applicants
also did not argue
to how the exercise of planning discretion should be guided in relation to STRA
uses, I accept the City has adopted LPP 19 for
this purpose, and I will consider
this local planning policy at Issue 3, commencing at [98]. However, after
providing my findings
to Issue 2, I will move to Issue 4 and consider and
determine the impact of the proposed development on the amenity of the
Findings - Issue 2
am satisfied, and I find, the proposed development may be consistent with the
relevant objective of the Residential zone for three
the uncontested evidence of Mr Reddy is that the proposed development may be
consistent with the objective of the Residential
LPP 19, at cl 7, accepts that STRA, such as the proposed development, will be
treated as a use not listed and advertised
accordingly, reflecting that such
applications should be considered on their merits, following advertising,
consistent with cl 3.4.2(b)
Table 1 provides that in the Residential zone planning discretion exists to
allow certain non-residential land uses. Therefore,
it cannot be correct, in my
view, that non-residential land uses are inconsistent per se with the objective
of the Residential zone
and therefore not permitted.
Issue 4 - Will the proposed development have an unacceptable impact on the
amenity of the locality?
is defined in the Deemed Provisions, at cl 1, and means:
... all those factors which combine to form the character of an area and include
the present and likely future amenity.
case authorities on evaluating amenity are well-known and settled. In
Tempora Pty Ltd v Shire of Kalamunda
(1994) 10 SR (WA) 296
), at [304], the
former Town Planning Appeal Tribunal set out a three-step test for evaluating
(1) establish
the existing amenity in an objective sense;
(2) evaluate the manner in which the proposed development will affect the
existing amenity; and
(3) assess the degree of impact on the locality.
19 objective 4(c)
Ensure STRA does not adversely impact on the character and amenity of the
surrounding residential areas or nearby residents.
Unhelpfully,
the City's SIFC overlooks the adjoining 46 place child care premises at No
notwithstanding, the City contends the proposed development is likely to have an
adverse impact on the character and amenity
of the surrounding residential area
and its residents and is contrary to policy objective 4(c).
applicants submit that No 50 is unoccupied at night and that during weekdays
there is audible noise that can be heard at the
subject site from this premises
caused by children
applicants also submit that the closest immediately adjoining residential
dwellings are 23 metres from the proposed development,
being separated by
outbuildings and a large
Applying the three-step test from Tempora
Considering
, the existing amenity of the
locality, the evidence of Mr Reddy is that it 'is consistent with a quiet
suburban residential character,
consisting of primarily single detached houses
and grouped
dwellings'.
evidence acknowledges the presence of No 50 and he says that during its opening
hours there is a 'marginal increase' in vehicles
parking at the premises and on
Pearl Road.
However, the photographic evidence, which I accept, and includes photos taken by
Mr Reddy and by the applicants, is that routinely
there is a pattern of
on-street parking in Pearl Road and in the car park of No 50 when it
residential built form and use, together with the operation of No 50 as a child
care premises and its accompanying traffic movements
and car parking, I accept,
constitute the existing amenity of this locality. Considering this, the
locality is not, on the evidence
before me, one with a pristine residential
amenity or character, but one which is impacted by the presence and operation of
step, the manner which the proposed development will affect
the existing amenity, the evidence of Mr Reddy draws from his experience
other STRA properties. He says the potential impacts are noise, traffic and
parking and that these 'impacts arise because of
the tendency for short-term
users to carry out those activities in a manner that is irregular, or more
intense, when compared to
what would be expected in a residential
accept this may be generally the case as it is consistent with the Tribunal's
observations regarding STRA in
Hope and City of Joondalup
[2007] WASAT 8
step, Mr Reddy's evidence, in my view, does not address the
degree of impact the proposed development will have in the locality.
Mr Reddy informed his opinion about the character of the locality, and its
amenity, with an inspection at which he observed
residential built form and also
car parking associated with No 50 at various times of the day and
his written evidence does not go further to opine as to the degree of impact the
proposed development will have on the
locality. This is, in my view, a
significant shortfall.
Reddy, in his written evidence, observes the residential built form at the
subject site and one car parked in the bay closest
to Pearl Road and
another parked at No
not, in my view, establish the proposed development will adversely impact the
amenity of the locality. From this evidence,
it appears the proposed
development, in my view, will be unremarkable from other residential dwellings
in the locality.
Reddy, under questioning about possible noise impacts of the proposed
development, identifies the outdoor area of the subject
site which abuts private
open space of properties in Scott Street but are somewhat separated by existing
outbuildings on these
when cross-examined about whether any complaints had been received by the City,
Mr Reddy concedes no complaints have been
received since the proposed
development commenced operation under the 2019 temporary approval and continued,
apparently, since without
authorisation.
This historical
absence of anything contrary, is sufficient, in my view, in this case to
establish that the proposed development will not
have an unacceptable impact on
the amenity or on the character of the locality.
to future amenity, Mr Reddy's evidence, which I accept, is that the future
amenity is likely to remain unchanged because the City
has no current intention
to amend the zoning or applicable planning
The applicants' property management plan
further consideration is the applicants' property management plan, as it
involves the owner of the subject site residing permanently
at No 52A, and
together with her family, managing the proposed development.
Reddy accepts that '[s]trict implementation of a management plan could
potentially mitigate the potential amenity impacts resulting
from the use of the
property as
opines that the measures are not all reasonably enforceable as they rely on the
applicants '24­hour attendance at
However, Mr Reddy accepts other measures in the property management plan
are 'what you would normally expect within a property management
concerns about the property management plan centre on the ability for the City
to enforce the requirement for the owner of the
subject site to reside
permanently at No 52A. However, Mr Reddy concedes, fairly in my view, this
could be addressed by a condition
of approval requiring implementation of the
property management
importance of this aspect of the property management plan is, I accept, that the
owner will be in close proximity to respond
to guest enquiries and be able to
promptly address concerns of neighbours, or the City, should they
Submissions from the public received by the City
proposed development was advertised for public comment as part of the City's
initial assessment of the
application.
resulted in three submissions being received by the City, each objecting.
However, two submissions do not identify their address
and the third is from
outside the
submitters were called to give evidence. I, therefore, accord these submissions
applicants provided five pro-forma letters of support from residents of three
properties in Pearl Road, within the locality,
and which were apparently sent to
the City, but after the development application was first
occupants of No 51 and No 53 Pearl Road, opposite the subject site, advise the
proposed development does not affect the amenity
of their neighbourhood.
residents were also not called to give evidence at the hearing and, as a result,
the basis for their opinions, I accept, could
not be tested. However, I accept
they live in close proximity to the proposed development, which has apparently
continued to operate
and, on the evidence of Mr Reddy, without complaint. I
accord these submissions little weight in coming to my findings on this
Findings - Issue 4
Considering
the evidence before me, I am satisfied, and I find, the proposed development
will not have an unacceptable impact on
the character and amenity of the
locality and, therefore, meets cl 8.3 and policy objective 4(c) of LPP 19. This
is for four reasons.
the evidence of Mr Reddy does not, identify that the proposed development will
negatively impact the amenity and character
of the locality to any degree.
the residential amenity and character of the locality is not pristine because of
the adjoining 46 place child care premises
at No 50, a commercial use, and this
activity forms an obvious part of the character and amenity of the
when the proposed development operated under temporary approval in 2019, and
apparently since without authorisation, there
have been no complaints received
by the City which, in this case, indicates it does not impact the character and
amenity of the locality.
the applicants' property management plan requires that the owner of the subject
site will reside at No 52A and, together
with members of her family, manage the
proposed development which should enable amenity related concerns, or
complaints, to be promptly
addressed if they arise.
Issue 3 - Is the proposed development consistent with LPP 19, and if not, is
there a cogent reason to depart from the policy?
City contends that the overarching objective of LPP 19 is to locate Unhosted
STRA in, or near, areas associated with tourism
land uses and amenity and away
from more traditional residential
is common ground
that the proposed development does not meet the location criteria in cl 8.1 of
LPP 19 which identifies that STRA is to be located
'within 400 metres of a high
frequency public transport stop located on Great Eastern Highway and an existing
tourist accommodation
applicants, however, point to a Bed and Breakfast approved by the City at No 6
Ellard Avenue, Belmont (
) as also being outside of the location
criteria identified in cl
to this submission, I accept the uncontested expert evidence of Mr Reddy,
that No 6 was approved by the City in 2012 and that
'Bed and Breakfast' is
a 'discretionary' land use in the Residential zone under Table
Further, Mr
Reddy asserts that No 6 is not a relevant consideration here because the City
granted its approval in 2012 which was
before changes to the Deemed Provisions
in 2024 that introduced the exemptions for Hosted
the applicants submission which seeks to draw similarities between the proposed
development and No 6 is, in my view, misplaced.
to the other assessment criterion in cl 8 of LPP 19, the City accepts the
proposed development meets the car parking requirements
is consistent with the uncontested evidence of Mr Reddy, who also says the
proposed development does not contravene cl 8.4,
relating to strata
developments, or cl 8.5 which prescribes instances in which STRA will not be
8.3 requires consideration of amenity and I found, at Issue 4, that the proposed
development is acceptable from a character
and amenity perspective in the
applicants also submit that LPP 19 is inadequate to cater for the demands and
needs of guests, nor does it support and encourage
fair competition in the
accommodation industry. They contend the actual number of homes that meet all
the criteria in LPP 19 is
'very miniscule'
and that the City has failed to understand the requirements of international,
interstate and local visitors in determining factors
that guests consider when
accommodation.
essence, they submit LPP 19 is defective.
to evidence to support this submission, the applicants rely on the evidence of
Mr Reddy, given under cross-examination, of only
three development applications
for Unhosted STRA that meet the location criteria of cl 8.1 lodged with the City
since the policy
was adopted and, that further, he was unsure if any of these
applications have been
determined.
does not, in my view, establish that LPP 19 is unsound as a local planning
policy and I do not accept the applicants submission
that it is. As Member
Lavery observed in
Maciejewski
LPP 19 is a
'contemporary policy that aligns with the WAPC's Position Statement and
Guidelines'. I agree - because, in my view, the
WAPC Position Statement and
WAPC Guidelines place a focus on, among other things, the designation of
appropriate locations for Unhosted
STRA outside of tourism
consideration of local housing
uncontested evidence of Mr Reddy, which I accept, is that when developing LPP
19, the City considered a range of these planning
factors including appropriate
locations for Unhosted STRA, the location of existing tourism accommodation, and
their levels of occupancy,
as well as the City's local long-term housing
I accept LPP 19 is central to the consideration of the exercise of planning
discretion in this case and, by virtue of
cl 67(2)(g) of the Deemed Provisions,
is to be given due regard.
the proposed development does not meet all the assessment criteria in cl 8, it
is necessary to consider the proposed development
against the policy objectives
at cl 4, which I will turn to next.
Objectives of LPP 19
4(b), 4(c) and 4(d) are relevant in this case. I considered objective 4(c),
relating to impact on character and amenity,
at Issue 4 and found the proposed
development satisfies this objective.
4(b) states:
Ensure STRA is appropriate for its location by being located near other
short-term accommodation and tourist accommodation uses (such
as hotels and
motels along Great Eastern Highway) and accessible for visitors by being near
high frequency public transport stop.
uncontested expert evidence of Mr Reddy is that the proposed development does
not meet this objective. He says this objective
is itself consistent with the
WAPC Position Statement at cl 5, 'Policy Measures' which promotes the location
of tourist accommodation
in areas with the highest tourism amenity and adequate
separation from, or management of, any interface with residential land
the proposed development is not located near other short-term accommodation or
tourism accommodation uses, being approximately
3.3 kilometres from the nearest
tourist accommodation in Great Eastern
proximity of a high frequency bus
the proposed
development, I am satisfied, and I find, does not meet objective 4(b).
Safeguard the primary purpose of residential areas in providing residential
dwellings which are affordable and available on a long-term
applicants submit that renting No 52 on a long-term basis will not provide
'affordable' housing to meet objective 4(d) because
it should generate a higher
weekly market rental than an average property in Cloverdale where, they submit,
the average rent is approximately
applicants point to one example of a property at 271D Fulham Street, Cloverdale
listed on realestate.com.au for $855 per week
as the highest rental listing in
Cloverdale (on 15 May 2025). This is for a town house with three bedrooms and
two bathrooms,
five bedrooms and four bathrooms as at No 52.
do not accept this is evidence that No 52 may not be affordable if rented on a
long-term basis. At its highest, the applicants'
evidence identifies a rental
income that may be achieved at another, unrelated, property in Cloverdale
albeit, I accept, a property
smaller than the subject site. The applicants
adduced no other evidence, expert or otherwise, that could be tested at the
that may establish if No 52 may or may not be 'affordable' if
rented on a long-term basis.
The Urbis Report
to housing being available on a long-term basis, which is also part of objective
4(d), the applicants rely on a report prepared
in November 2023 by
consultants, Urbis, for 'airbnb', titled
'Short-Term Rental Accommodation and
Housing in Australia'
Urbis Report examines the relationship between STRA and housing affordability in
Australia. The applicants did not call the
author of this report as a witness;
however, they submit the report demonstrates that Unhosted STRA does not have a
strong relationship
to housing availability or affordability because only 1.1%
of the total housing stock in Western Australia is used for Unhosted
Reddy considers the Urbis Report in his written evidence and argues it should be
given no weight for two
it was commissioned by 'airbnb', a key industry stakeholder with a vested
interest in the perceived impact of STRA on housing
availability and
affordability in Australia. Second, he says it presents generalised findings
based on statewide and national data,
without consideration of the local housing
context of the City. Mr Reddy was not cross­examined by the applicants as
the weight to be accorded to the Urbis Report is a matter for the Tribunal, I
accept it should be treated with caution, not
least because its author was not
made available for cross-examination at the hearing.
and as Mr Reddy identifies, I accept the findings in the Urbis Report have, at
best, a limited application here because
they are not specific to the
circumstances of the City. Therefore, I accord no weight to the Urbis Report in
coming to my findings.
Reddy's uncontested evidence, which I accept, is that if the proposed
development operates as Unhosted STRA it would not be available
as a residential
dwelling for long-term
accept that is so, and on this basis, it cannot be said that the proposed
development safeguards the primary purpose of residential
areas such that it
meets objective 4(d).
Considering
the above, I am satisfied, and I find, the proposed development does not meet
objective 4(d) of LPP 19.
Is there a cogent reason to depart from LPP 19?
correct approach to the application of planning policy is settled.
Decision-makers are to have due regard to relevant policy,
but the inflexible
application of policy without considering the site specific factors, or a policy
which purports to fetter all,
or part of a discretion, is
I accept that a policy cannot replace the discretion available to a
decision-maker, in that a policy cannot be inflexibly applied,
as Barker J
observes in
Clive Elliott Jennings & Co Pty Ltd v Western Australian
Planning Commission
[2002] WASCA 276
(2002) 122 LGERA 433
'the relevant consideration in many applications will be why the "policy"
should not be applied; why the planning principles that
find expression in the
"policy" are not relevant to the particular application'.
Pritchard J states in
Marshall v Metropolitan Redevelopment
[2015] WASC 226
While the exercise of discretion will involve a judgment about what is suitable,
appropriate, or apt or correct in a particular case,
that judgment must (if it
is to be 'orderly') be an objective one. If the exercise of discretion is to be
an orderly one, the planning
principles identified as relevant to an application
should not be lightly departed from without the demonstration of a sound basis
for doing so, which basis is itself grounded in planning law or principle[.]
(Footnotes omitted)
City contends there is no cogent reason to depart from LPP 19 which is a policy
that aligns with the WAPC Position Statement
and the WAPC Guidelines, which the
City further submits are more important
City also relies on the Tribunal's decision in
Coughlan and Shire of
Augusta-Margaret River
[2022] WASAT 110
), at [61] - [64], which considered the question of
whether there was a cogent reason to depart from the applicable local planning
policy addressing the location of a holiday house in that case. Despite the
presence of two existing holiday houses in the street,
the Tribunal held that
the development represents a further encroachment into the locality and that
approval 'would increase pressure
for further similar
developments'.
, at [76], the Tribunal identified the cumulative impact
of further encroachment would undermine the purpose and objectives of the
applicable local planning policy. The City submits approval here could
result in a similar cumulative impact, undermining the LPS
15 objective of the
Residential zone and the objectives of LPP
applicants, on the other hand, submit there are four reasons which provide a
cogent basis to depart from LPP 19,
(1) The parent lot, with two grouped dwellings, has been developed
to the maximum number of dwellings allowed under LPS 15 and this
distinguishes
this case from
Maciejewski
, which involved an R20/40 coded site,
containing a single dwelling, with significant further development potential.
The applicants
also submit the closest residential neighbour is 23 metres away
and that the amenity of the locality is affected by No 50 and activity
international and domestic airports.
(2) The proposed development will cater to a niche market because it can
accommodate large groups and that this is supported by cl
1.2.1 of the WAPC
Guidelines which addresses Tourism objectives and encourages 'facilitating a
variety of holiday accommodation types'
and 'innovative tourism and short-term
rental accommodation and facilities that respond to market
(3) Patrons of the proposed development will not use public transport and
instead will use hire vehicles or ride-share to access the
subject site.
(4) The Urbis Report demonstrates that STRA is not a significant contributor
to the housing crisis, with 1.1% of housing stock in
WA used for Unhosted STRA.
Considering
the applicants' four reasons they do not, as I will explain, amount to a sound
basis, grounded in planning law or principle,
to depart from LPP 19, in the
circumstances of this case.
I accept the factual circumstances here differ from
Maciejewski
that does not itself provide a cogent reason to depart from LPP 19. That the
subject site is developed with two grouped dwellings,
in my view, simply
reflects what is permissible under LPS 15.
considering the presence of No 50, or the 23 metre setback to neighbours, or the
noise impact of the airport, about which there
is no evidence before me, each of
these considerations relate to amenity and, therefore, do not contribute to a
cogent basis to depart
from objectives 4(b) and 4(d) of LPP 19, which
address location of STRA and impacts on long-term housing supply
respectively.
considering the applicants' submission that the proposed development accords
with cl 1.2.1 of the WAPC Guidelines, I observe
that the setting of 'tourism
objectives' when read in its correct context allow a local government to
'facilitate a variety of holiday
accommodation types including short-term
rentals ... in preferred
locations'.
uncontroversial the proposed development is not in a location preferred under
LPP 19. It is also not in proximity to other
tourism uses. That the proposed
development can accommodate large groups does not, therefore, in my view,
provide a cogent basis
to depart from the policy.
to transport, that patrons may choose not to access the proposed development by
public transport cannot, in my view, form a cogent
basis to depart from LPP 19
and its objective 4(b). The applicants adduce no evidence that gives
foundation to their submission
that patrons will not use public transport.
evidence before me is that there is no high frequency bus route servicing the
locality and, therefore, there is limited opportunity
to use public transport to
access the subject site. Public transport is, I accept, relevant when
considering the location of STRA
in this case. This is not only because it is
identified in LPP 19. It is also a factor in the WAPC Position Statement, at cl
which deals with the location of short-term rental accommodation, and
identifies '... accessibility to transport routes and public
transport services'
as relevant.
to the Urbis Report, I considered this earlier, at [117] - [121], and accorded
it no weight, therefore the report's findings do
not provide a cogent reason to
depart from LPP 19. Further, the expert evidence of Mr Reddy as to existing
tourist accommodation
in the City, along Great Eastern Highway, is that when LPP
19 was prepared the City's analysis 'revealed a supply of approximately
asserts when this was cross-referenced with Tourism WA occupancy rates, it
indicated an ample supply of tourist
accommodation.
This contrasts with an erosion in the availability of long-term housing in the
City, which Mr Reddy says, and I accept, have listings
and vacancy rates at
historic lows of
the uncontested expert evidence of Mr Reddy is that having considered the
proposed development, he has not identified or
been presented with any factors
that provide cogent planning reasons to depart from LPP
I explain above, I agree.
Findings - Issue 3
proposed development is not, I find, consistent with certain aspects of LPP 19
because it does not meet the relevant locational
criteria at cl 8.1 or two
relevant policy objectives at cl 4, being objective 4(b) and
objective 4(d). Further I am satisfied, and
I find, there is no cogent
basis to depart from LPP 19. This is for four reasons.
while No 52 and No 52A represents the maximum development potential of the
parent lot, this does not provide, or contribute
to, a cogent reason to depart
from LPP 19 because approving one of the grouped dwellings to be used for
Unhosted STRA undermines
objective 4(d).
as to the presence of the child care premises at No 50, neither LPP 19, nor the
WAPC Position Statement and WAPC Guidelines,
identify that 'child care premises'
is a land use that should be closely located with STRA because doing so will
bring about an identifiable
planning or land use benefit. Considering this, and
the observations of Pritchard J in
, the presence of
No 50 does not, in my view, give rise to a sound basis, grounded in
planning principle, to depart from LPP 19.
the lack of negative amenity impact arising from the proposed development does
not, of itself, or when considered in combination
with the other factors the
applicants identify, provide a cogent reason to depart from LPP 19. This is
because approval of the proposed
development raises concerns of impact on local
long-term housing supply, in circumstances where there is, on the evidence
me, ample supply of tourist accommodation in the City, and the subject
site lacks close proximity to tourist attractions and to high
frequency public
while the property management plan, which requires the owner of the subject site
to reside at No 52A, responds to amenity
considerations, it also does not
provide a cogent reason to depart from LPP 19 because this does not
overcome the location of the
proposed development lacking close proximity to
other tourism uses and attractions or its use impacting local long-term housing
Issue 5 - Will approval of the proposed development set an undesirable
For precedent to be relevant here, both tests set out in
Nicholls and
Western Australian Planning Commission
[2005] WASAT 40
(2005) 149 LGERA 117
) at [74] must be
(1) That the proposed development or subdivision is not itself unobjectionable;
(2) That there is more than a mere chance or possibility that there may be later
undistinguishable applications.
to the first test, the parties agree the proposed use is not in itself
unobjectionable.
This is because it is uncontentious that the subject site is outside the
location identified in cl 8.1 of LPP 19. I agree the first
test is satisfied.
to the second test, the City points to the evidence of
and contends the subject site is not unique and therefore, there is more than a
mere chance or possibility of later undistinguishable
applications.
The City submits its earlier
submission,
and identifying the potential for cumulative
impact is, therefore, also relevant
applicants, in their SIFC, contend the proposed development would not set an
undesirable precedent and identify five
(1) The proposed development received temporary approval in 2019
and it has operated without complaint from neighbours and that the
now support its on-going use as STRA.
(2) The subject site is so unique it cannot be found anywhere else in the
City because of the proximity to other dwellings, being
at least 23 metres away,
and the presence of the adjoining child care premises at No 50. As to No 50,
they submit this closes in
the evening and no one resides there overnight.
(3) The owner is the same for both No 52 and No 52A and the owner will reside
at the rear dwelling to ensure the proposed development
is 'hosted'.
(4) The grouped dwelling at the subject site consists of five bedrooms
and four bathrooms.
(5) The subject site is conveniently and centrally located to popular tourist
attractions such as Belmont Forum, Perth International
Airport, Perth CBD,
Caversham Wildlife Park and Fremantle.
to these five reasons, I do not accept they are factors which when considered
individually, or in combination, make No 52 unique,
as I will explain.
Considering
reason, that the proposed development previously received a
temporary approval and operated without complaint and that, the applicants
submit, neighbours apparently now support the STRA use does not, in my view,
demonstrate that these characteristics are unique to
the subject site. The
applicants adduce no evidence to establish that this is unique in the City.
reason, that the subject site adjoins a child care premises
abutting residential development, the written evidence of Mr Reddy, which
accept, identifies numerous other child care premises which also adjoin grouped
developments.
Similarly, the fact that the proposed development is setback 23 metres from
existing dwellings does not establish the subject site
is unique. The
applicants adduce no evidence to establish that such a setback from other
dwellings is unique in the City.
Considering
reason, the evidence of Mr Reddy is that, drawing from his
experience as a planning officer at the City, it is common for a landowner
retain ownership of both grouped
Considering this evidence, common ownership of grouped dwellings is not unique.
Common ownership is an attribute that can, in my
view, be readily replicated at
other grouped dwelling developments in the City, even for those that, like the
subject site, abut
an existing child care premises. Further, that the owner is
to reside at No 52A, as I have explained, does not transform the proposed
development so that it is Hosted
Considering
the number of bedrooms and bathrooms at the grouped dwelling on the subject
site, which is the
reason, this does not make the proposed
development unique and the applicants adduce no evidence to provide a foundation
submission. Considering the planning framework which permits grouped
dwellings in the locality, there appears to be no difficulty
replicating a
similarly sized grouped dwelling on a similar lot with an R20 density code.
This characteristic is therefore, on the
evidence before me, not
considering the applicants
reason, being located in proximity to
certain tourist attractions. This is also not unique because other dwellings in
the locality,
and even in other parts of the City, including grouped dwellings,
share a similar proximity to the tourist attractions the applicants
Findings - Issue 5
am satisfied, and I find, approval of the proposed development would set an
undesirable precedent for three reasons.
on the evidence before me, the proposed development satisfies the first test in
because the proposed development, being located outside
of the area identified in cl 8.1 of LPP 19, is not itself unobjectionable.
the factors identified by the applicants do not, on the evidence before me, when
considered individually, or collectively,
mean the proposed development is
unique in the City. Therefore, the second
test is also
satisfied and, as a result, there is more than a mere chance of later
undistinguishable applications which would likely
result in the potential for
cumulative impact of similar Unhosted STRA outside of the location identified in
cl 8.1 of LPP 19 and,
more broadly, an undermining of the local planning
the expert planning evidence of Mr Reddy is that approval of the proposed
development will set an undesirable precedent in
proposed development involves a change of use to 'Use not listed - Unhosted
STRA'. I also determined, by virtue of cl 3.4.2(b)
of LPS 15, this is a land
use that may be capable of approval in the Residential zone.
have considered the proposed development against the provisions of the local
planning framework, which includes LPS 15 and LPP
19, and I have found it does
not meet the location criteria at cl 8.1 of LPP 19 and two of the four
policy objectives, being objective
objective 4(d).
I have found that the proposed development will not have an adverse impact on
the amenity or the character of the locality
and therefore meets cl 8.3 and
objective 4(c) of LPP 19.
having considered whether there is a cogent reason to depart from LPP 19, I have
found, in the circumstances of this case,
the reasons identified by the
applicants fall well short of a cogent reason to depart from the policy.
applying the two tests in
, I considered whether or not
approval of the proposed development would give rise to an undesirable
precedent. I concluded that
it would because there is more than a mere chance
or possibility of later undistinguishable applications for Unhosted STRA in the
Notwithstanding
these findings, I acknowledge I retain a discretion to approve the proposed
development. However, considering that
there is no cogent reason to depart from
LPP 19 in this instance and weighing up my findings to the other issues before
me for determination
and having given due regard to the relevant matters in
cl 67(2) of the Deemed Provisions, the 'correct and preferable' decision,
pursuant to s 27(2) of the SAT Act, for the reasons I have outlined, is to
affirm the decision of the City to refuse the proposed
development and dismiss
the application for review.
these reasons, the Tribunal makes the following orders.
The Tribunal orders:
decision of the respondent is affirmed.
application for review is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MR R Povey, MEMBER
10 OCTOBER 2025
Exhibit 3, page
Applicants'
Bundle of Documents, pages 3 - 4, Exhibit
Short-Term Rental Accommodation Regulations 2024
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, pages 33 - 197, Exhibit
Maciejewski and City of Belmont
[2025] WASAT 47.
Exhibit 7 and Exhibit
The 'computer
room' was observed at the view being furnished as a bedroom for two
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, Attachment 2, Exhibit 4.
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 24, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 81, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 35, Exhibit
and cl 4(c) of LPP
Applicant's Statement of Issues, Facts and Contentions (
Respondent's SIFC para 10, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 36, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC , para 35, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 9(b), Exhibit 2.
example, the decision of Barker, P in
Boyd and Town of Vincent
[2007] WASAT 93
; (2007) 52 SR (WA) 125 at
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 298, Exhibit
Since being
amended in September
Identified earlier at
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 57, Exhibit
Volume 1, page
Volume 1, page
87 - 88, 8 July
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 293, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 3(c), Exhibit 2 and Applicant's SIFC, para 8, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 40, Exhibit 4, and with the definition
identified earlier at
Definitions identified earlier at
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 61, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 36, Exhibit 2 and ts 25 - 26, 8 July
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 232, Exhibit
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 298, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 43, Exhibit
Sunbay Developments Pty Ltd and Shire of Kalamunda
[2006] WASAT 74
(2006) 150 LGERA 116
Barker J generally endorsed that approach but added that consideration of
amenity should take account of future amenity.
That is now expressly recognised
in the definition of amenity in cl 1 of the Deemed Provisions.
Respondent's
s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 230, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 3, Exhibit
Applicant's
SIFC, para 73, Exhibit
Applicant's
SIFC, para 76, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 78, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 82, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, Attachment 3, Exhibit 4 and Applicant's Bundle of
Documents, pages 15 to 61, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 91, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, paras 25 - 33, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 29, Exhibit
ts 56 - 57,
8 July 2025.
ts 69, 8 July
history of the site is a relevant consideration under cl 67(2)(w) of the Deemed
Provisions.
Witness Statement of Nicholas Reddy, paras 87 - 88, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 99, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 100, Exhibit
Submissions received are a relevant consideration under cl 67(2)(y) of the
Provisions.
41 - 43, 8 July
development application was initially refused by the City by a decision notice
dated 13 September 2024. The letters in the Applicant's
Documents, pages 10 - 14, Exhibit 7 are dated 28 September
Respondent's SIFC, para 39, Exhibit
Respondent's SIFC, para 41, Exhibit 2 and Applicant's SIFC, paras 11 and 65,
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 234, Exhibit
Applicants'
SIFC, paras 66 - 67, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 74, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 75, Exhibit
Witness Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 67, Exhibit
Applicants' SIFC, para 61, Exhibit
Applicants'
SIFC, para 62, Exhibit
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 223, Exhibit 3 - cl 5.2.2.2, WAPC
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, pages 222 - 223, Exhibit 3 - cl 5.2.2.1,
WAPC Position
Witness Statement of Nicholas Reddy, paras 106 - 108 and Attachment 5, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, paras 106 and 108, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 67, Exhibit
Ibid and ts
Applicants' SIFC, para 79, Exhibit
Applicants'
Bundle of Documents, page 9, Exhibit
Applicants'
SIFC, paras 52 and 55, Exhibit 6 and ts 32, 16 July
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 127, Exhibit
Statement Nicholas Reddy, para 134, Exhibit
Re Romato; Ex parte Mitchell James Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] WASCA 286
16 July 2025.
16 July 2025.
ts 30 - 32, 16 July 2025.
Respondent's
s 24 Bundle of Documents, pages 201 - 202, Exhibit
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 201, Exhibit
Respondent's s 24 Bundle of Documents, page 223, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 125, Exhibit
Witness Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 135, Exhibit
8 July 2025 and ts 22, 16 July
Witness Statement of Nicholas Reddy, paras 138 - 142, Exhibit
23, 16 July
23, 16 July
Applicants' SIFC, paras 81 - 82, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, Attachment 4, Exhibit
Statement of Nicholas Reddy, para 138, Exhibit
earlier at [40] -
Objective 4(a) is not relevant in this case.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (526 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter