URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/162.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DELTA LEGAL PTY LTD -v- WOOD [2025] WASCA 162 (6 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
LEGAL PTY LTD -v- WOOD
[2025] WASCA 162
SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACV 42 of 2024
LEGAL PTY LTD
LOUISE WOOD
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- DELTA LEGAL PTY LTD
[2024] WASC 216
CIV 2292 of 2023
Practitioners - Solicitors - Costs agreements - Whether trial judge erred in
construction of
Legal Profession Act
(WA) - Whether costs agreement 'fair
or reasonable' - Whether costs agreement should be set aside
Legislation:
Profession Act 2008
Representation:
First Appellant
Solicitors:
First Appellant
Delta Legal
Delta Legal
Metaxas Legal
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
Introduction
appellants appeal against orders of the trial judge setting aside a costs
agreement between the first appellant (
) and the respondent dated 27 September 2018
Costs Agreement
). The order setting
aside the Costs Agreement was made under
Legal Profession Act 2008
(repealed) (
Section 288(2) empowered the Supreme Court to order that a costs agreement
be set aside if satisfied that the agreement was not
fair or reasonable. The
appellants contend that the trial judge erred in being satisfied that the Costs
Agreement was not fair or
reasonable, and in failing to consider whether the
discretion conferred by s 288(2) should be exercised in their favour after
that state of satisfaction.
the following reasons, none of the appellants' grounds of appeal is established
and the appeal should be dismissed.
Primary facts
following primary facts were either found by the trial judge or were established
by uncontroversial documentary evidence before
the primary court.
all relevant times the second appellant
) was the sole director
respondent first met with Mr Strbac on 26 September 2018, seeking
advice in relation to a family law matter. The meeting that
day lasted for
approximately 1.5 hours. The respondent had no documents with her and said
she was unable to get her file from her
previous lawyers until she paid them.
Mr Strbac discussed possible scenarios and outcomes of her family law
matter with the respondent
and told her that Delta Legal could not act for her
unless a costs agreement was
respondent was potentially vulnerable as a client seeking assistance in a
complicated family law dispute, which must have been
obvious to Mr Strbac
at least to some
the meeting on 26 September 2018, Mr Strbac provided the respondent
with a copy of the proposed Costs Agreement in relation to
her family law
proceedings for her to take home and
Relevant parts of the Costs Agreement are reproduced in the schedule to these
respondent met with Mr Strbac again on 27 September 2018. On that
day, Mr Strbac went through the Costs Agreement with the respondent
'paragraph by paragraph' and, in particular, advised
(a) Delta Legal's professional fees would be charged in accordance with
cl 3(c) of the Costs Agreement and that the costs are not
(b) costs estimates would be updated as the matter developed and she would be
notified about it;
(c) she was welcome to approach him at any time with respect to Delta Legal's
fees or any other matter as per annexure A1 of the
Costs Agreement;
(d) she was free to terminate the Costs Agreement at any time;
(e) of Delta Legal's right to withhold her documents if her legal bill was not
paid, and/or to lodge a caveat on her property; and
(f) she had the right to question Delta Legal's fees and would have one year,
from the date of the last invoice, to ask for costs
to be taxed by the
trial judge accepted that, at the meeting on 27 September 2018,
Mr Strbac gave the respondent an initial estimate of costs and
the estimate of $5,000 to more than $100,000, as set out in cl 25 of
annexure A1 of the Costs
The trial judge appears to have accepted Mr Strbac's evidence to the effect
that he told the respondent on 27 September 2018
I estimated the costs for Family Law Matter between $5,000, if the parties
resolve [the] matter by way of Binding Financial Agreement,
Consent Orders and likely more than $100,000 if parties go for
trial judge also appears to have accepted Mr Strbac's evidence that, on
27 September 2018, he told the respondent that usually,
in the Family
Court, there are no winners and losers and that the court very rarely awards
costs against another party. Mr Strbac
told the respondent, 'I can't tell
you whether there is going to be a situation in which the costs may be awarded.
If that happens,
then I will alert you to the
the meeting on 27 September 2018, the respondent told Mr Strbac she
had read the agreement and signed the Costs
respondent paid $20,000 into Delta Legal's trust account on 27 September
2018, and a further $5,000 on 28 September
payment of $27,000 was made by the respondent's former husband into Delta
Legal's trust account on 30 October 2018, pursuant to
an agreement between
her and her former husband. On 7 November 2018, Delta Legal paid $20,000
of that sum to the
respondent.
The respondent was aware that Delta Legal was going to retain $7,000 from the
payment made by her former husband and at least outwardly
acquiesced to Delta
Legal retaining that money for
Legal billed the respondent a total of $87,593.20 under the Costs Agreement.
Invoices were issued as
The August 2019 invoice covered work done between
4 March 2019 and 1 August
invoices issued by Delta Legal included entries for 'DMS', which stood for the
legal practice's document management system.
The evidence did not enable the
trial judge to satisfactorily resolve what individual charges were for. Some of
the work stated
to involve the DMS appeared to be no more than administrative,
done out of a preference on the part of Mr Strbac to use the DMS.
it also appeared that some of the work involved legal analysis and reference to
other documents by use of the
invoices issued by Delta Legal charged exclusively on the basis of time spent as
provided in cl 3(c) of the Costs
The invoices did not set out how many units of time were spent on any particular
task, who performed them, or what hourly rate had
been applied; they set out the
date, the task(s) carried out, the applicable GST for the task(s), and the total
charge for the task(s).
It was therefore not possible to discern from the
invoices whether the fees had been calculated on the basis provided for in
3(a) or cl 3(c) of the Costs
the initial estimate as to costs was provided on 27 September 2018,
Mr Strbac had conversations about costs with the respondent,
and at times
he referred to the amount of costs which was accruing and how they might be
29 April 2019, Delta Legal lodged a caveat on the certificate of title of a
property jointly owned by the respondent and her former
). That caveat prohibited any
dealings with the Property absolutely and the nature of the interest claimed by
Delta Legal was as
22 May 2019, Mr Strbac had a conversation with the respondent in which
he verbally updated her as to the accrued costs and provided
an estimate of
2 August 2019, Delta Legal terminated the Costs Agreement and its retainer
respondent.
Also on that date, Delta Legal wrote to the respondent advising that she had
incurred $86,918.80 in legal costs. She was also advised
that her estimated
costs up to and including an upcoming 'pre-hearing conference' would be
approximately a further $20,000 ‑
$30,000, and her likely trial
costs approximately a further $50,000. This was the only evidence of any
written update as to the
estimate of costs after 27 September
9 August 2019, Delta Legal lodged a further caveat on the certificate of
title for the Property, and the certificate of title
of a further property, as
to the respondent's interest only. That caveat prevented dealing with the
Property and the further property
unless expressed to be subject to the
June 2020, the respondent engaged Metaxas Legal to act for her in the family law
proceedings.
Procedural history
primary proceedings commenced on 15 November 2023 as the respondent's
application for pre-action discovery of the Costs Agreement.
On 5 December
2023, Delta Legal instituted a general procedure claim in the Magistrates Court
of Western Australia seeking $56,280.60
in unpaid legal fees plus
The primary proceedings were then converted into the respondent's claim,
relevantly, for an order setting aside the Costs Agreement
under s 288(2)
of the LP Act. On 18 June 2024, the trial judge ordered that the Costs
Agreement be set aside.
8 July 2024, the appellants instituted the current appeal to this court.
Ground 1 of the appeal contends that the trial judge
erred in finding that the
Costs Agreement was not fair or reasonable within the meaning of s 288 of
the LP Act. Ground 2 contends
that the trial judge erred in setting aside the
Costs Agreement upon finding that the Costs Agreement was not fair or
reasonable,
without also considering whether to exercise the discretion to grant
that remedy was in the interests of justice in all of the
circumstances.
Statutory context
all material times, s 271 of the LP Act generally provided for the basis on
which legal costs were recoverable, being
(a) under a costs agreement made in accordance with pt 10 div 6 of
(b) an applicable costs determination if there was no costs agreement; or
(c) according to the fair and reasonable value of the legal services provided if
there was no costs agreement or applicable
determination.
280(1) of the LP Act relevantly provided that, subject to any costs agreement
made in accordance with div 6, the taxation
of bills of law practices, and any
other aspect of the costs charged by law practices, was regulated by an
applicable costs determination.
all material times, the
Legal Profession
(Family Court of Western Australia) Determination 2018
Family Court Determination
applied to the remuneration of legal practitioners, clerks and paralegals in
respect of proceedings in the Family Court of Western
Australia. That
determination provided for the following hourly rates in relation to
practitioners other than
allowable hourly rate
Practitioner (permitted to practise on his or her own account for 5 years
Practitioner (permitted to practise on his or her own account for less than
Practitioner
Clerk/Paralegal
contrast to the
Legal Profession (Supreme and
District Courts) (Contentious Business) Determination 2018
Supreme Court Determination
the Family Court Determination did not provide for maximum allowances in terms
of particular steps taken in the relevant litigation.
282 of the LP Act, in div 6, provided for a costs agreement, which must be
written or evidenced in writing, to be made between
a client and a law practice.
Section 286 of the LP Act provided that generally a costs agreement may be
enforced in the same way
as any other contract. Under s 287, a costs
agreement that contravened, or was entered into in contravention of, any
provision of
div 6, was void.
288(2) of the LP Act provided for the power of the Supreme Court to set aside a
costs agreement in the following terms:
On application by a client, the Supreme Court may order that a costs agreement
be set aside if satisfied that the agreement is not
reasonable.
288(3) of the LP Act provided for a non-exclusive list of matters to which the
court may have regard in determining whether
or not a costs agreement is fair or
reasonable. Those matters relevantly include:
(c) whether the law practice has failed to make any of the disclosures required
under Division 3;
(d) the circumstances and the conduct of the parties before and when the
agreement was made;
(e) the circumstances and the conduct of the parties in the matters after the
agreement was
260(1), in pt 10 div 3 of the LP Act
), relevantly required a law
practice to disclose to a client:
(a) the basis on which legal costs will be calculated, including whether a costs
determination applies to any of the legal costs;
(c) an estimate of the total legal costs if reasonably practicable or, if that
is not reasonably practicable -
(i) a range of estimates of the total legal costs; and
(ii) an explanation of the major variables that will affect the calculation of
those costs;
(f) if the matter is a litigious matter, an estimate of -
(i) the range of costs that may be recovered if the client is successful in the
litigation; and
(ii) the range of costs the client may be ordered to pay if the client is
unsuccessful[.]
262(1) of the LP Act required disclosure under s 260 to be made in writing
before, or as soon as practicable after, the law
practice is retained in the
matter. Further, s 267 of the LP Act required continuing disclosure in the
following terms:
A law practice must, in writing, disclose to a client any substantial change to
anything included in a disclosure already made under
this Division as soon as is
reasonably practicable after the law practice becomes aware of that
268(3) of the LP Act relevantly provided that, if a law practice does not
disclose to a client anything required by div 3
to be disclosed, the client
may apply under s 288 for the costs agreement to be set
Trial judge's approach
trial judge
the following passages of this court's decision in
Stevenson v Zafra Pty
The current provision, s 288 of the LP Act, uses the language of 'fair or
reasonable' ... It is unnecessary and inappropriate to
attempt an exhaustive
analysis of the denotation of that phrase. It is sufficient, for present
purposes, to observe that:
word 'fair' in that disjunctive phrase is principally (albeit not necessarily
exclusively) directed to a consideration of the
circumstances relating to the
formation of the costs agreement in the context of the solicitor's position as a
fiduciary and officer
of the court;
determining whether a costs agreement is not 'reasonable', regard should
ordinarily be had to (1) whether its terms are unreasonable,
and (2) whether its
effect on the client is unreasonable;
ultimately,
however, the court is not confined to closed categories, and in determining
whether an agreement is not fair or not reasonable,
the circumstances must be
considered as a whole, and, in that regard, the circumstances and conduct of the
parties before, when and
after the costs agreement is made may be considered;
determining whether a costs agreement is not fair or not reasonable, the court,
at least as a starting point, would ordinarily
have regard to the factors listed
in s 288(3) of the LP Act.
If a court concludes that a costs agreement is not fair or not reasonable, the
court may, but is not obliged under s 288 of the LP
Act, to set aside the
agreement. In considering whether to exercise the power conferred under s 288,
the court will have regard to
whether, within the context of the administration
of justice, it is in the interests of justice in the particular circumstances of
the case to set aside the unfair or unreasonable costs agreement. (citations
trial judge found that Delta Legal failed to sufficiently comply with the
disclosure obligation in s 260(1)(a) of the LP Act.
This was in essence
because the Costs Agreement did not make it clear which of the three alternative
bases identified in cl 3 formed
the basis on which legal costs would be
calculated. The Costs Agreement also referred to the Supreme Court
Determination rather
than the applicable Family Court Determination. This
highlighted the lack of attention which was given to fully explaining the
between the manner in which costs would be calculated under the
relevant determination and the Costs
trial judge also found that Delta Legal failed to sufficiently comply with the
disclosure obligation in s 260(1)(f) of the LP
Act. This was on the basis
that the effect of the Costs Agreement was to inform the respondent that she may
be entitled to recover
some of her legal costs, or may be liable to pay some of
her former husband's legal costs, when there was no evidence Mr Strbac or
anyone else at Delta Legal considered this a likely, or even possible, scenario
the trial judge had regard to the fact that verbal disclosure was provided to
the respondent, her Honour was not satisfied
that it was capable of being an
effective substitute, to any meaningful extent, for the written disclosure
required by the LP
quoting from an authority dealing with a solicitor's fiduciary position in
relation to their
the trial judge
In this case, apart from the potential for a conflict of interest, there were
factors which highlighted the need for Mr Strbac to
pay additional
attention to meeting his fiduciary duty to [the respondent]. He was aware the
matter was very complex. Further,
to Mr Strbac's knowledge,
[the respondent] had had two previous lawyers with whose representation she
was very unhappy, and she was
already liable for legal costs to her previous
legal representatives which had not been paid.
The Costs Agreement specified that fees would be determined only by applying the
hourly rates to the units of time recorded by each
staff member on the matter.
The calculation of legal costs in such a manner means that the time recorded may
not have even been
time actually spent, having regard to the fact that time
spent was rounded up, to be recorded in six-minute intervals only.
There is no evidence that any verbal explanation was given to
[the respondent] as to the effect of the scale, the fact that the Costs
Agreement removed the limits imposed by it, or that charging fees calculated on
the third basis had the potential to be advantageous
to Delta Legal when
compared to the relevant determination.
trial judge held that, even if a lesser hourly rate was charged under the Costs
Agreement than was allowed under the relevant
costs determination, the
respondent could be disadvantaged by being charged under the third basis
provided in cl 3 of the Costs Agreement.
This was because of the rounding
up allowed for on the third basis and that 'there is no acknowledgement in the
third basis or on
the invoices that any attention was to be, or was, directed to
only charging for the reasonable amount of time required to be spent
The trial judge then
In addition, the hourly rates outlined in the Costs Agreement were stated to
apply on the basis of the person performing the task,
not the nature of the task
being performed. The potential for unfairness in the operation of the Costs
Agreement as a result is
obvious, and was highlighted in this case by the
charging of fees for the use of the DMS. Given the invoices do not indicate who
performed the work charged for, or the hourly rate which the work was charged,
it is impossible to ascertain whether there was any
discretion exercised in
charging on the basis of the nature of the task performed. That impossibility
in itself supports the proposition
that the Costs Agreement is not fair or
reasonable.
In my view, there was every prospect that a calculation of fees based on the
third basis would result in fees greater than the fees
to which [the respondent]
would have been liable under the relevant determination.
Having regard to the potential conflict of interest which arose if Delta Legal
were able to charge on the third basis, and the fiduciary
relationship between
it and [the respondent], in my view it would have been appropriate for those
matters to have been explained
to [the respondent] as part of the costs
disclosure. There is no evidence that was done.
trial judge expressed her conclusion in the following
For the following reasons, I am satisfied that the Costs Agreement was not fair
or reasonable:
(a) the failure on the part of [the appellants] to comply with the disclosure
obligations of s 260(1) of the [LP Act];
(b) the fact that the failure to comply with s 260(1) included a failure to
clearly disclose a matter of particular significance,
namely the manner in which
[the respondent's] legal costs were to be calculated;
(c) the fact that the failure to comply with s 260(1) of the [LP Act] involved
not only non-disclosure, but misleading disclosure,
namely as to:
(i) the otherwise applicable determination; and
(ii) the prospect of recovery of costs in the event of either a successful or
adverse outcome having regard to the jurisdiction in
which the proceedings were
being conducted;
(d) the lack of explanation on the part of the defendants as to the consequences
of [the respondent] entering into a costs agreement
which enabled legal costs to
be charged other than according to scale, and particularly that that arrangement
was likely to be disadvantageous
to [the respondent];
(e) the fact that [the respondent] was potentially vulnerable as a client
seeking assistance in a complicated family law dispute,
which must have been
obvious to Mr Strbac, at least to some extent;
(f) the lack of information contained on the invoices, which meant that [the
respondent] was unable to ascertain who performed the
work charged for, how long
it was said to have taken, or the hourly rate which had been applied to the
(g) the lack of regular invoicing between March 2019 and August 2019,
notwithstanding that work was being regularly performed and
billed during that
period; and
(h) the lack of any other written update as to [the respondent's] legal costs
during that period.
Accordingly, the Costs Agreement should be set aside.
The evidence available to me is not sufficient to enable me to make an order
pursuant to s 288(5) of the [LP Act]. Accordingly,
[Delta Legal] will need to
re-issue bills in accordance with the applicable scale, and if [the respondent]
seeks a costs assessment,
that can be done in the ordinary way.
Standard of appellate review
Steven Moore (a pseudonym)
the High Court described the distinction between the standards of
appellate review in the following terms:
Two standards of appellate review of first instance judicial determinations are
of present relevance, namely what has come to be
referred to as the correctness
standard and a
' standard involving judicial restraint affording latitude to a
trial judge. Under the correctness standard, the appellate court
determines for
itself the correct outcome while making due allowance for such 'advantages' as
may have been enjoyed by the judge
who conducted the trial or hearing
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
at 552; see also
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
House v The
, appellate intervention is limited to circumstances where the trial
judge: acted upon a wrong principle, or allowed extraneous or
irrelevant matters
to affect the decision; mistook the facts; failed to take into account some
material consideration; or made a
decision that was unreasonable or plainly
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505]. These grounds for intervention
contemplate the appellate court accepting that intervention is not warranted
even though
the members of the appellate court may have decided the matter
differently to the judge at first instance, a circumstance that is
reflected in
the language adopted by the Court of Appeal in this case when it described the
trial judge’s conclusion as 'open'
to his Honour. (some citations
an appeal from an order, or refusal to make an order, under s 288(2) of the
LP Act, the correctness standard rather than the
House v The King
standard of appellate review applies to the question of whether the Costs
Agreement is not fair or reasonable. What is fair and
reasonable is a matter,
albeit of an evaluative character, which is to be determined objectively.
However, once it is concluded
that the Costs Agreement is not fair or
reasonable, the standard identified in
House v The
applies to an appellate review as to how the discretion conferred by
s 288(2) should be
Disposition of appeal ground 1
our view, the trial judge was correct to find that the Costs Agreement was not
fair or reasonable for the purposes of s 288(2)
of the LP Act, having
regard (in combination) to the following features of the agreement and the
manner in which it was
implemented.
the Costs Agreement did not in its terms indicate the basis on which costs were
to be charged under the agreement. The Costs Agreement
did not on its face
indicate whether fees were to be charged on the basis indicated in cl 3(a)
or the basis indicated in cl 3(c)
of the agreement. Contrary to the
appellants' submissions, that ambiguity in the Costs Agreement was not resolved
by annexure A1
to the agreement. While cl 1 - cl 3 of
annexure A1 refer to how time charges are calculated under cl 3(c),
annexure A1 does not
clearly indicate that the respondent will be charged under
cl 3(c), as opposed to cl 3(a), of the Costs Agreement. While the
on which costs were to be billed was verbally explained to the respondent,
there was a failure to give written disclosure of the
basis on which legal costs
would be calculated under the Costs Agreement, as required by s 260(1)(a)
read with s 262 of the LP Act.
There was also a failure in the Costs
Agreement itself to properly state the basis on which costs were charged.
there was no proper written disclosure of whether a costs determination applied
to the legal costs to which the Costs Agreement
related. The Costs Agreement
itself referred to the Supreme Court Determination rather than the applicable
Family Court Determination
and was positively misleading in that respect. The
fact that the rates charged by Delta Legal may have been lower than the maximum
scale rates did not necessarily mean that the respondent was better off under
the terms of the Costs Agreement. The Costs Agreement
provided for a rounding
up of time spent while the Family Court Determination did not. Depending on how
the rounding up was done,
the respondent may have been worse off than if costs
were assessed under the Family Court Determination despite the rates being less
than the maximum permitted by the determination. This was never explained to
the respondent, either orally or in writing.
the invoices issued by Delta Legal did not enable the respondent to ascertain
the basis on which costs had actually been charged,
who had done the work, how
long had actually been taken or the rate which had been applied. Given that, it
cannot be concluded that
charging under the Family Court Determination would not
have been to the respondent's advantage. Without that detail, and in the
absence of any direct evidence as to how time was actually charged, the
appellants' submissions as to the limited effect of charging
in six-minute
blocks in the circumstances of the present case are speculative.
cl 6 of annexure A1 to the Costs Agreement left the invoicing periods to
the discretion of Delta Legal. Clause 7 of annexure A1
expectation of monthly invoicing unless justified by the nature of the work
performed. However, that expectation was
not met when no invoices were issued
between 3 March 2019 and 1 August 2019 despite over $32,000 in costs
being incurred over that
period. The attachment to the invoice issued on
1 August 2019 indicates that it related to work which was consistently
from the beginning of March to the end of July 2019. The effect of
this hiatus in the issuing of invoices was to make it difficult
respondent to keep track of the costs which were being incurred.
there was a failure to provide any written update of the range of estimates of
the total legal costs as required by s 267 read with
s 260(1)(c) and
s 262 of the LP Act. Given the limited information in the possession of
Delta Legal at the time the Costs Agreement
was made, the broad range of
$5,000 - $100,000 or more may have been the best that could reasonably
be done at that time. However,
a more precise estimate range could have been
given as the information provided, and Delta Legal's understanding of the case,
over time. However, no written update was provided until the Costs
Agreement was terminated on 2 August 2019. By that time, the
estimate of
taking the matter to a 'pre-hearing conference' had increased to about $117,000
and the estimated costs of taking the
matter to trial had increased to about
$167,000. This was in the context where Mr Strbac had verbally advised the
respondent that
the cost of resolving the matter by agreement could be as low as
$5,000. Mr Strbac's evidence of subsequent verbal discussions about
and in our view those verbal discussions were not a proper substitute for the
revised written estimate required by the LP Act.
the respondent was not a sophisticated or experienced litigant. She was an
individual involved in a family law dispute. While
the respondent had
previously engaged lawyers in relation to that dispute, it was apparent to
Mr Strbac that her relationships with
those previous lawyers had broken
As the trial judge found, she was in a potentially vulnerable position, and this
must have been apparent to Mr Strbac at least to
some extent. There was a
particular need to exercise care in ensuring that the terms of the Costs
Agreement were clear and clearly
understood.
net effect of these circumstances was that, in early August 2019, the
originally estimated costs range had substantially blown
out without the
respondent being given any updated written estimate until the termination of the
retainer. Although the original
estimate was between
$5,000 - $100,000 or more, the upper end of that range was based on
the matter going to trial. By August 2019
the costs had reached over $87,000
and the matter had not yet gone to trial. No invoices had been issued since
March 2019, so as
to assist the respondent in keeping track of the costs which
had been incurred. The basis on which costs were being charged was
not apparent
either from the terms of the Costs Agreement or the issued invoices. There had
been no proper verbal or written explanation
of the differences between the
costs chargeable under the Family Court Determination and cl 3(c) of the
Costs Agreement, which were
not necessarily favourable to the respondent.
combination of circumstances leads us to the conclusion on the unchallenged
primary facts found by the trial judge that the
Costs Agreement is not fair or
reasonable within the meaning of s 288(2) of the LP Act. The trial judge
was correct to reach that
conclusion as to whether the discretion conferred by
s 288(2) was activated. Ground 1 of the appeal to this court is not
established
for that reason. It is not necessary to address each of the
particulars alleging specific errors in the trial judge's reasoning.
one or more of those errors were established, they could not lead to the appeal
being allowed given our conclusion that
the Costs Agreement is not fair or
reasonable for the reasons explained above. It is also unnecessary to deal with
the respondent's
notice of contention.
Disposition of appeal ground 2
of the appeal to this court contends that the trial judge erred by setting aside
the Costs Agreement upon finding the Costs
Agreement was not fair or reasonable,
without also considering whether to exercise the discretion to grant that remedy
interests of justice in all the circumstances. This ground of appeal
is based on the trial judge's statement in the passage quoted
at the end of [
] above, after the summary of why her
Honour was of the view that the Costs Agreement is not fair or reasonable, that,
'Accordingly,
the Costs Agreement should be set aside'.
in isolation, this last statement might support a conclusion that the trial
judge erred in principle by failing to appreciate
that the court had a
discretion once it was satisfied that the Costs Agreement was not fair or
reasonable. However, the context
in which the statement was made is
inconsistent with such a conclusion. As noted at [
] above, the trial judge quoted the
statement of general principles in
included the discretionary aspect of the power. In that context, the trial
judge could not have failed to appreciate that
the court had a discretion. The
fact that her Honour did not expressly consider its exercise is explicable by
the way the case was
argued before her. Neither party advanced any
discretionary reason why the Costs Agreement should not be set aside once it was
that the agreement was not fair or reasonable. While citing the
passage from
quoted at [
] above, counsel
for the appellants did not in his oral closing submissions before the trial
judge, nor in his written submissions
filed on 14 February 2024 or
15 May 2024 in the primary proceedings, contend that the discretion should
be exercised in the appellants'
favour if the Costs Agreement was found not to
be fair or reasonable.
when the trial judge's reasons are considered as a whole in the context of the
arguments presented to the primary court,
it can be seen that her Honour did not
act on a wrong principle. The outcome of the exercise of the power under
s 288(2) of the
LP Act was not unreasonable or plainly unjust in the
circumstances, and no other error of the kind described in
House v The King
established. Ground 2 of the appeal to this court is without
these reasons, the appeal should be dismissed. We would hear from the parties
on questions of costs, which prima facie should
follow the event.
Costs Agreement between Delta Legal and the respondent
[Underlined text represents
handwritten parts of the costs agreement]
This Agreement is between:
DELTA LEGAL Law Practice,
of L7, 524 Hay Street, Perth in the State of Western Australia ('us', 'we',
[The respondent]
of [respondent's address] in the State of Western Australia ('you')
and sets out the terms and conditions upon which we will represent you and which
you have accepted and retained us on.
This document is an offer to enter into a Cost Agreement with you and by
accepting it you will be regarded as having entered into
a Costs Agreement. This
means you will be bound by the terms and conditions set out in this
Acceptance must be made by signing and returning a copy of this
to this agreement and marked
is the Statutory Disclosure to Clients
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
Application of this
Agreement applies to all work we do in relation to your matter from the time you
first retained us until your matter is concluded
or this Agreement is
terminated, whichever occurs earlier.
Scope of this Agreement
see Annexure
Professional Fees
fees will be calculated as follows:
In accordance with scale (Table A)
published in the most recent
Legal Profession
(Supreme Court) (Contentious Business) Report.
A copy of this scale is
attached and it is inclusive of GST.
(b) Agreed fixed fee including GST $
(c) Those members of the firm that work on your matter will record the time
they spend and charge according to the following
Senior Practitioner Hourly rate of $450 inclusive of GST
Senior Associate Hourly rate of $400 inclusive of GST
Lawyer Hourly rate of $350 inclusive of GST
Junior Lawyer Hourly rate of $300 inclusive of GST
Paralegal / Clerk Hourly rate of $220 inclusive of GST
Junior Clerk Hourly rate of $110 inclusive of GST
The firm's fees are determined by applying these hourly rates to the units of
time recorded by each staff member on your matter.
Time is recorded in
6 minute intervals units. Each interval or part of it represents
1 unit. Thus 6 minutes equals 1 unit; also
3 minutes equals
1 unit. For example: the time charged for a phone call of up to
6 minutes will be 1 unit and the time charged for
an attendance
between 6 and 12 minutes, say 8 minutes will be 2 units.
Disbursements
the course of your matter it will be necessary to incur fees expenses and
charges which are called disbursements such as court
filing fees, bank charges,
courier fees, barrister's fees, title searching and property enquiries, agency
fees for law stationers
and process serving. These are payable as and when they
fall due for payment. We will not incur any substantial expense without
obtaining your permission.
Our disbursements are based
on the following rates: [rates specified]
Estimate of Costs
see annexure
Fees/Disbursements
for the item 3(a) above, we may review our professional fees and disbursements
each year in accordance with variations in the
Consumer Price Index in the
12 month period immediately preceding the date of review, starting
1 July next after the entering into
Prepayments
may, from time to time, request you to pay an advance on account of our
professional fees and disbursements.
authorise us to apply monies we hold on trust for you towards payment of our
professional fees and disbursements charged against
14 days of any such application of monies, we will issue you with an account
showing that trust monies have been applied by
us towards payment of our
professional fees and disbursements.
Estimate of Cost
Recoverable
see annexure
Allocation of Work
may, in our discretion, arrange for work on or connected with your matter to be
performed by an appropriately experienced person
within our firm (depending upon
the importance, urgency, nature and cost involved). The manager of your file and
the person you should
Interim Accounts
see annexure
Payments of Accounts
of an interim account is required within 7 days of being received by
payment of such interim account will not interfere with your rights for
itemisation or taxation of the account.
Interest on Overdue
may charge you interest on any monies outstanding on any of our accounts if
payment in full is not received.
will be charged on the amounts unpaid after 30 days at the rate prescribed
by the Legal Profession Regulation 2009 from
time to time.
you default in payment of any invoice when due, you shall indemnify us from and
against all costs and disbursements incurred by
us in pursuing the debt
including legal costs on a solicitor and own client basis and our collection
agency costs.
Authority to Receive and
irrevocably authorise us to:
a) receive on your behalf any monies due to you in the course of or as a result
of the proceedings;
b) deduct from moneys you may receive and transfer to our own account, such
amount as is necessary to pay our professional fees
and disbursements in
accordance with this Agreement.
c) within 14 days of any such deduction and transfer, we will issue you with an
account showing that monies have been applied by
us towards payment of our
professional fees and
disbursements.
will (even if we have ceased to act for you) retain all files, documents and
personal property in our possession or control relating
to your matter until all
our accounts are paid in full or a Court otherwise
agree to charge all your interest in any real property which you may own solely
or jointly with any other person as security
for your performance of the terms
of this Agreement and the payment of the Fees and Disbursements and you
authorise us to lodge a
caveat on the title of any such real property for this
purpose. The preparation of the caveat and the withdrawal of caveat will
charged per unit or per folio (ie 100 words) whichever is the greater for
drafting plus stamp duty on this Costs Agreement, outside
clerk fees and
Landgate fees for lodging and withdrawal of
Independent Advice
you wish, you may obtain from another solicitor independent advice as to legal
and practical nature and effect of this Agreement
and as to whether or not it is
in your best interest to enter into it. The Law Society of Western Australia
may be able to assist
with the names of suitable firms that could give that
Substantial Changes to
will be informed as soon as is reasonably practicable, of any substantial
changes to anything contained in this document.
Acknowledgments
acknowledge and accept that:
a) we have advised you that costs calculated in accordance with this Agreement
may exceed the applicable scale which would otherwise
b) you may seek independent legal or financial advice concerning this Agreement
before entering into it;
c) there may be other solicitors who are willing to act for you at a lower cost
or who may not require you to enter into a Cost
d) if you request our account(s) to be taxed by a taxing officer of any Court,
we have the right to withdraw the account(s) in question
and render a
substituted account, which may be higher than that already presented to you;
e) you have read and understood all the terms of this Agreement and agree to be
bound by it;
f) you have received a copy of this Agreement including ANNEXURE A1
g) any monies due and owing to you pursuant to the settlement in your case must
be transferred through the Trust Account of Delta
Legal in order for us to
secure and obtain our fees.
I [respondent] have read and understood this document
HEREBY INSTRUCT Delta Legal to act on the
basis set out herein.
Signature: _____________________Dated:_____________
Signed for and on behalf of
Solicitor's Signature: ____________ Dated______________
STATUTORY DISCLOSURE TO CLIENTS
In addition to the Costs Agreement entered into by you with us which governs
matters on which you
instruct us, we disclose the following matters as required by
Profession Act 2008
Basis on which Legal Costs will be Calculated
(s260(1)(a))
costs will be calculated in accordance with the Costs Agreement.
summary, legal costs are charged on an hourly rate applicable to the lawyer or a
person performing the work, calculated in a 6
minutes intervals. Every
6 minutes or part of it represents 1 billable unit.
task takes 6 minutes, 1 unit will be charged.
task takes 2 minutes, 1 unit will be charged.
task takes 8 minutes, 2 units will be
Your Rights (s260(1)(b))
to attached Schedule 1 Form 2 of the
: 'Form of Disclosure of Costs to
Estimate of Legal Costs
(s260(1)(c))
paragraphs 21 to 25 below for our costs
Intervals at which you will be Billed
(s260(1)(d))
will be invoiced at intervals of our discretion.
we issue invoices at least once each month, but may issue invoices more
regularly or less regularly depending on the nature
of the work being
Estimate of Costs Recoverable if Litigation
(Section 260(1)(i))
you win the case (or part of it) you may be entitled to recover some of your
legal costs from the losing party.
order by a Court for payment of costs in favour of you will not necessarily
cover the whole of your legal costs.
must pay us the whole of your legal costs by their due dates. You cannot
off-set any amount recoverable from the losing party
against your indebtedness
our estimate of such costs, see paragraphs 21 to 25
Estimate of Costs Payable by You if Litigation
Unsuccessful
(Section 260(f)(ii))
you lose the case (or part of it) you may be ordered to pay some of the winning
party's legal costs, in addition to having to
pay your own legal costs.
our estimate of such costs, see paragraphs 21 to 25
Estimate of Legal Costs
(s260(1)(b)
estimates in paragraph 25 below are made at a time when it is usually very
difficult to predict all the work which will be required
to be done on your
estimates are based on information available to us at the time the estimate was
of the estimates are quotes.
main variables which affect the calculation of costs
24.1 The extent of documentary material that we must review and
24.2 The complexity of the legal issues to be considered.
24.3 The complexity of the factual matrix.
24.4 The difficulty in which instructions are able to be obtained.
24.5 Whether independent Counsel is engaged to undertake part of the
24.6 The number of contested interlocutory applications.
24.7 The other party's attitude to the matter (e.g. belligerent or
cooperative).
24.8 Generally, the nature of the work being
estimates [the word 'estimates' is circled] are as
in which we are instructed
Costs payable under Costs Agreement plus GST and disbursements
Costs payable to you if you win
costs payable by you if you lose (in addition to your own legal
SETTLEMENT - FAMILY LAW
5,000 - 100K +
Legal Profession Regulations
Form of disclosure of costs to clients
Legal Profession Act 2008
section 260(5)
Legal costs - your right to
You have the right to -
a costs agreement with us
a bill of costs from us
an itemised bill of costs after you receive a lump sum bill from us
written reports about the progress of your matter and the costs incurred in your
matter (at no cost to you)
for costs to be assessed within 12 months if you are unhappy with our
for the costs agreement to be set aside
or reject any offer we make for an interstate costs law to apply to your
us that you require an interstate costs law to apply to your
For more information about your rights, please read the fact sheet titled Legal
costs - your right to know. You can ask us for a
copy, or obtain it from the
Legal Practice Board (or download it from the website of the Legal Practice
Board or the Law Society
of Western Australia).
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
6 NOVEMBER 2025
Wood v Delta Legal
[2024] WASC 216
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision [9],
Primary decision
[70] - [71].
Primary decision [66] - [67],
[70] - [71].
Primary decision [57], [125],
[135] - [136].
Primary decision
[10] - [11].
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision [15].
Primary decision
Primary decision [47],
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision [19],
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision
Primary decision [22].
Primary decision
Stevenson v Zafra Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 181
(2021) 58 WAR 383
[245] - [246].
Primary decision
[101] - [104].
Primary decision
[127] - [129].
Primary decision [139].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 435 - 437, adopted in
Primary decision
[142] - [144].
Primary decision
[149] - [150].
Primary decision
[151] - [153].
Primary decision
[165] - [167].
Moore (a pseudonym) v The
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 98 ALJR 1119
[235] - [236];
Lewis Blyth & Hooper
(a firm) v Smith
[2015] WASCA 47
(2015) 48 WAR 467
[106] - [109].
The relevance of the manner in which the agreement is implemented is apparent
from the terms of
and s 288(3)(b) and (e) of the LP
well as the passage from
Affidavit of Mr Strbac sworn 31 January 2024 pars 15 - 16 and
annexures G and H to that affidavit; trial ts 127 - 129.
See Affidavit of Mr Strbac sworn 31 January 2024 pars 7 - 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (498 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter