URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anderson and Tang & Ors [2004] WASTR 59 (12 November 2004)
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
DATE OF ORDER :
12 NOVEMBER 2004
FINAL ORDER
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000078
STRATA PLAN NUMBER :
MALCOLM DOUGLAS ANDERSON
COLIN TANG, JAMES FIGLIOMENI, RAHIM BAKSH GHAURI &
QUADSIA YASMIN GHAURI
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property – Strata titles – boundary wall – height
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act 1985
Application dismissed
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also cited:
PRINCIPAL ORDER
1 A proposal to raise the height of a boundary
2 The Applicant is Malcolm Douglas Anderson, as the proprietor of Lot 2 on
Strata Plan 30606 ("the Strata Plan").
Plan and relevant Act
3 The Strata Plan was registered on 7 February 1996, pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1985
") which continues to be the
relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
5 The parcel, known as "Shepperton Estate", comprises 15 2-storey residential
lots in a group of buildings at the corner of Shepperton
Road and Harvey Street,
Victoria Park.
6 The Strata Plan specifies that the address for the serving of notices on the
Strata Company is 20 Harvey Street, Victoria
7 It is a "single tier strata scheme", as defined in
, because no
part of any lot is above or below any part of any other
8 The land comprised in the parcel slopes steeply down from east to west,
matching the slope of the adjacent Shepperton Road. The
rear boundaries of Lots
1 to 6 inclusive abut Shepperton Road.
9 The Applicant has sought an order, pursuant to
the following terms:
“I seek an order from the referee to allow the removal of the lattice
section of the rear fence at unit 2 and replace it with
brick construction, at the same time raising each fence panel 400mm higher than
its current height. All costs are to be borne by
the owner of lot
10 As no amendment, repeal or addition of any by-law is recorded on the Strata
Plan, the by-laws of the Strata Company are, pursuant
"standard" by-laws in Schs 1 and 2.
11 Each lot comprises a residence and external areas. Each such portion is a
"Part lot".
12 The Strata Plan includes the following endorsements on its ground Floor and
First Floor plan pages:-
"External faces of buildings are the boundaries of part lots comprising the
buildings except where stated
otherwise.”
(Note: “building” is defined in
as “a building or
buildings shown on a strata plan’)
13 The Ground Floor Plan pages also include an endorsement
“All distances are from the external surface of the wall, unless otherwise
14 There may be some problems in interpreting those endorsements and they must
be read with
and (3) which provide,
relevantly,
"(1) The ownership of land in a scheme is to be determined
in accordance with this section for the purposes of the
Dividing Fences Act
(2) In a single tier strata scheme...the owner of land in the scheme that
adjoins land outside the scheme shall be regarded to be
a) in the case of a lot, the proprietor of the lot..."
Section 3(1)
defines “land” as
“...land that is under the operation of the
Transfer of Land Act 1893
held by the registered proprietor of the land in fee
and defines “building” as
“a building or buildings shown on a strata plan”
16 I will refer to these provisions later in these
Boundary wall
17 There is a brick wall along Shepperton Road boundary of the parcel. It has
brick panels which are interspersed with vertical
brick piers. The piers extend
higher than the upper surface of the panels between them. There are three panels
adjacent to each
lot. The panels and piers are progressively
“stepped” down to lower levels, to take into account the slope of
18 In several places along the wall, including on part of the wall adjacent to
the Applicant’s Lot 2, timber latticing has
been added to the tops of the
panels, in the gaps between the piers.
19 The portions of the wall respectively adjacent to Lot 1 (immediately
west of the Applicant’s Lot 2), and Lot 3
(immediately
Lot 2) each have latticed additions on top of some of the panels.
20 I have inspected the wall and have noted differences in the colouring of
parts of the brickwork. It appears to me that the
piers and panels adjacent to
Lot 4 have been raised significantly at some time after the original piers
and panels were constructed.
It also appears to me that, as originally
constructed, the top of each panel was level. However, the brickwork that has
to the top of the western - most panel adjacent to Lot 4 has been
angled down towards the eastern-most pier of the portion of the
wall adjacent to
21 Similarly, the western-most panel adjacent to Lot 3 appears to have had
its height increased by additional brickwork. That
brickwork is also
angled down towards the top of the eastern-most pier adjacent to the
Applicant’s Lot 2.
22 The Applicant’s proposal is to raise the height of all three panels
adjacent to Lot 2 and to raise the level of the
in each of those
panels, by 400 mm.
23 His proposal is to have the tops of the relevant panels
“stepped to follow the slope of the ground and will be similar to the
fence of units 3 and 4”
24 A sketch plan, provided to me by the Applicant, indicates that one of the
piers adjacent to his Lot 2 would have to be increased
in height to
accommodate the proposed increased height of the panels in question, but the
highest point of the panels would be no
higher than the lowest point of the wall
where it adjoins Lot 3.
Applicant's
submissions
25 The Applicant’s submissions include:
"(1) Of the 14
other units in the Strata Company, 11 of the proprietors have consented to the
fence re-construction. The 3 dissenting
proprietors are those of Lots 1, 3 and
(2) Lot 15 have cited the following as reasons for dissention:
‘We put a request to build a carport on the area that belongs to unit 15
and was knocked back by a few owners of Shepperton
Estate. Therefore, unit 15
totally disagrees to any further development, redevelopment or renovation or
addition to any dwelling
26 The Applicant has commented that:-
"These grounds for refusal are not as per the requirements of
section 7(5)
subsequently I take approval to be given by the proprietor of unit
(3) Lot 3 have cited their reasons for
dissention that “the wall will be too high."
27 The Applicant's response includes:-
"... the proposed fence is to be constructed along the same lines as the
existing fence at unit 3. The fence will therefore be in
keeping with the rest
of the development.
1 have cited their reason for dissention as being:
‘The rear wall will be too high and does not match the shape of the
existing wall. The raised wall should follow the natural
slope of the ground
and taper off down slope similar to those of units 3 and
28 The Applicant's response is that:-
"...the fence will be stepped to follow the slope of the ground and will be
similar to the fence at units 3 and 4.
wall is being raised for reasons of safety, security and
Responses to
application
29 On 18 November 2003, the proprietor of Lot 3 wrote to the
Strata Company's managing agents, in response to a request
approval to
the proposed works. His letter included:
"As owner and resident of unit 3, I stress my objection and request you do not
approve the rear walls and/or side fences to be increased
I believe that if the existing low lattice fence between the brick piers was to
be removed and enclosed in brick it will stop intruders
from getting an easy
foot hold as I have carried out on my fence.
At the time of me carrying out my work, I was not allowed to change the
aesthetics of the rear walls as this would ruin continuity
of the Shepperton
Road façade and levels.
I also point out that if units 2 and 4 raise the side and rear walls or fences
to the extent proposed by Chris, it will also eliminate
my easterly views and
breeze, further I will be boxed in by high walls and fences from both sides.
I am the only one that is affected by the above proposed changes and
respectfully request you reject any intended wall and fence
(Note: I believe that the proprietor of Lot 3 may have intended to refer to
westerly views, not easterly views, as the Applicant’s
Lot 2 is to
the west of and at a lower level than Lot 3.
30 The proprietor of Lot 3 has continued to oppose the application, at
least in part. He has included the following in a submission
to me, in response
to this application:-
"...no meeting has been arranged by Mr Anderson for the owners to meet to
discuss what I believe is a major change aesthetically
to the main Shepperton
Road boundary brick fence.
I purchased into this complex because I liked the overall appeal, flowing lines,
the external façade, uniform look and the
views to the west, south and
east elevations.
Units 1, 2, 3, 5 & 6 have not increased their fence heights. If fence
heights are increased to units 1 & 2, unit 3 will
loose (sic) the much
needed breeze in the hot summer as the sun sets over our backyards and
aesthetically changes the following boundary
“liners”, this would
decrease the appeal and value. As an original owner, I have a right for this not
to be effected...
(Note: As indicated above, from my inspection of the wall, it appears that that
the portions of the wall respectively adjacent to
Lots 3 and 4 have, in
fact, been increased in height since the wall was originally
constructed.)
"The owners of units 1 & 3 are the only ones that are directly affected by
Mr Anderson's proposed changes.
I have no objection for Mr Mal Anderson to remove the timber lattice and brick
up the existing fence height as I have done or to
the underside of his existing
I reject the comment that the increased fence height is required due to security
He was instructed and informed by the Body Corporate that the raising of the
fence was rejected and the Town of Victoria Park instructed
him to stop work but
he did not."
31 The proprietor of another lot has supported the application on the following
“1. It is a safety issue for the small children
that live at their residence because the fence is currently at a level
could easily be climbed over.
2 It is a security issue, the backyard has easy access to
pedestrians along Shepperton Road.”
32 The proprietor of Lot 1 has responded in the following
“Based upon the following information Mr Anderson provided in his
application, I WILL support Mr Anderson’s application
to raise the rear
wall if ALL the following conditions are met:
1. The same type and colour of bricks as the existing wall will be used to raise
the rear wall.
2. The section of the wall next to Unit 1 (my unit) will form an angle
down slope exactly like Unit 3 or 4 so the whole wall
does not look out of shape
or in a zig zag manner.
3. The lattice panels will be hang ( sic) & firmly back on to the
raised wall in order to retain the original look of the
wall, just as Unit 3 has
done. I have noticed that Unit 4 has raised the rear wall as well and owner of
Unit 4 has informed that
he will hang & firmly fixed ( sic) the lattice
panels back onto the raised wall at his unit.”
(Note: Item 3 appears to mean that the lattice panels should be attached
to the external face of any brick work added to the
of the existing
33 The proprietor of Lot 4 supports the application
am one of six owners in the complex whose property backs onto Shepperton Road,
the height of the rear fence does not provide
any privacy or security.
Passers-by have an uninterrupted view of the inside of our
owner-occupier I have personal experience of intruders onto my property and have
endured the loss of my property as a
“The current
height of the rear fence grossly compromises the safety and security of our
property and more importantly the safety
“... Shepperton
Road is the main artery into the City of Perth... there are high volumes of
traffic at all times..."
Friday 21 November 2003 between the off-peak hours of 2-3pm in the afternoon,
563 vehicles of varying descriptions utilised
“The Town of
Victoria Park Council have agreed in principle to an increase in height of our
rear fence provided all owners whose
property backs onto Shepperton Road agree
to an increase in
“Mr J Figliomeni
(owner Lot 3) has increased the height of his fence without Body Corporate
permission in 2000 – 2001,
yet objects to an increase in the height of our
rear fence”.
“If one were
to travel along Shepperton Road one would see that most properties have fences
that back and front on to Shepperton
Road that are in excess of the standard
1.8m for precisely the reasons cited
34 The proprietors of Lot 15 would approve the Applicant’s proposal,
“all the other owners are given the same right to redevelop the boundary
wall, if they so wish, keeping the entire boundary
wall at the same height above
the ground level i.e. Consistent height along its entire length keeping natural
slope in mind; and
1. Reconstruction to a new wall height should take place at the same time for
aesthetic reasons; and
2. As some owners have already built pergolas, patios and brick improvements,
the rest of the owners should be given an equal opportunity
to have additions to
their units (such as unit 15’s carport and pergola) so that there is no
discrimination against any
Considerations
35 The first issue to be resolved is to determine whether the wall along the
Shepperton Road frontage forms parts of the adjacent
lots 1 to 6 or whether it
is part of the common property.
36 As mentioned above,
refers to the deeming of ownership for the
purpose of the
Dividing Fences Act
, but the wall in question does not satisfy
the definition of a “dividing fence”, because it separates freehold
from a road reserve. It appears to me that the road reserve is not
“land” within the definition of that expression in
quoted earlier in these Reasons.
37 Accordingly, in my view, the wall in question is not a "dividing fence" for
the purpose of the
Dividing Fences Act
38 The next issue is whether the wall is part of the lots which it abuts or
whether it is part of the common property.
39 In view of the endorsements on the Strata Plan
“External faces of buildings are the boundaries of part lots comprising
the buildings except where stated
otherwise”,
“all distances are from the external surfaces of the wall, unless
otherwise stated”,
it might appear reasonable to assume that the measurements along the boundaries
between the Shepperton Road - fronting lots to the
Shepperton Road wall, as
shown on the Strata Plan, should be deemed to be from the external, southern,
surfaces of those residences
to the inner, northern, surface of the Shepperton
Road wall. However, that assumption can only be confirmed by a surveyor.
40 If that assumption is proved to be correct, then, if the wall is totally
within the parcel, I would regard the entire Shepperton
Road wall as being
common property, rather than being comprised in the adjacent lots.
41 However, it is possible that the wall is constructed partly within the
parcel and partly outside of the parcel. Once again, a
surveyor must be
consulted to clarify that issue.
42 To the extent that the wall, or part of the wall, is found to be part of the
common property, any decision of the Strata Company
to carry out the works that
the Applicant has requested, would require only an ordinary resolution of the
Strata Company, subject
to the Strata Company satisfying itself that a decision
in respect of such works is within its powers and the adequate funds can
43 Some of the Strata Company’s obligations and powers include those in
s 35. They include obligations to repair and
and to control and
manage, the common property for the benefit of all the proprietors.
44 Ensuring the security of a parcel may, in some cases, extend to carrying out
works on the boundary walls and fences of the parcel,
but each case must be
examined on its particular facts and circumstances.
45 If the wall or part of the wall is common property and the Applicant is
prepared to carry out the proposed works, at his cost,
rather than requesting
the Strata Company to carry out those works on that part of the common property,
but the Strata Company does
not agree to allow him to do so, he may wish to
consider making an application of the kind referred to in s 85(a). Any
response to an application under that section, would depend on the
circumstances at the time when the application is made and
Reasons should be regarded as suggesting or indicating what order might be made
in response to such an application.
46 The Applicant has referred to s 7B. That section, and the related
provisions of
and s 103F, would apply only to such part of the
wall as is determined by a surveyor to be comprised in the adjacent lots
in those circumstances, the proposed works would involve alterations to
or the extension of a “structure” within a lot.
The expression
“structure” is defined by
“any prescribed improvement
47 The “prescribed improvements”, as set out in reg 32 of the
Strata Titles General
Regulations 1996
any...building or improvement...the construction or
erection of which is required to be approved by the local government or any
authority, whether freestanding or annexed to or incorporated with any
existing building on the lot
48 This means that, if the wall or part of the wall is part of a lot or lots
and is a “structure”, as defined (as to
which further enquiries may
be necessary), then, in the absence of the prior written approval of the
proprietors of all lots in the
scheme, any decision in relation to alterations
or additions to the wall or to any relevant part of the wall that is comprised
a lot, must be pursuant to an approval by way of a resolution without dissent
under s 3AC and s 3C, or, if such a resolution is not
achieved, then pursuant to
an order made on an application under s 103F. Under s 103F, an applicant must be
able to demonstrate that
any dissenting votes were unreasonable.
49 Alternatively, if the wall or part of the wall is common property, the
Strata Company could consider adopting a by-law of the
kind contemplated by
, granting to particular lot proprietors exclusive use rights or
special privileges in respect of clearly-defined parts of the common
(such as portions of the wall), subject those proprietors agreeing to take
responsibility for the repair and maintenance
(and, perhaps, insurance) of those
specified parts and subject to such other terms and conditions (for example,
consistency in size,
colour and materials) that the Strata Company may wish to
include. The adoption of such a by-law would require a resolution without
dissent. Section 51 might also be relevant.
50 These comments are not given as advice or recommendations. The Strata
Company would need to make its own enquiries and seek advice
and assistance from
appropriately-qualified advisers in relation to such matters, once the issue of
the ownership of the wall has
been resolved. Even if this application had not
been made, the question of ownership and responsibility for the wall are matters
that the Strata Company should seek to resolve as part of its management of the
scheme, including the management of its insurance
51 This application has been made under s 7B and its related s 103F,
both of which deal with alterations or additions
but, until the
ownership of the wall has been clarified, I am unable to determine if I have the
power to make the order
I do not have sufficient information upon
which to make the order sought, I must dismiss the application, but I hope that
these Reasons
will help to resolve the Applicant’s
My Order is that
“The application be dismissed”
DATED 12 November 2004
_________________________________
R J KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter