URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VAN BEEK [2024] WACIC 1 (5 February 2024)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2024] WACIC 1
DELIVERED :
5 FEBRUARY 2024
FILE NO/S :
CIC 3070 of 2023
DAVID JOHN VAN BEEK
Assault - Proved offence - Victim committed a
separate offence - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Medicines and Poisons Regulations
Road Traffic (Drug Driving) Regulation 2007
Traffic Act 1974
Compensation refused
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Attorney General for Western Australia v Her Honour Judge Schoombee
AW (pseudonym initials) v CD (pseudonym initials
[2023] WADC 36
Chase v Francis
[2020] WADC 34
Martin v Martin
[2015] WADC 138
[2013] WADC 83
Pym v Richardson
[2018] WADC 156
[2022] WADC 96
for Decision
way of an application dated 20 September 2023 Mr Van Beek
(the applicant) submitted an application for criminal injuries compensation
pursuant to section 12 of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
(the Act) in relation to an incident which occurred on 19 April
The offence
19 April 2022 the applicant was riding his motorcycle in a southerly
direction along Kwinana Freeway when he became involved in
a verbal altercation
with another driver, Ms Amy Sparks. Ms Sparks contacted her partner,
Mr Hayden Bilson, (the offender), who
was also driving his vehicle in a
southerly direction on the Kwinana Freeway. The offender drove in an erratic
manner, and flashed
his lights at the applicant, causing the applicant to pull
over onto the side of the freeway. The offender stopped his vehicle near
applicant, exited the vehicle and walked towards the applicant to confront him.
The applicant rode past the offender and as
he did so was pushed by
the offender, causing him to lose balance of the motorcycle and fall onto
the road surface. The applicant
sustained serious injuries as a result of the
offender was convicted of Acts or omissions causing bodily harm or danger to any
person in the Magistrates Court at Rockingham
on 27 April 2023. I am
satisfied the offender's conviction of the offence of Acts or omissions causing
bodily harm or danger to
any person is a proved offence for the purposes of
section 12 of the Act.
The applicant’s injuries
applicant sustained a comminuted and displaced fracture of the neck of the left
humerus with antero-inferior dislocation of the
humeral head as a result of the
underwent surgery at Fiona Stanley Hospital on 20 April 2022, but the
outcome of the surgery was poor function and anterior
subluxation of the left
humeral head.
applicant underwent further surgery at Fremantle Hospital in October 2022
comprising removal of the Phylos plate and a reverse
total shoulder replacement.
His recovery was complicated by a MET (Medical Emergency Team) call for rigors
and by a methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus epidermis
applicant had a prolonged recovery and in February 2023 was noted to have
ongoing restricted movement, pain upon sleeping and
difficulty using
addition, the applicant reported significant psychological impact from the
The discovery of tetrahydrocannabinol in Mr Van Beek's blood
the course of police investigations into the incident, the applicant was
required to provide a blood sample for analysis. The
blood sample was tested by
the Chemistry Centre (WA) and showed a positive test for tetrahydrocannabinol
(cannabis). The applicant
was charged with driving with prescribed illicit drug
in oral fluid or
records indicate the applicant's legal representative made a submission to the
Police Prosecutor the charge should be dismissed
on public interest grounds
taking into account the injury was caused to the applicant, not by him; the low
reading of tetrahydrocannabinol
in the applicant's blood; that the applicant was
prescribed medicinal cannabis and the applicant's lack of previous similar
The charge was subsequently dismissed for want of prosecution on
25 May 2023.
The source of the tetrahydrocannabinol
applicant's lawyer submitted to police in the course of the prosecution the
tetrahydrocannabinol was from a prescription of medicinal
cannabis. The
applicant repeated that submission in this application, stating " . . . the
cannabis was NOT illicit, but prescribed
and I was following my doctors
recomdations(sic)"
applicant provided a number of medical documents in support of his application,
including records from Rockingham Hospital which
indicated upon admission to
hospital on 19 April 2022 he advised medical staff he had "smoked THC this
morning" and a medical report
from a Dr Yin Wee dated 28 February 2023
with respect to the applicant's admission to Fiona Stanley Hospital on
20 April 2022 which
stated the applicant "smoked two to three joints of
cannabis per day".
medical records provided by the applicant included a Notification of Treatment
form dated 29 July 2022 indicating Dr Brian
Walker of Serpentine
Medical Centre prescribed Cannatrek T25 (dried herb formula) to the
applicant on 29 July 2022. Pursuant to
section 19 of the Act I
requested the clinical records from Serpentine Medical Centre which recorded the
applicant's first attendance
upon Dr Brian Walker was on 29 July 2022,
on which date he was prescribed medicinal cannabis due to pain from the injuries
in the incident and was advised of the driving restrictions which
applied when taking medicinal cannabis. The date of this prescription
the incident.
is a requirement under the
Medicines and Poisons Act 2014
Medicines and Poisons Regulations 2016
Division 3 for
Notification of a prescription of medicinal cannabis to be given to the
Medicines and Poisons Regulations
Branch (MPRB) of the Department of Health.
Pursuant to section 19 of the Act I obtained records from the MPRB which
indicated the
first prescription for medicinal cannabis was given to the
applicant on 29 July 2022, consistent with the records obtained from
Medical Centre. As the first prescription of medicinal cannabis was
made on 29 July 2022, after the incident, I find the tetrahydrocannabinol
found in the applicant's blood on 19 April 2022 was not from medicinal
cannabis prescribed in Western Australia.
obtained the applicant’s medical records from
Stirk Medical Group pursuant to section 19 of the Act. These
records indicate
the applicant requested his medical practitioners prescribe
medicinal cannabis to him on 8 February 2017 and on
21 February 2017
but those requests were refused. The applicant
advised he had been attempting to obtain legally prescribed cannabis from
The applicant
also advised he saw Dr David Jones at Stirk Medical Group on 14 April
2022 and was encouraged by him to self-medicate
with cannabis and the applicant
was therefore acting under medical
authorisation.
records from Stirk Medical Group contain no record of a consultation on
14 April 2022, although the applicant did attend Dr
11 April 2022 in relation to a squamous cell carcinoma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
applicant was requested to advise where the medicinal cannabis he consumed on
19 April 2022 was sourced. The applicant advised
it was obtained from
Louise Graves and the Nimbim Hemp
issued a notice pursuant to section 19 of the Act to obtain details of the
prescriptions issued to the applicant by Louise
Graves and the Nimbin Hemp
Embassy. In response, the legal representative for Louise Graves and the Nimbin
Hemp Embassy advised
no prescriptions had been issued to the
the course of correspondence sent by the applicant subsequent to a preliminary
refusal of his application, the details of which
are set out below at [23] to
[27], the applicant sent an email dated 12 December 2023 which
relevantly states:
... on my part there was a missunderstanding (
). Because a health
professional was involved the cannabis was not illicit I can now confirm this
not to be the case. A error on
my part that would bring your declination up to
date. I will now conclude my correspondence with you and except
) defeat humbly. I look forward to your final outcome in due
have found (at [10]) the tetrahydrocannabinol found in the applicant's blood on
19 April 2022 was not from medicinal cannabis prescribed
Australia. Further, there is no evidence the applicant was prescribed medicinal
cannabis from an interstate source and
I find the tetrahydrocannabinol found in
the applicant's blood on 19 April 2022 was not from medicinal
cannabis. The applicant's
submission he had consumed medicinal cannabis on
19 April 2022, which was made to police and to this office, was
Significance of tetrahydrocannabinol when driving
Road Traffic Act 1974
64AC. Driving with prescribed illicit drug in oral
fluid or blood
(1) A person who drives or attempts to drive a motor vehicle while a prescribed
illicit drug is present in the person's oral fluid
or blood commits an offence.
Tetrahydrocannabinol
(cannabis) is a prescribed illicit drug pursuant to regulation 3 of the
Road Traffic (Drug Driving) Regulation 2007
. There is no exemption in
the legislation for persons who have been prescribed medicinal cannabis.
Therefore, any person with tetrahydrocannabinol
in their blood stream whilst
driving is therefore committing an offence, irrespective of whether the cannabis
was from a prescribed
or an illegal source.
A separate offence: Section 39
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
provides "for the payment of
compensation to victims of offences in
circumstances".
One of the restrictions upon compensation being awarded is set out under
section 39 of the Act, which states:
39. No award if victim was engaged in criminal
(1) If an assessor is satisfied —
(a) that a person was injured as a consequence of
the commission of an offence; and
(b) that the injury was suffered when the person was committing a separate
the assessor
make a compensation award in favour of the person.
(emphasis added)
effect of section 39 is if an applicant was committing a separate offence
at the time he or she was injured, the claim for compensation
must be refused.
Relevant factors in relation to the application of section 39 include:
assessor has no discretion to allow an application when the applicant is
committing a separate
is no requirement the separate offence being committed by the applicant be a
proved offence.
is no requirement there be any causal connection between the injury suffered by
the applicant and the separate offence committed
by the applicant, but merely a
connection.
Application of facts to section 39 of the Act
evidence before me establishes the following:
applicant tested positive to tetrahydrocannabinol in his blood stream as a
result of a blood sample taken shortly after the incident;
applicant was riding his motorcycle when he was assaulted by the
find when he was injured, the applicant was committing a separate offence
pursuant to
section 64AC(1)
Road Traffic Act 1974
driving with a prescribed illicit drug (tetrahydrocannabinol) in his oral fluid
find there is a temporal connection between the applicant's injuries and the
separate offence as the applicant was riding the motorcycle
(despite having a
prescribed illicit drug in his blood) when he was pushed by the
Preliminary determination and applicant's responses
9 November 2023 I wrote to the applicant advising the evidence before me
indicated, when injured, the applicant was committing
a separate offence
pursuant to
section 64AC(1)
Road Traffic Act 1974
driving with a prescribed illicit drug (tetrahydrocannabinol) in his oral fluid
or blood. As a result, I advised I had reached
a preliminary determination I
must refuse the application pursuant to section 39 of the Act, and invited
the applicant to provide
any submissions in response prior to 9 December
2023. The applicant has provided responses on 10 November 2023,
14 November 2023,
16 November 2023, 7 December 2023,
8 December 2023, 12 December 2023, 14 December 2023,
18 December 2023, 4 January 2024, 8 January
12 January 2024 and 27 January 2024.
applicant's various responses raised three main issues. First, the applicant
submitted he had consumed medicinal cannabis on
the day of the incident and
therefore was not committing a separate offence. I have set out above at [7] to
[13] the evidence relevant
to this submission. The applicant was not prescribed
medicinal cannabis until after the incident, and therefore had not consumed
medicinal cannabis on 19 April 2022. The applicant accepted this in
his email dated 12 December 2023, which is set out at [13], above.
Further, irrespective of the source of the cannabis, it is illegal to drive a
vehicle in Western Australia with tetrahydrocannabinol
present in the driver's
oral fluid or blood.
the applicant asserts the blood test which revealed levels of
tetrahydrocannabinol should be disregarded as the police officer
should not have
taken a sample from him as the applicant was a victim, not the offender. The
applicant submits the blood sample
was taken as the police officer incorrectly
identified him as the
submission is incorrect as I reviewed the police statement of the police officer
who required the blood sample and this identified
the applicant as having been
the victim of a road rage incident that ultimately led to him being knocked off
his motorbike.
Section 66E
Road Traffic Act 1974
permits police to require a blood sample
test from any person in charge of a motor vehicle whose physical condition would
incapable of providing a sample of oral fluid. The powers to obtain
an oral sample are quite broad and under
sections 66C
apply to any
person in charge of a motor vehicle, or any person believed to be in charge of a
vehicle whose use has been an immediate
or proximate cause of personal injury or
damage to property. When requesting the blood sample from the applicant the
police officer
stated "I believe you may have been the driver of a motor vehicle
that was in an incident occasioning injuries consistent with Grevious
) bodily harm and as such I require you supply a sample of your blood
the police officer was able to compel the provision of the blood sample from the
applicant as he was a person in charge
of a vehicle for which there were
reasonable grounds to believe was an immediate or proximate cause of personal
injury or damage
to property. Further, by reason of the applicant's serious
injuries, he was under the care of St John Ambulance staff when police
arrived at the
and not able
to participate in a preliminary oral fluid test pursuant to
section 66C
to provide an oral fluid sample pursuant to
section 66D.
This meant the
blood test was the default option pursuant to
section 66E.
I consider the
police officer lawfully obtained the blood sample.
addition, pursuant to section 18(2) of the Act, an assessor is not bound by
rules or practice as to evidence or procedure but
may inform himself or herself
in any manner he or she thinks fit. In the event I am incorrect and the police
officer was not able
to require the applicant to provide a blood sample, I am
still able to have regard to the results of the blood test.
the applicant raised the issue he was not convicted of any offence. There is no
requirement under section 39 of the Act the
separate offence committed by
an applicant be a proved offence. I have set out the relevant case law at [18],
Determination
accept the applicant sustained significant injuries as a result of a proved
offence. However, the applicant's blood sample taken
shortly after the incident
tested positive for tetrahydrocannabinol (cannabis) and I find he was committing
a separate offence of
driving with prescribed illicit drug in oral fluid or
blood when he sustained those injuries. I adopt the comments of Black DCJ
AW (pseudonym initials) v CD (pseudonym
There is an obvious disparity between the very small quantity of drugs involved
in the appellant's offence and the very serious nature
of the offences committed
against the appellant. I note however that s 39 of the CIC Act does not allow
me, where I am satisfied
that s 39(1) applies to an application, to then
exercise any discretion regarding the proportionality between the two sets of
so as to decide if the appellant ought still to be compensated, at
least to some extent. The terms of the provision are clear that
if s 39(1) is
made out then I 'must not' make an award of compensation in favour of the
This is a case where the punishment did not fit the crime. Nonetheless, having
found that the appellant was committing a separate
offence at the time he
sustained injuries from a different offence, I must not make a compensation
award in favour of the appellant.
to section 39 of the Act, I now refuse this application.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
5 FEBRUARY 2024
Rockingham Peel
Group Emergency Department Continuation Sheet dated 19 April
Yin Wee dated 28 February
Yin Wee dated 28 February
Yin Wee dated 28 February
records Stirk medical Group dated 3 January
RO220003545.
Email from applicant dated 10 November
applicant dated 8 December
from applicant dated 4 January 2024 and 12 January
from applicant dated 8 December
Correspondence David Heilpern Solicitor dated 12 December
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
, Long title.
[2020] WADC 34
AW (pseudonym
initials) v CD (pseudonym initials
[2023] WADC 36
[2022] WADC 96
. See for example:
[2013] WADC 83
– applicant claiming
compensation for sexual penetration with a lineal relative (father) whilst an
adult had committed a separate
offence as she had engaged in consensual sexual
penetration with that lineal relative.
Martin v Martin
[2015] WADC 138
– applicant in
possession of cannabis when assaulted.
Pym v Richardson
[2018] WADC 156
– applicant
struck the offender with a bottle prior to being punched.
[2022] WADC 96
- applicant in possession
of drug paraphernalia in which there was a prohibited drug.
AW (pseudonym initials) v CD
(pseudonym initials
[2023] WADC 36
- applicant committing alleged
offence of being involved in a drug
Attorney General for Western Australia v Her Honour Judge
[2012] WASCA
applicant dated 18 December
Statement John Wood dated 25 November 2022 at
John Wood dated 25 November 2022 at
Statement John Wood dated 25 November 2022 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter