URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
K [2023] WACIC 3 (5 April 2023)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2023] WACIC 3
DELIVERED :
5 APRIL 2023
FILE NO/S :
CIC 239 of 2021
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[2020] WADC 152
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Hansen v Bolton [2017] 25 WADC [14]
Hatfield v Under Secretary for Law (Unreported, WASC Library No 4012, 15
December 1980)
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA 104
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
S v Neumann
(1995) 14 WAR 452
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
for Decision
application dated 12 February 2021, "K" (the applicant) made an application
for compensation for incidents in the period between
31 July 1993 and
1 November 1993. On 14 June 2022, I awarded the applicant $100,000. The
offender, ACC, has advised of his intention
to appeal the decision. The reasons
for my decision are set out below.
application was made pursuant to
sections 12
Injuries Compensation Act 2003
authorises an assessor to award compensation if satisfied the injury claimed
occurred as a consequence of a proved offence.
provides a proved offence is a 'crime, misdemeanour or simple offence of which a
person has been convicted'.
Sections 16
of the Act authorises an assessor to award compensation if satisfied the injury
claimed occurred as a consequence of alleged offences
in certain circumstances.
of the Act defines an alleged offence as a 'crime, misdemeanour
or simple offence of which no person has been
convicted'.
The offences
applicant was born on 10 August 1979 and is currently aged 43 years.
At the time of the offences the applicant was 14 years.
offender was convicted of offences between 31 July 1993 and 1 November
1993 of indecently dealing with a child over 13 years
and under the age of
16 years at Koongamia in the District Court at Perth on 4 April
offender was charged with 30 charges relating to the applicant on various
dates between 31 July 1993 and 13 March 1994.
17 January 2017 counts 1, 2 and 5 were discontinued, these related to
allegations of indecent dealing in the period 31 July 1993
22 August 1993 at Hovea and a date unknown between 31 July 1993 and
13 March 1994 at Koongamia.
further indictment was filed on 16 March 2018, comprising of
27 charges relating to the applicant. The trial proceeded and on
21 March 2018 a further 4 counts, that had not formed part of the
original indictment, were discontinued. The offender was convicted
of a single
offence against the applicant as identified above.
offender was acquitted of over 20 counts relating to the applicant, with
these generally related to allegations of sexual penetration
and indecent
Proved offences
offender was convicted of an incident on a date unknown between 31 July
1993 and 1 November 1993 at Koongamia. This pertained
to the offender
showing the applicant and an associate of the applicant video footage on a
handheld video camera that the offender
owned. The footage showed school aged
boys, some naked in the showers in a changeroom, with the penises of the naked
boys in the
video able to be seen. The offender told the applicant and his
associate that he had shot the video himself at school. At the time
incidents the offender was aged 21 years.
Alleged offences
applicant also alleges on the same date the offender had showed him porn
containing boys and children. On other occasions he
had showed the Applicant
gay porn, normal porn and child porn. These did not form part of the offences
for which the offender was
statement records the alleged offender mainly showed him child porn with young
children in them. The offender was not charged
with these incidents, but I
accept that they occurred and whilst they did not form part of the award were
indicative of behaviour
generally of the alleged offender.
am satisfied a proved offence as defined in the Act was constituted. I am also
satisfied alleged offences, which had been discontinued,
were likely to have
occurred and that alleged offences as defined by
of the Act were
constituted.
Extension of time
application was lodged by the applicant on 12 February 2021. The offence
for which the offender was convicted occurred in November
1993. This is a delay
of 28 years.
section 9(2)
of the Act an application for compensation must be made
within three years after the date on the offence relates was committed; or
related to more than one offence, the date on which the last one of those
offences were committed. However, an assessor may
allow an application for
compensation after the three year period if she or she think it is just to do so
on any conditions that
he or she thinks it is just to impose.
the last incident alleged occurred in 1994, the application was required to be
lodged by 1997. The application was in fact lodged
on 12 February 2021.
Accordingly, the applicant requires an extension of time within which to bring
his application for compensation.
Honour Judge Herron, DCJ outlined the factors relevant to the exercise of the
courts discretion in considering when it is appropriate
to allow an extension of
Factors that
may be relevant to the exercise of the court's discretion under
the Act include:
(a) the history of and background to the proposed
application;
(b) the length of the delay;
(c) the reasons for the delay;
(d) the nature of the proposed application;
(e) the consequences for the parties of grant or refusal of an extension of
time, including the extent of any prejudice to the respondent;
(f) the prospects of the compensation application succeeding; and
(g) whether injustice will be suffered if an extension of time is
accepted the applicant had had a troubled life since the incident being
incarcerated from an early age. The applicant had substance
abuse issues, as
well as ongoing mental health issues. He did not report the incident to police
until his mid-thirties, after which
time the offender was prosecuted.
applicant was only released from prison in 2019 and found the process of
providing evidence about the incidents to police difficult.
applicant recorded in his victim impact statement he did not feel mentally
capable of bringing the application immediately after
the conclusion of the
trial against the offender as he did not want to remember the incidents again.
He also recalled difficulties
in obtaining assistance due to his ongoing
incarceration and hospitalisations.
accepted it was just and reasonable in the circumstances to grant an extension
of time in which the applicant could lodge his application
compensation.
support of the application, the applicant provided the following
(a) District Court transcript of sentencing.
(b) Statement of applicant dated 20 January 2021.
(c) District Court indictment and list of witnesses.
(d) Applicant's police statement dated 28 August 2015.
(e) Report of Diane Paddon-Jones, Southwest Psychological Solutions dated
27 April 2020.
(f) Letter from Annie Rickman, Southwest Support Coordination, undated.
(g) Psychiatric report of Dr Adam Brett, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated
10 May 2017.
addition, a notice was issued to the Department of Corrections for a copy of all
documents relating to the applicant, in particular
his medical records.
applicable these documents will be referred to further below.
the statement of the applicant dated 20 January 2021, the applicant states,
that he had a good childhood and was a happy kid with
older sisters and that his
parents had separated when he was four. He participated in little athletics and
judo and was always happy
and safe. He confirmed that he suffered from
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and was a rebellious child, but
prior to the incident he had moved from his mother's home to live with his
father. He recalls being happy living with his father,
having two step-brothers
and one step-sister.
relation to the circumstances of the incident, the applicant recalls that in
1993 when he was 13 years he met the offender. He
identified himself as
"Adam Troy" and he had met him on the bus. The applicant recalls he later found
out the offender's true name
was in fact ACC.
recalls he hung out with the offender as he thought he was cool because he was
older, tough and strong.
applicant recalled the offender appeared to be doing things that seemed fun to
him at the time and that the offender had lots
of cool stuff and would often buy
alcohol for the applicant. The offender had a car which the applicant thought
was great as he
could drive, and he would often go to the applicant's house to
pick him up.
offender told the applicant on occasions that he was a police officer and at the
time the applicant said he believed him. He
recalls that in 1993 the offender
took the applicant and another boy to a bedroom. He remembered the bedroom was
separate to the
main structure of the house that the offender lived in and was
like a granny flat out the back.
applicant recalled that the offender got a video camera out, showed them the
video, he said that he took. The video was of young
boys showering. He said
the video was from a school.
applicant recalled the offender showing him lots of pornographic videos and
pictures, touching him and that he did a lot of things
to him on many occasions.
applicant recorded in his statement of 20 January 2021 the abuse started in
August 1993 and finished a week or two before he
went to gaol for the first
time in 1994. He recalls he got away from the offender by going to gaol and
when he was released he hung
out with a new group of friends. At the time it
was difficult for him to talk about what happened. The applicant recalled there
were seven other incidents which did not form part of the charges against the
regards to the impact of the events, the applicant records following the
offender showing him pornography for the first time,
it was the beginning of the
end of his life. He records in his statement that since the incident he has
been in and out of jail
and mental hospitals or homeless. It was his perception
that following the incidents he started to act out.
the age of 14 years the applicant was placed in detention for stealing
cars. It was the applicant’s belief the offender
had ruined his life and
brought him as a child into an adult world. He did not want to watch the
videos, but the offender made him
watch. He did not understand what was
happening. The applicant records in his victim impact statement every
relationship since
that time has been strong and confused and that sex is
associated with negative feelings and confusion. He records he has flashbacks
during sex, struggling with erections and during the majority of his sexual
relationships he has been on drugs or out of control.
He recalls that the
pornography and what the offender did affected him and that as a result and a
way to block out the trauma, he
started to inject methamphetamines at age
19 years and continued to take drugs, including methamphetamines on a daily
basis to age
age 21 years he had a drug induced psychosis and had had other periods in
which he suffered from drug induced psychosis. He had
abused drugs and had been
addicted to drugs. He recalls being in mental hospitals a number of times
connected to his drug use.
He also records as a result of taking
methamphetamines to block out the trauma he often felt agitated and aggressive
and could recall
talking about the devil. He records following his release in
2019 he had counselling which has assisted.
applicant records "I still struggle everyday with the trauma. I have traumatic
thoughts constantly running through my head and
I have extremely difficult time
with it. I have thoughts of pornography and about being raped or murdered by
men." He also records
that after the offences occurred, he was not able to
continue with his education. He started a job as a spray painter, but struggled
to concentrate and spent time in and out of gaol. This occurred in his opinion
as he became angry and violet towards grown men as
he associated the offender
with grown men. He stated not a single day passes in which he does not have
horrible thoughts about the
indicated above, such was the trauma caused that he only first reported the
incidents to the police in 2015 after which time police
proceeded to prosecute
the offender and the case was concluded in 2018.
Method of assessment
of the Act sets out the general powers of an assessor
(1) On a compensation application in respect of injury suffered by a victim as a
consequence of the commission of an offence, an
assessor may award such
compensation that the assessor is satisfied is just for the injury and for any
loss also suffered.
of the Act defines 'satisfied' to mean 'satisfied on the balance of
probabilities'.
assessing the amount of compensation which should be awarded the Court should
have regard solely to the injury suffered by the
applicant in consequence of the
commission of the offence. The amount is not to be fixed as punishment of the
offender or as an
expression of sympathy for the victim (
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79).
amount of damages for non-economic loss must be fair and reasonable compensation
for the injuries received by the applicant and
the disabilities caused, having
regard to current general ideas of fairness and moderation:
Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Underwood v
[2018] WADC 13
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA
[107]. The amount must be proportionate to the situation of the particular
[107]. Having considered the information
available to me, I found the applicant suffered a clear psychological injury
with various
reports giving the applicant a diagnosis of schizoaffective
disorder, with a differential diagnosis of recurrent drug induced psychotic
episodes; polysubstance abuse; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and
dissocial (anti-social) personality disorder.
decline in mental state seems largely to have coincided with the event for which
the offender was charged and convicted. Whilst
the applicant had had challenging
behaviours, his psychological condition spiralled after the incidents with him
being diagnosed
as suffering from bi-polar effective disorder and the applicant
embarking on a path of drug abuse and delinquent behaviour.
applicant himself has described his struggles since the incident as identified
the applicant did suffer from ADHD at the time when he was suffering from issues
at school, I accept the acceleration in his
behaviour and deterioration in
mental state was triggered by the incident for which the offender was convicted
and for those incidents
for which he was charged and the matters then
discontinued.
Psychological
symptoms are compensable as defined in the Act. In
Underwood v
, Gething, DCT comments the term 'injury' in sections, 12, 13
and 16 include "mental and nervous shock": (CIC
section 3).
phrase contemplates the impact of the offence on the mind or nervous system:
Hatfield v Under Secretary for Law
(Unreported, WASC Library No
4012, 15 December 1980), Burt, J. It refers to 'mental or emotional harm as
opposed to physical injury
or bodily harm':
S v Neumann
(1995) 14 WAR 452
[463]. It must be of a more enduring character so as to
amount to an injury, as opposed to a mere emotional reaction.
am satisfied that the applicant's symptoms were enduring in character and
continued to this day so as to amount to mental and nervous
shock for the
purposes of the definition of 'injury' under
of the Act. This
was exemplified by his inability to deal with the incidents or even acknowledge
they had occurred until his mid-thirties.
accepted the applicant suffered and continues to suffer from a significant
psychological injury which has had an ongoing impact
on his everyday life.
maximum amount of compensation that could be awarded for a single offence
at the time of the incident was $50,000
of the Act). As the
injury occurred to the applicant as a consequence of two or more offences
committed by one person that are not
related offences within the
then the amount awarded must not in aggregate exceed
of the Act).
determined the appropriate award for general damage injuries suffered by the
applicant to be is
taking into
account the jurisdictional maximum permitted under
for more than one offence.
apportioned $50,000 to the proved offence for which the offender was convicted
and $50,000 to the alleged offences I was satisfied
ordered pursuant to
section 45(1)(b)
of the Act that the offender, ACC be
limited to pay $20,000.
I made the compensation award, I considered it appropriate to prohibit
publication likely to lead to the identification of the
applicant due to the
nature of the offences. I hereby extend the prohibition on publication of
anything likely to lead to the identification
of the applicant to these
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
R Capararo, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
5 APRIL 2023
[2017] 25 WADC
[2020] WADC 152.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (161 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter