URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/152.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HSDO -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 152 (22 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 152
& 11 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
SEPTEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 80 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CC PE 3576 - 3578 of
law - Appeal against sentence - Juvenile offender - One count of aggravated
armed robbery contrary to s 392(c) and s 392(d)
and two counts of
grievous bodily harm contrary to s 297(1) of the
Criminal Code
committed with co‑offender - Parity
principle - Whether the sentencing judge erred in law in misstating the parity
- Principles of resentencing a juvenile offender in appellate court -
Relevant statutory context in resentencing a juvenile offender
Legislation:
(WA), s 392(c), s 392(d), s
Offenders Act 1994
Sentence set
Appellant resentenced to
conditionally suspended
imprisonment
Application for bail
Representation:
P Tehan KC & S
Solicitors:
Nigams Legal
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
is a child offender appeal against sentence.
16 May 2025, following a two‑day trial over 12 and 13 May
2025 before Quail P in the Children's Court of Western Australia,
appellant was convicted of three offences that occurred on 16 June
first offence was one of aggravated armed robbery contrary to s 392(c)
and (d) of the
Criminal Code
(Code). The appellant, while armed with a knife and in the company of JB, stole
from DJ a quantity of leafy green material
(said to be cannabis), while doing
bodily harm to DJ. The appellant was convicted of this offence on the basis
that he was an aider
pursuant to s 7(c) of the Code. The other two
offences were that the appellant unlawfully did grievous bodily harm to DJ and
contrary to s 297(1) of the Code. JB, the appellant's
co‑offender, stabbed DJ in the stomach with a knife. JB also stabbed
in his leg, wrist and hand. While it was JB that stabbed DJ and RM, the
appellant was convicted of the grievous bodily harm offences
on the basis that
the appellant was an offender pursuant to s 8 of the Code.
appellant was about 16 years and 11 months old at the time of the
appellant was sentenced on 11 June 2025. At that time the appellant was
17 years and 10 months old. Accordingly, the relevant
regime to be applied by the sentencing judge was that provided for under the
Young Offenders Act 1994
appellant was sentenced to 15 months' immediate detention as
armed robbery
and s 392(d)
imprisonment
(concurrent)
bodily harm - DJ
from 11 months for totality)
bodily harm - RM
from 9 months for totality)
sentence of 15 months' immediate detention was backdated to 12 May
2025 to take into account the time the appellant had already
spent in custody.
The sentencing judge noted that the appellant was to be eligible for release
under a supervised release order
after serving 7 and a half months of his
sentence. Accordingly, the appellant was to become eligible for release on a
release order from about 26 December 2025.
appellant's co‑offender, JB, was sentenced earlier by Barone DCJ. JB
pleaded guilty to the three offences. JB received
a 23% discount pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1995
(WA) on account of his pleas of guilty. After the 23% discount, and taking into
account all other relevant sentencing factors and
considerations,
Barone DCJ sentenced JB to a term of 2 years' immediate detention.
Barone DCJ also ordered that JB be made eligible
for a supervised release
order after serving 10 months' immediate detention.
individual sentences imposed on JB in relation to the common offences with the
armed robbery
and s 392(d)
imprisonment
(concurrent)
bodily harm - DJ
from 18 months for totality)
bodily harm - RM
from 18 months for totality)
was also sentenced for a fourth offence. JB was charged with, and pleaded
guilty to, offending consisting of assaulting a public
officer contrary to
s 318(1)(d) of the Code. JB head‑butted a youth custody officer on
12 July 2024 while in custody at Banksia
Hill Detention Centre.
Barone DCJ imposed a term of 3 months' immediate detention for that
offence. For totality reasons, although
it concerned separate unrelated
offending, this 3‑month term of immediate detention was to be served
concurrently with the
term of 2 years' immediate detention for the
offending in common with the appellant.
the time JB was sentenced (ie 2 October 2024) he was 16 years and
10 months old. JB was a sentenced prisoner at the time of his
sentencing -
JB was on a supervised release order at the time that he offended with the
appellant. The term of 2 years' immediate
detention was to be served
cumulatively on an existing term of immediate detention that was to expire on
10 January 2025.
were two grounds of appeal. Shorn of particulars they
learned sentencing judge erred in law by finding the parity principle required a
consideration of what the co‑offender would
regard as a proper and fair
sentence for the appellant in the circumstances.
learned sentencing judge imposed a sentence that was, in all of the
circumstances, in breach of the principle of parity insofar
as it gave rise to a
legitimate sense of grievance on the part of the appellant, having regard
sentence imposed upon the appellant's co‑offender;
overall culpability of the appellant as distinguished by that of his
co‑offender.
8 August 2025 Mazza JA granted leave to appeal on each of
grounds 1 and 2. Mazza JA also made an urgent appeal order. Such an
order was necessary to ensure that the appeal was heard and determined before
the appellant became eligible for a supervised release
order. The appeal was
heard on 8 September 2025. On 8 September 2025 the court adjourned
the appeal hearing to 11 September 2025
and requested that a community
corrections officer attend at that time to provide an oral pre‑sentence
report to assist in
any resentencing of the appellant.
11 September 2025 a senior adult community corrections officer attended the
appeal hearing. In the short time available to the
officer she had prepared a
thorough written pre‑sentence report. The officer spoke briefly to her
report. The court was much
assisted by the written and oral pre‑sentence
report. We wish to express our gratitude to the Department of Justice -
Services and the particular officer concerned for the prompt and
comprehensive pre‑sentence report that was provided to the
court on an
urgent basis.
hearing further submissions on 11 September 2025 the appeal was allowed.
The court was satisfied that appellable error had
been established in terms of
ground 1. The sentencing discretion having miscarried the court proceeded
to resentence. The resentencing
occurred in a context where the appellant had
already spent four months in custody. The four months already served in custody
taken into account in resentencing the appellant to a total effective
sentence of 10 months' imprisonment to be conditionally suspended
period of 9 months.
court said that it would provide written reasons for allowing the appeal and the
resentencing as soon as practicable. These
are our reasons for allowing the
appeal and resentencing the appellant.
The circumstances of the offending
sentencing the appellant, the sentencing judge relied on his Honour's
earlier factual findings in concluding that the appellant
was guilty of the
offences (sentencing ts 20).
summary, on 16 June 2024 the appellant and JB were both 16 years of
age. The appellant is slightly older than JB. The appellant
and JB lived on
the same street and were friends. That friendship involved mutual and ongoing
illicit drug use. Prior to 16 June
2024 the appellant and JB had obtained
drugs, including cannabis, on numerous occasions. Mostly the appellant and JB
paid for the
drugs. There were, however, a few occasions on which they stole
cannabis by 'doing a runner' at an arranged meeting with a drug
dealer (trial
ts 177 ‑ 178).
on 16 June 2024 the appellant had been involved in a separate incident
which saw him go to hospital. After discharge, the
appellant took some
prescription drugs and possibly other drugs. The sentencing judge was satisfied
that, immediately after the
offending, the appellant presented as someone who
was affected by substance use. However, the appellant was not heavily
intoxicated
(trial ts 178).
appellant and JB decided to obtain some cannabis (trial ts 179).
arranged a cannabis deal using a messaging app. The deal was arranged with RM.
JB told the appellant what he was doing; and
the appellant was a willing
participant in the plan. The plan went beyond a mere plan to obtain the
cannabis. The appellant and
JB formed a plan to steal the cannabis. They
discussed using threats to steal the cannabis. JB, to the appellant's
knowledge, had
a knife. There was a discussion between the appellant and JB
appellant and JB went to a Perth metropolitan shopping centre to steal a knife
for the purpose of the appellant using it to make
threats to obtain cannabis
from the drug dealers they were about to meet (trial ts 179). The
appellant stole a packet of knives
from a department store in the shopping
centre. The appellant pulled the package apart while walking through the
shopping centre.
When, in doing so, the knives fell to the floor, the appellant
picked up the largest knife. The appellant and JB then left the
centre. The sentencing judge was satisfied that the appellant picked up the
largest knife because it was the most threatening
ts 180 ‑ 181).
drug dealers (RM and DJ) were waiting for the appellant and JB. The drug
dealers were in a black utility vehicle owned by DJ.
DJ's role was to drive the
drug dealers to meet JB and then to hand over the cannabis. RM's role was to
collect the money. The
drug dealers had approximately four ounces of cannabis
in a brown paper bag (trial ts 179 ‑ 180).
appellant and JB approached the black utility vehicle at about 2.33 pm on
16 June 2024. JB was in the lead. The appellant was
JB. When approaching the utility vehicle the appellant put his hand close to
where he had concealed the stolen
knife. JB climbed into the utility vehicle.
The appellant was directly behind JB. The appellant removed the knife from his
hip area where it had been concealed. The appellant held the knife in
front of him at shoulder height. While this was happening
JB sat down in the
passenger seat of the utility vehicle. There was shouting and JB stabbed DJ in
the stomach. In the next few
seconds, immediately after DJ was stabbed, JB
stabbed RM in the leg and slashed RM's hand and wrist. JB took the brown bag
the cannabis. The appellant assisted JB to get out of the utility
vehicle. JB came out of the utility vehicle, both the appellant
their knives at waist level, and the two moved away in the direction they had
come from originally. JB had the brown
bag containing the cannabis in his right
hand. As JB and the appellant started to move away the appellant turned to the
vehicle and said, in a statement directed to DJ and RM: 'I will stab
you, my nigger' (trial ts 181 ‑ 186).
sentencing judge was not satisfied that the appellant saw JB stab DJ. However,
the appellant did see the violent movement that
followed in the next two seconds
as JB grabbed the bag containing the cannabis and started to move out of the
passenger seat (trial
ts 184). The sentencing judge was also satisfied
that the appellant saw JB stab RM in his leg (trial ts 185).
located by the police. The appellant did not attempt to
get away from the
police at all and was cooperative with them (trial ts 185).
sentencing judge made a series of formal findings as to the elements of the
offending. Among other things these included findings
that the sentencing judge
was satisfied
appellant and JB had a plan to steal cannabis and to use their knives to
threaten the people who had the cannabis to hand it over
- a plan that they put
into action in the manner summarised above (trial
ts 185 ‑ 186).
stole the cannabis as the principal offender and the appellant aided JB by his
presence and by producing the knife and holding
it in a threatening manner
(trial ts 186).
appellant and JB were joined in a common unlawful purpose. This went beyond
obtaining illicit drugs. There was a more serious
common unlawful purpose in
that the appellant and JB had a specific intention to obtain illicit drugs by
way of armed threats of
violence (trial ts 186).
grievous bodily harm offences were committed during the prosecution of the
common unlawful purpose that existed in the aggravated
armed robbery offending
(trial ts 187).
was a probable consequence of the appellant and JB's plan, and their common
unlawful purpose, that JB would aggressively use the
knife in order to get the
cannabis from the drug dealers and that, in that process, one or both of the
drug dealers would be stabbed
and sustain grievous bodily harm (trial
Accordingly,
the various elements of the aggravated armed robbery charge were established
beyond reasonable doubt. So too were the
elements of the grievous bodily harm
offences. In respect of the latter offences the sentencing judge found that the
appellant was
guilty as a
offender (trial ts 187).
Importantly,
however, the sentencing judge accepted that the appellant did not know that the
stabbings were going to happen (trial
ts 176 ‑ 177).
Moreover, when sentencing the appellant, the sentencing judge made the further
finding that the appellant did
not intend or expect that the stabbings would
happen (sentencing ts 26). The appellant did not know that the stabbings
would occur
(sentencing ts 27).
trial there were admissions that JB used a sharp instrument (the knife) to cause
grievous bodily harm to DJ and RM (trial ts 6
163 ‑ 164). Accordingly, the sentencing judge did not make
findings as to the precise nature of the injuries sustained
by DJ and RM.
However, further evidence was provided for the purpose of sentencing. DJ
suffered: (1) a 3‑cm stab wound to
his abdomen - without medical
intervention this would have resulted in permanent muscular impairment;
(2) a wound to his epigastric
artery - this resulted in 800 mL of
blood loss, something that was life threatening without medical intervention;
and (3) a 2‑cm
laceration to his liver, requiring surgical
intervention. RM suffered: (1) a laceration to his left forearm resulting
in the severing
of his ulnar artery and ulnar nerve, and flexor tendons. The
former was life threatening. The latter may result in the loss of
function to
his left hand even with surgery; and (2) a laceration to his right hand
extensor digitorum communis tendon and sagittal
band. See sentencing
ts 15 ‑ 16.
and RM provided victim impact statements. The victim impact statements are also
before this court. The sentencing judge accepted
that DJ and RM had suffered
and continued to suffer serious and substantial adverse physical and
psychological consequences as a
result of their injuries (sentencing
ts 21 ‑ 22).
The appellant's personal circumstances
appellant was about 16 years and 11 months old at the time of the
offending and 17 years and 10 months old when sentenced in
Children's Court of Western Australia.
appellant was born and raised in New Zealand. He is the eldest of three
children to his parents' union. The appellant has two
younger brothers. The
appellant came from a functional and supportive family. His parents had worked
and continued to work full‑time
to give the appellant and his siblings the
best possible opportunity in life. The appellant and his family moved to
Western Australia
in July 2022 to make a fresh life. The appellant had
experienced various issues in New Zealand and, more generally, opportunities
were available in Perth for a more stable environment for the appellant's family
(sentencing ts 22).
sentencing judge observed that the appellant was 'good' academically. However,
the appellant had struggled with bullying at
school in New Zealand. There were
also initial issues when the appellant was enrolled at a large public high
school in Perth. However,
the appellant himself had no suspensions or other
recorded negative behavioural issues. Regrettably, the appellant stopped
that school sooner than he should have. The appellant had, however,
completed various trade certificates and had also been employed
(sentencing ts 22 ‑ 23).
more detailed medical, educational and psychological history of the appellant
was provided in a neuropsychological assessment dated
19 April 2024 that
was before the sentencing judge. Among other
appellant suffered a significant head injury, at the age of 14 years,
as a result of a car crash as well as numerous minor head
injuries due to
fainting episodes while in his early teenage years. However, while CT and MR
medical imaging revealed a cyst, the
appellant's brain was otherwise
structurally unremarkable.
appellant had four in‑patient stays at mental health units in Perth which
were necessitated by deliberate self‑harm
behaviours. The appellant had a
history of anxiety and depression. (The character references refer to a fifth
stay after the neuropsychological assessment.)
appellant reported on a history of substance abuse. He smoked cannabis
regularly and also liked to use mushrooms. The appellant
also took prescription
medicine (such as Xanax and Vyvanse) without a prescription. He admitted to a
vulnerability to peer pressure
to take such substances despite insight that this
behaviour was self‑destructive.
author of the neuropsychological assessment observed that the appellant did not
show any signs of aggression or pro‑violent
attitudes. In the opinion of
the author, the appellant's psychological wellbeing was significantly impacted
by years of bullying
in New Zealand, potentially resulting in
post‑traumatic stress disorder. However, the appellant was not a
naturally aggressive
adolescent. The author ventured that it was the
appellant's substance use that resulted in his aggressive behaviour. The author
opined that the appellant was highly sociable but also impressionable and wanted
to please and seek the approval of those around
him. The author also noted that
the appellant's reported history was potentially consistent with attention
deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD).
appellant was in fact diagnosed with ADHD in 2024. However, the sentencing
judge was not satisfied that there was any causal
link between the appellant's
ADHD and his offending (sentencing ts 24 ‑ 25).
sentencing judge referred to the appellant's struggles with substance abuse as
having started when he was relatively young (sentencing
discussions with a senior youth justice officer, in early 2025, the appellant
disclosed that he began experimenting with
alcohol and cannabis when he was
13 years old. Over the ensuing three years the appellant's substance abuse
had increased significantly.
The appellant had also experimented with
hallucinogens, ecstasy, Xanax and the non‑prescribed use of pharmaceutical
However, as will be seen, following engagement in rehabilitative
activities after the subject offending, the appellant had ceased
illicit substances altogether. Nonetheless, at the time of the offending - and
in the months leading up to it - the appellant
was seriously affected by
substance use and was self‑harming (sentencing ts 25).
appellant had what was described as a 'minor' prior criminal record (sentencing
ts 28). The appellant had been fined for possession
of stolen or
unlawfully obtained property and had participated, successfully, in a Drug Court
program for other offending in respect
of which no conviction was recorded.
Also, during the early hours of the morning of the subject offending, the
appellant committed
two common assaults for which he had been sentenced to a
six‑month youth community based order as at the time of the sentencing
the subject offending. Of more significance to the sentencing exercise was that
the appellant was on bail in respect of this
offending at the time that he was
involved in the subject offending.
was a large body of material before the sentencing judge as to the
rehabilitative activities undertaken by the appellant.
It is readily apparent
that, by the time of his sentencing, the appellant had achieved significant
gains. The sentencing judge was
satisfied as to the appellant's positive
progress and that the appellant had rehabilitated to the extent that he had been
from drugs after having completed a four‑month residential
program with Drug and Alcohol Youth Services (DAYS) in late 2024
(sentencing
is convenient to defer a more detailed consideration of the extensive
rehabilitative activities undertaken by the appellant until
later in these
The co-offender's personal circumstances
appellant's grounds of appeal raise the parity principle. It is necessary, in
that respect, to consider JB's personal circumstances.
The sentencing judge did
so by reference to the transcript of the sentencing hearing before
Barone DCJ.
was 16 years and 7 months old at the time of the offending and
16 years and 10 months old at the time of his sentencing. JB pleaded
guilty and, as has been mentioned, received a 23% discount on his head sentences
on account of his pleas of guilty. JB was also
found to have some additional
limited remorse (sentencing ts 27).
sentencing judge observed that JB's and the appellant's personal circumstances
had some similarities but also had differences
(sentencing ts 27).
His Honour did not elaborate on the similarities. It is apparent, however,
that - like the appellant - JB had
a history of mental health issues. JB had
been diagnosed with ADHD, anxiety and depression and also had a history of
Also, like the appellant, JB had a history of substance abuse.
JB started using cannabis when he was 12 years of age and moved on
drugs. Another similarity is that JB was described as an intellectually capable
person. There was evidence in a detention
management report before
Barone DCJ to the effect that JB had been participating in educational
activities while in custody and had
been commended for his outstanding attitude
and engagement.
terms of the dissimilarities in personal circumstances, JB's prior criminal
history was more extensive and more serious than the
prior criminal history of
the appellant. The sentencing judge correctly characterised this as a 'much
worse' record of offending
(sentencing ts 27 ‑ 28).
Relevantly, it
offence of aggravated robbery (committed on 19 March 2023).
offences of aggravated armed robbery (committed on 14 July 2023 and
16 November 2023).
offence of assaulting a public officer (committed on 25 July 2023).
offence of possession of a prohibited drug (cannabis) with intent to sell or
supply (committed on 5 August 2023).
sentencing judge observed that, although JB's record did not aggravate his
position, it did mean that there was considerably
more mitigation available to
the appellant than there was to JB (sentencing ts 28). We understand this
to be a reference to the
relative need for personal deterrence as between the
appellant and JB. The sentencing judge confirmed as much later in his
remarks (sentencing ts 28).
important distinguishing feature, as between the appellant and JB, was that JB
committed the offences on 16 June 2024 notwithstanding
that he was on a
supervised release order at the time. True it is that the appellant was on bail
following the incident that had
occurred in the early hours of 16 June
2024. There is, in that respect, a degree to which both co‑offenders'
offending was
aggravated by a disregard for the law. However, as counsel for
the State correctly accepted, this aggravating factor was of comparatively
lesser weight in relation to the appellant (appeal ts 44).
should also be remembered that, at the time of his sentencing before
Barone DCJ, JB was being sentenced for his subsequent offence
of assaulting
a public officer contrary to s 318(1)(d) of the Code in addition to the
three offences committed in common with the
The sentencing remarks
is not necessary to recount the whole of the sentencing remarks. Mention has
already been made of the objective circumstances
of the appellant's offending
and the sentencing judge's findings as to the appellant's and JB's personal
circumstances. In referring
to the sentencing remarks, it is appropriate to
defer the sentencing judge's explanation of the operation of the parity
What was said by the sentencing judge in this respect will be
reproduced when dealing with ground 1. However, after dealing with
discrete findings of the sentencing judge, it is appropriate at this juncture to
say something more of the rehabilitative activities
undertaken by the appellant
prior to his sentencing.
sentencing judge described the appellant's offending as 'shocking' and 'serious'
(sentencing ts 23, 28). These are apt descriptors.
Each offence was a
serious example of offending of its kind. The sentencing judge found that JB
was more culpable than the appellant
in relation to the grievous bodily harm
offences. However, the objective circumstances of the co‑offenders'
culpability in
relation to the aggravated armed robbery offence was 'very
similar' (sentencing ts 27).
terms of mitigating factors, the sentencing judge mentioned the
was to the appellant's credit that he had limited the issues at trial
(sentencing ts 20).
was some remorse on the part of the appellant notwithstanding that he had
contested his guilt (sentencing ts 26 ‑ 27 -
sentencing ts 20). In that respect, a key issue at trial was the
attribution of criminal responsibility for the events
that had occurred. In
finding that there was remorse the sentencing judge had regard to the
appellant's letters to the victims and
the court (sentencing ts 26).
appellant's rehabilitation was well underway (sentencing ts 21 - see also
sentencing ts 24 ‑ 27). However, it was a work
in progress
and the appellant had to engage with continued counselling and needed further
support (sentencing ts 26).
appellant had been compliant with the youth community based order to which he
had been subject since 12 February 2025 - an order
that included a strict
24‑hour curfew (sentencing ts 24). (In fact the appellant had been
on a 24‑hour curfew from 27
August 2024 as part of his bail
conditions.)
appellant had been undertaking weekly psychological counselling and had
psychiatric support, engaging with a psychiatrist every
four to six weeks to
review medications (sentencing ts 24). (A report tendered during the
sentencing hearing confirmed that the
appellant had engaged in a 'meaningful
way' with this process and there had been significant improvement in his mental
author of the report, while acknowledging that there was more work
to be done, stated that the appellant had 'achieved significant
sentencing judge observed that the appellant had 'grown up a lot' and 'gained a
great deal of maturity' after being remanded
in custody having been charged with
the subject offences (sentencing ts 20, 23). The sentencing judge was
satisfied that the appellant
was a different person to the boy who had committed
the offences (sentencing ts 25). His Honour summarised the change in
the appellant
by stating that the time in custody at Banksia Hill Detention
Centre had had a 'salutary effect' on the appellant. The appellant
had insight
into his drug use and its effect on him and his family. The sentencing judge
was satisfied that the appellant was completely
committed to and focused on his
future and ongoing rehabilitation (sentencing ts 26).
materials before the sentencing judge as to the rehabilitative activities
undertaken by the appellant included Youth Justice
Service court reports dated
7 February 2025 and 22 May 2025; a detention management report dated
9 June 2025 as to the appellant's
time in custody on remand at Banksia Hill
Detention Centre; a report dated 26 May 2025 from Thomas Petit (an
accredited mental health
social worker with YouthLink); a report dated
28 May 2025 from Dr Laef Howell (a YouthLink psychiatrist); a letter
from the Y Vocational
School dated 28 May 2025; and numerous character
references. The latter category of materials included particularly
comprehensive
and candid assessments by the appellant's mother and father
detailing the struggles experienced by the appellant in relation to drug
mental health issues and the appellant's recent progress in dealing with those
matters. There was also a character reference
from a DAYS case manager.
appellant was referred to some of the support services before the subject
offending. The reports from these sources underline
the transformation of the
appellant. The materials evidence a marked change in the appellant before and
after the offending. For
example, Mr Petit referred to the appellant's
initial engagement with YouthLink in May 2024 as 'superficial' and the
appellant's
attitude was characterised as one of 'ambivalence'. The appellant
was said to have very limited self‑awareness, impulse control
reflexivity. However, post‑June 2024 - having started psychotherapy
treatment together with drug abstinence, a suitable
medication regime,
compliance with bail conditions and psychosocial intervention with DAYS -
Mr Petit reported that the appellant
had a changed presentation.
Mr Petit referred to the appellant appearing humbler and more vulnerable
with a genuine engagement and
curiosity in therapy, active learning and personal
growth. The appellant had started to identify healthy goals, plan for his
practice emotion‑regulation and self‑care techniques, and
learn about managing his ADHD. The appellant was also increasingly
experience a different and pro‑social lifestyle.
Y School similarly reported an initial ambivalence but subsequent engagement and
progress on the part of the appellant. The
appellant enrolled in the Y School
in October 2023 after referral by the Drug Court program. The Y School
reported that initially
the appellant participated in the Y School program 'with
varying levels of engagement and success'. It was suggested that this was
influenced by the appellant's continuing drug use and subsequent mental health
issues. However, following re‑engagement in
the 10 months
immediately preceding the sentencing, the appellant's efforts were said to be
'astounding'. The Y School referred
to the events of 16 June 2024 as a
'critical turning point' and 'the start of sincere efforts to make ... needed
changes'. It was
said that the appellant's engagement in the Y School had
'grown exponentially'. The appellant was engaging with staff, addressing
literacy and numeracy gaps, mentoring other students and participating in a
Department of Fire and Emergency Services volunteer course.
These matters
informed a finding by the sentencing judge that the appellant was 'flourishing'
in the alternative education stream
offered by the Y School (sentencing ts
DAYS case manager said that, on the appellant's re‑entry into the DAYS
residential rehabilitation program, the appellant
displayed a higher level of
motivation to change - the appellant was said to have expressed recognition of
the seriousness of what
could happen as a result of his substance abuse
appellant's more recent attitude and commitment to rehabilitation is evident
from his response to pain management following shoulder
surgery on 9 April
2025. The appellant refused to take opioid prescription drugs as pain relief.
The appellant restricted his pain
relief to mindfulness and paracetamol so as to
avoid the use of potentially addictive drugs.
addition to the appellant becoming and remaining drug free following the subject
offending - undoubtedly the most significant
step in the appellant's
rehabilitation - the materials before the sentencing judge disclosed
appellant completed the DAYS three‑month residential rehabilitation
program in November 2024 and thereafter completed a
further month of the
program at his own volition.
Y School had offered the appellant a one‑year scholarship with the aim of
training him as a mentor to support other struggling
young people.
appellant had been interviewed and had met the criteria for a transition to work
project by Programmed Facility Management (a
project training young people
across a range of property management pathways with apprenticeship
opportunities). The specific role
was within the gardening and maintenance
the offending the appellant had started training in a boxing gym. The director
of the gym, describing himself as a coach and
mentor to the appellant, provided
a character reference. The appellant was described as a 'valuable member' of
the gym's team who
had taken on a mentoring role with younger participants in
the gym's program. This included working with gym participants through
National Disability Insurance Scheme. The director said that the appellant's
growth and commitment made him a 'standout individual'.
The gym had offered the
appellant a scholarship to continue to be a role model.
materials we have referred to amply justified the sentencing judge's conclusion
that the appellant presented at sentencing as
a changed young person from the
drug‑using and mentally health challenged 16‑year‑old who had
committed the offending
some 12 months earlier. The rehabilitative
activities successfully undertaken by the appellant were a substantial
mitigating factor.
While it must be accepted, as Dr Howell opined and the
sentencing judge stated, that the appellant's rehabilitation was a work in
progress and there was more work to be done, by the time of his sentencing the
appellant had already made substantial progress towards
rehabilitation.
The parity principle
legal principles applicable to the parity principle are well established. The
following outline of principles by Buss P (Mazza
JA agreeing) in
has been adopted or reproduced in this court many
The object of the parity principle is to ensure appropriate consistency in the
sentencing of co‑offenders. The critical question
is whether disparity or
lack of disparity in the sentencing outcome is capable of giving rise to a
legitimate or justifiable sense
of grievance, or to give the appearance in the
mind of an objective observer that justice has not been done. The applicable
is objective not subjective. The application and effect of relevant
sentencing principles must be taken into account in determining
whether there is
a legitimate or justifiable sense of grievance.
An appellate court may interfere, on the ground of a marked and unjustifiable
disparity or on the ground of an absence of a marked
and justifiable disparity,
with a sentencing judge's exercise of the sentencing discretion even though the
sentence in question,
viewed in isolation, would not necessarily be regarded as
manifestly excessive or otherwise open to challenge. But parity of sentencing
does not require a sentencing judge to be so lenient as to 'shock the public
conscience' by imposing a sentence entirely disproportionate
to the offence in
Green v The
French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ said:
'(a) the parity principle is based upon the norm of ''equality before the law''
(b) equal justice according to law requires, so far as the law permits, that
''like cases be treated alike'' [28]; and
(c) equal justice also requires, where the law permits, "differential treatment
of persons according to differences between them
relevant to the scope, purpose
and subject matter of the law" [28].'
Their Honours also said that an appellate court will refuse to intervene, on the
basis of the parity principle, where disparity is
justified by differences
between co‑offenders; for example, differences in relation to age,
background, criminal history, general
character and the part each
co‑offender has played in the relevant criminal conduct or
enterprise [31].
It has often been said that it is desirable for co‑offenders to be
sentenced by the same sentencing judge. Alternatively,
if that is not
practicable, the second sentencing judge should be fully informed about the
sentence imposed by the first sentencing
judge ([36] ‑ [40]).
(citations omitted)
sentencing judge's application of the parity principle involves a discretionary
judgment to which the principles in
House v The
Green v The
v The State of Western
Diamantopoulos v The State
Consequently, the question raised by ground 2 is whether the lack of
disparity in the relevant sentences was open in the exercise
of the sentencing
discretion; it is not whether this court would have exercised the discretionary
judgment in relation to parity
differently:
Ho v The State of Western
parity principle is concerned with substance rather than form. The manner in
which the principle is to be applied will vary
according to the facts and
circumstances of the case. All factors relevant to the offenders, the offences
they have committed and
the sentences they have received must be evaluated and
taken into account in determining whether the parity principle has been
The factors relevant in a particular case will vary according to the
facts and circumstances of the case. In
Higgins v The State of
Buss P (Beech JA agreeing) identified a number of factors that will
ordinarily be relevant ([52] ‑ [53],
Disposition of ground 1
alleged an express error by the sentencing judge acting upon a wrong principle.
The ground focused on the sentencing judge's
explanation of the parity principle
in the course of his Honour's sentencing remarks. The sentencing judge
mentioned that he needed
to take into account 'what the law calls parity'
(sentencing ts 27). The sentencing judge then
When I speak to young people, I call it fairness, which is
what would [JB] expect is fair
he was sitting here listening to all of this, knowing what he did, knowing what
you did, knowing that he pleaded guilty last
year, straightaway,
what would he [ie JB] regard as a proper
and fair sentence for you
in the circumstances? (sentencing ts 27).
(emphasis added)
Accordingly,
the sentencing judge explained the operation of the parity principle in terms of
what JB would regard as a fair sentence
for the appellant given the sentence
imposed on JB.
counsel for the appellant submitted that his Honour's focus on what JB
would regard as a fair and proper sentence inverted
the parity principle.
Senior counsel referred to
Postiglione v The
Brockman v The State of
Capper v The
Senior counsel submitted that the sentencing judge's primary focus ought to have
been on whether the disparity in the co‑offenders'
sentences (more
correctly the lack of disparity in the sentences) would give rise to a
justifiable sense of grievance on the part
of the appellant. It was posited, by
way of amplification, that if the parity principle was to be applied in the
manner explained
by the sentencing judge, a situation could arise where,
following the imposition of a firm sentence of one co‑offender, a
subsequently
sentenced co‑offender might be sentenced to a manifestly
excessive sentence in order to avoid a justifiable sense of grievance
part of the offender who was first sentenced.
oral submissions, counsel for the State accepted that - reading the passage
reproduced at [
] above in isolation
- the sentencing judge had misstated the effect of the parity principle (appeal
ts 32 ‑ 34, 36 ‑
concession made by counsel for the State at the appeal hearing was correct.
This court addressed the operation of the parity
principle - and in particular
whether it was to be considered from the perspective of a previously sentenced
co‑offender or
the offender then before the court - in the recent case of
Akoum v The
Hall JA (Buss P and Mazza JA agreeing)
A sentencing judge dealing with an offender may need to consider parity where
other related offenders have already been sentenced.
In such a case the concern
is to ensure that the sentence imposed does not engender a justifiable sense of
in the offender then before the
The parity principle cannot be invoked for the purpose of increasing what would
otherwise be an appropriate sentence so as to avoid
a previously sentenced
offender feeling a justified sense of grievance. The parity principle is only
relevant where a sentence might
be such as to engender a justifiable sense of
grievance in the offender being sentenced.
Any view that a related offender may have of
the sentence to be imposed is an irrelevant consideration
[72] ‑ [73]. (emphasis added) (citations omitted)
conclusion is consistent with the justification for the parity principle as
given by Mason J in
Mason J stated that the justification for intervention in the case of
disparity is that disparity engenders a justifiable sense of
in the applicant
and an appearance of
injustice to the objective bystander (613). Dawson J similarly grounded
the parity principle on a justifiable
sense of grievance on the part of the
offender before the court (623). The passage in
, as relied
on by senior counsel for the appellant at the appeal hearing, also grounds the
question of grievance in the perspective
of the co‑offender who is before
the court for sentencing.
sentencing judge did not express the parity principle in terms of whether any
marked disparity (or lack of disparity) would engender
a justifiable sense of
grievance on the part of the appellant. His Honour's focus was on fairness
from the perspective of JB as
the previously sentenced co‑offender.
While, in this way, it is apparent that the sentencing judge misstated the
parity principle,
the State contended that no appellable error was disclosed by
State's contention that the misstatement did not mean that there was appellable
error was advanced in two ways. First, while
accepting that the sentencing
judge misstated the effect of the parity principle, the State submitted that the
sentencing judge did
not misapply the parity principle. To the contrary, in the
State's submission, the sentencing judge applied the parity principle
The State submitted that, despite the explanation of the parity principle as
given by the sentencing judge, his Honour
did not in fact take into account
what JB might consider to be an appropriate sentence to be imposed on the
appellant. Second, in
a closely related submission, the State contended that it
was insufficient for the appellant to show that the sentencing judge had
misstated the effect of the parity principle. The State submitted that any
infringement of the parity principle was more akin to
implied error rather than
express error. It was, according to the State, necessary to consider whether
the result infringed the
relevant norm of equal justice according to law. This
meant that the appellant had to make out ground 2 if the appellant was to
succeed in the appeal.
was no merit in either of these submissions.
to the State's first submission, insofar as the sentencing judge went on to
apply the parity principle, counsel for the State
relied on the following part
of the sentencing remarks:
Now, if you were exactly the same, if I were sentencing [JB] after trial, so you
were the same in that respect and everything else
was equal, I would have to
give you two years and seven months right now. That's what would be parity,
taking into account that
23 per cent discount, which would be the only other
difference (sentencing ts 28).
State also stated that, had the sentencing judge in fact proceeded to sentence
the appellant by having regard to what JB might
have thought was a fair sentence
to be imposed on the appellant, it is unlikely that the appellant's sentence
would have been less
than half that imposed on JB (disregarding, for this
purpose, the
discount enjoyed by JB).
passage relied on by the State does not contain an accurate statement of the
parity principle. Nor does it disavow the error
in the statement of the parity
principle as was earlier stated by the sentencing judge. It amounts to no more
than reducing the
parity principle to mathematical equivalence. Importantly, in
the context of the sentencing judge's erroneous statement of the effect
parity principle, it is a kind of mathematical equivalence that is unaffected by
which co‑offender's perspective is
to be considered. Nothing in this
statement satisfies us that having misstated the effect of the parity principle
the sentencing
judge nonetheless correctly applied the principle. The State's
alternative argument based on the differential in the sentences does
above assertion. It cannot be concluded that, having explained the parity
principle in erroneous terms, the sentencing
judge went on to correctly
apprehend and apply the principle merely because of the differential in the
co‑offenders' sentences.
State's second submission conflates the express error identified by
ground 1 with an implied error based on infringement of the
principle of the kind identified by ground 2. There is a difference in the
two types of error. Express error may arise in
various ways. These include
acting upon a wrong principle in the exercise of a discretion. The other kinds
of express error in
the exercise of a sentencing discretion are where the
sentencing judge allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect
determination, mistakes the facts or does not take into account some material
consideration. See
(505). Implied error is concerned with a different kind of
House v The King
error. Error is inferred from a result that bespeaks that a substantial wrong
has in fact occurred. With the second type of error
a litigant must show that
on the facts the result is unreasonable or plainly unjust. See
House v The King
appellable error of the first type is established it is not necessary for the
litigant to go on and also establish that the result
is unreasonable or plainly
unjust. It is enough, for appellable error, if the express error is material.
If it was otherwise, express
error would be subsumed within implied error and it
would always be necessary for a litigant challenging the exercise of a
discretion to show that the result was unreasonable or plainly
unjust. It is well settled that this is not the position. Putting
aside where,
in a separate and independent exercise of discretion, an appeal court concludes
that no different sentence should have
been imposed, an appeal court's power to
intervene is enlivened in the event of material express error. In such a case
the exercise
of the sentencing discretion has miscarried and it is the duty of
the appeal court to exercise the discretion afresh (although in
some cases the
appeal court may decide to send the charge back to the sentencing court to be
dealt with further). An offender is
entitled to be sentenced according to law.
Kentwell v The
error will be 'material' if it is capable of affecting the sentence imposed by
the sentencing judge. An error is capable of affecting
a sentence if, among
other things, the nature or degree of the error has the capacity to affect the
sentencing judge's assessment
of the seriousness of the offence having regard to
the factors which he or she must take into account when sentencing (ie the
specified in
Sentencing Act
). Where material
express error is demonstrated, enlivening an appeal court's jurisdiction to
intervene, the court does not assess
whether and to what extent the error
influenced the sentencing outcome. As already mentioned, the sentencing
discretion having miscarried,
it is the duty of the appellate court to exercise
the discretion afresh. See
the present case the sentencing judge's express error was material. It was
capable of affecting the sentence imposed on the appellant
in the way explained
by senior counsel for the appellant (see [
] above). The sentencing judge acted
upon a wrong principle by considering parity from the perspective of what JB
would regard as
a proper and fair sentence for the appellant. That approach to
the issue of parity had the capacity to affect the sentencing judge's
of whether the appellant ought to be subject to a custodial sentence; and, if
so, to affect the sentencing judge's determination
of the length of the term of
succeeded. As will be seen, this court was persuaded that a different sentence
should have been imposed. In the circumstances
the appeal had to be allowed.
The sentence imposed by the sentencing judge had to be set aside. It was
appropriate for this court
to resentence the appellant rather than sending the
charges back to the Children's Court for resentencing.
ground 1 succeeded it was not necessary to form a view on the merits of
Resentencing - the significance of the
Young Offenders Act
Young Offenders Act
makes provision,
among other things, for sentencing 'young persons' who commit offences. A
'young person' is a person who has not
reached the age of 18 years
or a person to whom the Act applies because he or she committed the
relevant offence before reaching the age of 18 years
applies to the appellant because he committed the three offences when he was
16 years old.
of the main objectives of the Act is to integrate young persons who have
committed offences into the community (s 6(e)).
general principles of juvenile justice are provided for in s 7 of the Act.
The general principles include that:
(a) there should be special provision to ensure the fair treatment of young
persons who have, or are alleged to have, committed offences;
(b) a young person who commits an offence is to be dealt with, either formally
or informally, in a way that encourages the young
person to accept
responsibility for his or her conduct; and
(c) a young person who commits an offence is not to be treated more severely
because of the offence than the person would have been
treated if an adult;
(d) the community must be protected from illegal behaviour;
(h) detaining a young person in custody for an offence, whether before or after
the person is found to have committed the offence,
should only be used as a last
resort and, if required, is only to be for as short a time as is necessary;
(j) punishment of a young person for an offence should be designed so as to give
the offender an opportunity to develop a sense of
social responsibility and
otherwise to develop in beneficial and socially acceptable ways;
(l) in dealing with a young person for an offence, the age, maturity, and
cultural background of the offender are to be
considered[.]
terms of sentencing,
Offenders Act
sets out the general principles and considerations to be
applied in sentencing a young person who has been found guilty of an offence.
Among other things, the court is to apply the general principles of juvenile
(s 46(1)(b)).
The court is also to consider the matters listed in
of the Act (including the extent, if any, to which any person was
affected as a victim of the offence). The court is to dispose
of the matter in
a way that is in proportion to the seriousness of the offence and is consistent
with the treatment of other young
persons who commit offences
In deciding how to dispose of the matter the court is to consider how young the
offender is as a mitigating factor
applies even if the offender is aged 18 years or older at the time of being
sentenced and the offender is thus to be sentenced under
Sentencing Act
. In that respect,
Young Offenders Act
(1) This section applies to and in respect of a young person found guilty of an
offence who at the time of being sentenced is 18
years old or older (the
(2) Subject to the
Sentencing Act 1995
the court dealing with the offender must dispose of the matter by sentencing the
offender under that Act, and that Act and the
Sentence Administration Act 2003
to and in respect of the sentence imposed.
(5) Despite subsection (2),
applies to the court dealing with an
was common ground at the appeal hearing that, if the appeal was to be allowed
and the appellant was to be resentenced,
Young Offenders Act
applied and this
court was to resentence by applying the sentencing regime under the
Sentencing Act
rather than the
sentencing regime under the
Young Offenders
. However, in doing so the court was to apply
Young Offenders Act
including the
general principles of juvenile justice (appeal ts 26 ‑ 27,
DC v The State of Western
, Mazza JA (Buss and Newnes JJA agreeing) identified the
following non‑exhaustive list of propositions relating to the sentencing
ultimate aim in sentencing a young offender is the protection of the community
by the imposition of a sentence proportionate to
the gravity of the offence,
having regard to the circumstances of its commission and the circumstances
personal to the offender:
AM (a child) v The
is normally a powerful mitigating factor and the rehabilitation of the young
offender is generally a dominant sentencing consideration:
Ainsworth v D (a
young offender must not be treated more severely than an adult for the same
s 118(1)(b)
of the YOA [ie the
Young Offenders Act
Deterrence,
both personal and general, punishment, retribution and public protection are
accommodated in the YOA and are relevant
to the sentencing of young offenders,
although their role will generally be tempered. However, when in a particular
case the rehabilitation
of an offender appears unlikely, the offending is
serious and the character and personal circumstances of the offender justify it,
these factors may become significant:
JSA v The State of Western
offenders, even those with good antecedents, may, having regard to the
circumstances of the case, be sentenced to detention
or imprisonment:
F (a child) v The State of
Western Australia
age and maturity of a young offender are relevant factors. Thus, a very young
offender who is immature may be dealt with differently
to an older child who,
while still young, has a greater awareness and
responsibility.
principles embodied in the
Young Offenders
recognise that substantial mitigation is to be given to youth and
rehabilitation. Where the detention of a young person is required,
of that detention must be for the shortest time possible:
DC v The State of Western
Resentencing - the disposition of the court
will be appreciated, from earlier discussion, that the resentencing by this
court took place in a different statutory context
to the original sentencing in
the Children's Court. This was because, by the time the appellant fell to be
sentenced in this court,
he had turned 18 years old. This meant that the
court had to dispose of the matter by sentencing the appellant under the
Sentencing Act
. Before the Children's
Court, as the appellant was then 17 years old,
Young Offenders Act
applied and the
relevant sentencing regime was that provided for under that Act. Nevertheless,
as has been explained, the principles
of juvenile justice applied to this
court's resentencing. Detention in custody was only to be used as a last resort
and, if required,
was to be for as short a time as was necessary. The
rehabilitation of the appellant was a weighty sentencing consideration.
court had the necessary materials to resentence the appellant.
materials before this court included the materials before the primary judge.
Other materials were received and taken into account
in the resentencing
exercise. First, the court received the written and oral pre‑sentence
report. Second, the court received
additional evidence as to further
rehabilitative activities undertaken by the appellant following his sentencing
in the Children's
Court. This consisted of a letter dated 6 September 2025
and an affidavit sworn 10 September 2025.
pre‑sentence report confirmed the appellant's presentencing compliance
with the 24‑hour curfew and the youth community
based order. There was
further confirmation of the appellant's presentencing rehabilitative activities
and his observable gains.
The author of the pre‑sentence report had made
the appellant's activities and attitude following his detention after the
sentencing in the Children's Court. There had been no
management issues with
the appellant during his further detention at Banksia Hill Detention Centre.
The appellant had undertaken
further educational activities including
certificates in civil construction and working at heights. The author of the
pre‑sentence
report also confirmed that the employment opportunity which
had been offered to the appellant before his sentencing in the Children's
remained available to him were the appellant to be released from detention.
pre‑sentence report went on to consider the availability of further
education and employment programs and the suitability
of various conditions were
the appellant to be released from detention.
will not repeat what has already been said about the circumstances of the
offending and the appellant's personal circumstances
in explaining the basis for
the appellant's resentencing in this court. That has already been covered in
earlier parts of these
reasons. Nor is it necessary to refer again to JB's
personal circumstances and the sentence that was imposed on JB by
Barone DCJ.
However, it is worthwhile to make some observations about some
critical differences affecting the appropriate sentencing dispositions
two co‑offenders that are not as obvious as the 23% discount that JB
received for his pleas of guilty and the extensive
rehabilitative activities
undertaken by the appellant. Before doing so it is appropriate to express
agreement with the sentencing
judge's characterisation of the
co‑offenders' respective culpability in relation to the aggravated armed
robbery offence.
The sentencing judge said that, as to this aspect of the
offending, the co‑offenders' culpability was very similar. We agree.
similarity in this respect highlights the dissimilarity between the
co‑offenders as to the objective circumstances of
the rest of the
most serious aspect of JB's offending was the grievous bodily harm offences.
The stabbing of DJ and RM was violent and particularly
serious offending. DJ
and RM suffered severe injuries. Barone DCJ was correct to accumulate the
12 months' immediate detention
for the offending against DJ with the
12 months' immediate detention for the offending against RM. The stabbings
followed one after
the other. But there were two victims and JB consciously
determined to stab RM after having stabbed DJ. Viewed from JB's perspective
two stabbings could not be characterised as a single transaction. It is here
that there is a crucial differentiation between
the culpability of the
appellant's offending and JB's offending. The appellant is criminally
responsible for the grievous bodily
harm offences as a
offender. But,
without gainsaying the findings that compelled the conclusion that the appellant
was criminally responsible for the
offending, the sentencing judge made findings
as to the appellant's subjective intentions and expectations. The appellant did
know that the stabbings were going to happen and did not intend or expect
that the stabbings would occur.
further findings of the sentencing judge had three consequences when determining
the appropriate sentencing disposition. First,
as between the appellant and JB,
JB's offending was considerably more serious so far as the grievous bodily harm
offences were concerned.
Second, having regard to the maximum penalties of the
offences committed by the appellant and JB, and the basis on which the appellant
was held to be criminally responsible for the grievous bodily harm offences, the
aggravated armed robbery was the most serious of
the offences committed by the
appellant. That was not the case for JB. The grievous bodily harm offences
were the most serious
of the offences committed by JB. Third, unlike the need
for accumulation that existed in relation to JB's offending against DJ and
in respect of the appellant it was appropriate that any custodial sentence in
relation to that offending be served concurrently.
Viewed from the perspective
of the appellant the grievous bodily harm offences were a single
transaction.
appellant's offending was so serious that, even applying the principles of
juvenile justice and having regard to the rehabilitative
steps undertaken by the
appellant, only sentences of imprisonment could be justified.
regard to all relevant sentencing factors and considerations, including the
sentences imposed on JB and the proper application
of the parity principle, but
disregarding - for now - the time already served by the appellant at Banksia
Hill Detention Centre,
the appropriate sentences of imprisonment were as
follows. First, as to the aggravated armed robbery offence, 14 months'
imprisonment.
Second, as to the grievous bodily harm offence involving DJ,
10 months' imprisonment. Third, as to the grievous bodily harm offence
involving RM, 10 months' imprisonment. It was appropriate, given what has
already been said, that the sentence in relation to the
aggravated armed robbery
offence be the head sentence. The sentences as to the grievous bodily harm
offences were to be concurrent
with the sentence on the aggravated armed robbery
offence and on each other.
the appellant had spent four months in detention as at the time of the
resentencing. The appellant had spent one month
on remand in the immediate
aftermath of the offending. Three months had been spent in detention following
the sentencing in the
Children's Court. So, by the time the appellant fell to
be resentenced in this court, he had spent considerably more time in custody
than had been the case at the original sentencing. The sentencing judge had
formed the opinion (correctly given the evidence) that
the one month spent in
Banksia Hill Detention Centre had been a salutary experience for the appellant.
By the time of the resentencing
that salutary experience had been reinforced
threefold. There had been no recidivism on the part of the appellant. To the
the appellant's rehabilitation had continued.
court must not impose a term of immediate imprisonment unless it is satisfied
that suspended and conditionally suspended imprisonment
are not appropriate
sentencing options. In deciding whether it is satisfied of those matters, the
court must have regard to the
sentencing principles in
Sentencing Act
Also, in considering whether suspended or conditionally suspended imprisonment
are not appropriate, the provisions relating to those
sentencing options must be
considered. Here, in addition, it was necessary for the court to apply the
general principles of juvenile
was not the usual case. This is a case where the appellant has taken
extraordinary and laudable steps towards his rehabilitation.
In circumstances
where, as the sentencing judge aptly put it, the appellant was a different
person to the boy who had committed
the offending, in resentencing the appellant
we were not positively satisfied that conditionally suspended imprisonment was
appropriate sentencing option. To the contrary, we were satisfied that
conditionally suspended imprisonment was an appropriate sentencing
option - one
calculated to best achieve the objective mandated by
Young Offenders Act
even more so where the appellant had spent four months in custody for his
offending, those four months in custody having
already contributed to satisfying
much of the recognised sentencing objectives by way of punishment, retribution
and deterrence.
Conditional suspended imprisonment would facilitate the
appellant's ongoing rehabilitation and provide a powerful disincentive against
the appellant returning to the anti‑social behaviour that preceded his
was, in all the circumstances, appropriate to conditionally suspend the term of
imprisonment to which the appellant was to be
sentenced. The conditions to be
imposed were determined having regard to the pre‑sentence report. Based
on the pre‑sentence
report we were satisfied that a supervision and
program requirement were appropriate but that a curfew requirement might be
counterproductive.
terms of imprisonment referred to at [
] above did not take into account the
time already served by the appellant at Banksia Hill Detention Centre. On the
resentencing
the terms of imprisonment to be imposed by this court were to be
conditionally suspended. Accordingly, the commencement of the terms
imprisonment could not be backdated. It was appropriate, in the circumstances,
to reduce the terms of imprisonment by four months
(ie the time the
appellant had already spent in custody). This resulted in a total effective
sentence of 10 months' imprisonment.
We considered it appropriate, in all
the circumstances, to conditionally suspend the terms of imprisonment imposed on
the appellant
for a period of 9 months.
Conclusion and orders
these reasons the court ordered
appeal is allowed.
sentences imposed by Quail P on 11 June 2025 in respect of CC PE 3576
to 3578 of 2024 are set aside.
appellant is resentenced as follows:
(a) On CC PE 3576 of 2024 (aggravated armed robbery) - 10 months'
imprisonment.
(b) On CC PE 3577 of 2024 (grievous bodily harm) - 6 months'
imprisonment.
(c) On CC PE 3578 of 2024 (grievous bodily harm) - 6 months'
imprisonment.
sentences of imprisonment on each of CC PE 3576 to 3578 of 2024 are to be served
concurrently with each other. Thus, the total
effective sentence imposed on the
appellant is 10 months' imprisonment. The total effective sentence of
10 months' imprisonment
is to be conditionally suspended for a period of
9 months, pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1995
(WA), with a
supervision and program requirement.
application for bail is dismissed.
application for bail concerned an application in an appeal filed 7 August
2025. The appellant was seeking bail pending the determination
of the appeal.
The application fell away given the disposition of the appeal. Accordingly, it
was appropriate to dismiss the application.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
22 OCTOBER 2025
Ngo v The Queen
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
EDR v The State of Western
[2024] WASCA 61
Diamantopoulos v The State
of Western Australia
[2024] WASCA
Ho v The State of Western
[2023] WASCA 160
Higgins v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 78
Postiglione v The
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Brockman v The State of
Western Australia
[2025] WASCA 40
Capper v The Queen
(1993) 69 A Crim R 64
Akoum v The King
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
154 CLR 606.
Kentwell v The
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 [35],
[42] ‑ [44].
Law v The Queen
[2019] WASCA 81
[126] ‑ [128],
[130] ‑ [131],
DC v The State of Western
[2014] WASCA 121
(2014) 242 A Crim R 147
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (365 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter