URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/477.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WINGSTAR INVESTMENTS PTY LTD -v- THE HONOURABLE GENEVIEVE M CLEARY IN HER CAPACITY AS MINING WARDEN [2025] WASC 477 (13 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD -v- THE HONOURABLE GENEVIEVE M CLEARY IN HER CAPACITY AS
MINING WARDEN
[2025] WASC 477
AUGUST 2024
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 1257 of 2024
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
HONOURABLE GENEVIEVE M CLEARY IN HER CAPACITY AS MINING WARDEN
CRAIG VAN BLITTERSWYK
(WA) - Forfeiture Application -
Regulations 1981
(WA) - Compliance with
expenditure condition - Meaning of 'in connection with mining' - Jurisdictional
Error - Materiality
Legislation:
Regulations 1981
Application
Representation:
Mr J Garas SC & Ms C
No appearance
Other Party
Ms C McKenzie
Solicitors:
Lawton Macmaster
State Solicitor's
Other Party
referred to in decision(s):
Introduction
Investments Pty
Ltd, applies for judicial review of the recommendation made by the mining Warden
that 10 mining leases held by it
be forfeited. The Warden made the
recommendation under
Mining Act 1978
Other Party,
Mr Van Blitterswyk
lodged forfeiture applications in respect of the 10 mining leases,
asserting that no activity in mining or in connection with mining
tenements occurred, and therefore Wingstar did not spend the minimum sum
required in the relevant year on the relevant tenements.
forfeiture applications were heard by Warden Cleary (as her Honour then
was), who in
Blitterswyk v Wingstar Investments Pty Ltd
[2023] WAMW 38
Warden's Decision
), concluded that
Wingstar had not satisfied the minimum expenditure requirements.
the reasons set out below, the application for judicial review should be
Legislative scheme
to outlining the background facts and the decision of the warden, it is helpful
to outline the applicable legislative
provisions.
Conditions applicable to mining leases
div 3 of the Act is concerned with mining leases.
82(1) of the Act is concerned with conditions and provides that every mining
lease shall be deemed to be granted subject
to the conditions set out in that
subsection. These conditions include the condition in s 82(1)(c) which
provides that the lessee
comply with the prescribed expenditure conditions applicable to such land unless
partial or total exemption therefrom is granted
in such manner as is
prescribed.
term 'expenditure conditions' is defined in s 8(1) of the Act as
expenditure
in relation to a mining tenement means the prescribed
conditions applicable to a mining tenement that require the expenditure of
on or in connection with the mining tenement or the mining operations carried
out thereon or proposed to be so carried out
162 of the Act is the regulation making power, which relevantly provides that
the Governor may make such regulations as are
contemplated by the Act, including
but not limited to, prescribing the expenditure conditions subject to which a
mining tenement
only prescribed expenditure condition applicable to a mining lease is that
contained in reg 31 of the
Regulations 1981
Regulations
(1) The holder of a mining lease shall expend or cause to be expended in mining
on or in connection with mining on the lease not
less than $100 for each hectare
or part thereof of the area of the lease with a minimum of $10 000 during each
year of the term of
the lease; but if the holder is directly engaged
part‑time or full-time in mining on the lease itself then an amount
to the remuneration that the holder would be entitled to if engaged,
under a contractual arrangement, in similar mining activity
elsewhere in the
district shall be deemed to have been
Provided that where the area of a mining
lease does not exceed 5 ha the minimum annual expenditure shall be $5
(1a) Expenditure incurred under subregulation (1) during the month in which the
anniversary date of the commencement of the term
of the lease occurs may be
treated by the holder as expenditure incurred in either the year immediately
preceding that anniversary
date or the year starting from such date.
(1b) The specific provisions in
regulation 96C
, relating to allowable
expenditure and non-allowable expenditure for the purposes of calculating
expenditure under a lease, apply
when calculating expenditure under this
regulation.
(2) If a mining lease is surrendered then a pro rata reduction of the amount to
be expended will apply in respect of each whole
month from the date of surrender
to the next anniversary date of the commencement of the term of the
of the Act also provides that the lessee must lodge, in the prescribed
manner, such periodical reports and returns as may be
prescribed.
The requirements for lodging evidence of compliance with the expenditure
condition is contained in reg 32 of the Regulations, which
require the
lessee to lodge a report in the form of Form 5 (Operations report -
expenditure on mining tenement) within (relevantly)
60 days of the
anniversary date of the commencement of the term of the mining lease.
96C of the Regulations contains a number of provisions identifying specific
matters that either may or cannot be used
in the calculation of expenditure
expended on, or in connection with, mining on a mining tenement. However, none
of these provisions
are relevant to the present
application.
Applications for exemptions from expenditure
102(1) of the Act provides that the holder of a mining tenement may apply for an
exemption from the expenditure conditions
applicable to the mining tenement.
The holder of a mining lease may be granted a certificate of exemption totally
or partially exempting
the lease to which the application relates from the
prescribed expenditures conditions relating to the lease in an amount not
the amount required to be expended in a period of
five years.
application for exemption may relate to more than one mining tenement. A
certificate may be granted for any of the reasons contained
in s 102(2) or
s 102(3) of the Act. Section 102(2)(f) of the Act is relevant here,
and provides that an exemption may be granted
for the reason
that the ground the subject of the mining tenement contains mineral ore which is
required to sustain the future operations of an
existing or proposed mining
Act goes on to provide that a person who wishes to object to the granting of an
exemption must lodge a notice of
If no notice of objection is lodged, then the application for an exemption is
determined by the
If a notice of objection is lodged, the application for an exemption shall be
heard by the warden, who will then transmit a report
recommending the grant or
refusal of the application for an exemption, and the warden's reasons, to the
Minister for the Minister's
determination.
Applications for the forfeiture of a mining lease
holder of a mining lease is liable to have their mining lease forfeited if the
lessee is in breach of any conditions of the
Section 97(1) of the Act makes provision for the Minister to declare a
mining lease forfeited. Section 97(5) of the Act provides
that if the
Minister thinks fit in the circumstances of the case, as an alternative to
declaring a mining lease forfeited, the Minister
may impose a penalty not
exceeding certain specified amounts, award the whole or part of the penalty to
any other person (other than
an officer of the Department) or impose no penalty
on the lessee.
98(1) of the Act provides that where the requirements of the Act are not being
complied with in respect of the expenditure
conditions applicable to
(relevantly) a mining lease, any person may apply for the forfeiture of the
mining lease.
application for forfeiture must be made during the expenditure year in relation
to which the requirement is not complied with,
or within eight months
thereafter.
application for forfeiture shall be heard by the
and if the warden finds that the lessee has failed to comply with the
expenditure conditions, the warden may recommend the forfeiture
of the mining
lease, or impose a penalty not exceeding $10,000 as an alternative to the
forfeiture, or dismiss the
application.
recommendation for the forfeiture of the mining lease shall not be made unless
the warden is satisfied that the non‑compliance
with the requirements is,
in the circumstances of the case, of sufficient gravity to justify the
forfeiture.
a recommendation for forfeiture is made, the warden must forward a copy of the
report and recommendation to the
and the Minister may declare the mining lease forfeited; or impose a penalty not
exceeding $10,000; award the whole or any part of
the penalty to the applicant
who applied for forfeiture; or determine not to forfeit the mining lease or
the Minister declares a mining lease forfeited, the applicant for forfeiture has
a right in priority to mark out and/or apply
for a mining tenement upon the
whole or part of the land that was the subject of the forfeited mining
warden who hears either an exemption application or a forfeiture application
does so in the exercise of administrative power conferred
by the Act, rather
than in the exercise of any judicial
Factual background
following summary of the background facts is taken from the Warden's Decision
and the affidavit material before this court, and
these facts are not in dispute
between the parties unless otherwise indicated.
2015, Wingstar became the holder of 10 mining leases. These 10 mining
leases are part of two integrated mining projects known
as the 'Cawse' project
and the 'Bulong' project.
Cawse project is, primarily, a nickel mining project. Wingstar became the
registered owner of the relevant mining leases on
18 June 2015. The
tenements making up the Cawse project are the subject of a combined reporting
group. Between 1998 and 2008 the
Cawse project produced mined ore, before the
previous owners ceased operations. Not all the tenements comprising the Cawse
were the subject of the forfeiture
application.
Bulong (also known as Avalon) project is, primarily, a nickel and cobalt mining
operation. Wingstar became the registered owner
of the relevant mining leases
in January 2015. The tenements making up the Bulong project are the subject of
a combined reporting
group. Between 1999 and 2003 the Bulong project produced
nickel, before the previous owners placed the project in care and maintenance.
All the tenements comprising the Bulong project were the subject of the
application.
case before the warden was that it intended to operate the Cawse and Bulong
projects as a single integrated project known
as the 'Cawse - Avalon - Siberia
Nickel Laterite project'. Wingstar's preference was to haul high‑grade
ore from the Bulong
leases to blend with ore from the Cawse leases and other
tenements for processing at the Cawse nickel
early to mid June 2018, Wingstar lodged the relevant Form 5 expenditure
reports. There is no dispute that these were lodged in
Extracts of the Form 5 expenditure reports are contained in the Warden's
Decision. The Form 5 expenditure reports were in relation
to the following
2 January 2018
2 January 2018
2 January 2018
2 January 2018
2 January 2018
27 March 2018
27 March 2018
27 March 2018
27 March 2018
15 December 2017
14 June 2018, Mr Van Blitterswyk lodged the applications for forfeiture in
relation to each of the mining
On 29 June 2018, Wingstar lodged its response to the forfeiture
applications, stating in each that it intended to defend the applications
that the expenditure on each tenement for the relevant year met the minimum
expenditure
requirements.
These applications for forfeiture were the subject of a hearing before the
warden, resulting in the Warden's Decision.
Warden's Decision
hearing before the warden took place over dates in August and November 2022. A
large amount of evidence was called by the parties.
Mr Van Blitterswyk
lodged two affidavits comprising 360 pages, whilst Wingstar lodged four
affidavits of Mr Robert Gardner (sole
director, company secretary and
shareholder of Wingstar) comprising over
1,400 pages.
Both Mr Van Blitterswyk and Mr Gardner also gave oral evidence.
warden observed that the manner in which Wingstar presented its evidence,
consisting of multiple sets of expenditure figures,
items and calculations, made
the warden's task of determining the actual expenditure very
Further, some of the expenditure claimed by Wingstar related to or relied on the
'project' as a whole, and was claimed over multiple
broad terms, Wingstar put forward multiple documents detailing the claimed
expenditure, many of which were not consistent with
each other. In addition to
the Form 5 expenditure reports, in January 2019, Wingstar lodged its
reg 144 statement of particulars
in relation to each of the leases. Whilst
each on the particulars relied on the total amount claimed on the various
Form 5 expenditure
reports, the particulars provided slightly more detail
and a breakdown of the original
then filed its affidavit evidence, and in one of those affidavits
Mr Gardner deposed that in the process of reviewing all
payments made by
Wingstar, Mr Gardner became aware that he had not provided his consultant
geologist (who was charged with preparing
the Form 5 expenditure reports)
details of various other expenditure. One of these was a heap leach dry plant,
which I will return
to later in these reasons. In that affidavit,
Mr Gardner embarked upon a calculation of the expenses per lease. However,
observed that it was difficult to determine from that affidavit
whether the expenses referred to by Mr Gardner had already been
incorporated
into the Form 5 expenditure reports or
to the hearing, Wingstar lodged an outline of opening submissions with payment
schedules attached. The warden observed that
the figures in these submissions
differed significantly from the affidavit, which may have been due to
Mr Gardner apportioning the
costs of bulldozers and the heap leach dry
plant differently. Finally, Wingstar lodged an amended outline of opening
submissions
on day two of the hearing which the warden observed also appeared to
contain another recalculation of the figures.
manner in which Wingstar presented its evidence resulted in a lengthy decision
from the warden of over 100 pages, in which the
warden comprehensively
summarised the written and oral evidence of each of the witnesses, before making
detailed findings in relation
to each of the claimed items of expenditure.
Ultimately,
the warden concluded that:
(a) Mr Van Blitterswyk bore the onus to prove on the balance of
probabilities that Wingstar had failed to meet the minimum expenditure
conditions for each relevant year, and that the failure was of sufficient
gravity to justify forfeiture;
(b) Wingstar was not limited to the expenditure referred to in the Form 5
expenditure reports, and could rely on the additional items
of expenditure
claimed, for the first time, in the affidavit evidence;
(c) the warden was not satisfied that any of the additional items claimed in the
affidavit evidence, including the heap leach dry
plant, was expenditure on or in
relation to mining on the various leases;
(d) only some of the remaining items of expenditure claimed in the Form 5
expenditure reports was expenditure on or in relation to
mining on the leases,
or had been apportioned appropriately over the various leases;
(e) the result was that the warden was satisfied Mr Van Blitterswyk had
proven his case in relation to Wingstar's non‑compliance
expenditure requirements; and
(f) in all the circumstances, the warden was satisfied that the
non‑compliance was of sufficient gravity to justify forfeiture
the mining leases, and recommended to the Minister that all leases be
is not necessary to summarise the warden's findings in relation to each of the
various items of claimed expenditure that were
before the warden. This is
because the application for judicial review concerns only one of those items of
claimed expenditure -
and the warden's decision in relation to it - being the
heap leach dry plant.
Heap leach dry plant - issues
issues before the warden in relation to the heap leach dry plant were as
(1) was Wingstar able to rely on the heap leach dry plant expenditure in
circumstances where it was not referred to in Wingstar's
Form 5 expenditure
(2) if so, was the warden satisfied that Wingstar purchased the heap leach dry
plant in the relevant year/s;
(3) if so, was that expenditure on or in connection with mining on the relevant
leases; and
(4) if so was Wingstar able to apportion the heap leach dry plant expenditure
across all the
relation to each of these issues, the warden concluded as
(1) Wingstar was able to rely on the heap leach dry plant expenditure in
circumstances where it was not referred to in Wingstar's
Form 5 expenditure
As this conclusion is not challenged by either party in the application for
judicial review, it is not necessary to consider this
aspect of warden's reasons
further, and I will proceed on this basis for the purposes of the
application;
(2) her Honour accepted that Wingstar paid a total of $2,585,000 (plus
$17,213.50 in associated costs) for the heap leach dry plant
in or about July
2017, and that the plant was delivered to the site of the Cawse project and is
located on lease
(3) the expenditure on the heap leach dry plant was not expenditure on or in
connection with mining on the relevant
(4) in light of the conclusion that the expenditure on the heap leach dry plant
was not expending on or in connection with mining
on the relevant tenements, it
was not necessary to consider whether the expenditure could be apportioned
application for judicial review concerns the warden's conclusion in relation to
issue (3) above.
On or in connection with mining
warden first considered the meaning of the phrase 'on or in connection with
Honour commenced by observing, with reference to a number of authorities but
principally the decision of
Warden Calder; Ex parte
the following applicable propositions or legal
provisions:
The definition of 'in connection with mining' is wide and imprecise. It is not
automatic that once a tenement is on care and maintenance,
surrendered or forfeited; there is no need for there to be actual mining to meet
the requirements of the Act. The Act
will be satisfied if there is work leading
up to mining.
Where work is done with the intention of future mining, even simply to the
extent of a pre-feasibility study, that work is in connection
with mining.
(citations omitted)
warden then outlined the definition of 'expenditure conditions' in s 8(1)
of the Act and emphasised the word 'proposed'.
warden observed that the case before her Honour had similarities with those in
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
(and the first instance
decision of
Resources Ltd v
I will return to these decisions in further detail later in these reasons, but
for present purposes her Honour observed that there
were two different issues
before Warden Calder. First, whether rehabilitation works fell within
reg 31 in circumstances where the
mine on the tenement in question had been
closed for many years. Secondly, whether work aimed at future exploitation (by
tailings) could support a claim for an exemption from the expenditure
conditions under s 102(2)(f) of the
warden observed that the Court of Appeal concluded in relation to the first
issue, that where expenditure is incurred in the
performance of conditions of
the mining lease which survive the cessation of mining operations, the
connection between the expenditure
and mining is direct and immediate and
accordingly satisfies the requirements of reg 31 of the
Regulations.
relation to the second issue, the warden observed that at first instance
Warden Calder refused the application for an exemption
as his Honour found
[T]he intention to process the tailings was 'nothing more than a hope,' there
being only a mere possibility that the ground would
be the subject of a mining
operation in the future.
He found that
calculations on potential profitability or non-profitability of operations were
hypothetical, being estimates based
on the unproved existence of mineable
reserves. He could find no sufficient certainty 'or even any reasonable
likelihood of any
mining operations being proposed, in the sense contemplated by
par 102(2)(f).'
He was of the view that 'proposed' means more than a mere expression of
intention or hope or expectation, and means 'at least an
identified or planned
or recognisable operation that includes activities such as exploration on the
ground, desk studies, feasibility
studies and adequate identification of
resources, in order that reserve classification may be achieved and necessary
capital-raising
activity.' That was not an exhaustive list.
(citations omitted)
warden observed that on review in the Court of Appeal, the challenge was to the
construction of the words 'in connection with
mining' in reg 31 of the
Regulations, as opposed to directly challenging the warden's view on 'proposed'.
Her Honour then observed
there is a connection between whether something is in connection with mining and
whether there are proposed mining operations. That
is, activity will not be in
connection with mining if, in reality, there are no proposed mining operations.
Honour then observed that the Court of Appeal accepted the following four
propositions concerning the meaning of 'in connection
(1) expenditure must be in relation to the ground the subject of the tenement;
(2) expenditure is to go to the provision of goods and services, being
activities;
(3) to determine whether an activity is in connection with mining, the nature
and purpose of the activity must be considered; and
(4) it is not necessary that there is active mining or even a current intention
to carry out mining in the relevant tenement year
for activity to be in
connection with
warden then noted that the following further proposition was put by the tenement
holder to the Court of Appeal, which found favour
with the court, but there was
no need for the Court of Appeal to finally determine the correctness of that
approach in the circumstances
An activity will be in connection with mining if:
(a) it assists, investigates, assesses or facilitates future possible mining,
(b) it is reasonably capable of contributing to such assistance, investigation,
assessment or facilitation.
the warden, Wingstar submitted that despite this proposition being related to an
application for an exemption from the expenditure
conditions, nevertheless the
comments made by the Court of Appeal provide a structure in which to determine
the issue in the present
case. Mr Van Blitterswyk did not seek to persuade
Honour agreed with this submission, and concluded that the final proposition,
and the Court of Appeal's observations in relation
whether expenditure is 'in connection with mining' where
there are only proposed
operations, however, overall, the question in the present case is an assessment
of the reasonableness of
such plans and the likelihood of their ever being
carried out.
warden then outlined the evidence led by the parties in relation to the heap
leach dry plant. It is not necessary to summarise
that evidence in detail here.
However, in these sections of the Warden's Decision, the factual matters
considered by the warden included
(a) what are Wingstar's plans for the tenements;
(b) is there evidence which suggests that those plans are not reasonable, or
will not be carried out;
(c) what practically is required to make the heap leach dry plant
operational;
(d) are there ore deposits;
(e) what the plans for the ore deposits; and
(f) was the heap leach dry plant ready or what was required to make it
operational.
considered that evidence, and making specific findings of fact about each of
these matters, the warden concluded that, at
the time of purchasing the heap
leach dry plant, Mr Gardner and Wingstar may have had 'a hope, but no real
intention or plans to
Her Honour also concluded as
I cannot be satisfied that the heap leach dry plant is in any near state to be
reconstructed and used. I am not satisfied that
Mr Gardner knows what is
required to piece it back together and put it in working condition, and neither
did he know that in 2017
when it was purchased and delivered.
Mr Gardner may have every intention, that does not translate automatically
into being able to mine. ...
the perhaps incomplete state of the heap leach dry plant when it was delivered,
it apparently being in pieces, possibly with
some missing, the lack of any
apparent plan to source limestone and sulphuric acid required to run the plant,
either now or in 2017
and 2018, the continuous messages in the reports that
there were other problems encountered, and work needed, and that a funder was
required all suggest to me that there was not any real hope or intention of
using the heap leach dry plant during or even close to
the relevant tenement
year, or perhaps at all. That being the case, I am satisfied that it cannot be
said that the purchase of the
heap leach dry plant was in any way close to
facilitating future possible mining, that is, an identified or planned or
recognisable
operation, and was not, considering those circumstances, reasonably
capable of contributing to the facilitation or assistance of
any such operation
or proposed operation.
Honour concluded that having regard to all the evidence, the payment of the heap
leach dry plant was not on or in connection
The application for
judicial review
claims that the warden made a jurisdictional error by misconstruing reg 31
of the Regulations in such a way so as to misconceive
the nature of the function
being performed or the extent of her statutory powers, in
(a) the warden misconstrued reg 31 in concluding that, in circumstances
where there are only proposed mining operations, there must
be an assessment of
the reasonableness of the proposed plans and the likelihood of their ever being
carried out ([177]), in determining
whether expenditure is on or in connection
with mining for the purposes of reg 31;
(b) applying that erroneous construction, the warden arrived at a conclusion
that absent positive findings on each of those matters
(ie reasonableness
of the proposed plans and the likelihood of their ever being carried out),
expenditure found to have been incurred
on mining equipment (relevantly, the
heap leach dry plant) was not on or in connection with mining within the meaning
of reg 31 and
carried no weight in response to a claim of under expenditure
([215] - [270]);
(c) on the proper construction of reg 31, that twofold test formulated by the
warden is not a requirement of reg 31, and the warden
erroneously injected
additional conditions in relation to the application of reg 31 which had
the effect of wrongly excluding expenditure;
(d) by giving no weight to the expenditure (found to have been incurred), on the
basis of that erroneous construction, the warden
acted outside jurisdiction and
the respondent's recommendations of forfeiture, which were partly based on that
finding, were therefore
also outside
broad terms, Wingstar submits that the warden erred in her construction of the
requirements of reg 31 of the Regulations and,
in so doing, erroneously
added the following two additional conditions that were required to be satisfied
in circumstances where
there was no actual mining occurring on the tenements in
question, and instead there was a proposal to mine in the
(1) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are reasonable; and
(2) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are likely to be carried
submits that the above construction is not only contrary to the text of
reg 31, but also contrary to the decision of the
Court of Appeal in
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
submits that the warden then assessed the claimed expenditure on the heap leach
dry plant on the basis of this incorrect
construction of reg 31, namely by
assessing the reasonableness of the proposed mining operations and the
likelihood of the proposed
operations ever being carried out. In so doing,
Wingstar submits that the warden misconceived the nature of her statutory
or the extent of her powers.
seeks a writ of certiorari and an order that the applications for forfeiture be
re‑heard according to law.
response, Mr Van Blitterswyk submits that the warden did not misconstrue
reg 31 or impose the two additional conditions referred
to above. Rather,
Mr Van Blitterswyk submits that the warden assessed Mr Gardner's
evidence as to why he purchased the heap leach
dry plant and made factual
findings regarding Mr Gardner's credibility and his evidence on this issue.
Mr Van Blitterswyk submits
that the warden assessed Mr Gardner's
evidence in relation to his claimed plans for the tenements, and made a factual
finding that
Wingstar did not have any real intention or plan to mine on the
tenements, and therefore the purchase of the heap leach dry plant
could not be
'on or in connection with mining' on the tenements.
Mr Van Blitterswyk submits that having concluded that there was no real
intention to mine, the warden did not need to consider
whether those plans were
reasonable, and the warden did not do so.
Blitterswyk submits that it cannot be the case that a party can simply say they
have purchased plant and that this is sufficient
for the purposes of reg 31
of the Regulations. There must be a nexus between the plant that has been
purchased and mining on the
lease. Mr Van Blitterswyk submits that if a
party says that they have purchased plant because they have plans to mine, it is
to assess that evidence to see if it is accepted and make factual
findings accordingly.
Blitterswyk submits that what the warden did was make a finding of fact that
Wingstar may have purchased the heap leach dry
plant, but it had no intention of
mining and therefore no intention of using it to mine on the tenements, and
therefore it was not
a real and genuine claim for expenditure that was 'in
connection with mining on the tenement'.
Blitterswyk therefore submits that there has been no jurisdictional error as
alleged by Wingstar.
of the application for judicial review therefore requires consideration of the
following issues:
(1) What is the proper construction of reg 31 of the Regulations, and in
circumstances where there is no current mining on the tenement,
and instead
there is a proposal to mine in the future, does it contain the following
conditions:
(a) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are reasonable; and
(b) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are likely to be carried
(2) Did the warden, in considering the applications for forfeiture, incorrectly
construe reg 31, and therefore misconceived the nature
of her statutory function
or the extent of her powers?
Legal principles - judicial review
error refers to a breach of an express or implied condition of a statutory
conferral of decision-making authority
which results in a decision made in the
purported exercise of that authority lacking the legal force attributed to the
exercise of
that authority by
Accordingly, a decision will involve jurisdictional error if the decision is
made outside the limits of the powers and functions
given to the decision
court, in exercising its supervisory jurisdiction to review a decision for
of the powers and functions
given to the decision maker and not the merits of the
applicant bears the burden of proving jurisdictional error, including the burden
of proving, on the balance of probabilities,
all of the facts on which the
allegation of jurisdictional error is
observed by the High Court in
Kirk v Industrial Court of
New South Wales
, it is neither necessary, nor possible, to attempt to
mark the metes and bounds of jurisdictional
However, relevantly for present purposes, if an administrative decision maker
misunderstands the applicable law under which they
exercise statutory powers, or
asks themselves the wrong question, they will commit a jurisdictional
addition, an error will only be jurisdictional if the error was material to the
decision that was made. Some errors (eg bias
or unreasonableness in the
final result) will, of their nature, always be jurisdictional errors. However,
for most cases, an error
will only be jurisdictional if the error was material
to the decision that was made in fact, in the sense that there is a realistic
possibility that the decision that was made in fact
) have been different if the
error had not
What must be shown to demonstrate that an established error meets the threshold
of materiality will depend upon the error, but the
threshold is not demanding or
Legal authorities
considering the issues raised in the application, it is first helpful to address
two authorities referred to by the parties
and the warden: the decision of the
Court of Appeal in
Warden Calder; Ex parte Lee
, and the first instance decision of
Grange Resources Ltd v
Grange Resources Ltd
first instance in
Resources Ltd v Lee
, Warden Calder was called on to determine three
plaints for forfeiture and one application for an exemption from the expenditure
conditions.
leases the subject of the various applications were named Horseshoe, Thaduna and
Green Dragon. Forfeiture applications were
made in relation to all three
tenements, but the exemption application was made in relation to the Thaduna
lease only. The exemption
application was made pursuant to (relevantly)
s 102(2)(f) of the Act on the basis that Thaduna contained mineral ore
required to
sustain future mining operations at another tenement, being
Calder recommended no certificate of exemption be granted and recommended the
forfeiture of the Thaduna and Green Dragon leases.
However, the warden
dismissed the application for forfeiture of the Horseshoe lease.
mining took place on the tenements during the relevant year, as the mines had
been on care and maintenance. The question raised
before Warden Calder was
whether the work done whilst the mines were on care and maintenance could fall
within the scope of reg 31
of the Regulations.
relation to the Horseshoe lease, Warden Calder was satisfied that the
tenement holder had expended, or caused to be expended,
in connection with
mining on the lease, an amount exceeding the minimum expenditure
That expenditure consisted of various tasks performed by the caretakers,
including tasks relating to obligations imposed on the tenement
holder in the
conditions attached to the grant of the mining lease. In the context of the
forfeiture application, Warden Calder
31 does not require that there be a present and on‑going mining operation
for there to be allowable expenditure.
The legislation creates obligations on
tenement holders that continue beyond the cessation of extractive and processing
on tenements and include, in particular, environmental obligations.
Mr Nutter said that it was inappropriate to simply close down
the mine in
1994 and immediately proceed to comply with environmental obligations to the
extent that there was completed closure
of the mine. That was so because of the
presence on the tenement of the remaining resource that it was then thought may
assessed as being mineable. In my opinion that was a reasonable
position to adopt at the time. I am satisfied that he therefore
Mr Martinick to proceed on the basis that Mr Martinick's report should
indicate where environmental rehabilitation work
of a complete mine closure type
should be undertaken and to also identify those parts of the tenement in respect
of which there was
potential for further mining to be undertaken and in respect
of which it would not be appropriate to undertake closure-type environmental
my opinion, in the present case, the tenement holder simply has no plans at all
concerning the mine other than to hold on to the
tenement. That has been its
intention and purpose from the time extractive and processing operations ceased
in 1994. That does
not, however, necessarily mean, and in this case does not
mean, that the work done by the Sivwrights and Coumbes in 2004 cannot be
be work done in connection with mining on the lease. I consider that the work
done by the Sivwrights and Coumbes and the
expenditure incurred in connection
with that work is properly within the provisions of reg 31 in that it is work
done and expenditure
incurred in connection with a mining operation that ceased
in 1994 but in respect of which the tenement holder had ongoing statutory
obligations to fulfil.
relation to the Thaduna exemption application, Warden Calder held that the
evidence was 'entirely inconclusive' in that it was
insufficient to show, for
purposes of s 102(2)(f) of the Act, that the deposit on the Thaduna
tenement was required to sustain existing
or proposed mining operations on the
tenement itself, or on Horseshoe or on Green Dragon or any other
Calder held
There is insufficient evidence to enable a conclusion to be properly arrived at
that, firstly, there is any existing or proposed
mining operation for purposes
of par (f) or, secondly, whether or not, even if there was, the mineral resource
on Thaduna could be
mined for the purpose of sustaining any other operation in
the future. The JORC category of the resources on both Green Dragon and
Horseshoe is no more than inferred. There is no planned mining operation for
either of those tenements. There is an expression
on the part of Grange of
nothing more than a hope that a mining operation will be commenced on Horseshoe.
Calder held that in his opinion, the term 'proposed' in s 102(2)(f) of the
means more than a mere expression of intention or hope or expectation I consider
that it means at least an identified or planned
or recognisable operation that
includes activities such as exploration on the ground, desk studies, feasibility
studies, adequate
identification of resources, in order that reserve
classification may be achieved and necessary capital‑raising activity.
That is not an exhaustive list. I mention those things merely to demonstrate
the context in which the activities of Grange concerning
Thaduna are to be
judged for purposes of determining whether or not there is any proposed mining
operation for which the resource
of Thaduna is required. It has not been
established that there is any proposed mining operation to be undertaken on any
of Thaduna,
Green Dragon or Horseshoe. It cannot be said that there is a
likelihood that there will ever be any such operation carried out by
by any other person. It cannot be said that there is anything beyond a mere
possibility that there will be a future operation.
That is not sufficient to
justify the granting of an exemption for purposes of par 102(2)(f).
Paragraph (f) does not say that the
resource 'may' be required.
Re Warden Calder; Ex
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
, the unsuccessful applicant for forfeiture in relation to the
Horseshoe lease sought writs of certiorari and mandamus in relation
Warden Calder's dismissal of their plaints for forfeiture. No other
parties sought judicial review, and Warden Calder's decision
to refuse the
Thaduna exemption application was also not the subject of any application for
judicial review. After an order nisi
was granted, the order absolute was
referred to the Court of Appeal for determination.
challenge to Warden Calder's decision concerned the proper construction of
the words 'in connection with mining' in reg 31 of
the Regulations.
JA, with whom Pullin and Buss JJA agreed, observed that the applicants,
correctly, did not contend that reg 31 required that
there be actual
mining, or expenditure on mining, on the tenement during the expenditure year.
Rather, as confirmed by the full
Re Warden P M Heaney SM;
Ex parte Flint v Nexus Minerals
it is sufficient if expenditure is 'in connection with'
McLure JA held that the words 'in connection with' are of wide import and
what constitutes a sufficient connection depends on the
context in which they
are used and the scope and purpose of the
JA observed that it is significant that none of the Act, the Regulations or the
conditions of the mining lease obliged the
holder of the lease to carry out
mining operations, or mining, on the lease. Regulation 31 was the sole
source of a tenement holder's
obligation in relation to mining‑related
expenditure.
McLure JA observed that the definition of 'expenditure conditions' in s 8(1) of
the Act is wider than reg 31, which is the
sole prescribed expenditure
applicant's case on review was that the expenditure was not incurred 'on mining'
and could only be 'in connection with mining'
if at the time it was incurred
there was an intention to engage in mining on the mining lease. In the absence
of such an intention,
the applicant submitted that expenditure subsequent to
mining was outside the scope of reg 31.
respondent advanced the following six propositions as to the proper construction
(1) the expenditure in question must relate to the land (ground) the subject of
the mining lease;
(2) the expenditure must be for the provision of goods or services (which for
convenience was referred to as 'activities');
(3) regard should be had to the nature and purpose of the activity the subject
of the expenditure in determining whether it is in
connection with mining;
(4) it is not necessary that there be current active mining, or an intention to
carry out mining, on the mining tenement in the relevant
expenditure year. This
flows from the nature of mining where there is often a long lead time before it
is possible to form a definitive
intention to carry out mining operations and an
intention can be frustrated by activities beyond the tenement holder's
(5) if the purpose of an activity is to assist, investigate, assess or
facilitate future possible mining and the nature of the activity
is such that it
is reasonably capable of contributing to such assistance etc, then that purpose
and nature will supply the nexus
between the expenditure and mining; and
(6) mining operations do not cease when the process of extraction and processing
ends. Managing the consequences of mining, including
rehabilitation, and the
possibility of future mining are within the definition of mining, alternatively
within par (d) of the definition
of mining operations or, in the further
alternative, are in connection with
JA held that propositions (1) to (3) advanced by the respondent were not
contentious.
McLure JA then considered propositions (4) to (6), noting that the
reference to 'mining' in these propositions was a reference to
operations' as distinct from fossicking, prospecting or exploring for
first to proposition (6), McLure JA held that managing the consequences of
mining could not be said to fall within the definition
of 'mining' in the Act
and therefore could not constitute 'mining' for the purposes of reg 31 of
the Regulations. The remaining
question raised by the respondent was whether
expenditure for the purposes of managing the consequences of a mining operation
'in connection with mining'.
JA concluded that she would confine her consideration to a narrower formulation
of the question which reflected the factual
findings made by Warden Calder
in that case being whether, following the cessation of mining operations and in
the absence of any
intention to conduct future mining, expenditure for the
purpose of complying with conditions of the mining lease is capable of 'in
connection with mining'. Her Honour concluded that the expression 'in
connection with' could, 'readily extend to expenditure on
matters subsequent to
and consequential upon the specified thing (in this case, mining operations)'.
McLure JA concluded that there
was no basis in the language or purpose of
the Act and Regulations to read down the expression 'in connection with' to
exclude such
matters. In circumstances where there was no challenge to the
validity of the conditions, and in circumstances where the Act contemplates
continuation of a mining lease after the cessation of mining operations, it
would be wrong to read down the expression 'in connection
with' to exclude
expenditure incurred subsequent to the cessation of
light of this conclusion, McLure JA also accepted the correctness of the
respondent's proposition
to proposition (5), McLure JA considered there was merit in the approach
reflected in the proposition, but for the following reasons
held that it was not
necessary to determine the correctness of the detail of the
proposition:
There is merit in the approach reflected in the fifth proposition advanced on
behalf of the second respondent. For example, expenditure
incurred on the
pre-feasibility undertaken in the period from 1996 to late 2003 for the purpose
of determining whether to recommence
mining operations in the form of processing
the low grade tailings on the mining lease is, in my view, expenditure in
with mining notwithstanding the absence of an intention to mine.
However, it is unnecessary in this case to determine the correctness
detail of the proposition, including in particular, the identification of the
activity as 'possible future mining' instead
of mining. If approved, it is
likely to be seen as governing the extent or degree of connection required
between expenditure and
mining. This is not a case which requires exploration
of the outer limits of the connection.
Issue 1 - construction
first issue for consideration is the question of the proper construction of
reg 31 of the Regulations.
Legal principles
general principles concerning the process of statutory construction are well
known. Statutory construction involves the attribution
of objective meaning to
the statutory text having regard to considerations of text, context and purpose.
The primary object of statutory
construction is to construe the relevant
provision so that it is consistent with the language and purpose of all the
provisions of
the statute. The statutory text is the surest guide to
Parliament's intention. The meaning of the text may require consideration
the context, which includes the general purpose and policy of the provision, in
particular the mischief it is seeking to
provisions of the statute must be understood, if possible, as parts of a
Where the text, read in context, permits more than one potential meaning, the
choice between those meanings may turn on an evaluation
of the relative
coherence of each with the scheme of the statute and its identified objects or
principles are equally applicable to the interpretation of regulations, with the
caveat that the regulations must be placed
in their statutory context, which
includes the legislation under which they are enacted and with which they are
required to be
consistent.
Construction of reg 31
did not understand there to be any real dispute from Mr Van Blitterswyk as
to the appropriate construction of reg 31. That is,
understand Mr Van
Blitterswyk to submit that it is a condition of reg 31 that in
circumstances where there is no current mining activity
on the tenement, and
there is instead an intention to mine, the following conditions must be
(1) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, must be reasonable; and
(2) the plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are likely to be carried
Mr Van Blitterswyk's case was that the warden had not imposed these
conditions, but rather had made a factual finding as
part of considering whether
the heap leach dry plant had been purchased on or in connection with mining on
the tenements.
Nonetheless,
as part of considering the application for judicial review, it is necessary to
first properly construe reg 31 of the
Regulations.
text of reg 31(1) of the Regulations relevantly
The holder of a mining lease shall expend or cause to be expended in mining on
or in connection with mining on the lease
text of reg 31 does not itself contain any reference to proposed mining or plans
for proposing mining, and does not contain any
reference to a condition that
(1) any plans for, or the proposed mining operations, are reasonable;
and/or (2) any plans for, or
the proposed mining operations, are likely to
be carried out.
definition of expenditure conditions in s 8(1) of the Act does contain the
following reference to proposed mining
operations:
expenditure
in relation to a mining tenement means the prescribed
conditions applicable to a mining tenement that require the expenditure of
on or in connection with the mining tenement or the mining operations carried
out thereon or proposed to be so carried out
this definition, when read into s 162(2)(h) of the Act, merely outlines the
scope of the regulation making power in relation
to expenditure conditions.
There is only one regulation which prescribes the expenditure conditions in
relation to mining leases,
and that is reg 31 of the Regulations. As
observed by McLure JA in
Re Warden Calder; Ex
, the definition of expenditure conditions is wider than the
text of reg 31 is sufficiently broad so as to admit expenditure 'on mining' and
expenditure 'in connection with mining' on the
tenements. It is in the context
of the phrase 'in connection with mining' that expenditure associated with
future mining may fall
within the scope of reg 31 of the Regulations.
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
, the Court of Appeal rejected the applicant's case that in
circumstances where there was no active mining on the tenement, expenditure
could only be 'in connection with mining' if at the time it was incurred there
was an intention to engage in mining on the mining
lease. The Court of Appeal
instead accepted the proposition that it is not necessary that there be current
active mining, or an
intention to carry out mining, on the mining tenement in
the relevant expenditure year. This flows from the nature of mining where
is often a long lead time before it is possible to form a definitive intention
to carry out mining operations and an intention
can be frustrated by activities
beyond the tenement holder's
It also flows from the fact that the neither the Act nor the Regulations require
the holder of a mining lease to carry out mining
operations or mining on the
lease. Rather, reg 31 is the sole source of a lessee's obligation in
relation to expenditure outside
of any of the conditions of the lease
often cited example of expenditure 'in connection with mining' is expenditure on
pre‑feasibility studies. Pre‑feasibility
studies may be a tool used
by the holder of the tenement to gather sufficient information from which to
make a decision as to whether
to engage in mining or mining operations on the
tenement at some point in the future. That is, at the time of the
pre-feasibility
studies, there may not be any intention to carry out mining.
Desktop studies were accepted as being expenditure falling within the
reg 31 by the Full Court in
Commercial Properties Pty
Ltd v Italo Nominees Pty
Re Warden P M Heaney
SM; Ex parte Flint v Nexus Minerals
circumstances where there is no legal requirement that there be active mining on
the tenement in the relevant year, or an intention
to carry out mining on the
mining tenement in the relevant year, I do not consider reg 31 can be
construed so as to impose either
of the above two conditions in order to satisfy
the nexus that the expenditure is 'in connection with mining' on the
a construction is consistent with the Act as a whole. In particular, the
wording of reg 31 stands in contrast to the wording
of s 102(2)(f) of
the Act which makes an express reference to proposed mining operations.
Section 102(2)(f) provides that an application
for an exemption from the
expenditure conditions may be granted where the ground the subject of the mining
tenement contains mineral
ore which is required to sustain the future operations
of an existing or proposed mining operation.
above construction of reg 31 is also not inconsistent with either the
primary purpose or objective of the Act, being to encourage
and promote the
prospecting and exploration for, and mining of, mineral deposits in the
or any of the other objectives identified by the Court of Appeal in
Forrest & Forrest Pty
Ltd v The Honourable William Richard Marmion, Minister for Mines and
is relevant to observe, however, that reg 31 does involve fact finding by
(relevantly here) the warden. The warden is ultimately
required to consider
whether the applicant for forfeiture can prove that the minimum expenditure
conditions have not been met. This
will involve considering the evidence
regarding the claimed expenditure.
so doing, the warden may be required to consider matters such as whether the
tenement holder has in fact expended money; whether
that expenditure relates to
the land (ground) the subject of the mining lease; the nature and purpose of the
good or service; was
the good or service purchased for some sort of use
associated with mining on the tenement (as opposed to being purchased for a use
not connected with mining at all, or mining on the lease in question); the
nature of the mining lease; the conditions of the mining
lease; and the type of
ore or other substance located on the lease. This is not in any way an
exhaustive list of facts that a warden
may need to consider when hearing a
forfeiture application and when considering whether claimed expenditure is on
mining on or in
connection with mining on the lease, and not all of these
factors may be applicable in any one case.
as a matter of construction, when carrying out that fact finding exercise,
reg 31 does not impose a condition that in circumstances
where there is no
current mining activity on the tenement that (1) the plans for, or the
proposed mining operations, must be reasonable;
and/or (2) the plans for,
or the proposed mining operations, are likely to be carried out.
will fall to the warden in each case where a forfeiture application is made to
consider whether the claimed expenditure is (relevantly)
expenditure in
connection with mining on the lease. In this regard, it is relevant to observe
that the phrase 'in connection with'
As observed in
of Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty
and referred to by McLure JA in
Re Warden Calder; Ex
, the words 'connected with' are capable of describing a
spectrum of relationships ranging from the direct and immediate to the tenuous
and remote. In light of this, it not possible to define the metes and bounds of
what will constitute 'in connection with mining'.
It will not only depend on
the purpose of the Act, but also the facts of the particular case.
Court of Appeal in
Warden Calder; Ex parte Lee
did not consider this issue. The Court of
Appeal also expressly declined to consider proposition (5) advanced by the
in that case, which was if the purpose of a good or service is to
'assist, investigate, assess or facilitate future possible mining
and the nature
of the activity is such that it is reasonably capable of contributing to such
assistance etc,' then that purpose and
nature will be a sufficient nexus between
the expenditure and on or in connection with mining. However, McLure JA
observed that
there was merit in this
proposition.
is likewise not possible or appropriate in the present case to outline a broad
overarching 'test' for when expenditure in circumstances
where there is no
mining on the lease, may constitute expenditure 'on or in connection with
Issue 2 - decision of the warden
of issue 2 involves a consideration of the reasons of the warden.
Blitterswyk's case is that the warden has not construed reg 31 so as to
contain either of the above two conditions, but rather
the warden has made
factual findings as part of considering whether the heap leach dry plant had
been purchased in connection with
mining on the tenements. In particular, the
warden has made a factual finding that Wingstar did not have any intention or
mine, and therefore the heap leach dry plant was not expenditure in
connection with mining on the leases.
is apparent from the reasons for decision that the warden has engaged in a
process of fact finding in relation to the claimed
expenditure on the leach heap
dry plant. However, that alone is not an answer to the alleged jurisdictional
outlined in
Azzopardi v
Tasman UEB Industries
A finding of fact ... may nevertheless reveal an error of law where it appears
that the trial judge has misdirected himself ie has
defined otherwise than in
accordance with law the question of fact which he has to answer. A possibility
of this kind exists with
ultimate findings of fact but not with respect to
primary findings of fact ... Further an ultimate finding of fact, even in the
of a misdirection, may reveal error of law if the primary facts found
are necessarily within or outside a statutory description and
decision has been made
also the decision of Pullin J in
Airflite Pty Ltd v
This Court may offer relief in relation to findings of fact, only if there is no
evidence to support a finding, or if the ultimate
finding of fact necessarily
demonstrates a misdirection on the law. That errors amount to errors of law.
(citations omitted)
is therefore necessary to review the decision of the warden to ascertain
whether, in the course of undertaking the ultimate fact
finding exercise, the
warden has construed reg 31 so as to impose the above two
conditions.
Incorrect construction
am satisfied, when the reasons of the warden are read as a whole, that the
warden has construed reg 31 as imposing the two conditions
this regard, the warden outlined at the beginning of the Warden's Decision that
there were two broad factual questions to
(a) If I consider the expenditure as recorded in the Form 5's, has Wingstar
shown, by its Form 5 expenditure reports, that they have
achieved the minimum
required spend, and
Whether I consider the expenditure as
recorded in the Form 5's or not, and if I am satisfied that the heap leach dry
plant and bulldozers
were in fact purchased at a relevant time, were these
purchases in relation to the ground the subject of these mining leases, and
or in connection with mining?
the context of dealing with factual question (b), the warden first included
a section which is headed 'What does "on or in connection
with mining"
This section of the Warden's Decision is not concerned with the task of fact
finding but rather outlines the relevant legal principles
which inform that fact
finding task.
the conclusion of that section, the warden outlined that when considering
whether expenditure is 'in connection with mining',
when there are only proposed
mining operations, the overall question
an assessment of the reasonableness of such plans and the likelihood of their
ever being carried out.
framing of the question in this way involves a construction of reg 31 which
includes the two conditions identified above.
framing of the question in this way is also contrary to the conclusion of the
Court of Appeal in
Warden Calder; Ex parte Lee
that it is not necessary that there be current active mining, or an
intention to carry out mining, on the mining tenement in the relevant
expenditure year in order for expenditure to fall within reg 31 of the
Regulations.
source of this error may have been a conflation of a number of different
this regard, the warden referred to the definition of 'expenditure conditions'
in s 8(1) of the Act, and emphasised the reference
to mining operations
to be carried out.
However, as outlined earlier in these reasons, the definition of expenditure
conditions is broader than the scope
of reg 31, which does not refer to
proposed mining operations or plans.
when the warden considered the decisions of
Re Warden Calder; Ex
Grange Resources Ltd v
, the warden appears to have ultimately conflated the two separate
plaints that were before Warden Calder, being the applications
forfeiture and the application for an exemption pursuant to s 102(2)(f) of
the Act. It is relevant to observe that an exemption
can be granted under
s 102(2)(f) of the Act if the ground the subject of the tenement contains
mineral ore which is required to sustain
the future operations of an existing
or proposed
mining operation.
It is in the context of considering this exemption that Warden Calder
assessed the proposed mining operation and
concluded that it was 'nothing more
than a hope'; that there was only a mere possibility that the ground would be
the subject of
a mining operation in the future; and that Warden Calder
could find no sufficient certainty 'or even any reasonable likelihood of
mining operations being proposed', in the sense contemplated by
s 102(2)(f).
Warden Calder did not make any findings as to the likelihood of any
proposed mining operations in the context of the forfeiture application.
is therefore not surprising that the challenge to the Court of Appeal, which was
only in relation to dismissal of the forfeiture
application in relation to
Horseshoe, concerned the construction of the words 'in connection with mining',
'as opposed to directly
challenging the warden's view on the correct
construction of the word
'proposed'.
warden also observed that Wingstar submitted that, 'the comments made by the
court on review in
Warden Calder; Ex parte Lee
provide a structure in which to determine the
issue in the present
The warden accepted this submission and considered that, 'those comments are
can be made on
whether expenditure is 'in connection with mining' when there are only proposed
operations'.
it is significant that the comments of the Court of Appeal in
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
did not refer to any requirement to carry out an assessment of the
reasonableness of plans for future mining and/or the likelihood
of the plans
ever being carried out.
Application of the incorrect test
am also satisfied, when regard is had to reasons of warden as a whole, that her
Honour has gone on to apply the incorrect construction
of reg 31 when
assessing whether the expenditure on the heap leach dry plant is 'in connection
with mining' on the leases.
Blitterswyk submits that the warden did not misconstrue reg 31, and instead
made factual findings regarding Mr Gardner's evidence
as to why he
purchased the heap leach dry plant and his plans for future mining.
can be accepted that the warden has, as part of her reasons, assessed the
evidence given by the witnesses, and made primary findings
of fact as to various
aspects of that evidence, including as to Mr Gardner's credibility. These
primary findings of fact were made
in the context then going on to consider the
ultimate finding of fact, being whether the expenditure on the heap leach dry
is 'on or in connection with mining' on the leases.
this regard, her Honour first assessed the evidence regarding the purchase of
the heap leach dry plant and concluded that Wingstar
had purchased the heap
leach dry plant in the relevant
Her Honour also found that it was being stored on one of Wingstar's tenements
associated with the Cawse
Honour then proceeded to consider whether the heap leach dry plant expenditure
was 'in connection with
and framed the questions that her Honour was considering when doing so
are Wingstar's plans, and
there evidence that suggests that those plans are not reasonable, or will not be
carried out?
warden then proceeded to consider and assess the evidence before her by
reference to the various different headings identified
earlier in these reasons,
which are all matters directed towards assessing the reasonableness of
Wingstar's proposed mining operations
and plans, and the likelihood of those
proposed operations or plans being carried out.
was those matters that then informed the factual finding made by her Honour that
Mr Gardner and Wingstar may have had 'a hope,
but no real intention or
and that all the
circumstances:
suggest to me that there was not any real hope or intention of using the heap
leach dry plant during or even close to the relevant
tenement year, or perhaps
at all. That being the case, I am satisfied that it cannot be said that the
purchase of the heap leach
dry plant was in any way close to facilitating future
possible mining, that is, an identified or planned or recognisable operation,
and was not, considering those circumstances, reasonably capable of contributing
to the facilitation or assistance of any such operation
or proposed
was in light of all these matters, that the warden then concluded that the
payment for the heap leach dry plant was not on or
in connection with
so doing, the warden made ultimate findings of fact in the context of applying
the incorrect construction of reg 31 of the Regulations.
That is, the
warden assessed all the evidence and made factual findings against two criteria
or conditions which reg 31, properly
construed, does not contain.
Blitterswyk also submits that the warden did not actually conclude that
Wingstar's plans were not reasonable, or that they
were never likely to be
carried out. Further, that there was no need for the warden to consider whether
the plans were reasonable
or never likely to be carried out, because her Honour
found that there was never any real intention or plan to mine.
do not accept this submission. The conclusions of the warden outlined above
were arrived at following a consideration of the evidence
under the various
different headings identified earlier in these reasons, which are all matters
directed towards assessing the reasonableness
of Wingstar's proposed mining
operations and plans, and the likelihood of those proposed operations or plans
being carried out.
For example, what was practically required to make the heap
leach dry plant operational; what was practically required to undertake
mining (including an assessment of the evidence regarding mineral ore deposits
and the need to recommission a pipeline; the
economic conditions and their
impact; and the integrity of the heap leach dry plant and what was needed (and
the likelihood) of it
becoming operational.
is also contrary to [217] of the Warden's Decision where the warden expressly
states that she has determined whether there is
evidence that suggests that
Wingstar's plans are not reasonable or will not be carried out.
am therefore satisfied that the warden has misconceived the nature of her
statutory function or the extent of her powers.
Materiality
concluded that the warden has misconceived the nature of her statutory function
or the extent of her powers, it remains necessary
to consider whether that error
is a material error.
is important to observe that the test in relation to materiality is whether
there exists a realistic possibility that the outcome
of the decision
), have been different had the
error not been made.
is not the role of this court to undertake the assessment of whether the
expenditure in relation to the heap leach dry plant is
expenditure on or in
connection with mining on the tenement. That is the function of the warden, and
in circumstances where I have
concluded that the warden has misconstrued the
nature of the statutory powers and function, it is not appropriate for this
to take on the warden's statutory role.
am satisfied that the threshold of materiality is reached. The warden has
undertaken the required assessment by applying the incorrect
test and assessing
the evidence against conditions that reg 31 does not, properly construed,
impose. In circumstances where the
warden has concluded that Wingstar did
purchase the heap leach dry plant in the relevant year and that the heap leach
dry plant is
stored on one of the Wingstar's tenements; and in circumstances
where the heap leach dry plant appears on its face to be a good that
may be used
for mining related activities, I am satisfied that there exists a realistic
possibility that the outcome of the decision
could, not would, have been
different had the error not been made.
the amount of the expenditure is of sufficient magnitude such that if the
expenditure is on or in connection with mining,
then it could result in the
warden determining that the minimum expenditure conditions have been met by
Wingstar. In this regard,
I observe that the warden would also need to go on to
consider the question of whether the claimed expenditure can be apportioned
across all the tenements. This was not a matter considered by the warden.
Blitterswyk submits that there is no realistic possibility, even if the correct
construction of reg 31 was adopted, that the
warden would have reached a
different conclusion. Mr Van Blitterswyk submits this is because the
warden concluded that there was
no real intention or plan to mine and made
negative findings as to Mr Gardner's credibility. I do not accept this
submission. That
submission assumes the incorrect construction of reg 31
of the Regulations.
the reasons outlined above, the application for judicial review should be
allowed. I will hear further from the parties as to
the appropriate orders and
as to costs.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
13 NOVEMBER 2025
The Act, s 162(2)(h).
The Act, s 102(5)(b) and s
The Act, s 102(5)(a) and s
Strother v Tavener
[2016] WASC 85
Re His Worship Calder SM;
Ex parte Gardner
[1999] WASCA 28
(1999) 20 WAR 525
Warden's Decision [17] -
Warden's Decision [24] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [9].
Warden's Decision [9]; Lawton affidavit, GLH1 -
Lawton affidavit, GLH11 -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [8] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [10] -
Warden's Decision [128] and
Warden's Decision [203] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Warden's Decision [163] -
Grange Resources Ltd v Lee
[2006] WAMW
Warden's Decision [166] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [169] ‑
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [172] -
Warden's Decision [174] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [255], see also [249], [252], [254], [256],
Warden's Decision
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Plaintiff M64/2015 v
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] HCA 50
(2015) 258 CLR 173
Kirk v Industrial Court of
New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
; (2010) 239 CLR 531 [71];
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[3] and the authorities cited
Aronson M, 'Jurisdictional Error without the Tears' in Groves M & Lee H P
Australian Administrative Law
Fundamentals, Principles and Doctrines
, Cambridge University Press,
Victoria, (2007) 330, 335 - 336, as cited in
Kirk v Industrial Court of
New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
; (2010) 239 CLR 531 [71]
‑ [72]. See
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 280 CLR 321
Nathanson v Minister for
[2022] HCA 26
(2022) 276 CLR 80
[33] (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gleeson JJ), [46] (Gageler J), [63]
(Gordon J).
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
Grange Resources Ltd v Lee
[2006] WAMW 8
Grange Resources Ltd v Lee
[2006] WAMW 8
Grange Resources Ltd v Lee
[2006] WAMW 8
Grange Resources Ltd v Lee
[2006] WAMW 8
Re Warden P M Heaney SM;
Ex parte Flint v Nexus Minerals NL
(Unreported, Full Court of Supreme
Court, Western Australia, Library No 1652 of 1996, 26 February
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
(1997) 187 CLR
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[69] ‑ [71];
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd
v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Shop,
Distributive & Allied Employees Association
[2017] HCA 53
(2017) 262 CLR 593
Kelly v Birchwood
Consolidated Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In Liquidation)
[2023] WASCA 76
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Mohammadi v Bethune
[2018] WASCA 98
Kelly v Birchwood
Consolidated Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In Liquidation)
[2023] WASCA 76
Master Education Services
Pty Ltd v Ketchell
[2008] HCA 38
(2008) 236 CLR 101
ENT19 v Minister for Home
[2023] HCA 18
(2023) 278 CLR 75
Re Warden Calder; Ex
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Commercial Properties Pty
Ltd v Italo Nominees Pty Ltd
(Unreported, Full Court of Supreme Court,
Western Australia, 16 December 1988),
Re Warden P M Heaney SM;
Ex parte Flint v Nexus Minerals NL
(Unreported, Full Court of Supreme
Court, Western Australia, Library No 1652 of 1996, 26 February 1997),
Nova Resources NL v
(1995) 12 WAR 50
Forrest & Forrest Pty
Ltd v The Honourable William Richard Marmion, Minister for Mines and
[2017] WASCA 153
(2017) 51 WAR
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Collector of Customs v
Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
Re Warden Calder; Ex parte
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB
Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Airflite Pty Ltd v Goyal
[2003] WASCA 45
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [163] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [215] -
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [255], see also [249], [252], [254], [256],
Warden's Decision
Warden's Decision [269].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (595 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter