URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/128.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
C [2025] WASAT 128 (14 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
C [2025] WASAT 128
DR E MARILLIER, SENIOR MEMBER
4 NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
12 NOVEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
14 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
GAA 4690 of 2025
GAA 5153 of 2025
GAA 5154 of 2025
GAA 5156 of 2025
Proposed Represented Person
Guardianship and administration - Enduring power
of administration - Enduring power of guardianship - Whether enduring power is
restrictive alternative - Whether enduring power of guardianship is valid -
Whether enduring power of attorney is operating in best
interests of donor -
Conflict of interest - Personal legal representative for purposes of
directorship of self-managed superannuation
fund - Public Trustee not willing to
be appointed as administrator for role as director - Split authorities
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Enduring powers of attorney revoked
power of guardianship not valid
Joint limited guardians appointed for
accommodation, medical treatment and service decisions
Public Advocate
appointed limited guardian for contact decisions
Private limited
administrator appointed to act as the represented person's personal legal
representative for the purpose of her self-managed
superannuation fund
Trustee appointed as limited administrator for all other functions
Representation:
Proposed Represented Person
Mr G Hewett
Mr D Miller
Solicitors:
Proposed Represented Person
HHG Legal Group
Culshaw Miller Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
(These reasons were delivered orally on 12 November 2025. They have been
anonymised, and citations have been added for the purpose
of publication as
written reasons, as some parties were unable to attend).
Introduction
are my reasons for decision in matters GAA 4690 of 2025, GAA 5153 of 2025,
GAA 5154 of 2025 and GAA 5156 of 2025. These are
applications under
for the revocation or variation of an enduring power of attorney
for the appointment of an administrator and/or a guardian,
(for a declaration of validity or invalidity in relation to an
enduring power of guardianship) and
(for the revocation or variation of
an enduring power of guardianship (
)) under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
). They all relate
made orders on 4 November 2025 revoking the powers of attorney C had executed on
23 March 2023 appointing her son Z, and on 7 August
2025 appointing her son Y as
enduring attorney. I appointed Y and his sister X as the joint limited
guardians for accommodation,
medical treatment and service decisions and the
Public Advocate as the limited guardian for contact decisions. I found that an
power of guardianship dated 26 July 2025 appointing Z as enduring
guardian was not valid and therefore did not require revocation.
I appointed Y
as limited administrator to act as C's legal personal representative with
respect to the self-managed superannuation
fund and the Public Trustee as
limited administrator with all the powers of a plenary administrator save and
except for those vested
said I would give my reasons for these orders at a later date. These are
those reasons.
initial application was made by Z under s 109(1)(c) seeking revocation of the
EPA C executed on 7 August 2025 in favour of Y
(and which conflicted with the
existing EPA appointing Z of 23 March 2023). Both enduring powers were lodged
with Landgate.
is now in her late 70s. She had entered residential aged care a few months
prior to the application after an admission to hospital
in late June and early
July of this year with a surgical emergency. During her hospitalisation she
underwent an MRI brain scan to
investigate falls which showed normal pressure
hydrocephalus, and advanced white matter, frontotemporal and hippocampal atrophy
stated in his application that C had advancing cognitive impairment, and
sufficient assets to enjoy high-quality self-funded residential
care. He wanted
the EPA of 2025 appointing Y to be revoked as it was unworkable to have two. Z
noted Y lives interstate and had
only been visiting Perth to help pack up C's
a Directions hearing on 11 September 2025, Z agreed to make oral applications
which I accepted for the consideration of appointment
of a guardian and an
administrator for C, as well as consideration of whether the EPG by which he
sought to make personal decisions
for C was valid and/or should be revoked.
This was because the parties agreed there was a question regarding whether C had
to execute enduring powers in July or August this year, and there
needed to be an option for substitute decision-making to be considered
of the enduring powers could work.
made orders appointing the Public Trustee as plenary administrator on an
emergency basis under s 65 of the GA Act pending final
determination of the four
matters, as I had been told that C had limited or no access to funds, and that
the superannuation fund
had been frozen due to non-lodgement of tax returns
since 2022.
have considered the documents filed by, and the written submissions and reports
Dr P, C's GP
since 2003;
the accountants
of the self-managed superannuation fund;
Advocate; and
have also heard the evidence and submissions given today by:
Z and his wife
representative (with whom I raised concerns regarding her capacity to give
instruction);
accountant;
the investigator
advocate of Public Advocate; and
Manager and the legal officer from the Public
Principles to be observed
making my decision, I am mindful of the principles set out in s 4 of the GA
concern is the best interests of
C is presumed to
be capable of looking after their own health and safety; of making reasonable
judgments in matters relating to their
person; of managing their own affairs;
and of making reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to their
estate until the
contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the
A guardianship
of administration order shall not be made where there is an alternative means of
meeting C's needs that is less restrictive
of their freedom of decision and
Where an order
is made, it must be in terms that impose the least restrictions on the C's
freedom of decision and
I must seek to
ascertain, as far as possible, the views and wishes of
What the Tribunal must be satisfied of
appointing an administrator, I must first be satisfied that C is unable, by
reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable
judgments in respect of
matters relating to all or any part of their
must also be satisfied that C is in need of an
administrator.
appointing a guardian, I must be satisfied that C is:
(i) incapable
of looking after their own health and safety; or
(ii) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to
their person; or
(iii) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of their own
health and safety or for the protection of
addition, I must be satisfied that C is in need of a
Mental disability
this case the evidence regarding C's condition is consistent and there is no
dispute in relation to this issue.
P who has been C's general practitioner (
) for 22 years and has seen
her seven times in the last 12 months says C has cognitive impairment consistent
with dementia which was
first recognised about 12 months ago. Dr P says this is
a progressive condition, and that it has already progressed to the point
does not have capacity to manage simple or complex financial decisions, legal
decisions or personal decisions about medical
treatment, accommodation or
services. Dr P also finds C is incapable of executing an EPA, EPG or advance
health directive (AHD)
or voting in elections based on her clinical presentation
on 25 August 2025. Dr P said that C attending the Tribunal hearing would
be detrimental to her health and wellbeing, and that she would not understand
sufficiently to make a reliable contribution.
am satisfied and I find that:
C has a cognitive impairment
consistent with dementia which comes within the meaning of a mental disability
as defined by s 3 of the
have considered the issue of capacity, starting from the presumption that every
person has the ability to make reasonable judgments
in relation to their
finances and person and then considering whether the evidence before me is
sufficient to rebut that presumption
and positively establish that C is unable
to make such reasonable decisions.
this case the evidence is all consistent and there seems to be no dispute in
relation to this issue. I am satisfied and I find
(a) Because
of her mental disability C has not been in a position to manage her own affairs
in relation to the taxation reporting
obligations of the self-managed
superannuation fund, even with the assistance of Z as enduring attorney and
fellow director, and
the involvement of an accounting firm. Her house was found
by the Public Trustee to have an unrepaired leak in the roof, black mould
lapsed insurance. C has frozen assets, a refundable accommodation deposit
) to be paid, and mounting liabilities for her residential care. She
has been unable to resolve these issues herself.
(b) C's long-term GP has found her to lack the ability to make reasonable
judgments about medical treatment, accommodation and support
in this case the presumption is rebutted by the evidence. I am satisfied and I
find C is unable to make reasonable decisions
in relation to all of her estate
and her person and is therefore a person for whom I can appoint an administrator
and a guardian.
Is there a less restrictive means of meeting proposed represented person's
is evidence from the reports of the Public Trustee and the Public Advocate and
the written and oral evidence of her children
that C is in need of someone to
(at least):
(a) operate bank accounts and pay bills;
(b) sell property to raise the RAD for nursing home care;
(c) investigate the situation with her assets held within the self-managed
superannuation fund in which she and Z were originally
trustees in their
personal capacity from inception in 2007, but then adopted a corporate
personality (of which they were the two
directors) instead in 2014 (as is
evident from the Deed of Variation of 15 September 2014);
(d) potentially to act as next friend in legal proceedings; and
(e) to arrange accommodation and support services.
have considered whether there is any less restrictive means of meeting the
proposed represented person's needs than the appointment
of a guardian and/or an
administrator.
am satisfied, on the evidence before me, that there is no less restrictive means
available than the appointment of a guardian and
an administrator
(a) The enduring power of attorney appointing Z cannot
stand as there are conflicts of interest arising from transactions admitted
in his written submissions. These include, but are not limited to, sales of
property in his name to the self-managed superannuation
fund, and payments he
said he made at C's direction to his siblings from his own funds and which he
considers to be moneys owed to
him by C in excess of $1 million. The audit
of the fund in 2022 lodged by the accountant expresses concerns about rental of
property to related parties not at arm's length.
(b) The non-lodgement of the tax returns of the superannuation fund which
have now caused the freezing of C's access to her funds
which otherwise might
have been available for the payment of her RAD indicates that Z has not been
effective in making decisions
in the best interests of C regarding her
(c) The EPA appointing Y and the EPG appointing Z which were executed on
7 August and 26 July 2025 respectively cannot stand where
given evidence in her report that C has had cognitive impairment consistent with
dementia for the last 12 months, and that
when examined on 25 August 2025
she lacked capacity to execute such documents. Z gave evidence that he
organised the EPG when C
entered residential care at the request of the facility
(i.e. it was not C's idea) and Y gave evidence that the EPA was his idea.
satisfied and I find that C did not instigate, and on the evidence of Dr P, did
not have capacity to legally execute those
enduring powers.
therefore find that the EPG is not valid under s 110K and thus do not need to
revoke it under s 110N. I will revoke both EPAs
pursuant to
s 109(1)(c) and s 108 which permits the revocation or variation of an
enduring power of attorney when the Tribunal makes
administration order.
there is no less restrictive means of meeting the PRP's needs than a formal
appointment, I am satisfied that C is in need of an
administrator and a
What are the views and wishes of C?
have been able to ascertain C's views and wishes from the investigation report
and oral evidence of the Public Advocate. C told
the investigator she believes
Z has misappropriated her funds and acted without her direction. She had no
recollection of appointing
him EPA in 2023 but noted that she had until recently
trusted him absolutely. She did not recall executing the EPG appointing Z
in July 2025. She does not want Z to visit her in the nursing home, or to
taken valuable artworks
from her house without permission and she wants them returned. C wants Z
removed from all positions of authority
in relation to her affairs. I have
taken those wishes into account.
indicated she would support Y's appointment but noted he lives interstate and
has small children, so he might not be able to take
on the roles. C supported
the appointment of the Public Trustee as administrator.
indicated she was happy for Y and/or X to be appointed as guardian, expressing
some concern about X's direct communication style
perhaps upsetting
Who should be appointed?
administrator or guardian must be a person over the age of 18 who is
willing to undertake the role, and whom the Tribunal finds
will act in the best
interests of C and is otherwise
interests must not conflict with those of C, and the Tribunal must take into
(a) the desirability of preserving existing relationships
within the family of the person in respect of whom the application is
(b) the compatibility of the proposed appointee with that person and with the
administrator/guardian (if any) of that person's
(c) the wishes of the person in respect of whom the application is
(d) whether the proposed appointee will be able to perform the functions
Public Advocate shall not be appointed as guardian or administrator unless there
is no other person the Tribunal finds suitable
who is willing to
this case, the Public Trustee has indicated it is not willing to be appointed as
director of the self-managed superannuation fund,
due to its concerns regarding
director's duties and liabilities. Y has indicated that he is willing to be
appointed as guardian
and as limited administrator for the purpose of the
self-managed superannuation fund in the absence of the Public Trustee being
to take on that part of the role. All parties otherwise support
the appointment of the Public Trustee for the remaining aspects
is willing to be appointed as guardian jointly with Y, but admits she cannot
communicate with Z.
proposed herself as a joint guardian with Y and X, particularly because she
believes she and her children with Z are included in
the ban from contact.
During the hearing it became apparent that there may in fact be no such ban in
relation to A and C's grandchildren.
Y expressed a concern that any joint
guardianship with A would end with her being a conduit of information to Z and
was not sure
that at this early stage of resolving the complex situation and
competing claims that it could work. He felt it was something to
aspire to in
the future.
legal representative for C gave evidence that when they met with C, she said she
felt very flustered if Z was in attendance and
they had advised her she could
let the facility know if she did not want him to visit.
OPA investigator gave evidence that the Clinical Nurse Manager at the care
facility reported C had come to her and said she felt
scared and threatened by Z
and that he was always asking for money. The Clinical Nurse Manager's written
report to the Tribunal
also reported C said she did not wish Z to visit
am satisfied that C has told multiple independent professionals that she does
not want to see Z. As a consequence, I am not satisfied
that the appointment of
A (Z's wife) as a guardian would be in C's best interests.
service provider report of the Clinical Nurse Manager reports that X and Y have
a close relationship with C.
Public Advocate supports the appointment of Y and X as joint guardians for
treatment, accommodation and services decisions.
the concerns around visitation, the Public Advocate submitted that an
independent guardian for contact decisions would be in
C's best interests.
am satisfied and I find that X and Y will act in the best interests of C and are
suitable to be appointed for all necessary functions
other than contact because
C supports their appointment, the aged care facility report no concerns
regarding their involvement and
Y has expressed willingness to communicate with
Z regarding personal decisions which arise for C. I note that although there is
an expectation the guardians will inform Z of circumstances and he can express
his views, the guardians must make the decisions on
what they believe is in C's
best interests, taking into consideration the factors set out in s 51(2) of the
(2) ...a guardian acts in the best interests of a represented person if the
guardian acts as far as possible -
advocate for the represented person;
(b) in such a way as to encourage the represented person to live in the
general community and participate as much as possible in the
life of the
(c) in such a way as to encourage and assist the represented person to become
capable of caring for themself and of making reasonable
judgments in respect of
matters relating to their person;
(d) in such a way as to protect the represented person from neglect, abuse or
exploitation;
(e) in consultation with the represented person, taking into account, as far
as possible, the wishes of that person as expressed,
in whatever manner, or as
gathered from the person's previous actions;
(f) in the manner that is least restrictive of the rights, while consistent
with the proper protection, of the represented person;
(g) in such a way as to maintain any supportive relationships the represented
person has; and
(h) in such a way as to maintain the represented person's familiar cultural,
linguistic and religious environment.
I am not satisfied X and Y can make contact decisions, given the current level
of suspicion and distrust around the financial
arrangements between Z and C. I
accept that until recently there has been a close and trusting relationship
between Z and C. I
accept that A and the grandchildren in Perth would like to
visit C and I believe it is necessary for an independent party to be the
that broaches that with C and explores her wishes in that regard. As a
consequence, I made orders appointing the Public Advocate
for that function
Scope of Orders
the reasons already explained, split appointments are necessary for
administration and for guardianship.
administration is needed given C's incapacity even in relation to simple
transactions. This is achieved by the Public Trustee
being appointed with all
the powers of a plenary administrator save and except for those vested in Y in
relation to the superannuation
fund, given the Public Trustee does not consent
to appointment for that purpose.
Accommodation,
support service and medical treatment decisions are required currently and on an
ongoing basis for C, because the
report of the Public Advocate indicates she
wishes to leave the aged care facility and return to live in the property with
leak and the mould. The report of the Clinical Nurse Manager
indicates that C requires greater care than can be provided outside
and that she has limited insight. Dr P's report states C lacks capacity to make
decisions about accommodation, services
and medical treatment. There is a
current need for a guardian with the contact function as well, as explained
Period of Order
am required to specify a period of time within which a review of the orders must
be made. The maximum time period allowed by the
GA Act is 5 years. In
this case I consider that it is in C's best interests to set a review within 5
years because of the progressive
nature of her condition, and the complexity of
the current financial position. On the evidence, she will need substitute
decision-makers
in the long-term. If there is any resolution of issues
which might allow less extensive orders to be made, the parties can seek
review of the orders.
has made gifts to family members at special times of the year. Given the
uncertainty of her financial position currently, I have
included a gifting
authority of up to $1,000 per annum in the administration order.
P's report states C no longer has capacity to vote. I accept that evidence and
so I have made a declaration to that effect.
those reasons on 4 November 2025, I made the following
GAA 4690/2025
The Tribunal makes the following orders:
Tribunal declares that the represented person, [C] is:
(a) unable,
by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in respect of
matters relating to all of her estate;
(b) in need of an administrator of her estate;
(c) incapable of looking after her own health and safety;
(d) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to her
(e) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of her own health
and safety; and
(f) in need of a guardian.
Administration
order made on 11 September 2025 pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) is revoked.
of [address] is appointed limited administrator of the estate of the represented
person to act as the represented person's legal
personal representative with
respect to the [Superannuation Fund].
Public Trustee of 553 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed limited
administrator of the estate of the represented
person with all of the powers and
responsibilities of a plenary administrator, save and except for the function in
Order 3 above.
avoid doubt, the Public Trustee's powers as a limited administrator include the
power to receive funds from the [Superannuation
Fund], should the trustee or
trustees of that fund choose to make a payment for the benefit of the
represented person.
administrator is authorised to expend up to a total amount of $1,000 per annum
on gifts on behalf of the represented person.
enduring power of attorney dated 23 March 2023 by which the represented person
appointed [Z] and the enduring power of attorney
dated 7 August 2025 appointing
[Y] be their attorney, are revoked.
administration order is to be reviewed before 4 November 2030.
Guardianship
of [address] and [X] of [address] are appointed joint limited guardians of the
represented person with the following functions:
(a) to decide
where the represented person is to live, whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live;
(c) to make treatment decisions for the represented person, subject to
Division 3 of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(d) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
access; and
(e) to decide whether to give or withhold consent to the use of any
restrictive practices for the represented person proposed from
time to time
Aged Care Act 2024
(Cth) or subsidiary legislation.
Public Advocate of David Malcolm Justice Centre, Level 23, 28 Barrack
Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed limited guardian
represented person with the following functions:
(a) to determine
what contact, if any, the represented person should have with others and the
extent of that contact.
Tribunal approves delegation by the Public Advocate of her functions as guardian
of the represented person to an officer or employee
employed in the Office of
the Public Advocate.
is declared that the represented person is not capable of making judgments for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of
Electoral Act 1907
(WA) relating to compulsory voting.
guardianship order is to be reviewed before 4 November
GAA 5153/2025
On an application by [Z] pursuant to
s 109(1)(c)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) concerning an enduring power of attorney dated
23 March 2023 by which [C] appointed [Z] and an enduring power of attorney dated
7 August 2025 appointing [Y] as her enduring attorney.
The Tribunal orders:
enduring powers of attorney are revoked.
On an application by [Z] pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) concerning an enduring power of guardianship
dated 26 July 2025 by which [C] appointed [Z] as her enduring guardian.
The Tribunal orders:
enduring power of guardianship is not
GAA 5156/2025
On an application by [Z] pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) concerning an enduring power of guardianship
dated 26 July 2025 by which [C] appointed [Z] as her enduring guardian.
The Tribunal orders:
enduring power of guardianship has been found not to be valid and therefore does
not require revocation.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
DR E Marillier, SENIOR MEMBER
14 NOVEMBER 2025
Guardianship
and Administration Act
s 64(1)(b).
Act, s 43(1)(b).
Act, s 44 and s
Act, s 44(2)(b) and s
Act, s 44(2)(c) and s
Act, s 44(2)(d) and s
Act, s 44(5) and s 68(5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter