URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MARIA & EGIDIO COLETTA and BENCHMARK DESIGNER HOMES PTY LTD (Formerly Minaret (Decision O.20284) [2011] WABDT 70 (1 September 2011)
BUILDING DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
W GILLAN (Chairperson),
C MARSH (Builder Member) J MILNE (Builder Member)
3 JUNE 2011
ORDERS MADE:
1 SEPTEMBER 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
29 AUGUST 2011
COMPLAINT NO.:
BETWEEN: MARIA & EGIDIO COLETTA
COMPLAINANTS
BENCHMARK DESIGNER HOMES PTY LTD
(Formerly Minaret Holdings Pty Ltd)
CATCHWORDS:
Unsatisfactory Brickwork – Bench top – Shower
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant(s):
Maria & Egidio
Respondent(s):
CASE(S) REFERRED TO
IN DECISION:
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerns a new house at 53 Canada Street, Dianella.
reference to the Owner’s letter of complaint dated 23 December 2010. the
Owners complain:
2.1 The exterior brickwork is not built to an acceptable aesthetic
2.2 A parapet wall was not built to an acceptable standard, was subsequently
rendered, and they seek compensation for that and against
possible future
maintenance;
2.3 The shower screens are not semi‐frameless as
2.4 The portico was built incorrectly;
2.5 There is an unsightly join in the stone bench top;
2.6 There is an unsightly gap between the garage door and the wall of the
2.7 No weepholes have been included under certain
2.1 and 2.3‐2.7 are workmanship issues while item 2.2 is a question of
whether the screens provided were those contracted
for. We will deal with each
issue in turn.
have had the benefit of photographs of the brickwork, a report dated 4 October
2010 prepared by BSP Construction Consultants (BSP)
for the Owners as well as a
report dated 20 May 2011 by AJB Management Services Pty Ltd for the Builder and
a site visit to inspect
the brickwork.
face brickwork used on the house is a rustic cream coloured block. The size of
the blocks is not completely uniform.
BSP Report notes that the general finish on the face brickwork is poor as the
join widths are not uniform, the cement mortar colour
varies and the join finish
is not uniform.
is not a particularly useful way in which the report on the finish but those
comments were proved to be accurate as demonstrated
by the photographs and, much
more compellingly, by the site visit.
Builder, by AJB, relies on the brickwork meeting the specific tolerances set out
in AS 3700‐2001 for masonry structures.
More about this
site visits revealed the following:
(a) the brickwork over the entire eastern wall of the house (two story) had
variations in both the perpend and horizontal joints
in both colour and size of
those joints;
(b) the brickwork on the western wall of the house showed variations in the
perpend and horizontal joints in both colour and size;
(c) the brickwork on the upper story at the front (north) and western corner
over the porch or portico was out of plumb by 8mm over
eight courses. This was
obvious to the eye;
(d) on the eastern and western walls the brick window ledges sloped backwards
into the windows;
(e) at various locations on each of the eastern and western walls, there were
examples of straight joins in the perpend joints;
(f) overall there were many examples of rough horizontal and perpend joints.
This was especially evident on the western wall, above
the porch/portico and on
the upper story of the eastern wall;
(g) some of the bricks were out of step with the adjacent bricks on the western
and eastern walls.
Builder relied on a report by AJB Management Services (AJB) to the effect that,
by reference to Table 11.1 of AS 3700‐2001,
that the tolerances for
non‐ structural face brickwork were not exceeded. The report sets
“Bed and Perpend Joints
(a) In ASA 3700‐2001, for bed joints the deviation from the
manufacturer’s specified thickness is
(b) In ASA 3700‐2001, for perpend joints the deviation from
specified thickness of joint is
5mm with a maximum difference of
(c) The brick manufacturers recommended a 10mm minimum
(d) In this case the bed joints measured were found to be between 10‐ 15mm
(where a clean brick to brick joint was found);
(e) Perpend joints varied 10‐16mm;
(f) There were variations from the standard but they only exceeded
tolerance by a small degree;
Horizontal Joints
(g) In ASA 3700‐2001, the horizontal joint deviation tolerances
10mm in any 10 metre length and
15, in total
checks the joints did not exceed tolerances;
(h) No corner was displaced more than
(i) There were areas of rough joints but these only required taking out and
repointing; and
(j) The colour of the mortar was within industry
tolerances.
our view the general provisions of AS3700‐2001 also apply. Relevantly
that standard also states:
“11.2 GENERAL
Masonry shall be constructed with appropriate site control and supervision so
that the strength and other requirements of the design
and this Standard are
“11.44 BONDING
Where necessary, the bond pattern shall provide for:
(b) the overlap of the units in successive courses to achieve such
horizontal bonding strength as required by the design (see
clause 7.4.3).”
‐ This requires the avoidance of straight joints.
“11.4.15 JOINT FINISHING
Mortar joints shall be finished as specified. The depth of raking shall not
exceed the amount specified I the documents.”
is clear to us that the standard is concerned with the overall appearance of the
brickwork as well as whether specific joints are
within tolerances: see in
particular 11.2 set out above.
do not agree with the Builder’s position. The major problem with the
western and eastern walls (leaving the porch/portico
to one side) arises because
of the difference in the size of the perpend joints and the differences in
mortar colour.
perpend joints, as admitted by AJB, varied in their thickness. That variation
exceeds, in many instances,
5mm. This was admitted by AJB on page 2 of
its report but it says that the excess of tolerances was only by a “small
may be that the random checks made by AJB of the horizontal joints did not find
horizontal joints that exceeded tolerances (AJB
report) but on inspection the
overall appearance showed the horizontal joints to be widely varied. It may be
this is contributed
to by the type of face brick used but the type
bricks including their rustic appearance is a matter that should
be taken into account by the bricklayer when laying the bricks.
the brickwork is, in our view, unsatisfactory in appearance. The contradiction
in the various joint sizes, both horizontal
and perpend together with the rough
joints, the wrongly sloping windowsills and the substantial variation in mortar
colour leads
to the western and eastern walls falling short of the required
agreed with the Owners that all that can be done to remedy this is to render the
walls. Quotes for rendering the walls are:
from Anthony Majvici
from Total Choice Plastering
from PJK Plasterers
An average cost being $8,241.00
For painting the rendered walls – Astro Painting
For scaffolding – three weeks ($330/week thereafter)
TOTAL COST $21,061.00
The job could be completed within three
Item 2 – Parapet Wall
argument it was not accepted by the Builder that the parapet wall was not built
in accordance with the plans. He submitted that
the plans showed the wall as
was simply not correct. The plans for the garage parapet wall were amended on 14
January 2009 after construction had commenced
and as a consequence the upper
story slab having been incorrectly laid out to the edge of the parapet
The incorrect laying of the slab then required the parapet wall to
(a) extended above the slab by several brick courses;
(b) to be rendered, whereas it was initially to be face
is an unfortunate occurrence but the Owners case for compensation was based
primarily on an apprehension that there would be
an ongoing maintenance
are not convinced that is the case and so we dismiss this
Item 3 – Shower Screens
shower screens to be installed in the house were described in the contact as
being semi frameless.
Owners’ evidence, from Mrs Coletta, is that she attended at the
Builder’s showroom and at various display homes where
she saw semi
frameless shower screens that had an external chrome frame but where the door
was unframed.
Coletta also says she collected a brochure showing the Mirage Square Cut screen
which was similar to a screen from the Builder’s
show room and was told
that was the frame she would have.
Builder could not oppose that evidence by any first hand evidence of his
inspected the shower screens. The doors were framed with chrome. Indeed none of
the members would have described the screens as
installed as being semi
frameless at all.
find this matter made out.
Owners indicated to the Tribunal that they had lost confidence in the Builder
and would prefer an order to pay rather than orders
to remedy however they did
not provide any quotes for the cost of replacement of the
screens. In the absence of quotes we have no choice but to order the
Builder to remedy. It should be kept in mind that should the remedy
undertaken by the Builder be unsatisfactory or if the order is
not complied with
by the Builder then an application for an order to pay can be made.
Item 4 ­ Portico
is accepted by the Builder that the portico is unsightly and out of plumb. This
can be remedied by rendering the portico.
cost of rendering the portico is included in the overall costs of rendering the
brickwork and so no separate order will be made.
Item 5 – Join in Bench Top
inspection the join was clearly evident to us on inspection. It was
unacceptable.
Owner did not provide any quote for replacing the bench top. For the same
reasons expressed above in respect to the shower screens
the Builder will be
ordered to remedy the bench top. The Owners can make a further application for
an order to pay should the remedy
not be successful.
Item 6 – Garage Door Gaps
is a clear gap between the garage door and the wall of the garage. The reason
for gap is that the outside wall of the garage
has been rendered but not back to
a straight edge where the garage door meets the rendered section o the
has resulted in a gap where, between the render and the door, there is a thin
line of face brickwork that clearly shows.
do not believe this to be a structural defect but it is unsightly and
unworkmanlike.
order this to be remedied but accept that it could and should be attended to by
the external rendering of the rest of the home.
Item 7 – Weep Holes
are clearly no weep holes. Weep holes are a necessary part of the waterproofing
of the upper story of the home where windows
are over 1 metre wide: BCA, Volume
2, Section 2 and AS 3700‐2001.
were no quotes for the installation of weep holes. We order that the Builder
remedy by the inclusion of, for any window greater
than 1 metre
The orders we make are as follows:
Builder is to pay the Owners the sum of $21,060 within 28
2 and 4 are dismissed;
3: the Builder is to remedy the shower screens by replacement with semi
frameless screens;
5: the Builder is to remedy the kitchen bench top;
6: the Builder is to remedy the gap between the garage door and the rendered
front wall;
7: the Builder to remedy the absence of weep holes.
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (461 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (113 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter