URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/218.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parkridge Group Pty Ltd v Western Australian Planning Commission [2004] WATPAT 218 (7 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 175 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 218
Heard: 12 November 2004
Decision: 7 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
PARKRIDGE GROUP PTY LTD
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING COMMISSION
Mr P McGowan
(President)
Subdivision – Landscape buffer – Private land
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr D Meagher (instructed by Meagher & Co) appeared for the
Mr C Bydder and Ms A Christou (instructed by State Solicitor’s
Office) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. The Appellant is the owner of Lot 1004 Edith Cowan Avenue, Eaton
subject property
”). The subject property is
9.8864 hectares in area.
2. On 8 October 2001 the Appellant made application to the Respondent to
subdivide the subject land into 126 residential lots. That
was then amended by
a further plan lodged on 30 October 2001 and again by amended plans lodged on 18
July 2003 and finally on 8 December
2003. It is that last application with
which this appeal is concerned. That application proposed the creation of 101
residential
lots with a public open space lot of 4712m
3. On 20 February 2004 the Respondent, having considered the proposed plan of
subdivision, advised the Appellant by its consultant
on 8 March 2004 that
the Respondent resolved to:
“Defer the application and
request the proponent undertake an acoustic and noise modelling report and
further address visual
screening prior to further consideration of this
4. Such an exercise was in fact undertaken by the Appellant and an acoustic and
noise modelling report was provided.
5. Ultimately by letter dated 31 May 2004 the Respondent advised the Appellant
that the application for subdivision was refused.
6. In refusing the application the Respondent provided the following
“1. The proposal does not comply with the Shire of Dardanup Town Planning
Scheme No.3 by reason of the landscaping buffer proposed
adjacent to the
Australind Bypass Reserve is below the 20 metres of landscaping required by
clause 3.18.1 of the Scheme and which
is inadequate to achieve appropriate
residential and landscape amenity to the proposal is inconsistent with the Shire
of Harvey and
Dardanup joint Town Planning Scheme No.1 in which the Minister for
Planning and Infrastructure requires a 40 metre buffer along the
3. The bypass is a heavily utilised main road service in Bunbury in the
south-west region. The Commission is not convinced that
the proposed use of
walls as a buffer is the appropriate method of securing residential amenity and
an attractive approach to the
4. An approval to the proposal would crate (sic) an undesirable precedent for
adjoining land owners to pursue subdivision without
appropriate landscaping
buffers and is inconsistent with the draft Shires of Harvey and Dardanup joint
Town Planning Scheme
7. The present appeal is brought from that refusal.
8. The subject property is zoned partly Residential R15 and Recreation Reserve
in accordance with the provisions of the Shire of
Dardanup Town Planning Scheme
9. The objectives of TPS 3
“(d) to plan for the development of a major road and trunk services
network generally in accordance with the Bunbury sub-regional
plan prepared by
the Bunbury Regional Planning
Committee;”
10. Clause 3.18 relates to landscape buffer and provides as
“3.18.1 A landscape buffer of 20 metres average width shall be provided on
private land adjoining the Australind Bypass Road,
for the extent of Eaton Super
Lots 3, 6, part 41 and 19. The exact nature of this buffer will be
determined on-site at the
subdivision design stage as endorsed by
Council. The purpose of the buffer is to protect existing flora and maintain an
uncluttered
vista along the Australind Bypass Road and Hands Avenue. Within
this buffer area:
(i) No buildings or
structures whatsoever are to be erected.
(ii) All existing trees are to be retained and protected unless otherwise
determined by Council.
(iii) Fencing shall be open farm-type fencing or otherwise as approved by
(iv) Additional tree planting is permitted without Council
11. The evidence demonstrates that the subject property did form part of Eaton
Super Lot 19 and is therefore affected by clause 3.18.1
12. The other relevant planning document is the draft Shires of Harvey and
Dardanup Joint Town Planning Scheme No 1 (“
Joint TPS 1
13. This document is what is said to be a guided development proposing to create
a cost sharing arrangement for the construction
of key district distributor
roads in east Australind and Eaton as well as a bridge over the Collie River
directly linking Eaton with
Australind via Eaton Drive.
14. As Mr Guise (Manager, Country South and Statutory Planning Division of the
Department for Planning and Infrastructure based in
Bunbury) points
“Once Gazetted, Joint TPS No. 1 will provide the
co-ordinated development and the equitable distribution of costs between land
owners within the Scheme Area. In contrast, TPS 3 is a traditional zoning scheme
which sets out land as zones and reserves with associated
provisions for the
whole of the Shire of Dardanup. Joint TPS No. 1 will exist independently of TPS
No. 3 and will not replace TPS
No. 3. Therefore, upon Gazettal, the Appeal site
will be subject to the provisions of both the Joint TPS No. 1 and TPS No.
15. Joint TPS 1 in its scheme map shows a buffer approximately 40 m width along
the Australind bypass.
16. Joint TPS 1 has been the subject of advertising and following advertising
was referred to the Honourable Minister for Planning
and Infrastructure for
final approval in October 2001. On 14 March 2002 the Minister wrote to the
Respondent in relation to the scheme
map forming part of Joint TPS 1 and
indicated as follows:
“Adequate open space buffers [are]
provided along the full length of the Australind bypass. This is in line with my
advice to the Commission that major transport infrastructure needs to
be protected from sensitive land use such as residential, which
may impact on
its future use, particularly in terms of freight haulage. The provision of
adequate buffer strips should provide this
protection.”
17. On 14 September 2004 the Council of the Shire of Harvey endorsed the
modified scheme map and resolved to support all other modifications
scheme required by the Minister.
18. The Minister had previously written to the Shire President of the Shire of
Dardanup on 28 January 2004 in the following terms:
advised that the Western Australian Planning Commission gave consideration to
your request in June 2003 and resolved to
reiterate the need for a buffer of
approximately 40 metres from the edge of the road reserve to improve amenity and
provide an adequate
barrier for noise and visual screening. The exact distance
and make-up of the buffer will depend on circumstances and can be determined
negotiations with the Commission.
I support this position and I ask the Shires to undertake the previously
requested modifications so that the Scheme can be finalised.”
19. Evidence was given by Mr Mark Jones. Mr Jones is the Principal Town Planner
for the Shire of Dardanup. He observes:
“The Shire opposes
the inclusion of this provision in the proposed Scheme.”
20. The capacity of Mr Jones to proffer that position was not clear.
21. In any event, he accepted in cross-examination that the ultimate position of
the Shire of Dardanup may well be affected by the
Tribunal’s decision in
this matter.
22. In any event I have little difficulty in accepting the submission of Counsel
for the Respondent that Joint TPS 1 is a seriously
entertained proposal. It has
been the subject of advertising. It has been the subject of express comment by
the Minister and has
been specifically endorsed by the Shire of Harvey. The fact
that the Shire of Dardanup, for its own particular reasons, has not yet
the same position as the Shire of Harvey does not undermine the Scheme as a
seriously entertained proposal. It therefore
represents appropriately a matter
to which I am to have regard in the consideration of the present
application.
Detailed description of Appellant’s
landscaping proposal:
23. The following description of the Appellant’s proposal comes from the
report of the Respondent considered at its meeting
on 12 February
“In lieu of providing a 20 metre wide landscaping
buffer within lots abutting the Australind Bypass reserve, as required by
3.18.1 of the Shire’s Scheme, the applicant is proposing that a 20 metre
wide road reserve be provided along the southern
boundary of the subject land.
The road reserve will be designed to have an off-set road pavement to allow for
dense vegetation to
be planted within an 11.5 metre wide road verge (see typical
cross-section on Attachment 2 – subdivision plan).
The Applicant is proposing to revegetate the Australind bypass reserve to
complement the revegetation which is proposed within the
verge of the 11.5 metre
wide subdivisional road. Main Roads WA has confirmed that it has no objection to
the Applicant undertaking
tree planting within the Australind Bypass reserve,
subject to the planting being done in accordance with Main Roads WA’s
method of landscaping and using preferred species. Additional tree
planting within the Australind Bypass reserve is important given
that there is
limited vegetation in portions of the Road Reserve to assist in screening the
subsequent development which occurs on
the subject land.”
24. The Appellant sought to place considerable weight on the fact that this was
part of a report containing a recommendation by officers
of the Respondent that
approval be granted subject to a number of conditions.
25. In the end as noted above the application was refused.
26. Mr Guise was at pains to emphasise that the role of the Statutory Committee
is not a matter which is determinative of this appeal.
27. The suggestion that some particular weight should be attached to
recommendation of officers who are not themselves the subject
cross-examination against the background of formal evidence given by Mr Guise,
who is a planner of considerable experience and
who has been in the Bunbury
office of the Department for Planning and Infrastructure for many years and who
formally advances the
position of the Respondent is difficult to
accommodate.
28. The suggestion that some particular weight should be attached to the
recommendation of the Respondent’s planning officers
may in some respects
misstate the role of this specialist Tribunal.
29. Given that the hearing is a hearing de-novo, recommendations to the
Respondent from certain planning officers merely form part
of the overall
material with which I am concerned. No greater weight can attach to the
recommendation that that.
Respondent’s opposition to
Appellant’s proposal:
30. In relation to the plan provided for subdivisional approval the Respondent
contends that it does not comply with TPS 3, and in
particular clause 3.18.1 in
“(i) The landscape buffer proposed by the Appellant (shown as “dense
planting”) approximately averages some 11.5
(ii) A solid wall along the southern boundary of the appeal site proposed for
noise attenuation, which I consider to be contrary
to TPS No 3 whereby “no
buildings or structures whatsoever are to be erected” within the landscape
buffer; and
(iii) The erection of a wall along the boundary of the appeal site for noise
attenuation would be contrary to the purpose of the
landscape buffer being to
maintain an uncluttered vista along the Australind Bypass
31. The following evidence was given by Mr Guise:
Commission does not consider that the proposed subdivision or road along the
southern boundary of the appeal site should
be used in the calculation of the 20
metre wide landscape buffer. TPS No. 3 refers to a “landscape
buffer” on private
land adjacent to the Australind bypass, and although
the term is not specifically defined by TPS No. 3, in a general sense it is
deemed to be 20 metres of actual landscaping. A landscape buffer is therefore
distinct from a “set-back” (40 metre total
separation from houses to
the bypass reserve and some 64 metres from houses to the bypass carriageway).
The Commission holds the
view that a landscape buffer in this context is an area
of land designed to limit noise and provide visual amenity for residents
subdivision and motorists along the Australind bypass (ie through vegetation
earth bunds).”
32. I agree entirely. There is absolutely no doubt that the express designation
of a landscape buffer connotes something more and
different to merely a physical
setback. Rather, it operates as a level of treatment designed to achieve a
particular end. In the
way in which clause 3.1.8.1 reads it is equally clear
that it is to be on private land.
33. Ultimately when the matter came to be addressed by Counsel for the
Appellant, he submitted that “There is no question that
this application
does not fit within the terms of it”, meaning clause 3.18.1.
34. In my view that seems to be a concession reasonably made. There is no basis
upon which, in my view, the Respondent could seriously
contend that that which
is proposed meets the combined requirements of clause 3.18.1 and the seriously
entertained proposal which
represents Joint TPS 1.
35. Essentially what the Appellant seems to be contending is that those
requirements should be modified, relaxed or waived and that
a varied and
different proposal advanced by the Appellant be accepted in its place. Mr Jones
who gave evidence indicated that the
Shire of Dardanup’s position was
apparently not to enforce compliance with clause 3.18.1 and pointed to a number
of instances
where developments have been allowed to occur in circumstances
where there appeared to be a blatant disregard for the provisions
36. The fact that that may have been the case and the fact that for whatever
reason the Shire is not giving effect to what the provision
of the scheme sets
out does not operate before me as a basis to deflect, diminish or ignore the
effect of that provision.
37. The Respondent was entirely correct in adverting to the provision and in
placing weight upon it as a basis for assessing and
determining the application
38. The position is the same in the context of the appeal before me.
39. Counsel for the Appellant seemed at pains to emphasise that there were some
concessions he thought he had obtained from Mr Guise
in relation to a comparison
between what might be effected if the scheme was literally applied and that
which was actually proposed
by the Appellant.
40. The qualification appears when the matter was clarified in an answer to a
question from me:
“The reservation is that this plan shows
a good part of the buffering and landscaping within the road reserve and not on
subject land.”
41. In other words, the assessment cannot, as the Appellant seems to content, be
conducted in isolation. The assessment must relate
to the scheme provisions
which ultimately operate as planning controls in relation to that which may be
42. That in itself represents a basis upon which, in my view, the Respondent was
entitled to reject the application for subdivisional
approval and provides a
basis upon which I in turn dismiss this appeal.
43. Thus in turn, the criticism made by Mr Guise and the basis ultimately upon
which I have determined for this appeal should be
dismissed provides a basis
upon which the evidence of Mr Baranowski is to be addressed. Mr Baranowski is a
landscape architect who
designed what is described as a buffer treatment to be
utilised by the Appellant.
44. It is not a question of whether in itself this is or is not an adequate
proposal. The test is really by reference to the provisions
of TPS 3 and by
implication Joint TPS 1 whether it meets the Scheme requirements.
45. For those reasons the appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (63.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter