URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAICmr/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
P and Department of Justice, Re [2025] WAICmr 2 (7 January 2025)
OFFICE OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER (W.A.)
File Ref: F2022299
Decision Ref: D0022025
Participants:
Complainant
Department of Justice
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – application for amendment of personal
information about a deceased person under
Information Act 1992
– death certificate – refusal to amend
personal information of a deceased person – closest relative of a deceased
Freedom of Information Act 1992
(5); Schedule 2: Glossary
Adoption Act 1994
sections 75
Births Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1998
Family Law Act 1975
section 61E
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Interpretation Act 1984
v Minister for Immigration
[2007] FMCA 1288
Re Gordon (a pseudonym)
[2020] NSWSC 673
Re J and Police Force of Western
[2008] WAICmr 5
Roche -v- Douglas as Administrator of
the Estate of Edward John Hamilton Rowan (dec)
[2000] WASC 146
Syme -v- Arthur Metaxas as
Executor of the Estate of Norman Frank Monck
[2005] WASC 152
[2009] MRTA 2652
, Legislative
Assembly, 28 November 2024, 6861-6863
The decision of the agency not to amend the disputed document in accordance
with the complainant’s application for amendment
Freedom of Information Act 1992
is confirmed.
Catherine Fletcher
INFORMATION
COMMISSIONER
7 January 2025
REASONS FOR DECISION
application for external review arises from a decision made by the Department of
) not to amend information in accordance with an
application for amendment made under
Freedom of Information Act
the FOI Act
the complainant
their birth, the complainant was adopted by an adoption order made under the
Adoption Act 1994
Adoption Act
). To protect the
complainant’s privacy, I have decided not to identify the complainant or
other individuals by name in the
particular circumstances of this
to making their amendment application under the FOI Act, the subject of this
external review, the complainant applied to the
Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Marriages (
the Registrar
) to correct the death certificates of their
birth mother (
the deceased
) and their adopted parents (
), pursuant to the provisions in the
Births Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1998
particular, the complainant applied to the Registrar to amend the
deceased’s death certificate to include the complainant’s
the first born child, which the Registrar declined to do in light of
Adoption Act
1 March 2022, the complainant applied to the agency under the FOI Act to amend
the death certificates of the deceased and their
adopted parents. Additionally,
the complainant applied to the agency under the FOI Act for access to
information regarding the deceased’s
other children listed on her death
certificate.
notice of decision dated 21 July 2022 (
initial decision
), the agency
not to amend the
personal information of the deceased, on the ground that the complainant is not
the closest relative of the deceased;
not to amend the
personal information of the adopted parents, on the ground that ‘another
enactment provides a means or procedure
by which that information can be
amended’, namely section 51 of the BDMR Act; and
application, regarding the other children, was not valid under section 12 of the
FOI Act because the complainant did not
pay the $30 application fee required to
make a valid application for non-personal information. The agency further
advised the complainant
that ‘exemptions are likely to apply where consent
of the relevant third party is not provided’.
26 July 2022, the complainant applied for internal review of the agency’s
decision not to amend the death certificates of
the deceased and the adopted
internal review decision dated 5 August 2022, the agency confirmed its decision
to refuse the complainant’s amendment application.
18 August 2022, the complainant applied to my office for external review of the
agency’s decision to refuse to amend the
death certificate of the deceased
the disputed document
REVIEW BY THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER
agency provided my office with its FOI file maintained in respect of the
complainant’s amendment application and a copy
of the disputed
12 September 2024, after considering all of the information before me, including
submissions provided to me by the complainant
on 15 September 2022, I provided
the parties with a letter setting out my preliminary view of the matter
preliminary view letter
). For the reasons given, it was my preliminary
view that the agency’s decision to refuse the amendment application, on
basis that the complainant is not the closest relative of the deceased for
the purposes of the FOI Act, is justified.
light of my preliminary view, I invited the complainant to accept my preliminary
view or to provide me with further submissions
by 31 October 2024.
complainant confirmed they wished to pursue this matter and provided further
submissions to my office on 9 October 2024 and 24
October 2024 (
submissions
AMENDMENT OF PERSONAL
INFORMATION
45 of the FOI Act (
), insofar as it is relevant, provides as
. Right to apply for information to be
(1) An individual (the
) has a right to apply to an
agency for amendment of personal information about the person contained in a
document of the agency if
the information is inaccurate, incomplete, out of date
or misleading.
(2) A dead person’s closest relative has a right to apply to an agency
for amendment of personal information about the dead
person and this section has
effect as if the information were information about the closest relative.
(5) This section does not apply if another enactment provides a means or
procedure by which the person can have the information amended.
section 45:
(a) creates mechanisms whereby:
individual can apply to an agency to amend their own personal information;
closest relative of a deceased person can apply to an agency to amend personal
information about the deceased person.
(b) provides that the right to apply to amend information under section 45 does
not apply if another enactment provides a means or
procedure by which the person
can have the information amended.
on the submissions made by the parties in this matter, I am required to consider
each of the points outlined above. I have
addressed point (b) first because, if
another enactment provides a means or procedure by which the complainant can
have the disputed
document amended, the rights under section 45 outlined at
point (a) above fall away.
another enactment provide a means or procedure by which the complainant can have
the disputed document amended?
its internal review decision, the agency stated that – in addition to the
complainant not being entitled to apply to amend
the deceased’s death
certificate under section 45(2) because they are not the deceased’s
closest relative – ‘there
is an existing process for the amendment
of death certificates, and therefore the FOI amendment process does not apply to
these records’.
The complainant has questioned whether there is such an
existing process, noting that, ‘according to information on the Registry
website [the complainant] can’t request any amendment as [they are] not
one of the children named on the death certificate’.
45(5) states that ‘this section does not apply if another enactment
provides a means or procedure by which the person
can have the information
amended’. The term ‘enactment’ is defined in
Interpretation Act 1984
(WA) to mean ‘a written law or any portion
of a written law’. ‘Written law’ is defined in the same
to mean ‘all Acts for the time being in force and all subsidiary
legislation for the time being in force’.
the context of information set out in the agency’s initial decision, I
understand the agency submits that section 51 of the
BDMR Act provides a means
or procedure by which the complainant can have information in the disputed
document amended; and that,
in light of 45(5) of the FOI Act, the right to apply
to amend personal information under section 45 does not apply.
information on the agency’s
regarding who can apply to
correct a death certificate states as follows:
Who can apply to correct a certificate?
The information related to eligibility is general in nature and therefore not
exhaustive.
The next of kin
named on the death certificate ie spouse (married/de-facto), parent or child (16
years of age or over) of the deceased
who is named on the death
certificate.
The funeral
Solicitor acting
for Next of Kin or Estate
Executor of the
agree with the complainant that the above information suggests that, as the
complainant is not regarded as the deceased’s
child under the law, it
appears the complainant is not eligible to apply to correct information in the
disputed document under the
BDMR Act. However, I do not consider that the above
information on the agency’s website is determinative of this issue.
51 of the BDMR Act states as follows:
51. Correction of
(1) The Registrar may correct the Register-
(a) to reflect a finding made on inquiry under Division 2; or
(b) to bring the particulars contained in an entry about a registrable event
into conformity with the most reliable information available
to the Registrar of
the registrable event.
(2) The Registrar must correct the Register if ordered by a State court to do
(3) The Registrar may correct the Register in accordance with a determination
made by a court of another State or of the Commonwealth
if the Registrar
considers that it is appropriate to do so.
(4) The Registrar is to correct the Register by adding or cancelling an entry
in the Register or by adding, altering or deleting particulars
contained in an
noted at [3] of this decision, before making their amendment application under
the FOI Act, the complainant applied to the Registrar
to amend the disputed
document. The Registrar declined to make the requested amendment, in light of
Adoption Act
, on the ground the complainant is not the
deceased’s child under the law. As a result, the Registrar said they were
to add the complainant’s name to the disputed document as one of
the deceased’s children.
my view, it therefore follows that section 51 of the BDMR Act does not provide a
means or procedure by which the complainant can
have information in the disputed
document amended. As a result, I find that section 45(5) of the FOI Act does
not operate in this
case to exclude the complainant’s right to apply to
amend personal information under section 45 of the FOI Act.
Does the complainant have the right to apply to amend the disputed
document under section 45(1)?
response to my preliminary view letter, the complainant submits they have a
right to apply to amend information in the disputed
document under section
45(1). The complainant submits that:
As an individual person I
believe I have a right to apply for an amendment of personal information under
s45(1) of the FOI Act on
the basis that the personal information is about myself
and is missing from a Registry document, my birth mothers death certificate.
My thoughts are this makes the document –
-missing my birth name and date of birth as a biological child.
of date - this is information that came to light after the deceased’s
death and evidently unknown to the persons who supplied
the death registration
information.
to a person who gets a copy of the certificate not to have official knowledge
that the deceased had given birth to another
45(1) states that ‘[a]n individual (the
) has a right
to apply to an agency for amendment of personal information about the person
contained in a document of the agency if
the information is inaccurate,
incomplete, out of date or misleading’.
the complainant only has the right to apply to amend information in the disputed
document under section 45(1) if the disputed
document contains personal
information about the complainant.
term ‘personal information’ is defined in the Glossary to the FOI
Act to mean:
[I]nformation or an opinion, whether true or not, and
whether recorded in a
material form or not, about an individual, whether living or dead —
(a) whose identity is apparent or can reasonably be ascertained from the
information or opinion; or
(b) who can be identified by reference to an identification number or other
identifying particular such as a fingerprint, retina
print or body sample
have examined the disputed document. It is the death certificate of the
deceased. I am satisfied that it does not contain personal
information about
the complainant as defined in the FOI Act. As a result, I find that the
complainant does not have a right to apply
to amend the disputed document under
section 45(1) of the FOI Act.
Does the complainant have the
right to apply to amend the disputed document under section 45(2)?
45(2) states that ‘[a] dead person’s closest relative has a right to
apply to an agency for amendment of personal
information about the dead person
and this section has effect as if the information were information about the
closest relative’.
the complainant only has the right to apply to amend personal information about
the deceased in the disputed document under
section 45(2) if they are the
closest relative of the deceased.
The agency’s
submissions
its initial decision and internal review decision, the agency submits, in
summary, that:
Section 75(b)
Adoption Act
states that “where an adoption order is made, for the
purposes of the law of this state, the relationship between the adoptee
adoptee 's births parents is to be treated as not being that of child and
Therefore, for
the purposes of section 45(2) of the FOI Act, the complainant is not the
deceased’s closest relative and is therefore,
unable to request an
amendment to the deceased’s personal information, on her behalf, under the
provisions of the FOI Act.
The FOI Act
allows only the closest living relative of a deceased person to amend their
personal information. As the complainant
is not, in law, the closest living
relative of the deceased they cannot amend her information.
The complainant’s submissions
complainant claims they are the closet relative of the deceased. In their
applications for internal and external review, in their
correspondence to my
office dated 15 September 2022, and in their further submissions in response to
my preliminary view letter,
the complainant submits, in summary,
records show that the deceased:
gave birth to
them and that child was adopted and given a new name and new parents;
marriages and the husband of the second marriage is deceased.
these records have some ‘missing connections not acknowledged’. On
that basis, the complainant claims they
are the ‘closest/nearest
relative/Next of Kin’ as the first born, biological child to the
dispute they are ‘not lawfully considered to be the deceased’s
child’. Adoption did not change their biological
connection to their birth
mother and they ‘did not get a new birth mother’. They had two
mothers – birth and adopted
– and they are related to
wish to have their birth name and date of birth added to the disputed document,
as the first-born child of the deceased, to complete
the deceased’s life
event history and to update the life event history of the complainant’s
birth identity.
Registrar has provided the complainant with personal information about their
birth and about the deceased. The complainant contends
that, to be provided
with such personal information, they are ‘considered to be a relative
amendment application is not an attempt to alter the legal status of their
adoption; it is an attempt to ensure that the records
pertaining to them and the
deceased are complete and accurate.
subsections of
Adoption Act
are not absolute in their
application;
section 75(5)
suggests that a ‘pre adoption relationship
still exists’ after an adoption order is made.
Adoption Act
indicates that ‘a Next of Kin/closest relative
relationship still exists between the adoptee and the birth
Adoption Act
say ‘for the purposes of the law of
this State’, not ‘for the purposes of the laws of this State’.
section 75(1)(c)
refers to ‘the law of this State’. The
complainant contends that this wording means that the law referred to in
can only be the
Adoption Act
. That is, where an adoption order is made, the
relationship between the adoptee and the adoptee’s birth parents is to be
as not being that of child and parent only for the purposes of the
Adoption Act
and not for the purposes of any other law, such as the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
is about ‘the legal transfer of Parenthood, Parental Rights and
Responsibilities by the Birth Parents to the Adoptive
Parent’ and does not
mean the ‘birth mother-child relationship is cancelled’ or provide
that the adopted child
is ‘no longer a child of’ their birth mother.
The complainant contends that the provisions in
section 61E
(Cth), which refers to the effect of adoption on parental
responsibility, and the report of the Victorian Law Reform Commission report
‘Review of the
Adoption Act 1984
[Vic]’ in 2017 supports these
Consideration – is the complainant the
deceased’s closest relative?
term ‘closest relative’ is not defined in the FOI Act.
way of comment only, on 28 November 2024, the Western Australian Parliament
). The PRIS Act makes some consequential amendments to the FOI Act,
including an amendment to section 45(2) (
the new section
. The PRIS Act was
assented to on 6 December 2024. However, the new section 45(2) has not come
into effect and is among the provisions
in the PRIS Act that will commence on a
date to be proclaimed.
the new section 45(2) commences, the words ‘closest relative’ will
be replaced with the words ‘nearest relative’
and will provide
A dead person’s nearest relative has a right to apply to
an agency for amendment of personal information that relates to the
dead person
and this section has effect as if the information were information that relates
to the nearest relative.
made by the Attorney General in the Legislative Assembly, on 28 November 2024,
indicate that the term ‘closest relative’
in the FOI Act is being
replaced with the term ‘nearest relative’ for consistency with the
term ‘nearest relative’
the new section 45(2) has not yet commenced operation, I must apply the law as
it currently stands. That is, I must consider whether
the complainant is the
‘closest relative’ of the deceased for the purposes of the FOI
Re J and Police Force of Western Australia
[2008] WAICmr 5
, the former
Acting Information Commissioner (
former Commissioner
) considered the
meaning of the term ‘closest relative’ in section 32(2) of the FOI
Act. The former Commissioner held
that the definition of the term
‘nearest relative’ in the GA Act is a relevant guide to the
interpretation of ‘closest
relative’ for the purposes of the FOI
Act. Section 3 of the GA Act defines ‘nearest relative’ as
nearest relative in relation to a person means the first in
order of priority of the following persons, who has attained the age of
and is reasonably available at the relevant time –
(a) a spouse or de facto partner;
(b) a child;
(ba) a step child;
(c) a parent;
(ca) a foster parent;
(d) a brother or a sister;
(e) a grandparent;
(f) an uncle or aunt;
(g) a nephew or niece;
and for the purposes of this definition –
(j) definition shall be preferred to the other or any other of those relatives
regardless of sex, and no distinction shall be made
between relatives of the
already noted, the complainant submits that, as the deceased does not have a
living spouse or de facto and, as they are the first
born child of the deceased,
the complainant is the nearest or closest relative of the deceased.
consider that the issue for me to determine in deciding whether the complainant
is the deceased’s closest relative is whether
the complainant is the child
of the deceased under the law, despite the adoption order.
Adoption Act
of adoption order
(1) Where an adoption order is made, for the purposes of the law of this
(a) the relationship between the adoptee and the adoptive parent is to be
treated as being that of child and parent;
(b) the relationship between the adoptee and —
(i) the adoptee’s birth parents; or
(ii) if the adoptee was previously adopted, the previous adoptive parent,
is to be treated as not being that of child and parent;
Accordingly,
the above provision provides that when an adoption order is made, the
relationship between the adoptee and the adoptee’s
birth parents is to be
treated as not being that of child and parent, for the purposes of the law of
this State. The GA Act is a
law of this State. In my view, it therefore
follows that, when an adoption order is made, the adoptee cannot be the nearest
of their birth parent for the purposes of section 3(b) of the GA Act,
or the closest relative of their birth parent for the purposes
accept the complainant’s submission that their adoption does not change
who their birth mother was nor does it change their
biological connection to
their birth mother. As I understand it, the agency does not dispute that the
deceased was the complainant’s
birth mother or that they were the first
child born to her. I acknowledge the paradox that this seemingly creates and
with the situation this puts the complainant in.
I understand it, the essence of the complainant’s submissions is that the
effect of an adoption order is limited to transferring
parental rights and
responsibilities and that the adoptee legally remains the child of their birth
parents. Therefore, the complainant
claims that, despite the adoption order
made, they are the lawful child of the deceased and, as a result, the closest
relative of
the deceased.
have considered the case law regarding the effect an adoption order has on the
question of whether the deceased is the closest relative
of the deceased.
Re Gordon (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2020] NSWSC 673
, the applicant, who had
been adopted, sought an order from the Supreme Court of New South Wales to
discharge the adoption order.
The applicant had also brought proceedings in
Queensland under the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) for family provision in
respect of his deceased father’s estate.
the reasons the applicant sought an order to discharge the adoption order were
in dispute between the parties, Hallen J observed:
There appears to
be no dispute that, currently, [the applicant] does not have standing to make
the application for a family provision
order, because
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) permits an application to be made only by the
deceased person’s spouse, child or dependant. Unless [the applicant] is
successful in discharging the adoption order, he will not be a person in respect
of whom an order for additional provision may be
made and his proceedings in
Queensland will, presumably, be
relation to the effect of an adoption order, His Honour relevantly
[A]n adoption order is status changing. It severs, in law,
but not in fact, the existing relationship of blood, and creates an adoptive
relationship in place of the natural relationship, which in fact, although not
in law, continues unchanged. New family ties are created
which approximate blood
ties. The child becomes part of his, or her, adoptive parents' family, solely
through operation of law, and
there is no necessity for any actual blood
relationship to exist between them. He, or she, thereafter, is regarded, in law,
child of the adoptive parents, and the adoptive parents are regarded in
law as the parents of the adopted child. The adopted child
also ceases to be
regarded, in law, as the child of the birth parents and the birth parents cease
to be regarded, in law, as the
parents of the adopted child. The parental
responsibility for the adopted child by the birth parents is also extinguished.
By operation
of law, a legal fiction is created.
An adoption order results, not only in the creation of a new legal status
between individuals, but also in the destruction of the
status as between
others... An adoption order is the only order that permanently, and, subject to
a discharge order, irrevocably,
terminates the relationship between a parent and
child. Accordingly, the act of adoption is regarded as possessing a peculiar
finality....
Douglas as Administrator of the Estate of Edward John
Hamilton Rowan
[2000] WASC 146
, the plaintiff brought an application
Inheritance (Family and Dependants Provision) Act 1972
Inheritance Act
) claiming that she was a child of the deceased and
therefore entitled to make a claim for family provision under section 7(1)(c)
plaintiff had been adopted by the deceased’s mother. The defendant
submitted that, as a result, the plaintiff was the deceased's
sister, and that
Adoption Act
precluded the plaintiff from making a
claim against the deceased's estate as his daughter.
Sanderson observed that, if the plaintiff was the daughter of the deceased, then
she fell within the class of persons who can
claim pursuant to section 7(1) of
the Inheritance Act and that, if she was not the daughter of the deceased, then
she had no right
to claim under that
While Master Sanderson did
not ultimately decide this issue,
he noted that ‘[t]his argument turns upon the meaning and effect of
Adoption Act
’ and that:
Prima facie
would appear that
has the effect of putting the plaintiff outside the
class of those people who can claim under s 7(1) of the Act. Such authority as
there is on this question suggests this is the case: see
Dehnert v The
Perpetual Executors and Trustees Association of Australia
[1954] HCA 47
; (1954) 91 CLR
[2009] MRTA
, the State Administrative Tribunal noted that,
general, State legislation throughout Australia severs the legal ties between a
child and their biological parents once a formal
adoption has taken effect,
Adoption Act
considered the case law, I am satisfied that the effect of the adoption order in
this case, made under the
Adoption Act
, is that the legal ties between the
deceased and the complainant were dissolved and, therefore, the complainant is
not the child
of the deceased for the purposes of the law. Further, I consider
the case law does not support the complainant’s contention,
cited at [33i]
above, that where an adoption order is made, the relationship between the
adoptee and the adoptee’s birth parents
is to be treated as not being that
of child and parent only for the purposes of the
Adoption Act
and not for the
purposes of any other law.
have considered the complainant’s submission, cited at [33g] above, that
section 75(5)
Adoption Act
suggests that a pre-adoption relationship
still exists after an adoption order is made. That provision
Despite subsections (1) to (4), for the purposes of the law of this State
relating to sexual offences, being law for the purposes
of which the
relationship between persons is relevant, an adoption order, or the discharge of
an adoption order, does not cause the
cessation of any relationship that would
have existed if the adoption order, or the discharging order (as the case may
be) had not
been made, and any such relationship is to be treated as existing in
addition to any relationship that exists by virtue of the application
section in relation to the adoption order or by virtue of the discharge of an
adoption order.
section 75(5)
refers to the existence or continuation of a ‘pre-adoption
relationship,’ that provision has very limited application,
namely that
the relationship continues to exist ‘for the purposes of the law of this
State relating to sexual offences’.
I do not consider this provision
supports the complainant’s arguments.
I have also considered the complainant’s submission, cited at [33h]
above, that
Adoption Act
indicates that ‘a Next of
Kin/closest relative relationship still exists between the adoptee and the birth
That provision states:
80. Death of party to adoption etc.,
CEO to notify certain
(1) If the CEO is informed by the Registrar that an adoptee has died, the CEO
is to inform the adoptee’s birth parents of the
death if the CEO considers
(a) it is reasonably practicable to do so; and
(b) it is appropriate to do so, after having regard to the provisions of the
relevant adoption plan.
(2) If the CEO receives information that one of the parties to an adoption or
a sibling of the adoptee (whether of the whole or half
blood) has died, the CEO
is to inform the other parties to the adoption, or the adoptee’s siblings
(whether of the whole or
half blood), as the case may be, of the death so far as
the CEO considers that it is reasonably practicable to do so.
(3) The CEO does not have to inform a person under subsection (1) or (2) of a
(a) if the person has, in a manner approved by the CEO, notified the CEO that
the person does not wish to be so advised; or
(b) in special circumstances.
imposes qualified obligations on the CEO of the agency to notify birth
parents of the death of an adoptee and to notify other parties
to the adoption,
or the adoptee’s siblings, of the death of one of the parties to an
adoption or a sibling of the adoptee.
In my view, these obligations do not
support the complainant’s contention that they are the child of the
deceased in the eyes
of the law.
considered all of the material before me, including the applicable law, I find
that the complainant is not the deceased’s
closest relative for the
purposes of the FOI Act. Therefore, the complainant does not have a right to
apply to amend the disputed
document under section 45(2) of the FOI Act.
the reasons set out in this decision, I find that the decision of the agency not
to amend information in accordance with the complainant’s
application is justified. Accordingly, the decision of the agency is
***************************
https://www.wa.gov.au/service/justice/civil-law/correct-or-amend-birth-death-or-marriage-certificate
See section 235 of the PRIS Act
See the ‘Blue Bill’ version of the FOI Act on Parliament’s
https://www.parliament.wa.gov.au/Parliament/Bills.nsf/3329DA2DC25F557148258B1E003267FF/$File/Freedom%2BOf%2BInformation%2BAct%2B1992%2B-%2BMUPA%2B1%2B%28includes%2BBill%2BNos%2B158%2Band%2B159%29.pdf
– the ‘Blue Bill’ shows the amendments to the FOI Act as a
result of the amending provisions in the PRIS Act and
Information
Commissioner Act 2024
Hansard, 6861-6863
The plaintiff also sought
an order from the Court to enable her to prove paternity by the deceased for the
purposes of her family
application.
For the reasons set out at
At [6]. See also
Liang v Minister for Immigration
[2007] FMCA 1288
Syme -v- Arthur Metaxas as Executor of the Estate of Norman Frank Monck
[2005] WASC 152
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter