URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Untitled [2004] WASTR 60 (16 November 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Strata Titles Act 1985
[2004] WASTR 60
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
16 NOVEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 93 of 2004
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - "exclusive use" by-laws
Legislation:
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
DATE OF ORDER :
16 November 2004
PRINCIPAL ORDER
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000093
STRATA PLAN NUMBER :
FRANCISCO LEYES
THE OWNERS OF LAKES EDGE VILLAS – STRATA PLAN 8436
Catchwords:
Real property – Strata titles – "exclusive use" by-law –
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act 1985
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – PRINCIPAL
2 The validity of an "exclusive use"
3 The Applicant is Francisco Leyes as the proprietor of Lot 80 on Strata
Plan 8436 (“the Strata
Strata Plan and relevant
4 Strata Plan 8436 ("the Strata Plan") was registered on
22 August 1980 pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
5 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles
") which continues to be the relevant
6 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
Previous proceedings
7 Some of the issues raised in this application deal with issues raised by the
Strata Company, as the applicant, in my file ST/2004-000059.
Some of the
material in my Reasons for Decision in that matter is relevant to and will be
incorporated into these Reasons, subject
to some necessary corrections,
amendments and additions.
8 The parcel is described on the Strata Plan as a “ two storey brick and
tile residential development.” It comprises
82 lots in seven
separate buildings. All except two of the lots are used for residential
purposes. Those two exceptions appear
Lot 81 (35 m
) and Lot 82 (10m
each of which comprises only a ground floor portion of the parcel. Each of the
other 80 lots comprises a ground floor portion
and a first floor portion.
9 All lots have equal unit entitlements.
10 The parcel is situated at 115 Herdsman Parade Wembley, which
according to the Strata Plan, is also the address for
notices on the
Strata Company.
11 The ground floor page of the Strata Plan shows 80 parking bays on common
property external to the buildings. They are numbered,
respectively,
1 to 80, but not in any particular sequence. For example, parking bay
16 adjoins parking bays 15 and 26
and parking
bay 20 adjoins parking bays 10 and
12 The parking bays are outlined in broken lines and are set out in five
“clusters”.
13 Adjacent to each lot are other ground floor portions of the common property,
also outlined in broken lines. They are endorsed
"courtyards".
14 The ground floor plan contains the following surveyor’s
endorsements:
• "Courtyards for use of adjoining lot.
• Numbered parking bays for use of corresponding lot
15 There are other ground floor parts of the common property apparently
intended for use as drying courts, water heater compounds
and bin areas, but
they are not directly relevant to this application.
Order sought
16 The Applicant has sought an Order in the following
"An order under
declaring that the change of by-laws registered on 16
July 1997 under Notification G532436 is invalid.
Or an order under
declaring that the resolution leading to the said change in by-laws is invalid.
Timeframe: as
convenient".
17 When the Strata Plan was registered, the by-laws of the Strata Company were,
pursuant to s 15(2) of the 1966 Act, the
by-laws in the
Schedule to that Act.
18 Pursuant to s 42(2), the transitional provisions contained in
Sch 3, cl 12 and the
Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995,
by-laws of the Strata Company have, since 14 July 1996, been the "standard"
by-laws contained in Sch 1 and Sch 2 to
19 However, the Strata Plan records, in Notification G532436, noted on the
Strata Plan on 16 July 1997,
(a) the purported repeal
"...the by-laws contained in the Schedule
and IV of the 1966
as amended as they apply to the Strata
Company..."
(Note: There were no "
by-laws in the 1966 Act. There was one
Schedule, broken into Part I and Part II).
(b) the adoption of the by-laws in Sch 1 and Sch 2
, plus the addition of a new Sch 1, by-law 16,
purportedly pursuant to a resolution without dissent which is recorded as having
passed on 16 April 1997. The Notification
refers to an
“attached sketch”. The sketch is, in fact, contained in six
The by-law is in the following terms:
"16. Rights of exclusive use
(1) The registered proprietor of each lot will be entitled to the exclusive
use and enjoyment of that part of the common property
as is marked on the
attached sketch as being 'for the use of' each lot respectively.
(2) The Strata Company will ensure that the part of the common property set
aside for the exclusive use and enjoyment of each lot
comprising a car bay is
maintained in good clean condition at the cost and expense of the Strata Company
in all respects.
(3) The registered proprietor of each lot will ensure that the part of the
common property set aside for the exclusive use and enjoyment
of the particular
lot comprising a courtyard is maintained in a good and clean condition at the
cost and expense of the registered
proprietor in all respects.
(4) No changes may be made to the treatment (including the paving) of any
courtyards comprising part of the common area set aside
for the exclusive use
and enjoyment of particular lots without the prior written approval of the
Strata Company.
(5) The Strata Company (and its duly authorised agents and representatives)
have the right to enter all courtyards comprising part
of the common area to
inspect same and carry out repairs and maintenance the Strata Company (or its
duly authorised agents and representatives)
deems necessary to:
(i) maintain the building services and improvements for which the Strata
Company is at law responsible; and
(ii) rectify any failure by a registered proprietor to comply with the
by-laws and the Strata Company shall be entitled to recover
from the registered
proprietor the costs and expenses incurred by the Strata Company in rectifying
any such failure by the registered
proprietor provided the Strata Company first
gave to the registered proprietor at least fourteen (14) days prior notice in
of the failure to comply with the by-laws and the registered proprietor
failed to rectify such failure within such period.
(6) The Strata Company will ensure that any fences around the boundary of
courtyards comprising part of the common area are maintained
at the cost of the
Strata Company in all respects.
(7) The drying of clothes in any courtyard or the parking of vehicles in any
courtyard is prohibited.
(8) To the extent not prohibited by the
Strata Titles Act 1985
, the by-laws
set out in sub-clauses (1) to (7) inclusive shall, while each remains in force,
be appurtenant to, and for the benefit
of, the respective lots and proprietor
and occupier or proprietors and occupiers thereof for the time being and all
persons authorised
by them or any of them from time to time".
20 I will refer to that by-law and “sketch” in more detail later in
these Reasons.
Applicant's
submissions
21 The Applicant has provided a copy of a "Notice of Extra Ordinary Meeting of
the Owners of Strata Plan 8436 – Lakes Edge
Villas” (“the
Notice of Meeting”). The Notice of Meeting, dated 20 March 1997,
related to a meeting to
on 9 April 1997
("the 1997 EGM") to vote on the repeal of the
"...contained in the Schedule Part 1 and 4 of the 1966
Strata Titles Act
(Note: there were no "
by-laws in the 1966 Act).
22 The Notice of Meeting also referred to the proposed adoption of the
Sch 1 and Sch 2 by-laws of the
adoption of a new
Sch 1, by-law 16.
23 The proposed new by-law 16, as set out in the Notice of Meeting,
included paragraphs 16(1),(2),(3),(4), and (6),(7)and (8),
quoted above.
However, in the Notice of Meeting, paragraph (5) was worded:
“(5) The Strata Company (and its duly authorised agents
and representatives) have the right to enter all courtyards comprising
the common area to inspect same and carry out any repairs and maintenance not
carried out by the registered proprietor lot.
Any costs and expenses incurred by
the Strata Company in carrying out such repairs and maintenance shall (where
such repair and maintenance
is the responsibility of the registered proprietor)
be charged to and may be recovered from the registered proprietor.”
24 This wording differs from Sch 1, by-law 16(5) as set out in
Notification G532436, as quoted earlier in these Reasons.
25 The “sketch” referred to in par 1 of the proposed new
by-law 16 included a statement referring
“...the exclusive use and enjoyment of that part of enjoyment of the
common property as is marked on the attached sketch “for
the use of each
lot respectively”
26 The “sketch” was in fact a one page photocopy of the ground
floor page of the Strata Plan, but without the addition
of the surveyor’s
endorsements, as quoted in par 13 of these Reasons. All of the parking
bays were, accordingly, numbered
in exactly the same way as in the Strata Plan,
but despite the assertion that the words ‘for the use of’, the
lots were included in the “sketch”, no parts of the
common property were actually endorsed with those words in that
27 As mentioned above, the “sketch” comprised in Notification
G532436 when it was lodged with the Registrar of Titles,
was set out in six
sheets. The parking bay numbering shown on four of the five
“clusters” of parking bays is the same
numbering in the same
positions as shown on the “sketch” accompanying the Notice of
Meeting. However, in the largest
cluster which, on the Strata Plan and in that
first “sketch”, contains 29 parking bays, the numbering has been
substantially
altered, both in sequence and in “allocation” and a
thirtieth parking bay has been added to that cluster in the six-sheet
28 On the Strata Plan and in the “sketch” accompanying the Notice
of Meeting, the largest cluster showed parking bays
numbered 52 to 67, inclusive
and 80. However, no parking bays with those numbers are shown on the
“sketch” in Notification
G532436. Clearly, the intention of the
original numbering of the parking bays on the Strata Plan was to
“allocate” one
parking bay per lot. However, the
“sketch” in Notification G532436 provides for seventeen lots to have
rights over two
parking bays each and to exclude an equal number of lots from
having any parking bays.
29 The proposed new by-law 16 as set out in the Notice of Meeting makes no
reference to any of those major changes and there is
no evidence that those
changes were voted on.
30 The 1997 EGM was convened on 9 April 1997 but on that date, as
there was no quorum to proceed to the business of the
the meeting was
adjourned until 16 April 1997.
31 The Minutes of the 9 April 1997 attempted EGM record those present
“A.Paine Lot 7
R. Heedes Lot 31
John Percudani Realmark Property Consultants
Jennifer Wright Realmark Property
Consultants”
32 The Minutes also record that there were proxies in favour of Jonn Percudani
from the proprietors of 36 other lots, although the
Minutes also record that, in
five instances, the grantors of the proxies owned more than one lot and that
this meant that there were
30 lots represented by those proxy appointments.
However, even with the addition of Messrs Paine and Heedes, it was considered
there was still only a total of 32 lot proprietors present or represented.
The Minutes further record that:
“ The Strata manager advised at the meeting that a total of 32
proprietors of a potential 82 were represented either by being
present or by
proxy and therefore a quorum was not established and the meeting would have to
be adjourned until Wednesday 16 April
33 That adjournment appears to have been based on Sch 1
by-laws 12(2), (3) and (4) which provide,
respectively
"(2) Except as otherwise provided in these by-laws,
no business may be transacted at any general meeting unless a quorum of members
is present at the time when the meeting proceeds to business.
(3) One-half of the persons entitled to vote present in person or by duly
appointed proxy constitutes a quorum.
(4) If within half an hour from the time appointed for a general meeting a
quorum is not present, the meeting, if convened upon the
requisition of
proprietors, shall be dissolved and in any other case it shall stand adjourned
to the same day in the next week at
the same place and time and if at the
adjourned meeting a quorum is not present within half an hour from the time
appointed for the
meeting, the persons entitled to vote and present constitute a
34 The Minutes of the re-convened 1997 EGM held on 16 April 1997
record that only four persons were present on that date.
“K Hook” and “J Ellison” (although in neither case are
they identified as being proprietors
particular lot or lots), plus
“L Costa of ABB Realty” and Jennifer Wright of Realmark Property
Consultants.
35 Those Minutes are also on Realmark Property Consultants' stationery.
36 Those Minutes repeat the list of proxies referred to in the
9 April 1997 Minutes, plus a further proxy from "Ellison"
have been the "J Ellison" who is recorded as having actually attended), but
there is nothing in those Minutes which records
John Percudani was present
on 16 April 1997.
37 This means, at best, that only two lots, being those of K. Hook and J.
Ellison, were represented at the re-convened 1997 EGM.
38 The Minutes of the re-convened 1997 EGM record that the proposed resolution,
as worded in the Notice of Meeting, was again tabled
"The Strata Company advised that one (1) owner objected to clause 5 on the
apparent basis that the Strata Company could impose unrestricted
work costs on a
Strata Lot Proprietor without
39 The Minutes then record that paragraph (5) was reworded to the terms of
paragraph (5), as contained in Notification G532436 and
that the proposed new
by-law 16, as so amended, was “passed”. The Minutes record
“The amended resolution was adopted without dissent and is to be
circulated to the Strata Lot Proprietors".
40 The Strata Company's Sch, 1 by-law 15(1) specifies, relevantly, that
the common seal of the Strata Company shall at no time
used except by
authority of the Council of Owners previously given and in the presence of the
members of the Council or at least
two members of the Council who must sign
every instrument to which the seal is affixed.
41 Notification G532436 bears the common seal of the Strata Company, indicating
that it was affixed on 16 June 1997 in
the presence
of two members of
the Council.
42 One signature has the name "K Hook" printed under it and it appears possible
that the signature is of that person. The other
signature has the name
“A.Lar” printed under it, but the signature bears no resemblance to
Statutory provisions
Section 42(2)
specifies that any amendment, repeal of or addition to
the Sch 1 by-laws must be by a resolution without
44 A resolution without dissent is defined by
"(a) passed at a duly convened general meeting of the
strata company of which sufficient notice (as defined by
section 3C)
been given and at which a sufficient quorum (as so defined) is present; and
(b) against which no vote is cast by a person entitled to exercise the powers
of voting on the resolution conferred under this Act
(i) voting at the meeting either personally or by proxy; or
(ii) voting in accordance with subsection (2)."
45 Section 3AC(2) allows a person who was not present at or represented at
the meeting at which the vote was taken, to cast
for or against the
resolution, within 28 days after the meeting at which it was voted on.
46 Section 3C(1)(a) specifies that at least 14 days' notice specifying the
proposed resolution must be given and s 3C(1)(b)
that, at the time
when the resolution is voted on, there must be present, personally or by proxy
(i) the proprietors of not less than 50% of the lots in the
scheme; and
(ii) proprietors whose votes have a value of not less than50% of the
aggregate unit entitlement of the lots in the scheme".
47 Section 3C(1)(c) provides, that in relation to voting on a resolution
without dissent:
"The value of a vote cast by a proprietor of a lot entitled to vote in respect
of that lot is equal to the unit entitlement of that
48 Section 3C(2) and (3) provide
"(2) If a resolution
specified in a notice of a meeting is passed with amendment at the meeting the
strata company shall, not later
than 7 days after the meeting, serve a copy
of the amended resolution on each proprietor who was not present at the meeting
personally or by proxy at the time when the resolution was voted on.
(3) If subsection (2) is not complied with the amended resolution is of
no effect."
49 Section 42(4) provides
"(4) No amendment or repeal of a
by-law or additional by-law has effect until —
(a) the strata company has, not later than 3 months after the passing of
the resolution for the amendment, repeal or additional
lodged a notice
of the amendment, repeal or additional by-law in the prescribed form with the
Registrar of Titles, including
case of a by-law made under
subsection (8) a description of the area affected; and
(b) the Registrar of Titles has made a reference to the amendment, repeal or
additional by-law on the appropriate registered strata/survey-strata
50 However, s 42(9) provides
"After the expiration of the period of 2 years that next succeeds the
making, or purported making, of a by-law referred to in
(including a by-law so referred to that amends, adds to or repeals another
by-law), it shall be conclusively
presumed that all
conditions and preliminary
steps precedent to the making of the by-law have been complied with and
performed."
Submissions in response
to notice of application
51 The proprietors of eight lots have supported the application.
52 There have been no submissions opposing the application.
53 All of those supporting the application contend that the by-law is invalid.
They consider it to be unfair because it purports
to remove all parking rights
from 17 lots and to grant to 17 other lots the exclusive use of two parking bays
54 If Sch 1, by-law 16 were to be given effect to, it would mean
(a) Lots 52 to 67, inclusive, and Lot 80 would not
be entitled to the use (exclusive or otherwise) of any of the parking
(b) Lot 81, which was not originally nominated on the Strata Plan as
having the use (even if unenforceable) of any of the parking
bays, would become
entitled to the exclusive use of a part of the common property not previously
designated as a parking bay, and
I also note that the area
“allocated” to Lot 81 is larger than any other parking bay shown on
the Strata Plan or in the
Notification.
(c) Seventeen lots (being Lots 25, 26, 33 to 37, 39 to 44 and 75 to 78)
would each have exclusive use rights over two parking bays.
55 However, I have been advised that, despite the purported adoption of
Sch 1 by-law 16, the practice of the owners and
the scheme has been to ignore the changes purportedly made by Sch 1, by-law
16 and to continue to use one
parking bay
each, being the parking bays
respectively numbered as shown on the Strata
Considerations
56 The surveyor’s endorsements on the original Strata Plan relating to
the use of the parking bays and courtyards created
no legal rights.
57 Section 42(8) provides that rights of exclusive use or special
privileges over any part or parts of the common property
created by the
adoption of a specific by-law, by resolution without dissent, and with the prior
consent in writing of the
of the lot in respect of which those rights
or privileges are to be granted.
58 If the 1997 EGM was convened upon the requisition of lot proprietors,
then, in the absence of a quorum on 9 April 1997,
the meeting
have been automatically cancelled, leaving no basis for it to be adjourned to
and reconvened on the 16 April 1997.
59 If the 1997 EGM was convened on the requisition of the Strata Company's
Council of Owners, the adjournment, to the same
and place seven days later,
would have been valid for the purposes of an ordinary resolution. However, as
s 42 specifies
that a strata
company’s by-laws must not be
inconsistent with the
, nothing in Sch 1, by-law 12 is
to overcome the statutory requirements of
in relation to
the quorum necessary to vote on a resolution without dissent.
Those specific
quorum requirements apply equally to
a general meeting and to an adjournment of
a general meeting.
60 There was not a sufficient quorum on either 9 April 1997 or, if the
7-day adjournment was valid, on 16 April 1997,
a resolution
without dissent.
61 Further, even if there had been a "sufficient quorum" for a resolution
without dissent, there is no evidence of the prior written
consent of the
proposed respective grantees of the exclusive use rights.
Section 42(11)
provides that a lot proprietor who has the benefit of a
by-law, is deemed to take over the Strata
Company’s repair
and maintenance and replacement, obligations, in relation to that
part of the
common property, as set out
, unless the by-law excludes that
liability. Accordingly, the written approvals required under
ensure that the proprietor of a lot to which exclusive use rights or special
privileges are to be granted, expressly acknowledges
the taking over of those
Strata Company obligations. It would also be unjust, in the present case, if
the proprietors of only two
out of 82 lots, without the approval of the other 80
proprietors, could transfer those obligations from the Strata Company to such
individual lot proprietors without the express consent of those proprietors.
63 Even if all necessary consents had been given and the
16 April 1977 meeting had been valid, the proposed by-law was
being voted on, on 16 April 1997, but I have not been provided
with any evidence that the requirements of
were complied with,
despite the Minutes indicating that the proposed by-law, as amended, was to be
“circulated”
lot proprietors. At best, the Minutes indicate
that there was an awareness of the provisions of
, but in the
of compliance with
would have invalidated the
resolution "automatically".
64 The same result would have reached even if the "preliminary" matters
referred to in
were to be deemed to have been
complied with. The
resolution in question was recorded as having been passed without dissent on
April 1997. The only
“conditions and preliminary steps
precedent” to that date were the convening of the meeting by
preparation of the
Notice of Meeting and Agenda.
Section 42(9)
to validate any deficiency in the content or timing of service of those
documents, but would not overcome the specific
“prior written
consent” requirements of
, the mandatory statutory
obligations
contained in
or the specific invalidation provisions of
65 I believe it also reasonable to assume that the changes contemplated by the
proposed Sch 1, by–law 16 would have
substantially to the
value of some lots, while decreasing the value of others, but there is no
evidence that any changes to
Plan’s Schedule of Unit
Entitlement were considered in conjunction with, or subsequent to, the adoption
of the proposed
by-law 16 and no evidence that the proprietors who
would benefit from that by-law would be obliged to pay any greater contributions
or levies to the Strata Company.
66 Further, no proprietor has provided any evidence that the Strata
Company’s common seal was affixed to Notification G532436
authority of the Council of Owners and there is no such authorisation recorded
in the Minutes referred to above. This was
a requirement after the purported
adoption of the amended and new by-laws that were set out in that Notification.
In my view,
would not validate an invalid use of the common
67 If it can be assumed that the areas of common property indicated on the
Strata Plan as “parking bays” are the same
areas intended by
Sch 1,by-law 16(1) and (2) to be the subject of exclusive use or
special privileges rights, the adoption
by-law would have been
reasonable. However, that proposed new by-law purports to provide major
benefits to a small group
proprietors while removing the rights of many.
If, as I have found, the surveyor’s endorsements on the Strata Plan
create any exclusive rights or special privileges over any part of the
common property, all lot proprietors, as co-owners
common property, had
and, until the Strata Company duly resolves otherwise, continue to have equal
rights of access to and
all parts of the common property. If the
proposed new Sch 1, by-law 16 had been valid, those rights would have
been excluded from
the areas “allocated” by that proposed new
68 It is also very significant that the “sketch” attached to the
Notice of Meeting and which formed part of the by-law
that was voted on, did not
accurately record the allocation of any particular parking bay or courtyard to
any particular lot and
that the “sketch” that was actually lodged
with the Registrar of Titles as part of Notification G532436 did not correspond,
in major respects, with the sketch covered by the vote on the
16 April 1997.
69 The Applicant has referred to
Section 93(3)
empowers me, on the application of a lot proprietor or a
mortgagee of a lot, to make an Order, among other
things, declaring a by-law
be invalid on the basis that a by-law
"(a) was made without
(b) was not made in accordance with this Act or the regulations or any other
requirement that ought to have been observed; or
(c) should not have been made having regard to the interests of all
proprietors in the use and enjoyment of their lots or the common
71 Section 93(5) provides:
"This section does not apply with respect to a by-law made or deemed to be made
under section 42(8)."
72 In the circumstances set out above, I do not consider that the Strata
Company’s Sch 1, by-law 16 was ever “made”
“deemed to be made” under s 42(8).
73 Notification G532436 specifies that that by-law was “passed” on
16 April 1997. As I have already noted,
lot proprietors, at
best, attended or were represented at the adjourned meeting on
16 April 1997.
74 The resolution that was said to have been “passed” on that date,
could not have been passed or be deemed to be passed
because s 3C required, as a
minimum, the presence of the proprietors of not less than 50% of the lots. It
was also defective for
the other reasons I have referred to above.
75 Accordingly I find that it was invalid.
76 Section 97 authorises a lot proprietor or a mortgagee to apply to me
for an Order, among other things, to invalidate a resolution.
I can make such an
Order if I am satisfied that the provisions of the
have not been
complied with in relation to a
meeting of the Strata Company. In fact, where I
am so satisfied in that regard,
prohibits me from refusing to make
such an Order unless I consider that:
“(a) ...the failure to comply with the provisions of this Act did not
prejudicially affect any person; and
(b) compliance with the provisions of this Act would not have resulted in a
failure to pass the resolution ...”.
77 I consider that there were persons prejudiced by the failure by the Strata
Company’s failure to comply with the
in relation to the meeting
at which Sch 1, by-law 16 was purportedly passed and I believe that there would
have been a failure to
pass the resolution.
78 Accordingly, I must make the Order
79 I propose to make an Order of the kind requested and in doing so, note that
they will invalidate all parts of the proposed new
Sch 1, by-law 16,
including the provisions relating to courtyards. The Strata Company should
consider reviewing its by-laws
rights are to be granted.
80 However, in the meantime, the Sch 1 and Sch 2 by-laws will
continue to apply, on the basis of
, which deems
them to be the
by-laws of the Strata Company until amended, repealed or added to by the Strata
81 Taking into account
, which allows me to express an Order in
terms other than sought provided that my Order does
not differ in substance from
sought, and
, which allows me to include in an Order such
ancillary or consequential
provisions as I think fit, my Orders are that
“I declare that Items 1, 2 and 3 of the resolution recorded in the Minutes
of the April 1997 Extra Ordinary General Meeting
of “The Owners of
Lakes Edge Villas – Strata Plan 8436 (‘the Strata Company”)
are invalid and I DIRECT that
the Strata Company to apply to the Registrar of
Titles by not later than 16 January 2005, to record on the Strata Plan
of this Order in relation to Notification G532436.
DATED 16 November 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (126 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter