URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2006/245.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VM and Y [2006] WASAT 245 (21 August 2006)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2006] WASAT 245
MS J TOOHEY (SENIOR MEMBER)
MS F CHILD (MEMBER)
MR E LEIPOLDT (SENIOR SESSIONAL MEMBER)
15 AUGUST 2006
DELIVERED :
21 AUGUST 2006
FILE NO/S :
GAA 415 of 2006
GAA 565 of 2006
GAA 566 of 2006
GAA 1140 of 2006
BETWEEN : VM
Proposed Represented Person
Catchwords:
Guardianship – Administration –
Intervention in Enduring Power of Attorney – Capacity at date of hearing
Capacity to execute Enduring Power of Attorney – Capacity to
execute Deed of Gift - Conduct of executor of husband's will –
Conflict of
interest – Investigation by administrator in the best interests of the
proposed represented person – Donees
of Enduring Power of Attorney
directed not to exercise powers during the period of the investigation
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Administrator appointed; other applications dismissed
Representation:
Applicant : Self-represented
Proposed Represented Person : Mr Prime
Parties : Mr Cuerdon
Solicitors:
Applicant : Self-represented
Proposed Represented Person : McCallum Donovan Sweeney
Parties : Michael Paterson and Associates
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE
Summary of Tribunal's decision
1 The applicant asked the Tribunal to appoint an
administrator for her mother, Y, and to intervene in an Enduring Power of
granted by Y to the applicant's brothers, P and M. The applicant
believed that her brothers' conduct before and since their father's
been in their own interests rather than their mother's and, as a result, her
estate, which the applicant said should have
been substantial, was reduced.
In particular, the applicant cited the failure of her brother, P, as
executor of their father's estate,
to transfer to Y two parcels of land left by
her husband. She also questioned her mother's capacity to execute a Deed of
which she transferred to P and M her interests in the
family business.
2 The applicant also asked the Tribunal to appoint a guardian for her mother
because of conflict between herself and P about arrangements
to visit her
3 The Tribunal was satisfied that Y no longer had capacity to manage her
financial affairs at the time of the hearing. It could
not be satisfied, on the
medical evidence, that she lacked capacity to execute the Enduring Power of
Attorney in favour of her sons.
It made no finding as to her capacity some time
later to execute the Deed of Gift.
4 At the time of the hearing, as a consequence of the executor's failure to
transfer to Y the land left by her husband, and having
gifted to P and M all of
her interests in the family business, Y owned only her pension and $5000 in the
5 The Tribunal decided that an independent investigation of her estate was
in Y's best interests and appointed the Public Trustee
for that purpose.
Because of Y's express wishes that her sons manage her financial affairs, it
decided not to revoke the Enduring
Power of Attorney but directed P and M
not to use it for any purpose, except in connection with the transfer of the
land to Y which
P and M undertook to do forthwith. The Public Trustee was
appointed for three months at the end of which the order would be reviewed
light of the Public Trustee's report on the outcome, or progress, of the
investigation.
Introduction
6 These proceedings concern four applications in
respect of the applicant's mother, whom we refer to here as Y. These written
are in the same terms as reasons delivered orally on 21 August 2006 but
with amendments necessary to remove any information that
might identify the
person whom the application concerns, or other parties.
7 The applications are:
(i) for the appointment of an administrator for Y;
(ii) for an order that the donees of an Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA) made by
Y file and serve a copy of all records and accounts
kept by them of their
dealings as donees;
(iii) for an order that such records and accounts be audited by an auditor
appointed by the Tribunal, and the auditor's report be
provided to the Tribunal
and the applicant; and
(iv) for the appointment of a guardian for Y.
first three applications arise from the applicant's assertion that Y's estate is
at risk because of the conduct of her brothers,
P and M, before and since their
father's death in January 2004. We will deal with these three applications
together. The application
for guardianship arises because of conflict
between the applicant and P about arrangements for her and her daughters to
9 Y is an elderly woman whose husband, J, died in
early 2004. There are five daughters and two sons of the marriage.
10 During his lifetime, J built up substantial assets, principally through
the purchase of land. During the 1970s, he and his sons,
P and M, formed a
partnership known as AA. A company known as BB was subsequently incorporated
for purposes including subdividing
and selling the land that J had
acquired. According to papers before us, over the course of 20 years
or so from the 1980s, some
$20 million was realised from sale of the properties
and other assets. The money was used to support the family and was re-invested
in the subdivision and other family business interests.
11 In the early 1980s, a company named SS Pty Ltd was formed. P and M were,
and still are, directors. Some years later J also became
a director. Over the
years, J and his sons also had interests in other family businesses.
12 J's property was at all times in his name only: there appears never to
have been any property in Y's name. By all accounts, Y
has never had any
interest in the family businesses or any of the family's financial dealings.
She entrusted all financial matters
to her husband and sons.
13 Under the terms of J's will, all of his property passed to his wife and,
if she pre-deceased him, to P and M in equal shares.
No provision was made for
their daughters.
14 According to the Statement of Assets and Liabilities filed in the Supreme
Court by P as executor of J's estate, with the application
for a grant of
probate, J's estate at the time of his death comprised two lots of land valued
at $400 000 and interests in the family
businesses. Those interests
comprised shares in SS Pty Ltd which had carried forward substantial losses,
giving the shares a nil
realisable value. There was also a loan account in
the same company with a nominal value of $6.165 million, and a
one-third share
of a net loan account in favour of the company BB with a nominal
value of $9635.87; both were stated to have a nil realisable value.
there was a one-third share of a net loan account in the company, IT Pty Ltd,
which trades as PA, in favour of BB valued
at $12 303.87. P and
M were, and still are, directors of IT Pty Ltd. After payment of
debts and funeral expenses, J's estate had
a net value of $404 180.52. Probate
was granted on 4 October 2005.
The applications for the appointment of an administrator and for intervention in
15 The applicant says that Y is no longer capable
of managing her financial affairs. By the applicant's reckoning, their mother
should now be a wealthy woman and not dependent, as she is, on Centrelink
benefits. It appears to the applicant that her brothers
have received the
benefit of substantial funds held by their father during his lifetime but
neither she nor her sisters know how,
or under what circumstances, that
occurred. The applicant believes that their brothers may not have accounted for
monies or property
to which her mother is entitled.
16 The applicant says her brothers' interests conflict with those of their
mother and that an independent administrator is needed
to inquire into, and
determine, the property to which their mother may be entitled from her husband's
estate, and then to administer
that property in her best interests.
Is Y capable of making reasonable judgments about any or all of her estate?
17 We have before us a number of medical reports
concerning Y's capacity to make decisions. The reports give rise to
questions as
to her capacity over the past two years, in particular in
May 2004 when she executed the EPA in favour of her sons, and again in
November 2004 when she executed a Deed of Gift (Deed) which concerned her
interests in SS Pty Ltd. That Deed purported to formalise
agreement reached in March 2004.
18 The medical reports are:
(i) reports from July 2004 and August 2004 from Dr C, geriatric registrar,
and Dr H, physician, to Dr T following an assessment at
the Memory Clinic
of the Rehabilitation and Aged Care Unit of Joondalup Hospital. The first
report states that Y had progressively
worsening memory loss over the previous
12 months and in particular in the previous six months since her husband died;
insight into her memory loss; she could not say what her current bank
balance was; she had loss of executive functioning and a Mini
Mental State
Examination result of 19/30;
(ii) a report dated 13 March 2006 from Dr R who, at the time, had known Y for
one year but was not her regular general practitioner;
Dr R finds she has a
mild cognitive impairment which was progressive and which he first recognised in
May 2005. In his view, Y was
capable at the time of the report of making
decisions that a guardian might make, and of executing an EPA, but incapable of
financial decisions;
(iii) a report dated 14 March 2006 from Dr T, Y's regular general practitioner
at the time, who had known her for over two years.
Dr T reports that a
diagnosis of progressive cognitive impairment, likely to be of the Alzheimer's
he first recognised the impairment maybe 12 months
prior to July 2004. In his view, Y was not capable at that time of either
guardianship
or administration related decisions and he was not sure if she
could execute an EPA;
(iv) reports dated 1 April 2006 from Dr M and 10 April 2006 from Dr P.
Dr M, who was not Y's general practitioner and had seen her
twice, described his
overall clinical finding as "not suggestive of dementia". Dr P states simply
that Y is "fit to make her finacial
] decisions";
(v) report dated 8 August 2006 from Dr D, consultant psychiatrist, who finds Y's
history "suggestive of insidious onset, gradually
progressive cognitive decline
of about two years duration". In his view, Y's ability to execute an EPA is now
compromised; she can
manage simple financial tasks such as small purchases at
supermarkets but is incapable of reasonable decisions in relation to complex
financial matters and she is not capable of understanding the nature and extent
of her estate.
19 We are satisfied, on the
evidence before us, that Y is no longer capable of making reasonable decisions
regarding her estate.
While she may be able to manage small, routine matters,
she no longer has the capacity to understand, and make decisions about,
estate as it came to her from her husband or how it has been managed since.
In reaching this finding, we prefer the reports
of Drs C and H, T and
R, as well as Dr D, to those of Drs M and P, whose contact with Y has
been limited and whose reports give no
detail of capacity
assessments conducted.
20 It was submitted for P and M that the Tribunal cannot go behind the grant
of probate by the Supreme Court which found their father's
estate worth
approximately $400 000 at the time of his death. We accept that
contention. However, it became apparent from the oral
evidence at the hearing
that the Statement of Assets and Liabilities did not fully
reflect J's estate at the time. The executor
failed to disclose debts
owed by J to SS Pty Ltd and to the partnership. It is arguable
that he should also have disclosed that
one of the properties that passed under
the will was subject to a mortgage by way of a guarantee.
21 Dealings with Y's estate as it came to her from her husband indicate that
the executor, P, has frequently been in a position of
conflict of interest as
between himself and his mother and that his interests have prevailed.
22 Turning first to the land left to Y by her husband. There are two
parcels, referred to here by their lot numbers. Lot 179, on
which Y's home
stands, is unencumbered. Adjacent is Lot 178 which is vacant and subject to a
mortgage in favour of BankWest granted
by J in late 2003 to guarantee a loan of
$160 000 to IT Pty Ltd, of which P and M are the directors. P and M have
been repaying
that loan but, as repayments have been made, they have from time
to time been drawn down again. We are told that the amount owing
never been more than the original $160 000. The amount currently
owing is $160 000.
23 Despite the grant of probate on 4 October 2005, at the date of the
hearing, both lots were still in J's name. No adequate explanation
offered for the failure to transfer them into Y's name other than that it was a
misunderstanding on the part of her sons'
solicitors.
24 By the Deed, Y purported to "forgive" debts owed to her husband
by SS Pty Ltd and she transferred to P and M in equal shares her
3 680 000 shares in the same company.
25 We have made no finding as to Y's legal capacity to execute the Deed.
However, even allowing that she was capable, circumstances
surrounding its
execution raise questions about that transaction.
26 At the time she signed the Deed, Y was in hospital for some seven to ten
days. It is unlikely she was mentally alert. She trusted
her sons implicitly
and was reliant on them, especially on P, who was her direct carer. She had
never shown any interest in, or
real understanding of, the family
businesses and the transaction was, by any measure, complex and would require
explanation. It
appears not to have been contemplated that Y might need
independent advice about the Deed from solicitors other than those acting
her sons and who appear to have drawn up the Deed on their instructions.
27 P has told the Tribunal that it was only because the company accounts
had just been finalised, and the Deed could therefore be
signed, that he and M
approached their mother in hospital to sign the Deed. However, there does not
appear to have been any urgency
to its signing.
28 As a result of signing the Deed, and as a consequence of the failure of
the executor to transfer the two lots of property into
her name, Y has
no legal interest in any property other than her pension and
approximately $5000 in the bank.
29 P, as both executor of his father's estate, and a director of SS Pty Ltd,
has stood in a position of conflict in which his own
interests have apparently
prevailed. In particular, the Deed purported to formalise an oral agreement
that, in effect, sought to
do what P and M had asked the family's accountants to
do, namely to transfer the shares directly to them, bypassing J's will.
It is not clear how Y could "forgive" a debt owed by her husband
to SS Pty Ltd, but it was apparently to her benefit because that
liability had
passed to her on his death. On the other hand, any benefit was somewhat
illusory because it was P's evidence that
there was no intention at any time to
call in the debt.
31 In transferring the shares, Y was apparently giving away something
worthless. But the shares had value, or at least potential
value, to P and M.
We have been given a very detailed submission from both about the family
businesses which they say have suffered
substantial losses over the years,
explaining their father's small estate at his death. The same submission states
that SS Pty Ltd
is likely to improve over the next five years or so. If that is
so, then it may be that the company can meet some or all of its
liabilities and,
if the value of the shares is restored, they could be of some value within the
next few years. By virtue of the
Deed, that interest now belongs to Y's
32 Y says she wants her sons to continue to manage her financial affairs as
they have always done and she does not want, or need,
anyone else involved.
This is apparently consistent with how she has entrusted her affairs to her
husband and sons all her married
life. It has been apparently of no concern to
her, if in fact she has ever realised, that no property, not even her
house, is in
33 We are bound to take Y's wishes into account. However, we are also bound
to make her best interests our primary concern.
Is Y in need of an administrator
34 Both P and M say they have not acted in
pursuance of their powers as donees of the EPA; as a result, there are no
records and
accounts of any dealings. In any event, it follows, from the
Tribunal's finding that Y is no longer capable of making financial
that they would now be bound to reply on the EPA if they are to do anything on
her behalf concerning her financial affairs.
35 P and M have undertaken to transfer both lots into their mother's name
forthwith; Lot 178 would be subject to the mortgage in
favour of BankWest. The
Tribunal accepts that undertaking. It is possible that Y would need
to sign documents in relation to the
transfers. If so, either the
donees or an administrator would have to sign on her behalf.
36 Y's immediate financial needs appear limited to dealing with her pension
and making small purchases. These needs appear catered
for: P is a
joint signatory to her bank account and her nominee for Centrelink purposes. We
have not considered the state of Y's
bank accounts or any need for
accountability by P in relation to them, but in practical terms, these
arrangements may be able to
continue without the need for the donees to exercise
their powers or for the appointment of an administrator.
37 Once the undertaking to transfer the property into her name is effected,
Y will own her house and the encumbered land next door.
Her estate will
need some management, if only to pay rates and other bills from time to time.
38 Y's sons, as donees of her EPA, could perform these functions. However,
we are not satisfied, in light of their dealings with
her estate since their
father's death, that this would be in her best interests. Once those
dealings have been investigated (for
the reasons below, we will appoint an
administrator to carry out an investigation), it may be that, on review of our
orders, we will
decide that they should manage her estate pursuant to the EPA.
In the meantime, it would be open to them to further mortgage the
properties on
her behalf if they chose to do so. That is not to say that they would do
so, but the intermingling of her financial
interests with theirs, and their
failure to recognise the conflict of interests they have been in, means that her
estate is at present
in need of more protection than would be afforded by the
39 Y's needs have clearly always been modest, and her daughter, P, and son,
P, care for her full-time. The applicant has not suggested
that her brother has
done anything but care for their mother. But it cannot be assumed that
this situation will continue. Y is
elderly. Her medical and care needs will
almost certainly increase. Even with the best efforts of her children, the
need to modify
her home or find nursing home or hostel care cannot be
discounted. Although there is no suggestion that her children would not do
everything they could to meet her needs, at present her estate is so reduced
that she could be entirely dependent on them for assistance.
If, for any
reason, they could not afford it, she could be left without.
It is not for the Tribunal to go behind the grant of probate.
However, it is clear that J's estate was not fully reflected in that
application. Further, the conduct of P, as executor of his father’s
estate and therefore bound to carry out the terms of his
will, has not been
without self-interest.
41 It is our view that an investigation into Y's estate since her husband's
death and, in particular, into the conduct of the executor,
best interests.
42 Y's sons say they will cooperate fully with any investigation by an
administrator into their mother's estate and we have no reason
to doubt them.
They concede that, if an appointment is made, neither of them could perform that
function. However, they say, the
applicant has her own interests at heart
because she stands to benefit from any increase in their mother's estate. They
applicant, rather than Y's estate, should meet the costs of any
investigation. We do not accept that argument. Even if the applicant
gain from an investigation that does not mean that an investigation is not also
in Y's best interests.
43 The Public Advocate's investigation has already gathered a large amount
of information about J's and Y's estates which will reduce
the cost of an
investigation. With the cooperation of P and M, any further information
required should be readily obtainable by
the administrator. We will order that
all documents and submissions filed with the Tribunal for the purposes of this
application
be provided to the administrator including the medical reports and
the report of the Public Advocate.
44 The investigation must be by an independent administrator.
We appoint the Public Trustee for that purpose. We have considered
extent of the powers needed by the Public Trustee. We cannot confer plenary
powers if limited powers would meet Y's needs.
We accept that the Public
Trustee will need plenary powers in order to have access to information and to
make any inquiries on Y's
behalf. On a practical day to day level, only the
management of Y's pension will be affected by the appointment, but we do not
that will make any appreciable difference to her.
45 We will make the appointment for three months. The order will be
reviewed at that time and the Public Trustee will be directed
to report to the
Tribunal at that time the outcome, or progress, of the investigation. With the
information already gathered by
the Public Advocate and the cooperation of P and
M, we would expect that an investigation could be substantially, if not fully,
in that time.
46 Taking into account Y's express wishes that her sons continue to manage
her affairs, we do not propose at this time to revoke
the EPA or to make the
orders sought in respect of it. However, other than for the purposes of signing
documents relating to the
transfer of the properties into Y's name, we do not
consider it appropriate for the donees to exercise their powers during the time
of the investigation. We will make a direction to that effect.
Application for the appointment of a guardian
47 The applicant asks the Tribunal to appoint a
guardian for her mother for the purposes of ensuring contact between herself and
her daughter and Y. It is evident that on at least one occasion, one of her
daughters has been unable to visit her grandmother because
of conflict with P.
We make no finding about any conflict.
48 The applicant, after consulting one of her sisters, has agreed that the
family should try to work this conflict out between themselves.
In light of
this, we dismiss the application for guardianship.
49 We recognise that these applications have caused
a degree of conflict, especially between the applicant and P. We have heard
say that she does not want any conflict between her children. The children say
they want to cooperate but there is clearly some
reluctance on P's part. No one
doubts his devotion to his mother. We hope that all parties will cooperate in
the investigation
and in the continued care of Y to reduce the conflict and
ensure her relationships with all her children are preserved.
50 The Tribunal orders that:
Public Trustee of 565 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed limited
administrator of the estate of Y with the powers
and duties of a plenary
administrator save and except for the purpose of executing any documents
concerning the transfer of the properties
known as Lot 178 and Lot 179
Public Trustee is directed to inquire into, and report to the Tribunal, on the
following matters:
(i) any assets or liabilities of J at the time of his death omitted from the
Statement of Assets and Liabilities filed with the application
for the grant of
(ii) the transactions pursuant to the Deed signed on 24 November 2004
including the current and likely future value of the shares
transferred by Y
pursuant to the Deed;
(iii) the extent to which P, as executor of his father’s estate, has
carried out his father’s wishes and whether he has
acted in the best
interests of his mother as beneficiary.
documents submitted to the Tribunal for the purposes of these applications are
to be provided to the Public Trustee including
all medical reports and the
report of the Public Advocate.
and M, as donees of the enduring power of attorney made by Y on
24 May 2004, are directed not to exercise their powers as donees
any purpose save and except for the purposes of transferring the properties
known as Lots 178 and 179 to Y.
and M are to report to the Tribunal no later than 21 days from the date of
this order as to their undertaking to transfer the properties.
applications for orders under s 190 of the Act are dismissed.
application for the appointment of a guardian is dismissed.
order appointing the Public Trustee administrator will be reviewed on 21
November 2006 at which time the Public Trustee is to
report to the Tribunal
the outcome, or progress, of his investigation.
I certify that this and the preceding [50] paragraphs comprise the
reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
___________________________________
MS J TOOHEY, SENIOR MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (106 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter