URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/229.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SV Australia Pty Ltd v Town of Cambridge [2004] WATPAT 229 (24 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 242 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 229
Heard: 30 November 2004
Decision: 24 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
S V AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
TOWN OF CAMBRIDGE
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Development refusal – Two grouped dwellings – Side setback
– Roof pitch - Wall height – Overshadowing –
Streetscape
– Design Guidelines
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr P Kotsoglo (Agent) appeared for the Appellant
Mr S Allerding (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal against the refusal by the Respondent to grant planning
approval for the proposed development of two grouped
dwellings at Lot 10
(HN 112) Kimberley Street, West Leederville (“
2. The subject land is orientated east west with a 10.04 metre frontage to
Kimberley Street at the western end. The depth of the
lot is 45.42 metres and
the area 455 m
. An existing brick and tile house on the
subject land is to be demolished. At the frontage there is a fall of 1.1 metres
to north. The lot also falls 3 metres from the south-west
corner to the north-east corner.
3. Proposed is the development of two grouped dwellings in a side-by-side
configuration. Each dwelling is two-storey and has a front
section and a rear
section joined by passageway beside a courtyard. The front section has on the
ground floor a bedroom, lounge and
wet areas and at the first floor a bedroom
with balcony overlooking the street, en suite and a study. A two level passage
to the rear portion, which has kitchen and family/dining at the
ground level and a bedroom, bathroom and rear terrace above. The
rear part is
1.2 metres lower than the front because of the fall in the land. One dwelling is
a mirror image of the other with a
common wall down the middle of the subject
4. Each proposed dwelling has a 5.02 metre frontage to Kimberley Street and
a front setback of 11.6 metres at ground level.
and a tandem bay
for a second car is located in each front setback. The carports are separated
by paths from the street
to the side-by-side
front entrances of the dwellings.
The carports have a “butterfly” sail cloth roof.
5. A significant feature of the front section is that at the ground floor there
is a zero set back from both side boundaries. At
the upper level the setback
from both the north and south boundaries is 900mm. The rear section has a 900mm
side set back at both
6. A second significant feature of the proposed development is the roof. The
roof appears flat at the front elevation. From the
side the front part has two
skillions sloping into the centre in a “butterfly” configuration.
The rear, lower part,
has a single skillion sloping toward the front.
Planning Framework
7. The subject land is zoned Residential with a coding of R40 under Town of
Cambridge Town Planning Scheme No.1 (“
”). Under TPS1 a
Grouped Dwelling development is an AA use in this zone. An AA use is not
permitted “unless Council has
granted planning approval”.
8. Under the Respondent’s Policy Manual, the subject land is within the
West Leederville Precinct P5.
9. The Respondent has adopted as policy Residential Design Guidelines
Design Guidelines
”) made up of two documents. One is the
Precinct Statements which further places the subject land within sub-precinct
Woolwich Street East.
10. The Respondent has incorporated Statement of Planning Policy 3.1:
Residential Design Codes (“
Design Codes
”) into TPS1 by
reference. The Design Codes and the provisions of TPS1 provide the standards for
development control.
11. Development is subject to further policy standards in another of the Design
Guidelines entitled Development Requirements. Design
Guidelines Development
Requirements section 6 “Boundary Setbacks”
“6.2 The purpose of setbacks from side and rear
boundaries is to provide for separation between buildings to enable access to
sunlight, provide for ventilation, assist in ameliorating the impact of building
bulk and in protecting privacy.
6.3 Compliance Standards
Development of boundary walls shall be considered to be compliant where they
meet the setback standards provided by Table 1, Table
2 and Figure 3 of the R
Performance
6.4.1 In considering an application proposing walls on boundaries, the Council
shall apply the performance Criteria in Part 3.3.2
P2 of the R-Codes ...”
12. Design Guidelines Development Requirements section 7 is concerned with
“Building Height and Bulk”.
13. Clause 7.4 “Performance Criteria” states:
“Variations of the Compliance Standards may be approved by
the Council where, in the opinion of the Council, the following criteria
(a) buildings which respect the scale of buildings generally in their
vicinity, in terms of their height and bulk and remain subservient
to the green
streetscape;
(b) buildings which are respectful of the predominant character and style of
existing development within the locality;
(c) where the front of the building facing the street is broken up,
presenting a varied and interesting façade to the street,
rather than a
continuous wall;
(d) where the performance criteria contained in Part 3.7.1 P1 of the R Codes
The Refusal
14. To summarise it can be said the Respondent refused the proposed development
because it did not satisfy the Acceptable Development
requirements or
performance criteria of:
Guidelines:
6 – Boundary setbacks.
– Building height and
3.7 Element 7 – Building height
3.3 Element 3 – Boundary setbacks.
15. The Respondent determined that the level of non-compliance would result in
an adverse impact on the amenity of the adjoining
landowners.
16. It was also determined that a lot of these dimensions is unsuitable for the
development of two dwellings of the scale proposed.
A 5 metre frontage is
insufficient for the provision of suitable residential development and would set
an undesirable precedent.
17. In Design Guidelines Precinct Statements under “West Leederville in
the Future” the concern is the protection of
the character of the
locality. Stated is “new infill houses are to respect the scale, materials
and significant forms (such
as roof pitches) of existing houses”. The aim
stated in Design Guidelines Development Requirements “Architectural
is “To ensure new development is respectful of existing
character, whilst allowing for contemporary design”. From this
accepted that not every development must replicate or be the same or even look
the same as all other developments in the
18. It was the submission of Mr Allerding for the Respondent, that breaches of
the Design Codes and the Design Guidelines would result
in two dwellings of a
scale and design that would be inconsistent with the pattern of development and
character of the locality and
that the amenity of the neighbours would be
adversely affected.
19. His analysis of the Kimberley Street streetscape was that the form of
development is consistent, particularly with respect of
visible roof pitches. In
his view the proposed development is not respectful of the dominant character
and style of dwellings in
the locality, particularly as it does not have a
pitched roof and associated lower wall heights.
20. The highest point of the skillion is at the front of the building and so in
the street elevations the dwellings appear to have
a flat roof.
21. The Design Guidelines Development Requirements state for the West
Leederville Precinct:
“ 8.3.7 Primary roofs visible from the street shall be hipped or gabled,
or a combination of the two.
8.3.8 The pitch of primary roofing visible from the street shall be between 30
degrees and 40
22. Mr Allerding interpreted these guidelines as requiring that primary roofs
shall be visible from the street and shall be hipped
or gabled. He used
photographs to illustrate that all but one roof in Kimberley Street is hipped or
a gable and visible. He said
the proposed development would undermine the
intact nature of the street and is not respectful of the existing character.
This analysis
is somewhat narrow in its focus.
23. Both parties provided photographs of the streetscape of Kimberley Street and
selected houses in neighbouring streets. Redevelopment
is occurring and the only
feature noticeably “respectful” of existing character appears to
have been the use of a pitched
roof visible from the street. From the evidence
and photographs it could be said that houses built in the last few years have
two storey, prominent in the street because they are higher and wider than
most of the older houses, with a balcony in the façade
common. Many could
be said to be of a character not particularly reflective of the traditional
style of houses in the Woolwich Street
East Precinct.
24. The proposed development does not include a pitched roof but in other
respects is “respectful” of the character of
the locality. It is of
lower elevation than its two adjoining neighbours and “has a varied and
interesting façade, rather
than a continuous wall”. The front
setback is equal to that of the house to the north and greater than that of the
25. From the evidence, I do not consider the absence of a visible pitched roof
will be so “disrespectful” of the streetscape
as to provide a basis
for refusal.
26. The Respondent submits that the proposed development is over height because
it is over 6 metres high. The Design Guidelines Development
Requirements Section
7 Building Height and Bulk includes at clause 7.3 Compliance
“7.3.1 New development shall not exceed the
following height limits, measured vertically above the “natural
immediately below the relevant point on the wall or roof:
(a) external walls, to the top of the eaves at the wall line, parapet or flat
roof, whichever is the highest, except gable walls or
skillion walls – 6.0
(b) upper surface of roofs, excluding hipped roofs, at their highest point
– 9.5 metres; or
(c) hipped roofs – 10.5 metres.”
27. Mr Rechichi, an architect called by the Appellant, said a skillion roof fits
7.3.1(b). The upper surface of the proposed roofs
is a maximum of 7.5 metres on
the northern side and 7.1 on the south side. As it is a skillion the walls are
of the same height.
Skillion walls are excluded from the 6.00 metre limit of
7.3.1(a). Mr Rechichi’s interpretation of height is preferred. To
that because of the slope of the land the building would be between 1.1 metres
and 0.5 metres below road level.
28. To be considered is whether the reduced side setbacks are enough to refuse
the proposed development.
29. The ground floor of the front section has parapet walls at zero set back on
both side boundaries. It was Mr Rechichi’s
submission that the impact on
the neighbours of these parapet walls was minimal. Mr Rechichi pointed out that
the floor level of
the proposed houses would be 1.78 metres lower than the floor
level of the house to the south, which is set back about five metres
boundary. The house to the north is set back one metre, but again it has a
floor level slightly higher than that of the
proposed development. The house to
the north has no major openings to habitable rooms on this section of wall.
30. A parapet wall to one boundary is common in the in Kimberley Street
locality. Zero setbacks to both side boundaries are not common,
particularly for
houses with no other rear access. Attention was drawn to the grouped dwellings
in Caddy Avenue, although these do
have rear vehicle access. Likewise, while two
storey reduced set backs are included in some dwellings, no examples of reduced
on both boundaries were provided.
31. The parties spent some effort on whether houses of 5.00 metre frontage were
part of local character. Evidence was that there
are no dwellings in Kimberley
Street with a 5.00 metre frontage and very few in West Leederville. Examples
were given of frontages
that were similar width or not more than one or two
metres wider. There would appear to be nothing inherently unacceptable in two
houses side-by-side of 5.00 metre frontage. Of concern is the width of the lot
on which they would be located. The subject land is
only 10.00 metres wide.
32. The proposed development has to rely on the siting and design of the
neighbouring buildings to reduce the impact of the zero
and reduced setbacks.
The neighbouring buildings comply with the relevant set back standards for the
boundaries common with the subject
33. Significant also is the effect of the reduced upper level setback. The
Respondent lists these
Side Setback – upper floor (R Codes and RDGs)
North/left side Acceptable Development Standards:
Minimum 2.0 to 2.2 metres for front portion of Dwelling B
Minimum 1.2 metres for rear portion of Dwelling B
Side Setback – upper floor (R Codes and RDGs)
South/right side:
Minimum 1.9 to 2.1 metres for front portion of Dwelling A
Minimum 1.2 metres for rear portion of Dwelling B
34. The plans show that the upper side wall of the front section is 14.8 metres
long and of the rear section 8.4 metres long. This
length of wall at reduced
upper level setback contributes to the concerns that have been raised in
submissions as to the overall
bulk and scale of the development. The length of
wall with the reduced setback extends beyond the rear of the neighbouring houses
to be adjacent to the private open space of these dwellings.
35. Overshadowing is of concern for the house to the south. To note is that the
adjoining house to the south is built over two lots,
Lots 8 and 9.
Mr Allerding argued that as the overshadowing standard refers to the
“adjoining lot”, to be considered
is the impact on Lot 9. From the
Appellant’s shadow diagram, Mr Allerding calculated that at noon at
the winter solstice
overshadowing
of Lot 9 would be 50%, well in excess of the
35% allowed under the Design Codes.
36. Mr Rechichi and Mr Kotsoglo, a planner appearing for the Appellant,
emphasised the fact that although it was two lots, it was
one house and it is
appropriate to consider the impact on that house and the associated yard.
Reference was made to existing vegetation
on the boundary, the substantial
awning to the window of the affected habitable room and the depth of the
37. The performance criteria of the Design Codes refer to overshadowing of
spaces and access to sunlight for habitable rooms. Lot
to the south
would have overshadowing of the main window of a habitable room at the side of
the house and the front verandah.
would also be overshadowing of part of
a paved area of the backyard, an adjacent verandah, which is effectively a
swimming pool.
38. The Respondent is relying entirely on the wording of the provision, not
recognising the form of development next door. That said
it is apparent that the
impact on the solar access of the house and the outdoor activity areas to the
south would be improved if
the upper level were at the correct setback.
39. The fact that the house is two storeys and is adjacent to the rear yard of
the neighbouring houses is not considered to be of
itself a reason for refusal.
Of concern is that concessions are required on setbacks simply to achieve a
particular form of development
on the subject land, but this is to be at some
expense to the amenity of the neighbouring house because of the effect of bulk
overshadowing.
40. The subject land is coded R40 and is above the minimum area per dwelling
required for the development of two grouped dwellings.
That is not the end of
the matter however, as grouped dwellings are an “AA” use and the
development standards of the
Design Guidelines and the Design Codes have to be
addressed when assessing the merit of such a development proposal.
41. The impact of the proposed development on the streetscape, local character
and the neighbours is the result of a combination
of a number of elements. Of
these, I do not consider height a concern or that the roof design is a matter
fatal to the proposal.
42. More significant are the zero setbacks at both side boundaries of the front
part and the reduced setback for the entire length
of the upper levels of the
two parts of the building. Such variations to setbacks at both boundaries are
not common for lots of the
dimensions and access arrangements of the subject
land in this precinct. In this the proposed development will be a departure from
the general form of development evolving in the locality.
43. Mr Allerding raised as an issue the orderly and proper planning of the
locality. In that regard, it must be acknowledged that
the character of the
precinct is evolving as redevelopment occurs. While the Appellant has
illustrated that there are examples of
variations in setbacks in the
neighbourhood, the extent of variation required and the impact in this instance
are such that I have
concluded that the development as proposed cannot be
supported. I therefore advise that the appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (85.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter