URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/121.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
J-CORP PTY LTD and MCCUTCHEON [2025] WASAT 121 (3 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
BUILDING SERVICES (COMPLAINT RESOLUTION AND ADMINISTRATION) ACT
J-CORP PTY LTD and MCCUTCHEON [2025] WASAT 121
JUDGE F VERNON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
15 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
18 SEPTEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
3 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CC 430 of 2025
J-CORP PTY LTD
JANICE MCCUTCHEON
First Respondent
GRAEME MCCARTHY
Second Respondent
BUILDING COMMISSIONER
Third Respondent
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Interlocutory application - Application for a
stay of the operation of a building remedy order - Application to adjourn review
proceedings
while Supreme Court proceedings are on foot
Legislation:
Building Services (Complaint Resolution and
Administration) Act 2011
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
(Cth), s 75, s 76, s 77
Competition and Consumer Act
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA), O 56, r
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Application for a stay of the operation of a
building remedy order granted upon provision of an undertaking
Application
for an adjournment of the proceedings dismissed
Programming orders made
Representation:
Mr M Sims SC and Mr L Swanson
First Respondent
Second Respondent
No appearance
Third Respondent
Ms J Shaw SC
Ms J Shaw SC
Solicitors:
Hotchkin Hanly
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Third Respondent
State Solicitor's Office
State Solicitor's Office
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Collector of Customs (NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
(1979) 24 ALR 307
Dobson and Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2022] WASAT 80
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
[2024] WASCA 96
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2019) 266 CLR 250
[2019] HCA 16
Hanssen Pty Ltd v Owners of Strata Plan 58161
[2024] WASCA 87
Legal Profession Complaints Committee and Rayney
[2016] WASAT 142
Nugawela and Medical Board of Australia
[2023] WASAT 82
Owners of Strata Plan 58161 and Hanssen Pty Ltd
[2022] WASAT 77
PAG (WA) Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Consumer Protection
[2018] WASAT 57
SH v Chief Executive Officer of Department of Communities
[2019] WASCA 31
Soutorine and The Medical Board of Australia
[2020] WASAT 5
Western Australian Planning Commission and Coogee General Store Pty Ltd
[2007] WASAT 182
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
an application dated 27 June 2025, J-Corp Pty Ltd (
) applied for
review of a Building Remedy Order (a
) made on 30 May 2025 under
Building Services (Complaint Resolution and Administration) Act
Building Services Act
) by a delegate of the Building
Commissioner in relation to a house owned by Janice McCutcheon and Graeme
respondents
), being BRO O2024-0979 (
BRO requires the applicant, amongst other things, to conduct a full home re-pipe
of Typlex piping that the applicant installed
in the respondents' house.
pipes installed in the respondents' house are given various names in the
documents before me, including Typlex, Pro-Fit, and
Iplex pipes. In these
reasons I will call them 'the pipes'.
applicant is a company in the BGC group of companies (
an application dated 1 August 2025, the applicant applied for interlocutory
(a) staying the operation of the BRO pending further order
of the Tribunal, pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act
(b) adjourning the proceedings pending further order of the Tribunal,
pursuant to s 32(5) or, alternatively, s 32(7)(e) of the SAT
the applications
applications were heard at the same time as identical applications in three
other matters,
concerning a BRO in similar terms to the BRO requiring another company in the
BGC Group, Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd (
), to conduct a full home
re-pipe (amongst other things) of houses owned by each of the respondents in
those proceedings. Separate
reasons will be delivered in those matters,
referring to these reasons, given the overlap of the issues in each matter.
principal basis on which the stay was sought was to ensure that the applicant is
not required to carry out the work required
under the BRO before the proceedings
for review of the decision to make the BRO (
review proceedings
) have been
determined.
adjournment was sought to delay the review proceedings until determination of
Ventura's application in the Supreme Court, commenced
on 13 June 2025, for
judicial review of the decision of a delegate of the Building Commissioner to
make a BRO relating to the pipes
installed in a house that is not the subject of
any of the four applications before me (
Supreme Court proceedings
respondents and the intervenor opposed the application for an adjournment. The
respondents also opposed the application for
a stay. The intervenor did not
oppose the stay.
18 September 2025, I decided to make orders in the terms set out at the
conclusion of these reasons (
), in summary,
(a) grant the application to stay the operation of the BRO until
further order of the Tribunal, upon the applicant providing the respondents
an undertaking as to damages in the form set out in the Orders;
(b) refuse the application for an adjournment of the review proceedings;
(c) program the review proceedings to a direction hearing to progress the
matter to a hearing.
18 September 2025, I said that I would produce written reasons for my decision
to make the Orders. These are those reasons.
determining the applications, I have had reference to the following
affidavits:
(a) the affidavit of Adam
Casotti sworn 1 August 2025. Mr Casotti is a registered building contractor and
an employee of BGC Group
involved in the managing, investigating and
coordinating of BGC Group's response to plumbing failures relating to the
(b) the affidavits of Luke Swanson sworn 1 August 2025 and 22 August
2025. Mr Swanson is a partner of the firm of lawyers acting
(c) the affidavit of the first respondent, Janice McCutcheon, affirmed on 7
September 2025;
(d) the affidavit of Lilly Deluca affirmed on 11 September 2025. Ms Deluca
is a lawyer employed by the firm of lawyers acting for
the applicant; and
(e) the affidavit of Aleksandra Miller affirmed on 12 September 2025. Ms
Miller is a lawyer employed by the State Solicitor's Office,
acting for the
intervenor.
addition, I have had reference to an amended application in the Supreme Court
proceedings dated 8 August 2025, which is
Swanson's affidavit dated 18 August 2025, filed in one of the other three
proceedings.
Legal Principles
Stay of the Building Remedy Order
25(2) of the SAT Act provides that I may make an order staying the operation of
a decision that is the subject of a proceeding
for review. Section 25(4) of the
SAT Act provides that I may make that order only if I consider that it is
desirable to do so after
taking into account the interests of any person whose
interests may be affected by the order, any submissions made by the
decision-maker,
and the public interest.
decision-maker, namely the delegate of the Building Commissioner, has not made
any submissions in relation to the applications.
25(6)(a) of the SAT Act provides that, in making an order for a stay, I may
require any undertaking as to costs or damages
that I consider appropriate. At
the hearing on 15 September 2025, the applicant's counsel provided a form of
wording for an undertaking
and said that the applicant did not oppose my
requiring an undertaking if I considered it appropriate.
principles for the exercise of a stay are summarised in
Legal Practice Board of Western
referring to the decision in
Soutorine and the Medical Board of
I adopt what was said in those
paragraphs, as follows:
Tottle J, sitting as Supplementary President of the Tribunal, was
concerned with a decision by the Medical Board of Australia to
take 'immediate action' to suspend Dr Soutorine's registration as
a medical practitioner. His Honour enunciated the following
principles,
which have since been repeated and
of the SAT Act provides the Tribunal with a wide discretion to grant a stay that
must be exercised judicially;
analysis of that discretion must begin with the terms of the statute,
particularly s 25(4) of the SAT Act;
must be taken in looking for guidance to:
with a different statutory basis for the power to grant a
concerned with the exercise of discretion to grant a stay in curial proceedings.
In particular, where a stay application
is brought within an application to
review an administrative decision, a regulatory decision-making authority is not
to be equated
with the 'successful party' following a contest
and determination;
the SAT Act does not exhaustively list the matters relevant to the
Tribunal's consideration; and
party bears an onus of persuading the Tribunal to grant a stay or
noted above, one of the matters for which regard must be had in an application
under s 25(4) of the SAT Act is the public interest.
The 'public
interest' in a particular case must be understood within its statutory
context ... (citations omitted)
PAG (WA) Pty Ltd and Commissioner for Consumer
Curthoys J said:
... the analogy with a stay pending appeal is not helpful. An appeal is
premised on a decision after a hearing. The Commissioner
is not the 'successful
party' in any sense compared to a party who is successful after contested
proceedings.
respondents submitted that
I should treat the stay
application as analogous to a stay in curial proceedings, such that I should be
satisfied that there are exceptional
circumstances to justify the grant of a
stay. The reference to curial proceedings is a reference to appeal proceedings
from a judgment
arrived at after trial. In making that submission, the
respondents sought to distinguish this matter from
Nugawela and Medical
), relying on their personal interest in the remedial
work being carried out. The respondents also submitted that a presumption
correctness should apply to the decision to make the BRO.
accept that the respondents have a personal interest in the work specified in
the BRO being performed, which the regulatory board
did not have in the proceedings the subject of that decision. However, in my
view, the process leading to the making of the BRO
is not the equivalent of a
judgment of a court after a contested hearing in which both parties lead
evidence. On the evidence before
me, the applicant was given the opportunity to
make written submissions about whether the Building Commissioner (and,
the delegate) had jurisdiction to make the BRO and whether the BRO
should be made. In that response, it did not address all the
matters now
raised on review. The decision to make the BRO was then made on the papers, and
on the results of the delegate's own
any event, the basis on which the Tribunal in
said that a
decision of a regulatory authority was not to be equated with a successful party
in curial proceedings was because the
nature of the proceedings was a review 'de
novo', that is
where there
is no presumption that the original decision was correct.
In particular, a decision of a regulatory decision-making authority is not to be
equated with a successful party in proceedings in
which the issues have been
contested and determined by a court or tribunal. That is because in review
proceedings, the Tribunal
engages in a hearing de novo, in which it
determines, on the basis of all of the evidence then before it, what is the
correct and
preferable decision. The decision under review is not subject to
any presumption of correctness. No error need be shown for the
decision to be
set aside or varied. No party bears any onus of proof. Instead, it is for the
Tribunal to review the evidence and
make a determination as to the correct and
preferable decision as at the date of the determination. In those
circumstances, it would
not be appropriate to regard the Board as entitled to
the benefit, on a stay application, of any presumption that its immediate action
decision is the correct and preferable decision, so as to impose a higher
threshold for the grant of a stay, over and above the Tribunal
forming the view
that the grant of a stay is 'desirable' having regard to the matters in s 25(4)
of the SAT Act and any other considerations
it considers relevant. (citations
reasoning is equally applicable in this case.
comments in
are consistent with what was said by
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Minister for Aboriginal
as follows:
... As Fox, Deane and Morling JJ said
(411), it is 'unsound in determining the
correctness of a decision to treat the decision itself as being probative of its
own correctness'.
In the present case, there was no presumption that the
Minister's decision was correct. Accordingly, the Minister's decision did
in itself, carry any weight.
is no basis for presuming the decision of the delegate to make the BRO is
correct, or to give the decision itself weight, at
an interlocutory stage any
more than there is at a final hearing.
My assessment is that Dr Soutorine has raised a serious question to be resolved
as to whether it is reasonable to believe that
a suspension of his registration
is necessary to protect public health and safety ...
Accordingly,
I conclude that it is not necessary to show that there are special circumstances
warranting the stay, or to be satisfied
that the review proceedings have a
reasonable prospect of success, in order to justify the grant of a stay under s
25 of the SAT
Act. In my view, it is necessary, however, to show that there is
a serious question to be resolved or, in other words, an arguable
Adjournment of the review proceedings
32(7)(e) of the SAT Act provides that the Tribunal may adjourn a proceeding to
any time and place. It is not in dispute
that this allows me to make an order
adjourning proceedings pending the outcome of Supreme Court
proceedings.
relevant considerations in determining whether it is appropriate to adjourn the
review proceedings are not prescribed in the
SAT Act, but were identified in
Owners of Strata Plan 58161 and Hanssen Pty
(a) the reason for the adjournment and any prejudice to the
applicant for the adjournment if the hearing is not adjourned;
(b) any prejudice to the other parties to the proceedings if the adjournment
is granted;
(c) the effect of the adjournment on the use of the Tribunal's resources;
(d) the impact of delay as a result of the grant of the adjournment; and
(e) the statutory framework within which the discretion falls to be
exercised, which include that:
(i) the objectives of the Tribunal are to act as speedily, and with as little
formality and technicality, as is
practicable;
(ii) the Tribunal is required to achieve resolution of the questions before
(iii) the Tribunal is required to minimise the costs of proceedings to the
Order of consideration
applicant's counsel submitted that I should determine the application for a stay
first and then determine the application for
an adjournment, because the
decision to grant a stay would have an impact on the assessment of the
appropriate approach to the
adjournment.
is a considerable degree of overlap in the considerations relevant to each
application. Accordingly, it is difficult to approach
the matter as the
applicant's counsel suggests. In my view, the most appropriate approach is that
suggested by the intervenor, which
was essentially to consider the applications
light of the relevant factors in relation to both the application for a stay and
the application for an adjournment, these reasons
proceed with a consideration
of the following factors:
statutory framework;
(b) any prejudice to the applicant if a stay, or an adjournment, is not
granted, the latter of which includes consideration of the
prospects of success
in the Supreme Court proceedings;
(c) any prejudice to the respondents if a stay, or an adjournment, is
granted, which includes consideration of the impact of delay;
(d) whether there is a serious question to be determined in the review
proceedings;
(e) the public interest;
(f) the impact of an adjournment on the Tribunal's objectives; and
(g) where the balance of convenience lies.
addition, the respondents allege that the applications are an abuse of process,
essentially on the basis that they are for an
improper purpose. That issue is
addressed at the end of these reasons.
I say in these reasons should not be construed as findings of fact. In so far
as I express views on the relative strength of
the parties' positions on various
issues, they are not more than preliminary views, based on untested
Statutory framework
purpose of the Building Services Act is stated, in the preamble, to be to
provide for a system for dealing with complaints about
building services, home
building work contract matters and disciplinary matters, and to provide for a
public officer with functions
relating to building services and complaints. One
of the Building Commissioner's functions is to deal with complaints made to the
Building Commissioner about regulated building services not being carried out in
a proper and proficient manner or being faulty or
unsatisfactory.
power to make a BRO is set out in s 37 of the Building Services Act as
(1) Subject to regulations made under section 11(5),
if the Building Commissioner is satisfied that a regulated building service that
is the subject of a building service complaint has not been carried out in a
proper and proficient manner or is faulty or unsatisfactory,
the Building
Commissioner may deal with the building service complaint by making a building
remedy order.
(2) The Building Commissioner cannot make a building remedy order requiring
(a) work to be done of a value estimated by
the Building Commissioner to exceed the prescribed amount; or
(b) an amount exceeding the prescribed amount to be paid,
unless the respondent consents to the order being made.
(3) Unless a greater amount is prescribed by the regulations, in subsection (2)
the prescribed amount is $100 000.
(4) The Building Commissioner may make any ancillary or incidental order the
Building Commissioner considers appropriate.
BRO is defined in s 36(1) of the Building Services Act as
(1) A building remedy order consists of one of the
following —
(a) an order that a person who
carried out a regulated building service remedy the building service as
specified in the order;
(b) an order that a person who carried out a regulated building service pay
to an aggrieved person such costs of remedying the building
service as the
Building Commissioner or State Administrative Tribunal, as the case requires,
considers reasonable and specifies in
(c) an order that a person who carried out a regulated building service pay
to an aggrieved person a sum of money specified in the
order to compensate the
aggrieved person for the failure to carry out the building service in a proper
and proficient manner or for
faulty or unsatisfactory building work.
57(1)(c) provides that a person aggrieved by a BRO made by the Building
Commissioner may apply to the Tribunal for review
of the order.
s 29 of the SAT Act, the Tribunal has the same functions and discretions as the
Building Commissioner in making the BRO and
may affirm or vary the BRO, or set
it aside and substitute its own decision, or refer it back to the Building
Commissioner to be
reconsidered.
my view, the statutory context is not of particular assistance in resolving
either the application for an adjournment or a stay,
given the competing
interests allowed for under the legislation.
one of the purposes of the Building Services Act is to provide for a system of
resolution of complaints, including by the
Building Commissioner issuing BROs,
the Building Services Act also allows for those decisions to be reviewed by the
Tribunal on the
application of an aggrieved person, which includes a person
required to do work under a BRO. As has already been noted, there is
presumption that the original decision is correct. The review is not predicated
upon the applicant for review proving that the
Building Commissioner, or
delegate, was in error. The Tribunal is required to consider the matter afresh
and make the correct and
preferable decision at the time of its decision on
review, on the material before
Prejudice to the applicant if the review proceedings are not adjourned
applicant says that, if Ventura succeeds in the Supreme Court proceedings, it
follows that the delegate did not have jurisdiction
to make the BRO. Whilst the
applicant and the respondents are not parties to the Supreme Court proceedings,
it does not appear to
be in dispute that, if Ventura is successful, the
practical effect will be to bring the review proceedings to an end.
Accordingly,
the applicant submits, in effect, that it should have the benefit of the
decision in the Supreme Court proceedings before
being required to incur the
expense of progressing the review proceedings, and that this is a more efficient
use of the Tribunal's
intervenor submits that there is no serious issue to be tried in the Supreme
Court proceedings in light of the decision in
Hanssen Pty Ltd v the
Owners of Strata Plan
). As a result, the intervenor submits that the
refusal to adjourn the review proceedings pending determination of the Supreme
proceedings would not render the review proceedings futile.
with the intervenor's submission, and for the following reasons, I have formed
the view that Ventura has no prospect of
success in the Supreme Court
proceedings if those proceedings are determined by a single judge of the Supreme
Court, and faces significant
obstacles to success if those proceedings are
determined by the Court of Appeal. This reduces the prospect that any costs
in the review proceedings will be wasted or that the Tribunal's resources
will be wasted in conducting the review proceedings.
Prospects of success in the Supreme Court proceedings
the Supreme Court proceedings, Ventura seeks a declaration that s 37 of the
Building Services Act is invalid to the extent that
it purports to authorise the
making of a BRO requiring replacement of the pipes Ventura had installed in a
consequentially, the delegate of the Building Commissioner had no jurisdiction
to make a BRO in that case.
I understand it, in the Supreme Court proceedings, Ventura argues, in summary,
(a) there are currently two actions on foot in the Federal
Court of Australia involving BGC Group companies, the pipes' manufacturer,
Pipelines Australia Pty Ltd (
), and the owners of houses in which
the pipes were installed (
(b) the scope of the 'matter' in each of the Federal Court actions includes
whether the homeowners have claims against BGC Group companies
or Iplex in
respect of defects in the manufacture, supply, or installation of the pipes;
(c) the decision to make a BRO in relation to the pipes forms part of the
'matter' in the Federal Court actions, and is a 'matter'
arising under a law of
the Commonwealth Parliament, namely the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(d) by reason of s 75,
and s 77 of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
the Western Australian Parliament cannot confer judicial power in relation to
that 'matter' on an entity, namely the Building Commissioner
or its delegates,
that is not a Court of the State and s 37 of the Building Services Act is
invalid to the extent it purports to
confer such power.
is not in dispute that in order to succeed, Ventura must satisfy the Court that
the answer to both of the following questions
Building Commissioner exercising judicial power when making a BRO; and
(b) if the Building Commissioner is exercising judicial power when making a
BRO, does the making of the BRO fall within a 'matter'
arising under a law of
the Commonwealth.
Accordingly,
Ventura must fail in the Supreme Court proceedings if the Court decides the
answer to either question is 'no'.
applicant accepts that, in determining the Supreme Court proceedings, a single
judge of the Supreme Court will be bound to follow
the decision in
. In that case, the Court of Appeal decided that the
Commissioner was not exercising judicial power in making a
Accordingly,
a single judge of the Supreme Court, following
decide that the Building Commissioner is not exercising judicial power in making
a BRO, and the answer to the question referred
to in [48(a)] is 'no'. It
follows that Ventura has no prospect of success in the Supreme Court proceedings
before a single judge.
recognition of this inevitability, Ventura has informed the case management
judge, Howard J, that it will seek an order under
O 56 r 5(4) of
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
) for the Supreme
Court proceedings to be transferred to the Court of Appeal without first being
determined by a single judge. Order
56 r 5(4) of the Rules allows a single
judge dealing with a judicial review application, without deciding the
application, to order
that it be heard by the Court of Appeal.
intervenor is a party to the Supreme Court proceedings and says that he intends
to oppose the proposed application. The intervenor
says that there is still
benefit in the Court of Appeal having a first instance decision on the question
in [48(b)] above, which
has not previously been determined. The applicant's
counsel conceded in oral submissions that there was some force to this
The application to transfer the Supreme Court proceedings would, therefore,
need to be argued. If that application is not granted,
and the matter is heard
by a single judge who, following
, decides against Ventura,
it appears that Ventura's current intention is to appeal.
either case Ventura will have to persuade the Court of Appeal that
is plainly wrong.
have not been informed of the basis on which the applicant will argue that
was wrongly decided and that the Building Commissioner, in
making a BRO, is exercising judicial power. However, it seems likely,
intervenor submits, that Ventura will have some difficulty persuading the Court
of Appeal that a recent, considered, and unanimous
decision of that Court is
plainly wrong.
addition, the applicant will also have to satisfy the Court that the answer to
the second question, in [48(b)] above, is also
'yes'. In light of the
difficulties the applicant faces in succeeding in the first question,
I have not considered the prospects
of success in the second question.
There was no suggestion that it was not arguable. However, logically, the need
to prove both
must further reduce the applicant's overall prospects of success
in the Supreme Court proceedings.
a result, I conclude that Ventura has no prospect of success in the Supreme
Court proceedings, if heard by a single judge, and
there are significant
obstacles to success before the Court of Appeal.
Accordingly,
in my view, there is limited prejudice to the applicant in being required to
pursue the review proceedings before the
Supreme Court proceedings are
to the question of what costs would be thrown away, or wasted, if the review
proceedings are not adjourned and the Supreme
Court proceedings are
ultimately successful, the applicant has not presented any evidence, or made any
submissions, of what those
costs are likely to be. However, in my view, those
costs are unlikely to be substantial, even taking into account the likelihood
that the applicant will be represented by senior counsel.
I understand the issues, it appears likely that the length of the hearing will
be relatively short, perhaps a few days. There
will obviously be some
preparation necessary. However, it appears on the material before me that some
of that preparatory work has
already been done, at least in developing the legal
arguments raised with the delegate, and in compiling some factual evidence.
view is not changed even if the costs of the four matters are considered
collectively. The hearing is likely to be somewhat longer
but still in the
vicinity of a week or so. The legal issues in each case are identical. Whilst
there are some factual differences
between the matters, there appears to be a
significant degree of overlap in the evidence to be led as far as the
applicant is concerned.
is also likely that the decision in this matter, and the other three matters,
will be the basis of some precedent for later proceedings
for review of similar
BROs. There is no dispute that the review proceedings have a wider implication.
Although there is no evidence
before me of the number of BROs made in relation
to houses in which BGC Group companies have installed the pipes, the pleadings
in the Federal Court proceedings indicate that the number of houses where
there had been three or more burst pipe
under 900 as at August 2024.
addition, the costs are unlikely to be significant relative to the overall costs
that the applicant is likely to incur in pursuit
of the Supreme Court
proceedings, the Federal Court proceedings and the ongoing repair work that is
already being done in relation
to the replacement of burst pipes and repair of
damage caused by those burst pipes, given the number of burst pipe events
to in the Federal Court pleadings.
Prejudice to the applicant if the stay is not granted
applicant submits that, if the stay is not granted, it will be required to
perform work under the BRO before the review of the
BRO is completed, rendering
the review proceedings nugatory, or be at risk of prosecution for the failure to
comply, or at risk of
the respondents applying for a monetary order.
respondents say that the review will not be rendered nugatory because the
applicant has said it will continue to meet its obligations
to remedy burst
events, and it is very probable that the applicant will be required to repair
zones in the house that must in any
event be repaired under the BRO.
BRO requires that the applicant conduct a full re-pipe of the respondents' house
within 6 months of 30 May 2025, that is by 30
November 2025. It is not in
dispute that this goes beyond the work that the applicant has been doing and
says it will continue to
Casotti says in his affidavit that BGC Group has been performing damage repair
where there have been burst pipe events, and ceiling
re-pipes, on a voluntary
basis. Mr Casotti says that the applicant has not performed a full home re-pipe
of the respondents' house,
but, in April 2025, had commenced a ceiling re-pipe,
as well as works to remove and replace the pipes in a laundry and a bathroom.
In her affidavit, Ms McCutcheon confirms that these works were completed in
April and May 2025. On Mr Casotti's evidence, in order
to complete the full
re-pipe required by the BRO, the applicant must remove and replace the remaining
pipes in a different laundry
and bathroom, the kitchen, a powder room and an
Mr Casotti's evidence, based on re-pipe work the BGC Group has undertaken on six
houses, a complete re-pipe takes 12 to 14 weeks
to complete if the occupiers
move out of their home while the work is being done, and 14 to 16 weeks if they
do not do so. Accordingly,
Mr Casotti says that there is a risk that the
complete re-pipe of the respondents' house will not be complete by 30 November
if the re-pipe work is not commenced by the end of August 2025.
That deadline had passed as at the date of the hearing before me.
Accordingly,
on Mr Casotti's evidence, there is a real risk that the required work would not
be completed by 30 November 2025 in
Casotti says that a ceiling re-pipe is the most effective mitigatory measure to
avoid burst pipe events and reduce the potential
for hazards as a result of
burst pipes. Mr Casotti does not say how he has arrived at this opinion, and it
is not clear to me what
Mr Casotti means by 'most effective', given that there
does not appear to be any dispute that a ceiling re-pipe does not involve
replacing all the allegedly defective pipes in the walls and there is still a
risk that these may burst.
Casotti also says that BGC Group has a policy of trying to perform ceiling
re-pipes on a voluntary basis, doing 150 per month
on single storey homes and 20
per month on double storey homes. He says that BGC is responding to five
pipe failures per day, although
this appears to have reduced to four pipe
failures per day between his first affidavit sworn on 1 August 2025, and his
later affidavits
sworn on 18 August 2025 in the other three proceedings.
Casotti says that BGC Group cannot do all the aspects of a full home re-pipe
itself and must outsource some of the repair work.
He says that this is at
significant cost. He also says that BGC has 200 homes under construction
and 9,000 homes with post completion
maintenance obligations. However, these
assertions were broad in their scope, with no detailed evidence. Accordingly, I
in considering the applications, I can give little weight to the
implication that BGC does not have the resources to perform the
work in the BRO,
either alone or with the other three matters combined.
said, however, it is obvious that, if the stay is not granted, the applicant
will be required to perform work on the respondents'
house, at a not
insignificant cost of both time and resources, before the review of the BRO is
determined, or be at risk of prosecution
or the respondents seeking a monetary
order. There is no dispute that the review proceedings will not be heard and
determined by
the latest date that the applicants are required to perform the
work. If the applicant then succeeds in the review proceedings,
it will be in a
position where it has already undertaken work it is no longer legally required
to undertake. Self-evidently, once
the applicant has done that work, it cannot
be put back in the position where it has not done the work.
Accordingly,
in my view, whilst there may still be some collateral benefit to the applicant
in having a matter determined in its
favour, if that occurs, the review will be
rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted.
Respondents' further submissions in relation to the applicant's prejudice
relation to the issue of the applicant's prejudice if the stay is not granted,
the respondents say that it is in the applicant's
long-term interests to
pre-empt these repairs, and that the applicant has been incurring unnecessary
expense by replacing only the
parts of pipes that have burst and not replacing
other pipes at the same time when they have the opportunity. Whilst that is the
respondents' opinion, it is apparently not the applicant's view and I am not in
a position to form a view, one way or another, on
the evidence before me.
in relation to this issue, the respondents say that the applicant is seeking
compensation for the repair costs. This is
presumably a reference to the
Federal Court action against Iplex, which appears to be some time away from a
resolution, or to the
possibility that the applicant has relevant insurance
cover, about which I have no clear evidence. Even assuming, however, that
cost of repair is being funded by an insurer, there would appear to be a
difference between undertaking repairs as burst pipe
events occur and
undertaking the pre-emptive replacement of all the pipes in a house, with the
latter apparently being more extensive
and, therefore, more expensive, than the
former. The fact that the applicant might ultimately be able to recover the
cost of work
done does not mean the review would not be rendered nugatory, given
the potential that, if the BRO is set aside on review, the applicant
have to perform the work at all.
do not accept the respondents' submission that it follows from the fact that the
applicant is repairing burst pipes as they occur
that the applicant has
impliedly accepted responsibility to replace all the pipes that have not burst.
respondents also submit that the applicant has failed to 'mitigate their loss'
by failing to take part in the industry response
referred to in the
Australian Plumbing Failure Policy (2024)
Participation in the industry response is voluntary. The applicant has not
chosen to take part. I do not consider this to be relevant
to either the
application for an adjournment or for a stay.
Prejudice to the respondents if the stay or adjournment are granted
Potential financial and emotional impacts of delay
applicant concedes that the delay following a stay of the operation of the BRO
will have a significant detrimental impact on
each of the respondents, which
will be greater if the stay is coupled with an adjournment of the review
proceedings. In my view,
that concession is appropriate.
her affidavit of 7 September 2025, Ms McCutcheon
describes the ongoing detrimental effect of the
repeated burst pipes that have already occurred, and the fear of further burst
She says that she and her husband, Mr McCarthy, have suffered
nine burst pipes in their property over a period of nearly 4 years,
the first on 13 October 2021 and the latest on 12 October 2024. Ms
McCutcheon says that each burst event causes enormous stress,
financial cost,
and inconvenience.
McCutcheon says that the house was rented until February 2024, and the tenants
received a reduction in rent for the duration of
repairs for each event. A
burst event in February 2024 resulted in the need to replace the entirety of the
wooden floorboards on
the ground floor and the carpet in two bedrooms. Ms
McCutcheon says that, as she and her husband felt that they could no longer
the anxiety of dealing with upset tenants, they moved into the property
themselves and rented out their own home, which has
cost and tax implications
for them. Ms McCutcheon says that she and her husband have spent many
hours arranging entry for tradespeople
undertaking repairs.
McCutcheon says that she lives in fear of further burst pipes and the chaos they
cause. She says that she and her husband check
for leaks in the house every
night before they go to bed.
is no challenge to this evidence. I accept that the respondents have suffered
adverse financial consequences as a result of
the ongoing problem of pipes
bursting. It may be inferred that it would be difficult to sell their house,
and that its value has
been reduced, given the risk of ongoing pipe burst
events, although Ms McCutcheon does not say that the respondents want to sell
their house.
also accept that there is an emotional toll where a person has experienced
numerous burst pipes and has to live with the risk that
other pipes may burst at
any time, and with the disruption to their normal lives in a house where
building work is repeatedly being
undertaken to replace burst pipes. I accept
that there may be health risks associated with the flooding that results from a
pipe event.
I do not accept that the stay will cause the respondents hardship that cannot be
alleviated to some extent by the terms
of the stay. Whilst the history suggests
that there is a risk of a burst pipe event before a hearing, if the BRO is
stayed, that
may not occur. As noted, Mr Casotti's evidence indicates a
recent, slight, decline in the daily rates of burst pipes.
addition, I also find that the work that has been done to date has reduced the
risk to some extent, given the replacement of a
portion of the allegedly
defective pipes.
financial risks attached to delay, if not the emotional consequences, may be
alleviated to some extent by conditioning the order
for a stay on the provision
of an undertaking as to damages. As I have said, the applicant did not oppose
providing such an undertaking.
Length of the delay
Length of the delay if there is a stay but no adjournment
my view, there is no basis for the respondents' submission that the applicant
does not intend to prosecute the review proceedings,
in the event that a stay is
granted but an adjournment is not. The applicant's counsel said that the
application would be pursued
with 'appropriate
event, if the review proceedings are not adjourned, the Tribunal's case
management procedure should operate to ensure that
the review proceedings
progress in a timely way to a final hearing. Failure to comply with programming
orders would expose the applicant
to the risk that the matter would be dismissed
for want of prosecution under s 46(3) of the SAT Act.
will necessarily take some time to complete the review proceedings. In my view,
if the adjournment is refused but the stay is
granted, and the Tribunal affirms
the decision to make the BRO, the delay in the work under the BRO being
performed is likely to
be in the vicinity of between 9 to 12 months.
the matter is heard within 6 months and a decision is handed down within 90 days
thereafter, as required by s 76 of the SAT Act,
the matter would not be
determined until June 2026. If the Tribunal decides to affirm the delegate's
decision, the Tribunal may
include a reasonable time thereafter to comply with
the BRO. Noting Mr Casotti's evidence referred to at [68] above, and
an allowance of 16 weeks at least, the principal work under the BRO
would not be completed until at least the end of November 2026,
around 12 months from the date the BRO requires the work to be done. Of course,
that is just an estimate and there may
be a greater delay. However, I consider
it is unlikely the delay with be less than that
Length of the delay if there is a stay and an adjournment
delay will be significantly greater if the stay is granted and the review
proceedings are adjourned pending the outcome of the
Supreme Court proceedings,
despite the applicant's written submissions suggesting that the Supreme Court
proceedings would cause
relatively little delay. Those submissions were not
pressed during the hearing of the applications, and they did not appear to take
into account that success in the Supreme Court proceedings required the Court of
Appeal to determine the matter.
best, it is uncertain whether an order transferring the Supreme Court
proceedings to the Court of Appeal will be made. That application
any event, delay the determination of the Supreme Court proceedings.
intervenor suggested an estimate for completion of the Supreme Court proceedings
of not before the end of 2026, if transferred
directly to the Court of Appeal.
That estimate strikes me as being realistic. There is no evidence that Ventura
has sought, or
intends to seek, to have the Supreme Court proceedings heard on
an urgent basis. The likely time to completion will certainly be
longer, in my
view, of at least 2 years, if the matter must first be heard and determined by a
single judge before being taken on
Ventura is unsuccessful in the Supreme Court proceedings, it is likely that the
review proceedings will then take a further 12
months. Accordingly, the
respondents may be waiting up to 3 years or more before having an answer to
whether the work under the
BRO will be performed.
Prospects of success in the review proceedings
strength of the applicant's case in the review proceedings is a matter that
weighs in the balance against the other relevant
factors. I can only
approach the question of the strength of the case with a broad brush. It is not
appropriate for me to give
detailed consideration to the merits or to make any
findings about those merits at this stage.
applicant and Ventura seek review in identical terms in each of the four review
proceedings. In summary, and in light of the
applicant's submissions, I
understand the grounds of review to be:
(a) the delegate's estimate
of the cost of the re-pipe work as falling under the statutory limit of $100,000
did not include relevant
costs in relation to the respondents' house, but rather
were based on the probable costs of hypothetical works that were different
that house, and that there was no estimate of the damage to the contents of the
house, which is a category of remedial work included
in the BRO;
(b) on a proper construction of s 5(1) of the Building Services Act, the
regulated building service provided by the applicant was
not faulty or
unsatisfactory merely because the applicant had installed pipes containing an
unknown latent defect;
(c) the delegate did not have power to include an order in the BRO requiring
the applicant to remedy damage directly caused by the
plumbing failures to the
house, and alternatively damage to the contents of the house, because these
are not orders requiring the
applicant to remedy the building service it carried
out within the meaning of s 36(1)(a) of the Building Services Act;
(d) the applicant is not able to comply with the BRO within the meaning of cl
10.5 of the Plumbing Policy without reallocating resources
already committed to
the applicant's contractual obligations to construct other houses and its
attendance on emergency burst pipe
repairs, rectification works, ceiling
re-pipes and zone re-pipes; and
(e) the delegate failed to have regard to cl 10.3(d) of the Plumbing Policy,
requiring that the delegate consider whether the respondents
are able to receive
a remedy in relation to the pipes, including through an insurance or other
grounds referred to in [96(a)], [96(c)] and [96(e)] above are expressed in terms
of the delegate having made an error. It is
not the role of the Tribunal to
assess whether the delegate has made an error in making the BRO, or whether it
is validly made.
A reference to a 'decision' in the context of provision for
administrative review of a 'decision' is ordinarily to a 'decision in
regardless of whether or not it is a legally effective
said, the Tribunal will, on review, be required to determine for itself the
matters referred to in those paragraphs. As the
hearing is a hearing de novo,
it is the Tribunal's role to determine whether the BRO should have been made on
the material before
the Tribunal at the time of the Tribunal's decision, subject
to the same constraints as the original
decision-maker.
considered the substance of the grounds, it appears that the argument in
relation to some of the grounds is stronger than
others. However, I conclude
that it cannot be said that the applicant's case is without merit as was
suggested by the respondents,
although that merit remains to be determined after
a substantive hearing. In my view, each ground raises a serious question and
at least arguable.
Public Interest considerations
accept that the issues occurring in the respondents' house have occurred in a
significant number of houses in Western Australia,
although I do not know
precisely how many. It follows from this that the outcome of the review
proceedings has a broader public
interest, at least to those people in whose
houses the pipes have been installed. The decision in this case, and the other
cases, is likely to have implications for other homeowners and that adds
to the need for the matter to be dealt with speedily. However,
it also has
broader implications for the applicant, Ventura (which is the applicant in the
other three matters), and the BGC Group.
I do not consider that public interest adds to my consideration of whether to
grant either the stay or the adjournment.
do not consider the stay decision is particularly relevant to the protection of
public confidence in the regulatory system. Even
if a stay is ordered, the
regulatory system will follow its course. I would expect, if a stay is ordered,
the public would accept
that it was not unreasonable to relieve the applicant of
its obligation to do the work specified in the BRO until the Tribunal has
determined whether the applicant should do that work.
public interest is of more relevance in relation to the grant of the
adjournment, given the greater potential delay, and the
difficulties faced by
Ventura in the Supreme Court proceedings. However, overall, I do not consider
the public interest to be a
significant factor in addition to those
considerations.
Impact on the Tribunal's objectives
Tribunal's main objectives in dealing with matters within its jurisdiction
(a) to achieve the resolution of questions, complaints, or
disputes, and to make or review decisions, fairly and according to the
substantial merits of the case; and
(b) to act as speedily and with as little formality as is practicable and
minimise the costs to the
consider that each of these factors balances the other out. An adjournment
would significantly undermine the objective that the
Tribunal must deal with the
matters before it speedily. A stay would not do so, as the proceeding will
proceed to a final hearing
if a stay, and not an adjournment, is granted. On
the other hand, a review proceeding that is rendered nugatory, because the
will have to carry out the work before the Tribunal has decided
whether the applicant should have to carry out the work, is not fair.
to the applicant's submission, there would appear to be no prospect that, in
considering its jurisdiction, the Tribunal
would arrive at a different decision
from a single judge in the Supreme Court proceedings, given both are bound by
the Court of Appeal
. The prospects of the decision
differing from the Court of Appeal would appear to be limited. In my view, that
consideration is
not a significant factor in determining these
applications.
Balance of convenience
my view, the balance of relevant factors favours a refusal of the adjournment,
in light of the significant obstacles to success
in the Supreme Court
proceedings that I have referred to, the relatively limited costs of the review
proceedings, the likely lengthy
delay of some years in concluding the review
proceedings if an adjournment and a stay are granted, and the significant
ongoing detriment
suffered by the respondents in delaying the resolution of the
review proceedings.
my view, however, the balance of convenience favours the grant of the
application for a stay, in the absence of an adjournment,
where the failure to
grant a stay will render the review proceedings nugatory, the delay in resolving
the review proceedings, in
the absence of an adjournment, should be less than a
year, the respondents' financial, if not emotional, detriment will be mitigated
to some extent by an undertaking as to damages (which I consider appropriate)
and the work the applicant has said it will do voluntarily,
and the risks of
burst pipe events may be inferred to have been reduced by the replacement of a
number, albeit not all, of the pipes
in the house.
Other matters
Abuse of process and improper purpose
my view, there is no basis for the respondents' submission that the
interlocutory applications are an abuse of process because
they are for an
improper purpose.
respondents submitted that improper purpose was the applicant's alleged desire
to delay having to do any remedial work for people
in whose houses the pipes
have been installed until after the Federal Court litigation is determined. The
respondents correctly
accepted that they bear the onus of establishing that the
applicant had brought the proceedings for an improper purpose, and that
is a heavy one.
the respondents are obviously anxious to have the remedial work on their houses
completed and are suspicious of the applicant's
motives in commencing the review
proceedings and the Supreme Court proceedings, the submission that those
proceedings, and the applications,
have been made for an improper purpose finds
little, if any, support in the evidence.
exercise of the right to bring review proceedings, and the bringing of the
applications, could not be said to evidence any improper
purpose where it cannot
be said that those proceedings are hopeless.
high point of the respondents' submission, in my view, was that the applicant
had sought the adjournment pending the completion
of the Supreme Court
proceedings, in circumstances where those proceedings have no prospect of
success at first instance.
I have said, the applicant has not disclosed the basis on which it argues that
the Court of Appeal could find the decision in
wrong'. However, in my view, the difficulties faced by the applicant in the
Supreme Court proceedings do not allow me to
conclude that the applications were
brought for an improper purpose and are an abuse of process as a result.
Failure to raise Hanssen
the intervenor's written and oral submissions, counsel for the intervenor
commented negatively on the applicant's omission, in
its supporting material, to
and the proposed application to transfer the
Supreme Court proceedings to the Court of Appeal. The intervenor did not,
suggest any consequence flowing from that omission.
applicant's counsel conceded that, with the benefit of hindsight, this omission
should not have
view, it was a serious oversight.
whilst none of the parties to the four applications are parties to the Supreme
Court proceedings, the intervenor is a party
to those proceedings. Accordingly,
it was inevitable that these matters
would be raised at the
hearing on 15 September 2025, as they were.
Accordingly,
I do not think that the omission is relevant to my consideration of the
applications.
the reasons referred to above, I have determined that it is desirable to order a
stay of the operation of the BRO subject to
the provision of an undertaking by
the applicant and to dismiss the application for an adjournment of the review
proceedings. I
have also decided it appropriate to make orders programming the
review proceedings to a directions hearing, as set out
The orders made on 18 September 2025 were as
The Tribunal orders:
section 25(2)
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
operation of the Building Remedy Order O2024-979 made by the Building
Commissioner against the applicant on 30 May 2025 is
stayed pending further
order of the Tribunal, upon the applicant making a written undertaking as to
damages in the following terms
and lodging that undertaking with the
J-Corp Pty Ltd hereby undertakes to the Tribunal to pay to
any party restrained or affected by the Tribunal's order dated 18 September
2025 staying the operation of Building Remedy Order O2024-979 pending further
order of the Tribunal such compensation as the Tribunal
may in its discretion
consider in the circumstances to be just, such compensation to be assessed by
the Tribunal or in accordance
with such directions as the Tribunal may make and
to be paid in such manner as the Tribunal may direct.
copy of any undertaking lodged pursuant to order 1 is to be served on the
parties have liberty to apply in relation to order 1 on giving 48 hours notice
to the Tribunal and the parties.
applicant's application dated 1 August 2025 to adjourn the proceeding is
matter is listed for a directions hearing at 10.30 am on Wednesday, 24
September 2025 at 565 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia.
4 pm on Monday, 22 September 2025, the parties must file with the Tribunal and
give to the other parties proposed orders to program
the proceeding to a final
hearing and their unavailable dates for a final hearing in November and December
2025, and January and
February 2026.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
Associate to the Deputy President Judge Vernon
3 NOVEMBER 2025
Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd and Simon Bosnich &
Ors, CC 459 of 2025; Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd and Timothy Cox & Ors, CC
of 2025; Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd and Jamie Wright & Ors, CC 480 of
Ventura Home Group and Wright
proceedings
proceedings.
Dobson and Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2022] WASAT 80
Soutorine and The Medical Board of Australia
[2020] WASAT 5
(WA) Pty Ltd and Commissioner for Consumer Protection
[2018] WASAT 57
Nugawela and Medical Board of Australia
[2023] WASAT 82
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
[2024] WASCA 96
, the decisive factor appears to be that the doctor had
undertaken not to perform certain procedures which meant that it could not
said it would jeopardise public safety if he was granted a stay: see
Western Australian Planning Commission and Coogee General Store Pty
[2007] WASAT 182
Owners of Strata Plan 58161 and Hanssen Pty Ltd
[2022] WASAT 77
[11], [16], [17] and
Act, s 9(a).
Building Services (Complaint Resolution and Administration) Act 2011
Building Services Act
), s 5(1) and s
91(1) of the Building Services Act enables the Building Commissioner to delegate
the power under s 37.
27(1) and s
Hanssen Pty Ltd v Owners of Strata Plan 58161
[2024] WASCA 87.
The owners of which house are not a party to any of the four matters before
15 September
being the category in the Western Australian Plumbing Failure Policy (2024)
published in the
Western Australian Government Gazette
12 November 2024, page 2661, into which the respondents in these
proceedings and the other three proceedings
Australian Plumbing Failure Policy (2024) published in the
Western Australian
Government Gazette
, No. 137, 12 November 2024, page 2661. See cl 12.9 and
cl 12.12 in
particular.
30, 15 September 2025.
Chief Executive Officer of Department of Communities
[2019] WASCA 31
[29] following
Collector of Customs (NSW) v
Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
(1979) 41 FLR 338,
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2019) 266 CLR 250
[2019] HCA 16
Act, s 9(a) and s
Legal Profession Complaints Committee and Rayney
[2016] WASAT 142
15 September 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter