URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PHIPPS [2025] WACIC 2 (3 July 2025)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WACIC 2
4 December 2024; 22 May 2025
DELIVERED :
27 JUNE 2025
PUBLISHED :
3 JULY 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIC 2650 of 2021
Rebecka Hannah PHIPPS
Proved offence -
Police officer - Assault (Spit) - Mental and nervous shock - Risk of contracting
blood-borne virus - Expert evidence
- Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation refused
Representation:
Solicitors:
STEPHEN BROWNE LAWYERS (SOUTH PERTH)
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Dimitrovska v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 162
; (2015) 253 A
Crim Reports 407
DNA v Britten
(1995) 14 SR (WA) 325
[2018] WADC 148
J v J (Unreported, WASC, Library No 920598, 19 November 1992).
[2002] NSWCCA 381
(2002) 134 A Crim R 174
R v Peisley
(1990) 54 A Crim R 42
[2001] NSWCCA 353
(2001) 127 A Crim R 369
[2024] WADC 41
[2014] WADC 131
Re Hojetzki
[2009] WADC 77
Re Richards
[2022] WADC 100
S v Neumann
(1995) 14 WAR 452
Savic v Duric
[2021] WADC 53
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
Woodward v Davies
[2021] WADC 73
Reasons for Decision:
30 January 2020 at approximately 1.30pm the applicant, Ms Rebecka Phipps, was on
duty as a police constable in the Perth CBD.
Alyssa Walker (
the offender
was detained, secured in handcuffs and subjected to a basic search, during which
open containers of alcohol were seized by police
officers and poured out, while
another officer wrote out a move on notice. Shortly after, the offender spat at
Ms Phipps from a distance
of approximately 1.5 metres away (
the offence
offender pleaded guilty to one charge of assault public officer and I am
satisfied a proved offence occurred. Therefore the application
is brought under
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
of the Act I must not make a compensation award unless
satisfied on the balance of probabilities the claimed injury and claimed loss
has occurred and did so as a consequence of the commission of the proved
Phipps submitted an application for compensation on 2 December 2021, accompanied
by a statement of events and a victim impact
6 December 2021 Case Manager 1 wrote to Ms Phipps explaining her application
could not be processed as it was submitted incomplete
and asking her to provide
copies of her blood test results.
22 November 2023 Ms Phipps’s solicitors, Stephen Browne Lawyers
), re-submitted the application. The application included claims for:
(a) Injury – Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (
Depression, Anxiety;
(b) Report expenses – $1,958 for Dr Ng’s report;
(c) Treatment expenses – $2,817.50 for 12 sessions with Clear Health
Psychology;
(d) Travel expenses – 207km in relation to attendance at Professor
Hardisty’s rooms, Wanneroo Physiotherapy, and Dr Ng’s
(e) Loss of income – $10,000 for ‘past and future loss of earning
capacity and employment benefits lost’; and
(f) Future treatment expenses - $7,860 for medication and trauma specific
psychotherapy.
In support of the application, Ms Phipps provided:
(a) Ms Phipps’s police statement dated 31 January 2020;
(b) Unsigned statement dated 2 December 2021;
(c) Victim impact statement dated 15 November 2023;
(d) Royal Perth Hospital (
) records dated 30 January 2020;
(e) WorkCover WA Certificate of Capacity dated 30 January 2020;
(f) WA Police brief capacity report signed by Dr Helena Piirto dated 1
December 2020;
(g) Report of Dr Frederick Ng dated 28 June 2023;
(h) Schedule of expenses prepared by SBL;
(i) Letter from SBL to WA Police Health & Welfare dated 1 August
(j) Email from SBL to WA Police dated 6 December 2022;
(k) Email from WA Police to SBL dated 7 December 2022;
(l) WA Police List of Absences from 20 August 2020 to 11 February 2021 re
ankle injury;
(m) WA Police List of Expenses in relation to an ankle injury;
(n) WA Police Medical Certificate dated 9 August 2020 in relation to an ankle
(o) Certificate of Professor Hardisty dated 18 August 2020 in relation to an
ankle injury;
(p) Report of Mr Brendan Aitkins dated 24 September 2020 in relation to an
ankle injury;
(q) Report of Professor Hardisty dated 29 September 2020 in relation to an
ankle injury;
(r) WorkCover WA Certificate of Capacity dated 12 October 2020 in relation to
an ankle injury;
(s) Schedule of report expenses with supporting tax invoices;
(t) Schedule of special damages;
(u) Schedule of future medical expenses;
(v) Schedule of past and future loss of earnings; and
(w) Payslips for the period of 29 November 2019 to 3 September 2020.
of these documents concerned an unrelated ankle injury that occurred prior to
the offence the subject of Ms Phipps’s application.
Phipps did not provide her blood test results as requested.
Ms Phipps’s claim for mental and nervous shock
her impact statement dated 15 November 2023 Ms Phipps states her injuries were:
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Depression and
the heading ‘Treatment’ she states: ‘I had to have blood tests
for six months before getting the all clear.
I had many sessions of
psychotherapy and was prescribed antidepressant
medication.’
the heading ‘Effects of the incident’ Ms Phipps states prior to the
incident, she was sociable and happy, generally
confident and optimistic. She
then describes the impact of the offence as follows:
(a) She was
barely able to sleep the night of the offence because she felt stressed and
(b) She felt disgusted at the thought of the offender’s saliva touching
her lips and probably getting in her mouth;
(c) It had a major impact on her life;
(d) It was tremendously difficult not being affectionate with her partner
whilst awaiting the final blood results and it put a huge
strain on her
relationship;
(e) It caused grief to her loved ones and she was reluctant to see her family
because she felt insecure and embarrassed;
(f) Her partner wanted her to resign as she was worried about the [COVID-19]
pandemic and the risk of contracting contagious diseases;
(g) They were under financial pressure as her partner had lost her job and Ms
Phipps lost all her shift penalties and overtime because
she was moved into a
non-operation role;
(h) She was withdrawn and began to go into a deep depression;
(i) She started drinking alcohol excessively;
(j) She could not sleep or focus;
(k) She developed panic attacks and had flashbacks of the offence;
(l) She had nightmares about the offence and became anxious;
(m) Her memory and concentration deteriorated;
(n) Her appetite was affected and she lost weight;
(o) She avoided working night shift and wanted to work away from the CBD;
(p) Her ordeal continued for an extended period of time before the
prosecution and subsequent appeal was finalised;
(q) She became severely depressed and contemplated suicide;
(r) She felt completely defeated and unsupported by the justice system; the
actions of the offender completely destroyed her life.
22 February 2024 I wrote to Ms Phipps’s solicitors stating the documents
from Professor Hardisty and Wanneroo Physiotherapy
and the travel claimed in
relation to this treatment did not appear to be relevant to Ms Phipps’s
current application and seeking
clarification as to which of Ms Phipps’s
injuries were caused by the offence on 30 January 2020, particularly in relation
Ms Phipps’s claim for mental and nervous shock, loss of earnings and
future medical expenses.
26 February 2024 Ms Phipps’s solicitors responded clarifying the following
(a) WA Police Medical Certificate dated 9 August
(b) Certificate of Professor Hardisty dated 18 August 2020;
(c) Report of Mr Brendan Aitkins dated 24 September 2020;
(d) Report of Professor Hardisty dated 29 September 2020;
(e) WorkCover WA Certificate of Capacity dated 12 October 2020;
were for an unrelated incident for which their client was in receipt of
compensation from WA Police and stating ‘Our client
does not wish to claim
for any injuries to her ankle, and confirm these were included only to highlight
which incident she received
compensation
3 May 2024 I wrote to Ms Phipps’s solicitors stating the injury to her
ankle as a result of her doing a ‘u-turn’
in her driveway on her
motorcycle occurred (according to her medical records) on 14 January 2020, two
weeks before the offence, therefore
there appeared to be some significant
inaccuracies in the chronology and conflation in relation to the psychological
effects of the
offence, the ankle incident on 14 January 2020 and other factors
in Ms Phipps’s life. I also provided my preliminary view Dr
report was factually inaccurate and I would not place any weight on it.
Consequently, I was not satisfied I could make
an award for the report expense
nor travel expense.
of the Act I obtained the WA Police prosecution brief and Body-Worn
4 December 2024 I held a hearing to allow Ms Phipps and her lawyers to view the
BWC footage.
22 May 2025 I held a hearing during which Ms Phipps gave evidence and I heard
oral submissions from her counsel. The BWC footage
was played during Ms
Phipps’s evidence.
central issue in this matter is whether Ms Phipps suffered the claimed injury in
the form of mental and nervous shock, namely
PTSD, Depression and Anxiety, as a
consequence of the offence.
requires consideration of the following factors:
(a) Whether Ms
Phipps was anxious about contracting a contagious disease;
(b) The actual risk of contracting a contagious disease;
(c) Whether there was an actual psychological impact on Ms Phipps as a
consequence of the offence.
Was Ms Phipps anxious about contracting a contagious disease from the
Were there scabs or blisters on the offender’s face?
her statement dated 31 January
Ms Phipps states
the offender ‘had severe blistering around her lips that were
Phipps’s solicitors provided me with a statement from Megan Cleary, the
other officer present at the time of the offence,
dated 19 December 2024. Ms
Cleary recalls the offender’s ‘face having scabs on
Cleary cannot recall where the scabs were or what they looked
her oral evidence Ms Phipps stated the blisters were not actively or profusely
bleeding but if they were touched with a tissue,
you would be able to see the
blood on the
accept there were scabs or blisters on the offender’s
Was there blood in the spittle?
above, Ms Phipps states the offender ‘had severe blistering around her
lips that were
her evidence before me, Ms Phipps said she would not be able to say whether or
not there was blood in the spittle but her belief
is that there was a likelihood
of blood being in the spit.
Statement of Material Facts refers only to ‘an amount of saliva’
landing on her face.
blood can be seen in the BWC footage whether on the offender, in the spittle as
it is in the air or on Ms Phipps.
am not satisfied there was blood in the spittle.
Where did the spittle land?
her statement dated 31 January 2020 Ms Phipps states the saliva landed on the
right side of her nose, cheek area, lips, sunglasses
and on the front of her
high-visibility vest.
the BWC footage Ms Phipps can be heard saying ‘she spat on my face’.
Cleary states she did not see the offender spit and she did not see the spit go
on Ms Phipps.
does not recall being able to see anything on Ms Phipps’s glasses. She
told Ms Phipps she would hold the offender so Ms
Phipps could try cleaning her
her statement dated 15 November 2023 Ms Phipps states she felt disgusted at the
thought of the offender’s saliva touching
her lips and probably getting in
her mouth as she was talking at the
her oral evidence Ms Phipps stated the spittle landed on her bottom lip and the
bridge of her nose. She accepted it was a ‘spray’
rather than a
congealed piece of
Phipps gave evidence she believed the saliva entered her
hearing I stated my preliminary view, from watching the BWC footage, was that no
saliva entered her mouth as her mouth
was closed at the time of the spit and I
asked for the BWC footage to be played again so I could clarify this issue with
However Ms Phipps requested the footage not be played again and said
‘factually, I can’t agree or
find the spittle ‘spray droplets’ landed on her nose, cheek area,
lips, sunglasses and on the front of her high-visibility
is no objective evidence the spittle entered Ms Phipps’s mouth, in her
statement dated 31 January 2020 Ms Phipps does
not say the spittle entered her
and I do not
accept any spittle entered Ms Phipps’s mouth.
Was Ms Phipps anxious about contracting a blood-borne virus (BBV)?
Phipps attended Royal Perth Hospital at 2.50pm on 30 January 2020 and had blood
collected. The RPH notes state ‘GP follow
up for results.’
Phipps attended her General Practitioner (
) at Wembley Family Medical
Practice on 11 March 2020. The notes record: L ankle still playing up and a bit
Phipps agreed she did not seek any medical attention after leaving RPH until 11
March 2020, nearly six weeks later. She did not
provide an explanation for the
is no mention of the offence in the GP’s notes but the blood test results
record they were printed and faxed on 11 March
2020 so I infer the GP requested
the results during this consultation.
results of the blood tests record:
Herpes Simplex Type 1 Probable
past or recent herpes
simplex virus type 1 infection
Hepatitis A Immune
Hepatitis B Immune
Hepatitis C Antibody not detected
Syphilis Not detected
results of these blood tests show Ms Phipps was immune to Hepatitis A and B.
Therefore, she knew she was immune to Hepatitis
A and B from 11 March 2020. Ms
Phipps confirmed this in her
Phipps attended her GP on 18 March 2020 and 27 March 2020 for unrelated matters.
There is no reference to the offence in the notes
and Ms Phipps confirmed she
did not discuss the offence with her GP in her
Phipps next attended her GP on 26 May 2020. A referral to Professor Hardisty was
made in relation to concerns about her left ankle
and a blood test request form
was printed for Hepatitis A; B & C; HIV Serology (checkup).
23 June 2020 Ms Phipps had blood collected.
results of the blood tests record:
Hepatitis A Immune
Hepatitis B Immune
Hepatitis C No evidence of recent or past infection
Phipps’s solicitors have submitted she attended her GP on 26 June 2020 to
obtain the results
but there is no record of this in the GP notes.
Phipps gave evidence she was told the results were ‘negative’ and
‘nothing further was needed’ when she
attended the GP on 22 July
2020, one month after the blood was
GP notes for this attendance record: Post surgery L ankle – doing
find Ms Phipps attended the GP on 22 July 2020 for the primary reason of
following up her ankle surgery and was told the blood
test results were
‘negative’.
is no other reference to the blood tests nor any discussion about the risks of
Ms Phipps contracting a BBV or other infectious
disease in the GP records.
Risk of contracting a BBV
shows the occupational risk of contracting a BBV whilst on operational duties is
extremely low for all frontline workers,
including police
transmission of HIV through biting or spitting has ever been documented in
to the Department of Health ‘Guideline for the Mandatory Testing of a
Suspected Transferor for an Infectious Disease
(Blood-borne Viruses)
Guideline’ 0012 / August
[P]olice officers have a risk of an occupational exposure to direct contact with
another person’s body fluids or blood. Transmission
of HIV, HBV and HCV
may occur via parenteral or non-parenteral exposure to blood. These viruses are
not spread in saliva. Generally,
a police officer who sustains an occupational
exposure has a low risk of contracting a BBV. The presence of blood in the mouth
the risk of BBV transmission through biting or spitting. However,
research has shown if no blood is present in each of these scenarios:
• there is no risk of transmitting HIV through spitting, and the risk
through biting is negligible
• the risk of HCV transmission through spitting is negligible, and very
low for biting
• the risk of HBV transmission through biting or spitting is very low.
(footnotes omitted)
the below table shows, the risk to Ms Phipps of developing a BBV from saliva
landing on her face is zero.
if I accepted there was blood in the saliva (which I do not), the risk to Ms
Phipps developing a BBV from blood and saliva landing
on her face is zero.
if I accepted there was blood in the saliva and it entered her mouth (which I do
not), the risk to Ms Phipps developing Hepatitis
C (HCV) or HIV is low. The
general risk of developing Hepatitis B (HCB) is moderate but given Ms Phipps had
immunity to Hepatitis
B her risk was zero (which she was aware of from 11 March
Risk of contracting coronavirus (COVID-19)
the date of the incident, 30 January 2020, there were no confirmed cases nor any
suspected cases of COVID-19 in Western
is no evidence the offender had been exposed to COVID-19. Ms Phipps did not seek
any medical advice or testing in relation
to her risk of contracting COVID-19.
Therefore, Ms Phipps’s actions at the time do not demonstrate she was
concerned about
contracting COVID-19 and in any event, I do not accept any
concern was reasonable in the circumstances.
symptoms would have appeared between 1 and 14 days after
therefore even if I did accept Ms Phipps had a concern about contracting
COVID-19 (which I do not), any concern should have been
alleviated by 13
February 2020.
have considered publicly available information pursuant to
of the Act to
determine the objective risk of Ms Phipps contracting a BBV or COVID-19 when
assessing the evidence in relation to
Ms Phipps’s subjective perception of
risk, in order to make a finding as to whether she suffered mental and nervous
Did Ms Phipps suffer mental and nervous shock?
Ms Phipps’s evidence of the impact on her
above, in her impact
Phipps states her injuries were PTSD, Depression and Anxiety. She states she had
to have blood tests for six months, had many
sessions of psychotherapy and was
prescribed antidepressant medication. In her impact statement she describes the
effect of the offence
as set out at paragraph 10 above.
Phipps has described the impact of the offence on her in very general terms. She
has not provided any specific examples and she
has not included the relevant
fact that she was experiencing other significant personal and mental health
issues at the time. When
an applicant describes the impact of an offence on them
in a very generic way, only limited weight can be placed on it.
Phipps gave evidence the offence affected her quite badly; she had trouble
sleeping, flashbacks, she isolated herself, she struggled
with trust issues, she
felt let down by the justice system, she felt betrayed and defeated. She said it
felt like her whole character
had been destroyed. She said she had suicidal
thoughts, struggled with alcohol abuse, struggled to maintain friendships and
issues. She said she became a shell of her former self and it still
impacts her.
Phipps gave evidence she had mental health treatment in relation to the offence
through her GP and
psychologist.
I will explain below, I do not accept Ms Phipps’s evidence in relation to
the impact of the offence on her.
GP consultations - Wembley Family Medical Practice
the months following the offence, Ms Phipps saw her GP at Wembley Family Medical
Practice. I have considered the records and they
are summarised below:
11 March 2020 L ankle still playing up and a bit painful
[blood test results received by facsimile]
18 March 2020 Letter written to physio re. specialist referral
27 March 2020 Sophie at home. Medical Certificate given
from 27/03/2020.
26 May 2020 L ankle not 100%
Letter written to Gerard Hardisty
Request printed: Hepatitis A; B & C; HIV Serology (checkup)
10 June 2020 Tearful here. Needs referral. Not
Wants top [sic] deal with drinking and emotional issues. No recreational
drugs. For review next week.
Letter written to Dr Murray Chapman
22 July 2020 Post surgery L ankle – doing well
13 May 2022 Referral to psychiatrist
8 August 2022 Anxiety / depression has come back a bit
letter from GP, Dr Lin Arias to psychiatrist, Dr Murray Chapman dated 10 June
2020 states:
Thank you for seeing Rebecka for her ADHD. She is going through a relationship
break up and is needing some time off. Have been living
together for about 18
month and her partner just left without giving saying [sic] anything, 3 days
She concerned about perhaps having anxiety and depression and needs to be
assessted [sic] for such. She also says she is drinking
daily to the extent of
“writing herself off”. She used to drink very rarely.
Past Medical History
PTSD - childhood
is no reference to the offence in any of the GP records including the referral
to Dr Chapman.
Phipps gave evidence that she did tell her GP, Dr McCorkill, informally about
the offence and that she was not enjoying work as
much since the incident, when
he asked her how work was going on a few different
in her statement dated 9 January 2025 she states:
I recall being so ashamed and embarrassed about the incident, and the
outstanding results that I did not want to discuss it with
anyone, including my
I asked her about this inconsistency, she said she only spoke about not enjoying
work in a very vague way with Dr McCorkill
and agreed she did not discuss the
impact of the offence, including trouble sleeping because of the offence or
flashbacks about the
incident, with Dr McCorkill or any other
Consultations with psychiatrist Dr Murray Chapman
the months following the offence, Ms Phipps saw Dr Chapman about the management
of her ADHD and medications.
did not discuss the offence with
Consultations with psychologist – Joanne Lee
Chapman wrote to psychologist Joanne Lee on 11 June 2020. The letter refers to
her long-term relationship ending, an extensive
childhood history of trauma,
self-medicating with alcohol, being depressed and anxious.
is no reference to work stress nor the offence in the referral letter.
Phipps first saw Ms Lee on 11 June 2020. Ms Lee’s notes record:
Referral reason: ADHD inattentive. PTSD. Depression. ETOH Use.
Presenting problem: Recent breakup with fiancé ... ETOH use ...
Depression – long history, worse since breakup.
Psychiatric history: Psychologist: 2.5 yrs ago – PTSD – only 3
Personal history: Family issues
What are your goals for therapy: Relationship breakdown, ETOH use reduced
Phipps continued to see Ms Lee and I have considered Ms Lee’s notes from
sessions on:
22 June 2020 (relationship and family issues, ankle
reconstruction)
24 July 2020 (ankle reconstruction, ETOH ceased, sleep improving,
relationship)
24 August 2020 (relationship, ETOH, surgeon cleared to go back to work, sleep
29 September 2020 (ETOH, relationship)
13 October 2020 (relationship, ETOH, family)
17 November 2020 (moved house, stressful, work issues with new Sergeant
– got in trouble for being late ... feels burnt out
– taking sick
leave for rest of week – requested supporting letter)
30 November 2020 (new house, self-care, work stress feels new Sergeant
putting pressure on her, ETOH, relationships)
14 December 2020 (IME went well – psychiatrist cleared for operation,
work transfer, dog pregnant, ETOH)
4 January 2021 (ETOH, family issues)
15 February 2021 (work going well, friendships, family issues, relationship)
2 March 2021 (family, working lots, relationship)
30 March 2021 (work issues – transferred to COVID team, relationship,
family issues)
19 August 2021 (health, medication, family, work)
Lee’s update letters to Dr Chapman dated 24 July 2020, 24 July 2020 (date
appears to be incorrect), 20 January 2021 refer
to various personal issues but
no issues in relation to work nor the offence.
Lee wrote a letter in support of Ms Phipps taking time off work dated 18
November 2020. In that letter she states:
Phipps diagnosis of depression and anxiety and to inform you of her recent
burnout in the context of psychosocial stressors including,
but not limited to
the end of a long-term relationship, a recent ankle reconstruction and
rehabilitation and having to independently
move house.
the psychology records, there is reference to a number of issues including:
complex family of origin issues; childhood family
violence; a history of
depression and anxiety; alcohol dependence; anger issues; and struggles in both
her romantic relationships
and friendships.
are some references to work stress (as above) but there are no references to the
offence in these records.
her evidence, Ms Phipps agreed she did not discuss the offence at all with her
psychologist Ms Lee during the 13 sessions between
22 June 2020 and 19 August
Dr Piirto’s report
Phipps was referred by the Welfare and Safety Division of the WA Police Force
for an assessment by Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr
Helena Piirto in December 2020.
Phipps gave evidence the purpose of this assessment was to ensure she had
capacity to fulfil her operational duties without restrictions.
Ms Phipps agreed
it was important to be truthful when speaking with Dr Piirto and that it was
important to tell her if she was experiencing
any work stress, including any
specific incidents that were bothering her, such as the
this, Ms Phipps did not tell Dr Piirto about the
Piirto’s report dated 7 December 2020 does not mention the offence nor any
other work stress. Dr Piirto’s report
states ‘[Ms Phipps] denied any
incidents being particularly distressing or traumatic. She has not experienced
bullying and
has not had any major stressors in the
workplace.’
Dr Ng’s report
Ng assessed Ms Phipps on 28 June 2023. Ms Phipps’s solicitors provided him
(a) Authority to release information;
(b) WA Police brief Capacity report dated 1 December 2020;
(c) WorkCover First Certificate of Capacity dated 30 January 2020;
(d) Blood test results (Herpes Simplex Serology, Hepatitis/HIV/HTLV Serology,
Treponemal Serology, dated 30 January 2020) and blood
test results (urea and
electrolytes, full blood picture dated 1 December 2020);
(e) RPH records;
(f) Impact statement dated 2 December 2021;
(g) Police statement dated 31 January 2020;
(h) Medical certificate for police officers dated 9 August 2020 signed by
Professor Hardisty (in relation to the ankle injury).
Phipps gave evidence the assessment consisted of a question-and-answer format
and went for approximately one
evidence she was not sure if she told Dr Ng about her history of depression,
anxiety and alcohol
dependence.
Phipps gave evidence she did not tell Dr Ng about:
(a) being under
the care of Dr Chapman; nor
(b) being assessed by Dr Piirto in December
Phipps agreed this was relevant information which she should have told Dr Ng
Phipps gave evidence she thought she did tell Dr Ng that she had been seeing
psychologist Ms Lee from mid-2020 until Aug
but this is
not reflected in his report.
Ng’s report states Ms Phipps:
[D]enied being formally diagnosed with any psychiatric disorder arising from the
childhood domestic violence that she witnessed,
and she denied experiencing any
nightmares as a child growing up and denied having any psychiatric treatment in
her childhood or
in relation to the childhood
relation to the impact of the offence on her work, Dr Ng states:
Following the subject incident, she had 1 day off from work and then she
persisted at work thereafter, however, was working in light
nonoperational
duties for 6 months after the subject incident, after which she had since
returned to normal
note this is consistent with Ms Phipps’s statement dated 15 November 2023.
There is no evidence Dr Ng discussed the impact
of the offence on Ms
Phipps’s work at all.
Ng diagnosed Ms Phipps with PTSD. He states:
Regarding causation, from the history elicited and the available documentation,
I form the view that the most significant contributing
factors in materially and
directly precipitating the onset of the psychiatric disorder stated above was
the emotional trauma directly
arising as a consequence of the subject incident,
the basis of this claim.
She may have been mildly predisposed to the onset of the psychiatric disorder
stated above due to her childhood experiences of witnessing
domestic violence,
but she had denied being formally previously diagnosed with a psychiatric
disorder arising from her childhood,
except that she was diagnosed with ADHD by
a paediatrician for her developmental attentional difficulties which is
unrelated to the
subject incident and unrelated to the childhood domestic
relation to the motorcycle accident, in his report Dr Ng
[Ms Phipps’s] alcohol use increased following the subject incident, she
reportedly felt so stressed that she even crashed her
motorcycle going to work
one day. She said no other vehicles were involved, she fell off the motorcycle
and now no longer rode a
motorcycle.
Ng clearly refers to the motorcycle incident as occurring after the incident on
30 January 2020.
I raised this discrepancy with Ms Phipps’s solicitors, they made the
submission:
We therefore dispute that Dr Ng’s report of the motorcycle incident was
incorrect, he has simply not included the element of
Ms Phipps having been in
her driveway, which is irrelevant in any event, except that she was behaving in
a different manner following
the incident.
13 May 2025 I was provided with a further supplementary statement of Ms Phipps
dated 8 May 2025 in which she states:
During a medicolegal appointment with Dr Frederick Ng on 28 June 2023, which was
arranged by Stephen Browne Lawyers, I reported that
the motorcycle accident
occurred after the assault.
It has been brought to my attention that medical records of Wembley Family
Medical Practice show that on 11 March 2020 I reported
the motorcycle accident
to have occurred on 14 January 2020, which was two weeks prior to the
I am aware that the date I have reported to Dr Frederick Ng doesn’t
coincide with what the date I have reported to Wembley
Family Medical Practice
in relation the when the motorcycle incident occurred.
Due to my ADHD, I don’t have the same concept of time as others do.
I thought the motorcycle accident happened after the assault, because they both
happened during January 2020.
I think I must have mixed up the dates with them being so close together.
I can’t recall the exact date the motorcycle incident occurred; however, I
confirm that I agree with the medical records of
Wembley Family Medical Centre
and agree that 14 January 2020 would be the accurate date of the motorcycle
accident occurring.
I confirm that I agree that the motorcycle accident occurred prior to the
Phipps gave evidence her recollection was that the motorcycle accident happened
after the offence and accepted this was incorrect
information she provided to Dr
agreed any stress from the incident did not
the motorcycle
accident, which is how it is described by Dr
19 May 2025 I was provided with a supplementary report of Dr Ng dated 14 May
2025. Dr Ng was provided with Ms Phipps’s statement
dated 8 May 2025 which
clarifies the timing of the motorcycle accident, the Wembley Family Medical
Practice records and the psychology
Ng noted the references to Ms Phipps having a long history of depression,
anxiety and alcohol dependence, extensive childhood
history of trauma and
previous PTSD. Dr Ng noted both Dr Piirto and the psychologist, Ms Lee, stated
the ankle injury required surgery.
Dr Ng states this was not disclosed to him
when he assessed Ms Phipps in June 2023, although I note he was provided with a
certificate dated 9 August 2020 that refers to ‘post
surgery’ signed by Prof Hardisty. Dr Ng did not clarify the relevance
this. It is unclear why this was included in the documents for Dr Ng to
receiving the further documents, Dr Ng formed the view that it was appropriate
to revise his original opinion. He states:
Given all of the additional information I now have at hand, and in conjunction
with my assessment of your client on 28 June 2023,
I am of the opinion that
there was a component of psychological distress arising from the subject
incident, which would have at least
mildly to moderately exacerbated any
pre-existing psychiatric difficulties. Regarding how to actually psychiatrically
the mild to moderate exacerbation of pre-existing psychiatric
difficulties, following on from Dr Chapman’s view that it is
likely your
client had previous PTSD –
“childhood related”, and considering her report to me of her
experiencing post trauma anxiety type symptoms following
the subject incident,
one could therefore in light of the additional documentation, categorise that
following the subject incident
she suffered from a relapse into PTSD, mild to
moderate in severity, or in the alternative that she suffered from the onset of
adjustment disorder with some reported PTSD type psychiatric symptoms. The
psychiatric symptoms did improve (after the subject incident)
over a few months,
and she was able to keep working in that time in light duties (after 1 days off
from work following the subject
incident) and eventually she was able to attain
normal duties
thereafter.
are several aspects of Dr Ng’s reports that are troubling. Despite Dr Ng
referring to the Wembley Family Medical Practice
records and the psychology
records, including Dr Piirto’s report, he does not address the fact there
is no reference to Ms
Phipps discussing the offence, nor any psychological
impact of the offence, in any of the medical records or reports.
the original nor supplementary report expose any attempts by Dr Ng to critically
test the information provided by Ms Phipps
and it is apparent Dr Ng accepted at
face value what Ms Phipps told him about the nature and severity of her
symptoms, and the fact
they were suffered as a consequence of the offence.
is unclear what Dr Ng was told and what he understood about the motorcycle
accident and subsequent ankle surgery. For example,
Dr Ng states in his
supplementary report:
There was also the added stress and distress arising from an ankle injury
(arising from a bike accident), the ankle injury was not
disclosed to me.
Ng did not clarify the relevance of the medical certificate for police officers
dated 9 August 2020 signed by Professor Hardisty
in relation to Ms
Phipps’s ankle injury, which was provided to him before he wrote the first
Ng’s report does not include any information about PTSD, the diagnostic
criteria that must be met and his process in making
the diagnosis. There is no
evidence he used psychometric test instruments such as the Depression, Anxiety,
Stress Scale (DASS), Generalised
Anxiety Disorder Assessment (GAD-7), Trauma
Symptom Inventory-2 (TSI-2), Clinician-Administered PTSD Checklist for DSM-5
or Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5).
Ng’s reasoning about causality is based on correlation. While Ms Phipps
was experiencing psychiatric symptoms in the months
after the offence, there is
evidence those symptoms arose from other stressors in her life at the time.
Dr Ng has recorded incorrectly that Ms Phipps worked in light duties (after one
day off) after the offence before returning
to normal duties, whereas the change
in her work duties was due to the ankle
issues I have outlined above, speak either to the applicant’s reliability
or to the quality of Dr Ng’s consideration
of the information before him
or both. The result is that the confidence I have in Dr Ng’s opinion is
reduced. Given the deficiencies
and inconsistencies in both Dr Ng’s
reports, I cannot place any weight on them.
offence of assault public officer by spitting is regarded by the courts as
serious given the disgusting and degrading aspect
to it. It also has the aspect
of contempt shown for the authority of the police, at least in some cases.
the offender was sentenced the magistrate agreed with the prosecuting
sergeant’s description of the offending behaviour
agree the act of spitting in a person’s face is disgusting and
disrespectful. However, I must have regard solely to the injury
suffered by the applicant as a consequence of the commission of the offence and
not the seriousness of the offence. The
amount of compensation is not to be
fixed as punishment of the offender or as an expression of sympathy for the
factual circumstances of the offence are relevant as they inform my assessment
of the credibility and weight of the medical evidence
and the likely severity of
the injury.
definition of ‘injury’ under
of the Act includes ‘mental
and nervous shock’. This phrase contemplates the impact of the offence on
the mind or nervous
to ‘mental or emotional harm as opposed to physical injury or bodily
assessment of mental and nervous shock is a question of fact and it is necessary
to draw a distinction ‘between a mere
emotional reaction and something of
a more enduring character which may in both the legal sense and in common
parlance, be described
Mental and nervous shock includes distress, horror, disgust and other similar
adverse mental reactions but does not encompass mere
fright, humiliation or
onus is on the applicant to establish on the balance of probabilities a causal
relationship between the commission of the offence
and the injury, in order to
compensation.
Phipps provided an impact statement and gave evidence the offence had a
significant impact on her. In assessing the weight to
attribute to Ms
Phipps’s oral evidence and signed statements, I am mindful of the comments
expressed in
Dimitrovska v The State of Western Australia
victim cannot be expected to provide an objective and impartial account of an
offence and its
consequences.
Accordingly I attach greater weight to the independent evidence than the account
given by Ms Phipps. Likewise, where the relevant
expert opinion is based on, or
substantially on, the applicant’s own account without any supporting
evidence, caution is required.
Ms Phipps having two blood tests, I do not accept Ms Phipps was anxious about
contracting a contagious disease given:
(a) Ms Phipps did not seek
the results of the first blood tests until 11 March 2020, nearly six weeks after
the offence;
(b) Ms Phipps knew she was immune to Hepatitis A and B from 11 March
(c) Ms Phipps was told the second blood test results were
‘negative’ during a GP visit one month after she had the blood
(d) There is no reference to the offence, nor the impact of the offence, in
any of the GP notes except the request for follow up blood
tests on 26 May 2020
during a visit where she was referred to Dr Hardisty in relation to her ankle
(e) There is no other reference to the blood tests nor any discussion about
the risks of Ms Phipps contracting a BBV, COVID-19 or
other contagious disease
in the GP records;
(f) Objectively, there was a very low risk of Ms Phipps contracting a
contagious disease from the offence and Ms Phipps did not contract
a contagious
records from Wembley Family Medical Practice and Clear Health Psychology Subiaco
refer to a number of issues including: complex
family of origin issues;
childhood family violence; a history of depression and anxiety; alcohol
dependence; anger issues; and struggles
in both her romantic relationships and
friendships. There is no reference to the impact of the offence in any of the
medical records.
115 Given Ms Phipps did not discuss the offence with her GP
nor her psychologist, there is no objective evidence the psychological
Ms Phipps was significant. If Ms Phipps was feeling anxious about the offence
and if it was affecting her life, she would
have spoken to her GP, psychologist,
or psychiatrist about it during her sessions with them in the months after the
Ms Phipps was affected psychologically by the offence, she should have told Dr
Phipps gave evidence she conflated the impact on her from the ankle injury with
the impact from the
this to be the case.
the inconsistencies, confusion and conflation in Ms Phipps’s evidence, I
cannot rely upon Ms Phipps’s recollection
of the offence and its impact.
Dr Ng’s reports, there are significant inaccuracies in the chronology and
conflation in relation to the psychological effects
of the offence, the ankle
incident on 14 January 2020 and other factors going on in Ms Phipps’s
life. As above, I cannot place
any weight on Dr Ng’s opinion.
am not persuaded on the balance of probabilities Ms Phipps suffered mental and
nervous shock of an enduring character so as to
amount to an injury as a result
of the proved offence.
find the effects of the incident as outlined in Ms Phipps’s statement and
set out at paragraph 10 above, were caused by unrelated
issues and were not as a
consequence of the offence. I find her ongoing mental health issues were caused
by other factors separate
from the offence. I do not accept the offence
exacerbated her pre-existing psychiatric difficulties.
I accept Ms Phipps suffered an emotional reaction for a short time after the
offence, I am not satisfied Ms Phipps suffered
mental and nervous shock of an
enduring character to the required standard and therefore I refuse her
application for compensation.
Claim for loss of earnings and past and future treatment expenses
my finding Ms Phipps has not suffered an injury, I cannot make an award for
economic loss pursuant to
of the Act. Ms Phipps has conceded she is not
entitled to loss of earnings nor past and future treatment expenses for her
psychological
and psychiatric treatment as
will briefly address these claims for completeness.
Phipps claimed a global sum of $10,000 for past and future loss of earning
capacity and employment benefits due to her moving
to light non-operational
duties for six
given the offence did not affect her work and she had full capacity to work from
30 January 2020,
even if she was not precluded from being awarded compensation, I am not
satisfied she has a claim for loss of earnings.
Phipps claimed $10,677.50 for past and future treatment expenses for her
psychological and psychiatric treatment. Given Ms Phipps
could claim this from
the WA Police
even if she
was not precluded from being awarded compensation, I require Ms Phipps to pursue
these expenses from her employer pursuant
of the Act.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
A Barter, ASSESSOR Of CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
27 JUNE 2025
SBL letter dated
26 February 2024.
Statement of
Megan Cleary dated 19 December 2024
of Megan Cleary dated 19 December 2024 [17].
Statement of
Rebecka Phipps dated 31 January 2020 [26].
Statement of
Rebecka Phipps dated 31 January 2020 [28]-[29].
Statement of
Megan Cleary dated 19 December 2024 [24]-[26].
Statement of
Rebecka Phipps dated 31 January 2020
dated 9 January 2025
‘Police and Blood-Borne Viruses 2023’
https://ashm.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/ASHM-Police-BBV_v4.pdf
‘Police and Blood-Borne Viruses 2023’
https://ashm.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/ASHM-Police-BBV_v4.pdf
https://www.health.wa.gov.au/~/media/Corp/Documents/Health-for/Communicable-Diseases/Guidelines/Guideline-for-the-Mandatory-Testing-of-a-Suspected-Transferor-for-an-Infectious-Disease.pdf
News ‘Coronavirus warning to WA students returning to school next week as
four cases cleared’ 28 January 2020
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-28/coronavirus-cases-cleared-in-western-australia/11908178.
Australian Centre for Disease Control ‘COVID-19’
www.cdc.gov.au/topics/covid-19; accessed on 11 June 2025; Lauer SA,
Bi Q, Jones FK, Zheng Q, Meredith HR, Azman AS, Reich NG, Lessler J. The
Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) From Publicly Reported
Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Ann Intern Med. 2020 May
5;172(9):577-582. doi: 10.7326/M20-0504.
Epub 2020 Mar 10. PMID: 32150748;
PMC7081172.
Dated 15 November 2023 [24]-[27].
Statement of
Rebecka Phipps dated 9 January 2025 [14].
Report of Dr
Piirto dated 7 December 2020, 2.
Dr Ng report
dated 28 June 2023, 4.
Dr Ng report
dated 28 June 2023, 6.
Dr Ng report
dated 28 June 2023, 10.
Dr Ng report
dated 28 June 2023, 7.
dated 9 January 2025.
supplementary statement of Rebecka Phipps dated 8 May 2025, [5] – [12].
Supplementary
report of Dr Ng dated 14 May 2025. 3-4.
Transcript of
Proceedings, Western Australia Police v Alyssa Joseline Anne Walker, PE 5530-1
of 2020, Magistrates Court at Perth,
31 March 2020, Magistrate De Vries, 10.
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Re Hojetzki
[2009] WADC 77
(Sleight DCJ).
DNA v Britten
(1995) 14 SR (WA) 325
[2022] WADC 100
Savic v Duric
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC
S v Neumann
(1995) 14 WAR 452
[2018] WADC 148
[2014] WADC 131
(Unreported, WASC,
Library No 920598, 19 November
[2024] WADC 41
Dimitrovska v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 162
(2015) 253 A Crim Reports 407 [74]
(Martin CJ, McClure P & Hall J
Woodward v Davies
[2021] WADC 73
[2024] WADC 41
R v Peisley
(1990) 54 A Crim R
[2001] NSWCCA 353
(2001) 127 A Crim R 369
, [58]–[59];
[2002] NSWCCA 381
(2002) 134 A Crim R 174
letter dated 9 January
Statement dated 15 November 2023 [58]-[59].
certificate of capacity dated 30 January 2020.
Australian Police Force Industrial Agreement 2021, Clause 39.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter