URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHARTERIS [2023] WACIC 1 (6 January 2023)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2023] WACIC 1
DELIVERED :
6 JANUARY 2023
FILE NO/S :
CIC 811 of 2020
NICOLE ELIZABETH CHARTERIS
Other - Alleged offence - charge not determined
- Alleged offence - no person charged - Assessment of damages - Mental and
shock - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation awarded
Compensation refused
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
(1994) 11 WAR 481
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Dulieu v White & Sons [1901] 2 KB 669
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC 93
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA 104
[2010] WADC 6
M v J and J v J (Unreported WASC, Library No 920598,
19 November 1992)
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
, 331 - 332
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
[2017] WADC 76[28]
(1984) 4 SR (WA) 219
[2016] WADC 74
[2011] WADC 10
RJE v Bandy (Unreported WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974)
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC 14
[2003] 77 ALJR 1104
Winiarczyk v Tsirigotis
[2011] WASCA 97
for Decision
application dated 18 May 2020 Nicole Elizabeth Charteris
(the applicant) claimed compensation for injuries sustained as a
consequence
of alleged offences committed by "GC" on 3 February 2020,
3 May 2020 and 18 May 2020. I now provide reasons for my
application with respect to the incident on 3 February 2020 was made
pursuant to
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
(the Act). The applications with respect to the incidents on
3 May 2020 and 18 May 2020 were made pursuant to
of the Act. Both
sections 16
of the Act authorise an Assessor to make an
award of compensation for an alleged offence if an Assessor is satisfied the
loss and injury occurred and that it did so as a consequence of an
alleged offence. Pursuant to
of the Act 'satisfied' means
'satisfied on the balance of probabilities'. It must be more probable than not
that the alleged offending
An applicant who claims compensation under the Act where no conviction has
been entered bears the burden of proving the
support of the application, the applicant provided her Statements to Police
dated 4 February 2020, 3 May 2020 and 18 May 2020
(the first page of each document only), an unsigned document entitled Statement
of Injuries, eight pages containing photographs of
her computer screen showing
the "Income report" for her business and a quote to obtain a psychological
report. When asked to provide
additional information the applicant also
provided her income statements from 1 July 2020 to
30 June 2021 (202 pages), individual
monthly statements for the
periods September 2019 to June 2020, income tax returns for the
financial years 2018 to 2021 and income
statements for the financial years 2019
to 2021. The applicant also provided a report from Ms Lisa Dominguez, clinical
psychologist
dated 5 August 2021.
of the Act I obtained the applicant's medical records from
Myaree Medical Centre. I also obtained the Police Briefs for each incident,
Incident reports relating to the applicant's complaints to police about the
alleged offender and the transcript from the Magistrates
18 November 2020 with respect to the incident which occurred on
3 May 2020. In response to a request I made Ms Dominguez
produced a supplementary report dated
2 October 2021.
The Alleged Offences
her Statement of Injuries the applicant provided the following background to the
is a neighbour who lives 4 houses away diagonally opposite our home
(approximately 50 metres away) in a culdasec (
) at [address
has become a significant nuisance to myself since residing at our property for
the last nine years with an increase in his sexually
and mentally abusive
behaviour, particularly within the last five years where he has attempted to
engage with me on a regular (weekly,
sometimes daily) basis, despite being asked
to remove himself from our property by myself, my husband, police and mental
health care
workers which includes the following unwanted behaviour:
Persistent and
unrelenting sexual harassment
Persistent and
unrelenting mental harassment
behaviour (sneaking up behind me, watching me from my neighbours (
property and his property for long periods of time)
Theft of my
property (Gardening tools, sprinklers etc) and of our tradesman's property
(tools) entering our property for maintenance
and renovations
Calling my dog
to him to improve his ability to engage with me consistently.
persistent unwanted and mentally abusive behaviour in conjunction to his
unwillingness to comply with our requests lead(sic)
to a successful VRO
(Magistrate determining sexual violence & harassment) on November 19, 2019,
which he has breached on three
separate occasions since this time which includes
the following:
February 2020 led to him being arrested by police
and warned.
Sunday 3rd of
May lead to him being arrested by police, charged and convicted of breaching his
Monday 18 May
2020 led to him being arrested by police, charged and convicted of breaching his
alleged offender lived on the same street as the applicant and was a
77 year old man who had been diagnosed with dementia. The
applicant refers
in her statement, and when speaking to Ms Dominguez, clinical psychologist,
to many years of harassment from the
alleged offender. Her application was
brought with respect to three incidents only.
to the extensive history referred to in the statement and in Ms Dominguez's
report, I obtained a copy of the applicant's interactions
with the police in
relation to the alleged offender. The first incident reported to police was on
17 November 2019.
The Incident report recorded the applicant was distressed about her neighbour
coming onto her yard and standing there. She told
police she'd had ongoing
issues with him for six years and he had been sexually inappropriate in the
past. She advised police she
was a psychologist, "something is wrong with [the
alleged offender]" and she was in the process of obtaining a restraining order
against him. Police attended on 19 November 2019 and spoke to the alleged
offender. Police recorded the alleged offender having
described going to the
applicant's house to advise her of a wine which was on sale at Liquorland and
was a "deal too good to miss",
but she misunderstood and her husband called him
a "sexual molestor". The alleged offender advised police he tried to diffuse
situation by offering the applicant seeds from a rare tree in his garden but
the applicant began yelling at him to get off her property.
Police advised the
alleged offender to avoid the applicant's property.
applicant subsequently applied for a violence restraining order in relation to
the alleged offender and a hearing was held on
19 November 2019. The
applicant described the alleged offender's conduct to the Magistrate as:
In the last few days – this has been happening for the last five years
– that amount of times, the 500 times that he
has been approaching me on
my property when my husband is out. He does it to all the females in the street
and surrounds. He often
walks around in his underwear, and he won't take no for
an answer. It's absolutely tormenting.
-So we ask – so over the last probably three years – he started five
years ago – you know, feigning friendliness,
but he just – every
time I go out into my garden, he is there right behind me, talking, and the
subject always turns to sex,
and I don't feel safe in my home. I've stopped
gardening. I haven't been able to sleep, I haven't been able to work. I'm a
psychologist,
so it's important for me to be – you know, to have my
downtime on the weekends, and despite police and mental health nurses
social workers attending his property, he hasn't stopped. He now stands on the
boundary of my property, all around it, when
I am outside, as soon as I come
outside my front door. And I tell him to leave, and he refuses to leave, so I
often – you know,
if I have gardened on the odd occasion, which I did with
a friend on Sunday, who is also a psychotherapist, he said – he agreed
with me that he has got a psychiatric condition.
29 November 2019, police served Violence Restraining Order 2019 04714
upon the alleged offender. The conditions of the order
included the alleged
offender was not to communicate or attempt to communicate with the applicant,
not behave in an intimidatory,
offensive or emotionally abusive manner towards
the applicant, approach within five metres of the applicant or to enter or
upon the property where the applicant lives, works or is
Incident 1 – 3 February 2020
4 February 2020 the applicant reported to police she was out the front of
her house watering the garden when GC approached and
began pacing back and forth
and then said, "There
is something I wanted to say to you, but if you don't want
me to say it I will go away".
applicant attended Murdoch Police station to report the offence and provided a
video of the incident. The video confirms the
words the alleged offender spoke,
but the video is dark and the person taking the video cannot be identified.
Police interviewed
the alleged offender in relation to the offence and he
confirmed that he was the person in the video but denied he approached or
to the applicant. GC advised police he spoke to the applicant's husband and it
was her husband who took the video footage.
Police did not consider there was
sufficient evidence to proceed with any charges against the alleged offender.
application in relation to this offence was brought pursuant to section 17
of the Act and I am required to be satisfied an alleged
offence occurred. I
have reviewed the video footage of the incident. The alleged offender made no
attempt to enter the applicant's
property. In addition, due to the quality of
the footage, I cannot be sure the alleged offender approached within 5 metres of
person who recorded the footage. To be satisfied there was a breach of the
Violence Restraining Order I must accept the alleged offender
was communicating
with the applicant. Whilst I can be satisfied the alleged offender was speaking
to a person at the applicant's
property, the video does not identify that
person. On 22 April 2022 I wrote to the applicant, advising I could
not be satisfied
the incident occurred as alleged, as it was open to me to find
the offender was speaking to her husband, not to her. I suggested
she provide a
statement from her husband confirming it was not him the offender spoke to. The
applicant was regrettably distressed
by my query in relation to this alleged
offence, in particular she was concerned I was accusing her of "lying" about the
Requesting additional evidence in support of an application is not an
accusation of dishonesty, rather it provides an applicant an
opportunity to
substantiate the claim being made, and to address any gaps in the evidence.
a response dated 19 May 2022 the applicant advised her husband did not
have a clear recollection of this incident "given this
was so long ago and he is
confused with the other 500 times he approached me but he can confirm that GC
[redacted] was trying to
speak to me again –
otherwise he would not
have been outside speaking to him asking him to leave me alone following an
. If it is essential to the outcome of this claim that he sign
something, then I will have him do so" (emphasis added). Given the
advised her husband had no clear recollection of the incident I considered there
to be no point in obtaining a statement
from him. The applicant's response
contains an acknowledgement at some stage that evening her husband was outside
speaking to the
alleged offender. It is therefore possible the alleged offender
was indeed speaking to the applicant's husband.
the same response the applicant provided two videos demonstrating alleged
breaches. She provided the following description of
the footage,
explaining:
One was an evening when he breached the VRO standing in my bush at night and one
during the day showing him pacing up and down my
boundary on our neighbour next
doors' property whilst I was in my front yard. As you can see, following the
continued harassment
on these days, I went back inside the house to get my
phone, so in the first video I had to walk toward him again locating him in
bushes and the 2nd video he was further away than he initially was (up against
my boundary trying to talk to me). He was within
5 metres of my person which led
to the VRO breaches. It is me behind the camera in both of these
The first video referred to in the applicant's response
is of this incident as it includes the offender speaking the words referred
in paragraph [10] above and in the applicant's statement dated
4 February 2020. That statement does not refer to the applicant
the offender standing in her yard, and then going inside to get her phone before
returning outside to record him. The applicant's
statement also does not refer
to the applicant's husband going to speak to the alleged offender as referred to
in her email dated
19 May 2022.
I do not consider the further submission from the applicant provides any
additional evidence to satisfy me the alleged offender was
speaking to her in
the video. It may be the alleged offender spoke to the applicant earlier, and
then spoke to her husband later
in the evening. It may be the alleged offender
spoke to the applicant on two separate occasions. Neither of these scenarios
described in the statement dated 4 February 2020. I consider the
events of that evening to be unclear and I cannot be satisfied
offence occurred. I therefore refuse the application in relation to this
Incident 2 – 3 May 2020
second incident occurred on 3 May 2020. In her statement to police
dated 3 May 2020 the applicant stated she was standing at
the driveway of her house when the alleged offender walked up to her and said
"excuse me". The applicant did not want
to look at him or talk to him so turned
away and said "Fuck off". The applicant went inside to tell her husband GC was
outside and
grabbed her phone and took it outside in an attempt to film the
alleged offender near her property. He was not there and the applicant
inside. In her statement to police dated 3 May 2020 the applicant
was feeling very shaken.
the compounding nature of the situation. I feel like he is stalking me and I
can't go outside and enjoy my gardening.
just want this situation to stop.
has caused me to lose sleep at night.
ongoing anxiety leaves me feeling very stressed.
10:47 am the applicant telephoned police. The police CAD
recorded the
applicant's advice to police the alleged offender had "breached his VRO again
and has come up to her on her own property
and says things like "you're very
sexy' and makes lewd comments". The description of the incident recorded by
police based on the
initial call from the applicant is inconsistent with the
applicant's statement to police.
attended that afternoon and spoke to the alleged offender who made admissions he
had spoken to the applicant as he wanted
to tell her earlier in the week her
bins had tipped over and all the contents had fallen out. The Statement of
material facts states
the words spoken by the alleged offender were "Seeing that
you are out here and you are close, I wanted to tell you about those bins
you had out on Friday and what I was willing to do to help you with that." The
alleged offender was charged with breach of
violence restraining order. The
prosecution brief contains a report from Dr Roger Clarnette, Consultant in
Geriatric Medicine, dated
10 February 2020, which reported GC was
suffering from significant cerebral atrophy, with a deteriorating mental state
over the previous
two years which was manifested by behaviours including
wandering around the local suburb talking to strangers and looking in bins
deteriorating social skills with an inability to appreciate cues from normal
human interaction. On 18 November 2020 the charge
was dismissed in
the Magistrates Court at Perth with the Chief Magistrate noting the alleged
offender was suffering dementia and
in a locked environment at Bentley Hospital.
I am satisfied an alleged offence occurred in relation to this incident.
Incident 3 – 18 May 2020
18 May 2020 the alleged offender entered the applicant's front garden
to place two bricks around the bottom of a sign which displayed
her business
information and which was located approximately five metres behind the
applicant's letterbox. The applicant told the
alleged offender to leave and he
replied 'Don't be silly, look what I've done, I'm just trying to help you.' The
alleged offender
then left the applicant's property taking the bricks with him,
as requested by the applicant. The applicant telephoned police at
advising of the incident and that the alleged offender "has dementia and is
constantly moving items in the
attended that evening and spoke to the alleged offender who made full admissions
in relation to the incident and explained
to police "I was just trying to help,
I like helping. I wasn't breaching the order, I wasn't committing violence
against her, I
was trying to stop the sign blowing over". The applicant was
noted by police to be "shaken by the incident" and in her statement
dated 18 May 2020 stated "[GC] makes me feel shaky, anxious and
exasperated". The alleged offender was charged with Breach
of Violence
Restraining Order. On 12 August 2020 the charge was dismissed in the
Magistrates Court at Perth for want of prosecution.
I am satisfied an alleged
offence occurred in relation to this incident.
The applicant's injuries
her Statement of Injuries, the applicant stated:
[GC]'s behaviour has caused me Significant Psychological and Mental distress,
which includes the following:
Hypervigilance
Mental Anguish
an email dated 19 May 2022 the applicant
[T]he sexual and general persistent long-term harassment instigated by Mr
Ciantar which had deeply affected my personal and professional
life over a
period of eight (8) years - especially the impact it was having on my
relationships, freedom, mental health, finances
and ability to perform
adequately in my professional life whilst he was persistently targeting me. I
could not walk outside my front
door without being approached by him despite my
long-term request in addition to my husband's and family or friends visiting
that 'he leave the property immediately'. He refused constantly and
would often sneak up behind me when I was gardening alone and
be within 2 feet
to the back of me discussing inappropriate sexual topics, pace up and down my
boundary and my neighbours (
) property whilst I was
applicant attended Ms Lisa Dominguez, clinical psychologist, on
15 February 2021 and 15 March 2021 subsequent to which
Ms Dominguez
produced a report dated 5 August 2021. The applicant
provided a history of harassment by the alleged offender for a period of seven
years, from 2013 to 2020. She described the alleged offender having visited her
period despite her asking him
not to. She gave an example of having opened her front door, she thought to the
postman, whilst wearing
just a robe with her hair in a towel. The alleged
offender was at the door and despite her telling him she couldn't talk to him
kept speaking to her, mainly about the garden before he asked if she was naked
under the towel. She described crying from this
when her husband got home as
"it triggered old stuff, creepy neighbour". She described GC, who was in his
70s, walking around the
street in his pyjamas. She described GC standing in the
neighbour's yard and staring at her, or walking along the boundary of their
property in the neighbour's yard, taunting her.
applicant described intrusive and distressing memories including unpleasant
dreams of "powerlessness" with GC or someone like
him in her dreams, flashbacks
of when he was around and distress from reminders of the harassment including
people knocking on the
door and seeing his house and garden. She described
avoiding gardening, answering her front door, lack of motivation, disturbed
sleep, increased alcohol consumption and weight gain. The applicant also
described irritability and marital strain caused primarily
from lack of support
from her husband who she reported told her she "overreacted" to GC. The
applicant, who is a psychologist, described
an impact on her ability to work due
to impaired concentration, feeling overwhelmed and under stress. She reported
to Ms Dominguez
this led to financial strain which caused additional
Dominguez commented:
Ms. Charteris' was harassed for an extended period (over 7 years), culminating
in a VRO against her neighbour for sexual misbehaviour.
What is the
psychological impact of these injuries? Ms. Charteris has experienced extensive
psychological concerns as a result of
this her experiences. As mentioned, her
symptoms meet the criteria for PTSD as per the DSM-5, including viz.,
re-experiencing, avoidance,
negative alterations in mood and cognition, and
hyperarousal. . . . Given the assessment profile and her self-report, it is my
that she experiences Severe symptoms of PTSD. Further, given the
specificity of the triggers, it is also my opinion that these symptoms
caused directly by the harassment.
Ms. Charteris reported that she has experienced a depressed mood for a lengthy
period (more than two years). She also is plagued
by insomnia, low energy, low
self-esteem, poor concentration, and moments of 'hopelessness'. In my opinion,
she is dysthymic, and
this condition is chronic in nature, commencing in
response to the ongoing harassment from George. She also experiences anxious
specifically feeling keyed up and tense, having problems
concentrating, and living with fears that something awful may happen. In
view, her symptoms met the criteria for Persistent Depressive Disorder
(Dysthymia) with Anxious Distress.
Ms. Charteris disclosed that she drinks more now than she did before the
harassment. There was quite a notable increase in her use
of alcohol, increasing
from an occasional, 'social' drink to a couple each night. In my opinion, she is
probably engaging in this
behaviour as a maladaptive behavioural pattern aimed
at controlling her symptoms of PTSD, Dysthymia, and anxiety.
Ms Dominguez
recommended the applicant have between 10 to 20 sessions of psychological
treatment, recommending EMDR therapy at a
cost of $267 per consultation.
is important to note whilst the applicant submits the alleged offender harassed
her for several years, her claim is in relation
to only three incidents, and she
is unable to be compensated for any conduct by the alleged offender which does
not comprise an offence.
The applicant described the impact of the alleged
offender upon her mental health prior to the restraining order being issued
I emailed him to say, "I'm not taking this any more. I can't stand it. I can't
work, I can't – I'm not sleeping, and I want
you to leave me alone". That
was a year and a half ago, and he sent me a song to say, "Don't go out tonight,
there's a bad moon on
the rise", or something like this. He is threatening and I
don't feel safe in my home. I bought myself a dog, and often I've had
her outside with all my gardening tools because he has come again, and I go
inside, and I call my husband.
On her own evidence the applicant
and her ability to work, sleep and feelings of personal safety were impacted by
the behaviour of
the alleged offender prior to the restraining order being
issued, and prior to any offences being committed.
13 August 2021 I wrote to Ms Dominguez seeking clarification of her report,
requesting she distinguish between the impacts of
offences for which the applicant had brought her claim compared to the seven
years of harassment prior to this. Ms Dominguez
responded in a report
dated 2 October 2021, commenting:
Ms. Charteris experienced harassment for a sustained period of seven years. This
culminated in a Violence Restraining Order (VRO)
on February 3, 2020, protecting
her from [G]. As noted in my report dated August 5, 2021, she consequently
experienced symptoms of
PTSD, and Dysthymia with anxious distress. She was on
shaky grounds.
Having a VRO probably gave her hope that things might return to 'normal',
however, this was no doubt dashed every time [G] breached
the Orders –
three times over an extended period of months. In my opinion, given the ongoing
harassment and her mental health
functioning, she had less resilience, coping,
and the internal fortitude to effectively manage these breaches. In response,
she described
feeling defeated when she encountered George.
In my opinion, the breaches exacerbated her already compromised mental health.
She described symptoms consistent with a diagnosis
of PTSD (unresolved), Major
Depressive Disorder and General Anxiety Disorder . . . More specifically, Ms.
Charteris explained that
her symptoms of depression intensified. They were
clearly worse than her pre-episode status. She felt constant and ongoing
mood every day, an overwhelming sense of fatigue, sadness, loss of
interest in activities she used to enjoy, lack of motivation,
concentration, and sleep disturbances. Further, her symptoms of anxiety also
increased, and her worry was excessive, pervasive,
pronounced and interfered
with a wide range of functions. She continues to feel these
24 September 2021 the Psychology Board imposed a condition upon the
applicant requiring her to be supervised by another registered
psychologist with
respect to certain matters. It was apparent these disciplinary proceedings were
in progress when the applicant
attended Ms Dominguez, but there was no
mention of those proceedings in either of Ms Dominguez's reports. By way
of correspondence
dated 22 April 2022 I enquired of the applicant
whether she had advised Ms Dominguez of the disciplinary proceedings as I
anticipated
a person subject of such proceedings would have some level of
concern in relation to the process and outcome of those proceedings.
concerned this may have impacted the applicant's presentation to
Ms Dominguez and thus the reliance that could be placed on
Ms Dominguez's reports. By way of correspondence dated
19 May 2022 the applicant advised the complaint was a "Vexatious
which had been received on 16 February 2020 and did not cause
her concern. She did not mention the complaint to Ms Dominguez as
limited impact upon her and in her experience it is usual for psychologists to
limit discussions about such notifications
or complaints with their peers. I
accept the applicant's submission in this regard.
considered the applicant's records from her general practitioner at Myaree
Medical Centre, reviewing her records for the period
8 November 2016
until 2 November 2021. No mention is made in those records of any
mental health concerns, the difficulties with
GC or the incidents subject of
this claim.
determining the injuries sustained by the applicant I must have regard to the
circumstances of the offending as I must be satisfied
the injury was suffered as
a consequence of the alleged
second incident the alleged offender attempted to advise the applicant about an
issue with her rubbish bin being tipped
over. The third incident involved the
alleged offender attempting to prop up the applicant's business sign so it did
not fall over.
I accept in approaching the applicant the alleged offender was
in breach of the violence restraining order and so alleged offences
committed. These alleged offences were however at the lower end of the scale of
any offending. The alleged offender had dementia
(which was known to the
applicant), was ignoring social cues and becoming a nuisance to his neighbours,
including the applicant.
The impact of the two alleged offences upon the
applicant as described by the applicant was considerable given the nature of the
incidents and raised the issue of whether the applicant was a person of normal
is well established principle a defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds
him, both physically and psychologically. This
is generally referred to as the
'egg shell skull'
Shorey v PT
Kirby J said:
[44] The principle of law is that a negligent defendant must take its victim as
it finds her and must pay damages accordingly. It
is not to the point to
complain that the injury, in the form of the fall, was trivial in itself and
that it would be unfair to burden
the respondents with the obligation to bear
costs consequent upon the fact that the appellant was peculiarly susceptible to
bizarre symptoms inherent in a conversion disorder. If such symptoms
were genuine and a consequence of the subject trauma, the apparent
disproportion
between cause and effect is not an exculpation for the negligent party. It does
not render the damage 'unforeseeable'
or otherwise outside the scope of the
damages that may be recovered. As Dixon CJ explained in
'If the injury proves more serious in
its incidents and its consequences because of the injured man's condition, that
does nothing
but increase the damages the defendant must pay. To sever the
remaining leg of a one-legged man or put out the eye of a one-eyed
man is to do
a far more serious injury than it would have been had the injured man possessed
two legs or two eyes. But for the seriousness
of the injury the defendant must
her report dated 2 October 2021 Ms Dominguez opined the
harassment from the previous seven years caused the applicant to have
resilience, coping and internal fortitude to manage the breaches.
find the applicant sustained an exacerbation of a pre-existing psychological
condition as a result of the alleged offences. The
applicant's mental health
was already compromised by the events prior to the alleged offences and she was
suffering from PTSD and
Dysthymia, with anxiety. The applicant described
symptoms of depression for two years prior to her review with Ms Dominguez
2021, and I therefore find the depressive symptoms also commenced
prior to the alleged offences. However, I accept the depressive
intensified after the alleged offences.
Method of assessment
of the Act sets out the general powers of an assessor. It provides 'on
application in respect of injury suffered by a
victim as a consequence of the
commission of an offence, an assessor may award such compensation that the
assessor is satisfied is
just for the injury and for any loss also suffered'.
assessing the amount of compensation I should have regard solely to the injury
suffered by the applicant in consequence of the
commission of the offence. The
amount of compensation is not to be fixed as punishment of the offender or as an
expression of sympathy
correct approach to adopt in assessing the amount of compensation under the Act
is to apply the ordinary tortious principles
for assessment of damages, subject
to the limitations imposed by the definitions of 'injury' and 'loss' in the Act,
and to the jurisdictional
limit of the
to section 12 of the Act a victim who suffers injury as a consequence of
the commission of a proved offence may apply for
compensation for the injury and
any loss suffered. 'Injury' is defined in section 3 of the Act as 'bodily
harm, mental and nervous
shock, or pregnancy'.
amount of damages for non-economic loss must be fair and reasonable compensation
for the injuries received by the applicant and
the disabilities caused, having
regard to current general ideas of fairness and
moderation.
amount must be proportionate to the particular situation of the
regard to the medical evidence outlined above, I found, as a result of the
offences, the applicant suffered from a psychological
injury comprising an
exacerbation of pre-existing symptoms of depression and anxiety. I considered
an appropriate allowance for
the applicant's injuries to be $7,500.
Loss of earnings
applicant is entitled to compensation for 'loss of earnings as a direct
consequence of the injuries' he
earnings includes loss of earning
applicant is self employed as a psychologist, operating her business out of her
demonstrated the following
Financial year ending 30 June
Income earned according to income statements
Gross earnings according to income tax returns
(Not provided)
18 October 2021 the applicant submitted "the losses will not likely be
reflected clearly on my tax returns given my income increased
However, you will see that the annual increases were significantly reduced as a
result of this stressful situation (see
period in particular from 2018-2019
taxation year - there was only a 10k increase that year as opposed to the normal
40-50k annual
increase). This is why I provided you the original paperwork for
losses of income for each period that this person's behaviour affected
sleep, relationships, mental health and inability to attend work due to
consistent attendance to police stations and magistrates
court on those days.
Please note, my income for 2020/21 period (since the perpetrator ceased sexually
harassing me) is 200k. This
shows how much these events affected me previously
in the earlier periods." The applicant is unable to claim for any losses which
predate the incidents. She is also unable to claim for losses caused by
attending police or court.
2 December 2021 the applicant referred me to the income statements and
described her claim for loss of earnings as based on her
earnings averaging
$22,000 to $26,000 per month normally but dropping to $19,000 in December 2019
when "the behaviour of the perpetrator
escalated requiring court attendance,
police reports and attendance by police to my home on multiple occasions that
this provides
evidence of days taken off and income lost" and further dropping
to between $12,000 to $16,000 in March to May 2020 when "the behaviour
to escalate leading me to take considerable time off during this period due to
incapacity to focus and concentrate on my
work and patients."
have found alleged offences occurred in May 2020. The applicant's
submission indicates a negative impact on her earning capacity
prior to the
alleged offences having occurred. On 19 May 2022 the applicant
The dates you are referring to indicate purely when [GC] breached the
Restraining Order 3x, not the psychological, personal and
professional
damage he has caused to my person over many years which led to the VRO and
subsequent breaches. Have these incidents,
my distress and financial loss
periods been taken into account also? Trying to match up my financial losses
with his persistent harassment
I would suspect would be impossible. But as you
can see from the income statements I have provided - as the years went by and it
was normal for me to increase my annual income by 20-30k, however this began to
go backwards as a result of my distress, insomnia
and inability to see patients
on particular days as a result.
I cannot compensate the
applicant for any impact on her earnings prior to the alleged offences having
occurred in May 2020.
reviewed the applicant's monthly income statements and note the
Number of in person appointments
Number of telephone appointments
Any periods not worked
September 2019
October 2019
November 2019
December 2019
24/12/19 to 31/12/19
January 2020
February 2020
12/3/20 to 23/3/20
applicant took no time off work subsequent to the incident which occurred on
3 February 2020, sustaining no loss of earnings
that month. The
applicant's appointments in May 2020 show no impact from the alleged
offences which occurred on 3 May 2020 and 18
biggest impact on the applicant's earnings was in March 2020. As I did not
accept the incident on 3 February 2020 comprised
an alleged offence,
and this is before the alleged offences occurred in May 2020 I cannot award
any compensation for it. However
the circumstances of the loss and the
applicant's explanation of that loss are relevant to the weight I can place on
the applicant's
evidence. For reasons that become apparent below, I formed a
view the applicant exaggerated the impact of the incidents upon her,
her ability to work.
applicant did not work between 12 March 2020 and
23 March 2020. Upon returning to work on 24 March 2021 the
applicant only saw
patients by telehealth/videolink for the balance of the
month. This was a significant change in the applicant's business model with
only two telehealth/videolink appointments recorded in the 6 months prior to
this date. In April 2020 the applicant also had a majority
telehealth/videolink appointments. On 15 March 2020 the Western
Australian State Government declared a State of Emergency with
respect to the
Covid 19 outbreak. Nonessential businesses were unable to open for a
period of time, and when permitted to re-open
were on restrictions with respect
to face-to-face contact. Restrictions were put in place in relation to persons
leaving home which
included shopping for essentials, to work or study if you
could not do so from home, caring for family members, exercise and for
care. On 22 April 2022 (and prior to my reaching a determination that
the incident on 3 February 2020 was not an alleged
offence) I wrote
to the applicant advising I had reached a preliminary determination not to make
an award for loss of earning capacity
on the basis any impact to her business
between March and May 2020 was due to the impact of the covid outbreak and
not the alleged
an email dated 19 May 2022 the applicant advised she travelled
interstate for this period of time "to recover psychologically".
medical evidence the applicant was unfit to work over this period of time. I
requested the applicant provide evidence
of her interstate travel, which she did
on 8 December 2022. The E-Ticket, Itinerary Receipts and Tax Invoices
provided by the applicant
indicates she flew from Perth to Melbourne on
11 March 2020, returning on from Brisbane to Perth on 23 March 2020.
These dates are
consistent with the time period she did not work. However, the
ticket from Perth to Melbourne was issued by Virgin Australia on
23 December 2019, prior to the alleged offending. I do not accept the
applicant travelled interstate "to recover psychologically"
from the alleged
offences, given she purchased her air ticket in December 2019.
19 May 2022 the applicant advised in response to the preliminary
determination:
In regards to 'the telehealth sessions' you are suggesting in 2020, I continued
with face to face sessions with patients (when I
felt I could cope mentally on
particular days) up until January 2022 this year. I took a lot of time off
during the incidents in
2020/21/22 not only to attend the police station,
complete paperwork, document evidence and attend the Magistrates Court but in
to experiencing severe insomnia as a result of Mr Ciantar's persistent
harassment which ultimately diminished my livelihood.
As such multiple time
off was required where I could not see patients as per normal for several days
. Regarding restrictions, Psychology is considered an 'essential
service'. I saw patients face to face on certain days (where I could
because the office was large enough to reduce transmission to and from patients
- so hence I continued. Sure, there may
have been a slight drop off initially
due to COVID concerns by patients over an initial two week period, but this
period included
recovering from my mental health breakdown which resulted in
taking considerable time off. I am a very busy Psychologist with increasing
annual income generally so this is a true account of the impact his persistent
behaviour had on me financially. To use COVID as a
reason 'not to consider my
financial losses or experiences' appears very convenient in your attempts to
dismiss this application.
therefore reviewed the applicant's monthly income statements in detail to
determine which days each month she did not work, to
establish the periods of
time subsequent to the alleged offences she was unable to work. The applicant's
income statements show
no income for the following days each
February 2020: 1-2 (weekend); 8-9 (weekend); 15-16 (weekend);
22-23 (weekend); 29 (weekend)
March 2020: 1-2 (long weekend); 7-8 (weekend), 9, 12-23; 28-29
April 2020: 4-5 (weekend), 11-12 (weekend), 13 (Easter Monday Public
holiday), 18-19 (weekend), 25-27 (long weekend)
May 2020: 2-3 (weekend), 9-10 (weekend), 17 (Sunday, the applicant worked on
16/5 – Saturday), 18, 24 (Sunday), 31 (Sunday)
June 2020: 1 (Public holiday), 6-7 (weekend), 10, 13-14 (weekend), 19
(Friday), 21 (Sunday – note applicant worked on Saturday
20/6), 27-28
Other than the period surrounding the State of Emergency in March 2020
I was only able to identify four days subsequent to the alleged
offence on 3
February 2020 the applicant did not work being 9 March 2020,
18 May 2020, 10 June 2020 and 19 June 2020. With
to 18 May 2020, the applicant had worked on Saturday
16 May 2020 and it may be this day was a planned day of leave. I
the applicant provide me with her diary so I could determine what
client appointments had been cancelled but she refused, citing
Whilst I could have insisted she provide this to me under section 19 of the
Act I did not consider the diary to
be vital to the applicant establishing her
claim. The third alleged offence occurred at about 4.47 pm on
18 May 2020. Given the
offence occurred so late in the day I consider
it unlikely the applicant was prevented from working on this day due to the
offence. I have no evidence as to why the applicant did not work on
10 June 2020. Although she did not work on Friday 19
2020, she did work on Saturday 20 June 2020 and this could
be indicative of flexibility in work practices. Based upon the applicant's
business records I do not accept the applicant's submission she was prevented
from seeing patients for "several days at a time"
due to the alleged
have also considered the medical evidence in relation to the applicant's
incapacity to work. She did not attend a medical practitioner
in relation to
her injuries. The report from Ms Dominguez dated 2 October 2021
She has not been able to work regularly since the breaches, finding it difficult
to provide psychological services while she, herself,
is feeling anxious and
depressed. (She is only now trying to return to work and is doing so in a very
paced and staggered manner).
The applicant's financial records
do not demonstrate an inability to work regularly, or that she has returned to
work in a very paced
and staggered manner. She has had limited time off work.
Her earnings by June 2020 had recovered to pre-pandemic and pre-incident
levels. No evidence was provided of ongoing losses after that date. I find the
applicant exaggerated the impact of the alleged
offences on her work capacity
when speaking with Ms Dominguez. I do not accept the applicant's injuries
resulted in any loss of earnings
and make no award in this regard.
Report fees
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that arise in obtaining any
report from a health professional or counsellor
in relation to the injury
suffered by the
applicant incurred the cost of obtaining the medical report from
Ms Dominguez in the amount $2,178. I allow this
Future treatment expenses
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that are likely to be
reasonably incurred for any treatment the applicant
is likely to need as a
direct consequence of the injury suffered by the
report dated 5 August 2021 Ms Dominguez recommended the applicant
have between 10-20 (and possibly more) sessions of Cognitive
behavioural
therapy, including EMDR therapy at a cost of $267 per consultation. This report
was written on the basis the applicant's
condition, including that caused by the
conduct of the alleged offender prior to the offending, was compensable. In her
report dated
2 October 2021, despite acknowledging the applicant's
mental health was compromised prior to the alleged offending, Ms Dominguez
repeated this recommendation. I have difficulty accepting this recommendation
as the applicant had untreated PTSD, dysthymia with
anxious distress and
depressive symptoms prior to the alleged offending. I also note there is no
evidence of the applicant seeking
psychological treatment subsequent to
Ms Dominguez's recommendation being made. However, despite these
observations, I accepted the
applicant suffered an exacerbation of her symptoms
as a consequence of the alleged offences I was satisfied occurred and allowed
$1,500 for future treatment at $150 net (after Medicare contribution has been
deducted from a consultation fee of $267) for 10 consultations,
to be paid in
accordance with section 48 of the Act.
Summary of assessment
assessed the applicant's injury and losses as
Head of damage
Report expenses
Future treatment expenses
make an award in favour of the applicant in the amount of $11,178 of which the
amount of $1,500 is payable for future psychological
treatment pursuant to
section 48(1) of the Act. On 15 December 2020 I made an interim payment in the
amount of $2,178 for payment
to Mindstate Psychology for Ms Dominguez's report
and I deduct that amount from the sum payable to the applicant.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
6 JANUARY 2023
[2016] WADC
(1984) 4 SR (WA) 219
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
, 331 - 332;
[2015] WADC 93
WADC 76[28].
LWP19111700856987.
LWP20050300366933
LWP20051800411933
Transcript of hearing PE RO 4714 of 2019
19/11/19 at page
When writing
to Ms Dominguez I proceeded on the basis that all three incidents for which the
applicant was claiming would be successful
as I had not yet determined to refuse
the claim arising from the first
17(2) of the Act.
Dulieu v White & Sons
[1901] 2 KB
Shorey v PT Limited
[2003] 77 ALJR
(1989) 6 SR (WA)
(Unreported WASC, Library No 920598, 19 November
1992).) (Scott J);
RJE v Bandy
(Unreported
WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974.) 3 (Burt J);
[2011] WADC 10.
(Braddock DCJ);
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC
[12] (Stone
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
(Barwick CJ, Kitto & Menzies JJ);
[2009] WASCA 104
[107] (Newnes JA with whom Pullin
& Miller JJA agreed);
Winiarczyk v
[2011] WASCA 97
[71] (Judgment of the
The Act, s6(2)
(1994) 11 WAR 481
[2010] WADC 6
s6(2)(a)(ii).
The Act, s6(2)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (451 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter