URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A.S CAMPBELL & A.R STENT -v- Jason Michael Carleo [2025] WAIRC 119; (26 February 2025)
AGAINST A DECISION OF THE COMMISSION IN MATTER NUMBER U 16/2024 GIVEN ON 25 JULY
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R COSENTINO
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
COMMISSIONER T B WALKINGTON
FRIDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
WEDNESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2025
A.S CAMPBELL & A.R STENT
JASON MICHAEL CARLEO
ON APPEAL FROM:
Coram : COMMISIONER T KUCERA
[2024] WAIRC 00714
File No : U 16/2024
Industrial law – Unfair
dismissal claim – Commission’s powers under s 27(1)(d) –
Whether Commission has power
to decide application in favour of applicant for
respondent’s default – Requirement to act in accordance with the
substantial
merits of the case – Appeal upheld
Legislation
Federal Court Rules 2011
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971 (WA)
Trade Practices Act 1974
Appeal upheld
Representation:
Mr A Stent (in person)
Mr J Carleo (in person)
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Australian Securities Commission v
[1994] FCA 901
(1994) 130 ALR 717
Cribb v Freyberger
[1919] WN 22
Embleton Motor Co Pty Ltd v St Kilda Beach Taxi School and Staffing Pty
[2014] WASCA 183
Health Services Union of Western Australia v Director General of Health
[2008] WAIRC 00215
(2008) 88 WAIG 543
Jason Michael Carleo v A.S Campbell & A.R
[2024] WAIRC 00714
(2024) 104 WAIG 1798
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
[2023] FCAFC 174
MY Distributors Pty Ltd v Omaq Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 491
(1992) 36 FCR
Permanent Custodians Ltd v Elite Grains Pty Ltd (No 2)
United Voice WA v The Director General, Department of Education
WAIRC 01361
(2014) 95 WAIG 13
Young v Thomas
[1892] 2 Ch 135
Case(s) also referred to:
Warea Pty Ltd v Waterloo Industries Pty Ltd
[1986] FCA 234
Reasons for Decision
THE FULL BENCH
issue the Full Bench must decide in this appeal is whether the Western
Australian Industrial Relations
has power to decide an
application in favour of an applicant by default.
19 July 2024, Commissioner Kucera held a show cause hearing in the
respondent’s, Jason Carleo’s, unfair dismissal claim.
appellants, A.S. Campbell & A. R. Stent, trading as
Mighty Mentors
failed to attend that hearing. The Commissioner proceeded to make orders for
Mighty Mentors to pay Mr Carleo for three weeks’
salary and superannuation
contributions fixed in the total sum of $6,403.86.
published on 25 July 2024:
Jason Michael Carleo v A.S
Campbell & A.R Stent
[2024] WAIRC 00714
(2024) 104 WAIG 1798
Commissioner explained why he made the compensation orders. The reasons commence
with the following at [1]:
For the reasons set out, I have
determined that it is appropriate an order should issue that decides this matter
by default. This
decision is made in circumstances where the respondents failed
to appear before the Commission on two consecutive dates.
Commissioner proceeded to set out the procedural history, outlining that the
application before the Commission was in respect
of unfair dismissal under
Industrial Relations Act
). He noted that Mighty Mentors had
filed a response to the claim in which they strenuously opposed the unfair
dismissal application.
However, Mighty Mentors failed to attend a conciliation
conference and then, after receiving due notice of the 19 July 2024
to show cause why the application should not be decided in the
applicant’s favour, Mighty Mentors failed to appear at that
[23]-[27], the Commissioner states:
relation to the respondents' failure to appear at the show cause hearing,
s 27(1)(d) of the IR Act relevantly provides:
of Commission
(1) Except as otherwise
provided in this Act, the Commission may, in relation to any matter before it
(d) proceed to hear and determine the matter or any part of the matter in
the absence of any party who has been duly summoned to
appear or duly served
with notice of the proceedings;
I have set out in the preceding paragraphs [19] and [20], the respondents were
served with a Notice of Listing for the show cause
hearing. They were also sent
an email reminder. Yet despite this, the respondents did not appear at the show
cause hearing.
circumstances such as these, s 27(1)(d) of the IR Act gives the
Commission the power to decide the matter by default. Accordingly,
therefore determined by default, that the applicant’s dismissal by the
respondents was unfair.
the respondents had wanted me to find otherwise, they should have appeared at
the show cause hearing and made submissions to the
contrary. Instead, the
respondents forfeited this opportunity.
reached the conclusion the applicant's dismissal was unfair, I now turn to
consider the relief sought by the applicant in his
application.
Commissioner then proceeded to determine that reinstatement was impracticable
and to make an order for compensation. In considering
the quantum of
compensation, the Commissioner noted that Mr Carleo had advised during the show
cause hearing, that he was out of
work for a period of four weeks before
obtaining alternative employment. The Commissioner relied upon payslips provided
by Mr Carleo
after the hearing to calculate the amount of $6,403.86,
representing four weeks’ loss of wages, less one week paid in lieu
termination.
Commissioner made orders for Mighty Mentors to pay this sum within 28 days
of the date of the order issuing.
Mighty Mentors and Mr Carleo were self-represented in the proceedings at first
instance, and on this appeal.
Mentors’ three grounds of appeal are as follows:
of the IR Act:
The Commissioner proceeded to
determine the matter by default in reliance on section 27(1)(d) of the IR Act,
asserting that the respondents
had been duly served but failed to appear at the
show cause hearing. However, I submit that this decision was based on erroneous
and unfair consideration of the facts. Specifically, while it was acknowledged
that I arrived five minutes late to the hearing, the
Commissioner prematurely
concluded proceedings without taking into account my presence or the
explanations provided to the court
clerk regarding my delay.
Section 27(1)(d) grants discretion to proceed in the absence of a party;
however, this discretion must be exercised judiciously, taking
into account the
circumstances and ensuring procedural fairness. The Commissioner’s failure
to accommodate my late arrival,
or to adjourn the matter briefly, constitutes an
abuse of this discretionary power.
Inconsistent
Procedural Treatment:
The Commissioner’s handling of this
matter stands in stark contrast to the approach taken in earlier proceedings
involving the
applicant (FILE NO.: U 16 OF 2024). In that instance, the
Commissioner demonstrated a willingness to accommodate the applicant’s
request to reschedule a conciliation conference due to unavailability.
Conversely, in this matter, no similar flexibility was extended
respondents despite comparable circumstances.
For example, in FILE NO.: U 16 OF 2024:
applicant was permitted to request a rescheduling of a conciliation conference
despite initially indicating withdrawal of the
application.
Commissioner actively sought clarification and facilitated a fresh listing to
accommodate the applicant’s circumstances,
even engaging with both parties
via email to ensure procedural fairness.
These actions demonstrate a clear inconsistency in the
Commissioner’s application of procedural standards, leading to a
of bias and a lack of impartiality in this matter.
to Consider Evidentiary Facts:
The Commissioner’s decision
to proceed by default and rule against the respondents failed to adequately
consider the factual
evidence supporting the respondents’ case. The
Commissioner’s remarks, as outlined in the decision, suggest that the
judgment was based solely on the respondents’ absence, rather than a
substantive assessment of the merits of the case.
understand Ground 1 is in essence that the Commissioner lacked power to decide
the application by default. We understand Ground
3 is in essence that the
Commissioner erred by failing to consider the merits of the case. These grounds
are closely connected.
response to these grounds, Mr Carleo:
the assertion that Mr Stent was five minutes late to the show cause hearing. Mr
Carleo says Mr Stent was 15 minutes late
and offered no excuse other than having
difficulty finding parking.
Mighty Mentors have demonstrated a pattern of disrespecting the
Commission’s procedures, wasting the Commission’s
time and delaying
his own attempts at justice by failing to appear at hearings and conferences
Mentors effectively brought the situation upon themselves by failing to inform
the Commission in advance of their difficulties
in attending the hearing.
purpose of the show cause hearing was for Mighty Mentors to demonstrate why the
Commissioner should not decide in Mr Carleo’s
favour and their failure to
do so meant that the Commissioner was correct to proceed with the decision in
Mighty Mentor’s absence,
a possibility which Mighty Mentors were
repeatedly warned of in documentation provided concerning the hearing.
the reasons that follow, we agree with Mighty Mentors’
Grounds 1 and 3 and would uphold the appeal. It is therefore
unnecessary
for us to consider Ground 2.
is no doubt that s 27(1)(d) of the IR Act enables the Commission to proceed
to hear and determine a matter in the absence of
any party who has been duly
served with notice of the proceedings. The section
27. Powers of Commission
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Commission may, in relation
to any matter before it —
(d) proceed to hear and determine the matter or any part of the matter in the
absence of any party who has been duly summoned to appear
or duly served with
notice of the proceedings;
this contemplates is the practice common to tribunals that if a party fails
without reasonable cause to appear at an appointed
time and place, then, subject
to proof of service, the tribunal may proceed ex parte: Forbes JRS,
Justice in Tribunals
2024), [12.10].
Proceeding ex parte simply means that the matter may proceed without the absent
party being heard, on the basis that
they were given the opportunity to be
heard, but had foregone it.
Section 27(1)(d)
does not, in its clear terms, empower the Commission to decide a matter by
courts in Australia have rules which expressly deal with the consequences of a
default in giving notice of an intention to defend,
or default in pleadings.
These kinds of default judgments are interlocutory in nature and courts having
the power to order default
judgment also are empowered to set aside default
judgments for irregularity or other reasons:
Halsbury’s Laws of
[325]-[6925].
a court’s rules empower it to give judgment in default, such a power is
based on the concept that that by its failure,
the defendant is taken to admit
all of the allegations in the writ:
Cribb v Freyberger
[1919] WN 22.
instance, in
Embleton Motor Co Pty Ltd v St Kilda Beach Taxi School and
Staffing Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 183
, Newnes JA (with whom Murphy JA and
Edelman J agreed) referred at [43] to the corresponding
Rules of the Supreme
(WA) for judgment in default of a defence, and stated
...It is the case that where judgment is entered in default
of defence, a defendant is deemed to have admitted the allegations of
contained in the statement of claim in the action. That is because O 20 r 14(1)
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) provides that an allegation
of fact made by a party in a pleading is deemed to be admitted by the other
party unless it is traversed
by that party in its pleading or a joinder of issue
under r 15 operates as a denial of it. Where a defendant fails to file a
the effect of O 20 r 14 is to relieve the plaintiff of the obligation
to prove the facts pleaded in the statement of claim in order
to obtain such
relief in that action as the plaintiff may be entitled to on those facts....
courts may also have an inherent power to dispose of matters without a trial:
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
, [325]-[6920].
the Commission is a creature of statute. It has no inherent powers. Its powers
must be sourced in the legislation creating
it. Its powers, jurisdictions or
authorities are only those authorised by the IR Act:
United Voice WA v The
Director General, Department of Education
[2014] WAIRC 01361
s 27(1)(a) gives the Commission power to dismiss a matter or any part of it
in the circumstances stipulated in that section,
nothing in the IR Act expressly
confers a power to decide an application in an applicant’s favour by
the contrary, s 26(1)(a) obliges the Commission to act ‘according to
equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to
technicalities or legal forms.’ This is, in effect, an obligation to act
judicially, to apply the
law, to afford natural justice to all parties, and not
act arbitrarily:
Health Services Union of Western Australia v Director
General of Health
[2008] WAIRC 215
(2008) 88 WAIG
) at [164]. The extent to which the requirement to so
act will impact on the way the Commission exercises its jurisdiction will vary
according to the particular function, jurisdiction or power being exercised:
at [171]. But the merits of a case must be taken into
account when exercising any discretion under the IR Act:
Accordingly,
Ground 1 of the Appeal should be upheld.
As for Ground 3, it follows, from our reasons for upholding Ground 1, that
we consider that the Commissioner erred by failing to
consider the application
on its merits. Some further elaboration is warranted.
Consideration
of the merits requires that the Commission, at a minimum, be satisfied that it
has jurisdiction and the facts material
to the application have been proven
Australian Securities Commission v Macleod
[1994] FCA 901
130 ALR 717
ASC v Macleod
). In the absence of a defence, or
the absence of an appearance at a hearing, the consequences may include that
there will be no contradictory
case advanced by a respondent, no positive
defences will be available, and proof at final hearing may be more straight
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
[2023] FCAFC
(2023) 416 ALR 24
per Wheelahan J at [222].
there is a statutory provision which deems facts to be taken to be admitted by a
party’s default, proof of the claim may
be very straight forward. But
there must still be an evidentiary basis for the determination.
application of this approach is demonstrated in
MY Distributors Pty Ltd v Omaq Pty
[1992] FCA 491
(1992) 36 FCR 578.
The claim before the Court was for damages for misleading conduct under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). The respondents to the claim
did not file any defence within the time ordered. The claim was set down for
hearing, which one
of the two respondents failed to attend. The trial proceeded
with evidence being led by the applicant, and no evidence being called
by the respondents. Judgment was ultimately given, with reasons, dismissing the
applicant appealed on grounds that included that the allegations in the Amended
Statement of Claim should have been deemed under
Order 11 r 13 of the
Federal Court
(Cth) to have been admitted and judgment entered for
the applicant accordingly. Sweeney J dismissed this ground, saying at [10]-[11]:
The grounds of appeal based upon Order 11 Rule 13 were, in my
opinion, misconceived. That rule is part of Order 11 which deals with
It has the effect that where a defence has been filed and served, an allegation
of fact made in the Statement of Claim
which is not traversed in the defence is
deemed to be admitted.
Rule 13 has no application in a case such as the present where no defence has
been filed or served. The position was that on and after
22 June 1991, the
respondents had failed to comply with an order of the court directing them to
take a step in the proceeding and
the applicant was entitled under Order 10,
Rule 7, to move the court on notice for judgment or an order against the
respondents.
If it had done so, it would have been obliged to support its motion
"by affidavit setting forth the facts relied upon" (see Order
19 Rule 1(2)). The
facts would no doubt have included those relied upon to show the existence of
the court's jurisdiction.
the same case, Gray J observed at [12]:
I have considerable doubt
whether O 11 r 13(1) can have the same effect as the equivalent provision in
other rules of court. There
is no equivalent in O 10 r 7, or in O 11 r 23, to
the words "such judgment shall be given as, upon the writ or statement of claim,
the court or a Judge shall consider the plaintiff to be entitled to". The
procedures in this court differ from those in courts whose
rules were based on
the English rules of court. There are no provisions in this court for the
automatic entry of judgment in default
of appearance. Instead, O 4 r 5 of the
Federal Court Rules
requires an application to bear a note that a respondent
will be liable to suffer judgment or an order against him if there is no
attendance on his behalf on the return date. The form of application, being Form
5 in the first schedule to the Rules, reflects this
requirement. There is no
provision for the automatic entry of judgment in default of delivery of a
defence. Pleadings are filed as
well as served. Order 10 of the Rules provides
for directions hearings. The practice of the court is that the interlocutory
of proceedings are conducted according to directions given at one or more
directions hearings. If an occasion arises for a party
to move for judgment
under O 10 r 7, or O 11 r 23, O 19 rr 1 and 2 require that the motion be by
notice and be supported by an affidavit,
setting forth the facts relied upon.
This court is a court of limited jurisdiction. No judgment can be given unless
the court is
satisfied that it has jurisdiction. At the very least, an affidavit
supporting a motion for judgment, where no defence has been filed
and served,
would need to provide evidence on which the court could be so satisfied. I am
inclined to the view that affidavit evidence
proving the facts necessary to
entitle the party moving the court to judgment would also be necessary.
reasoning was applied by Drummond J in
ASC v Macleod
Honour compared the Federal Court’s rules dealing with default in
complying with procedural requirements to the post-Judicature
Act rules of the
English High Court, noting that under such rules the plaintiff was not required
to produce evidence in support of
allegations in a statement of claim, on the
basis that the defendant’s failure to plead amounted to an admission of
in the statement of claim. In other words, evidence was required, but
it was to be found, and only found in, the defendant’s
admission of the
facts in the statement of claim constituted by the failure to plead to them. His
Honour cited Bowen LJ in
Young v Thomas
[1892] 2 Ch 135.
the absence of a Federal Court rule which deemed the facts in a statement of
claim to be admitted in the event of default, Drummond
J concluded that an
applicant would not be entitled to judgment in proceedings without putting
sufficient evidence before the Court
to make out each element in each cause of
action sued upon at 721-722:
[I]t is not possible to infer in the
face of the denials in the defence that the respondents' conduct is such as to
amount to admissions
of the untried facts alleged against them. Most of the
allegations in the applicant's statement of claim thus have no status other
that, viz, as mere allegations. Of course, in so far as some of these
allegations are admitted in the respondents' pleading,
then they constitute
evidence upon which the applicant can rely in support of the present
application....
...Where final judgment is sought following default by the defendant in
compliance with a direction or some other procedural step,
there being no
specific rule that enables the applicant to enter up judgment without coming
before the Court, the applicant must
prove his entitlement to the judgment
claimed by evidence sufficient to prove, among other things, the facts upon
which his cause
of action is based. As I have said, the original English rule
dealing with the obtaining of judgment in default of defence proceeded
assumption that evidence was required to prove the plaintiff's entitlement to
the judgment, but that this requirement was
satisfied by the admission by the
defendant of the facts alleged in the statement of claim constituted by his
failure to plead to
In my opinion, where final judgment is sought against a respondent pursuant
to O 10, r 7(1)(b) on the ground that he is in default
in complying with
directions given under the order, the applicant must support its motion for
judgment with material in legally admissible
form sufficient to prove not only
that the Court has jurisdiction in the matter and that the circumstances are
such as to justify
the grant of this discretionary remedy, but also all the
facts necessary to prove its entitlement to the relief claimed under the
judgment applied for. An application for "judgment", rather than for "an order",
pursuant to O 10, r 7(1)(b) is an application for
final rather than
interlocutory relief. It is therefore a proceeding which constitutes a "trial"
within the meaning of that term
in O 1, r 4. It follows that all facts must be
proved by direct, as opposed to hearsay, evidence, since O 33, r 2 has no
application
to such a proceeding. See
Warea Pty Ltd v Waterloo Industries
[1986] FCA 234
(1986) 66 ALR 537
is apparent from the transcript of the proceedings at first instance, and the
Reasons, that the Commissioner did not seek to be
satisfied that Mr Carleo was
entitled to relief by reference to admissible proof of any facts. The relief
ordered was granted simply
on the basis of Mighty Mentors’ default, and
therefore involved no underlying determination of the substantive merits:
Permanent Custodians Ltd v Elite Grains Pty Ltd (No 2)
is upheld. The order dated 25 July 2024 should be quashed.
the Commissioner’s decision was made without hearing any evidence in
relation to the circumstances leading to the termination,
the Full Bench is
obviously unable to make its own decision on the merits of Mr Carleo’s
unfair dismissal application. Mr Carleo’s
unfair dismissal application
must be remitted to the Commission for determination.
will hear from the parties as to whether the matter should be remitted to the
Commission differently constituted.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter