URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HUYNH -v- DANG [No 2] [2025] WADC 75 (30 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
HUYNH -v- DANG [No 2] [2025] WADC 75
CURWOOD DCJ
21 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
PUBLISHED :
30 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 1624 of 2022
RICHARD LE MINH HUYNH
THI TUYET DANG
Judgment and orders - Setting aside judgment
entered after trial in absence of defendant - Order 34 r 3
Rules of Supreme
(WA) - Delay - Whether bona fide defence on merits
Legislation:
Application to set aside judgment dismissed
Representation:
Ms H Hofmann
Solicitors:
Legal Care Australia
Tan and Tan Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Bevan v Bevan
[2016] WASC 7
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
Huynh v Dang
[2025] WADC 4
Northey v Bega Valley Shire Council
[2012] NSWCA 28
Pham v Gall
[2020] NSWCA 116
Vacuum Oil Co Pty Ltd v Stockdale
[1942] NSWStRp 31
(1942) 42 SR (NSW) 239
Zhengzhou Lvdu Real Estate Group Co Ltd v Shu (No 2)
[2025] NSWSC 405
[This judgment was
delivered extemporaneously on 21 October 2025 and has been edited from the
transcript.]
10 and 11 February 2025 I heard a trial of the plaintiff's claim against
the defendant. On 18 February 2025 I ordered that judgment
be entered for
the plaintiff against the defendant for the sum of $111,134 plus interest and
costs and delivered my reasons for
defendant did not attend the trial. In my earlier Reasons, I detailed why
I decided that the trial should proceed notwithstanding
the defendant's failure
to appear at the
These reasons
should be read with my earlier Reasons delivered on 18 February 2025.
9 June 2025 the defendant filed a chamber summons seeking orders that:
(a) the time within which the application for an order under
O 34 r 3 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
could have been brought should be extended to 9 June 2025 pursuant to
O 3 r 5 of the RSC; and
(b) the judgment entered on 18 February 2025 be set aside pursuant to
O 34 r 3 of the RSC.
chamber summons was programmed to a hearing before me. It is not clear to me
why it has taken approximately four months from
when the application was filed
to be ready for a hearing.
support of the application the defendant relies upon:
affidavit which she swore on 30 May 2025; and
(b) an affidavit of her solicitor, Mr Tyzton Jun Lai Tan, such affidavit
having been sworn on 1 October 2025.
jurat to the defendant's affidavit states that the affidavit was sworn through
the interpretation of Trang Vo, who was first
sworn and then truly and
faithfully interpreted the contents of the affidavit to the deponent in
Vietnamese and that the deponent
appeared to understand the affidavit.
her affidavit the defendant deposes:
2022 and 2023 she contracted COVID-19 several
that time' she had been diagnosed by a doctor in Vietnam with hypertension,
dyslipidaemia and myocardium.
was unable to attend the trial in Perth because she was in hospital in Vietnam
from 2 February 2025 to 22 February
hospitalisation in February 2025 was the only time she had to stay in hospital
for a prolonged period since having been diagnosed
with her medical conditions.
August 2024 and February 2025, she resided 'primarily' in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam but whenever her condition was 'manageable'
she would return to Perth to
visit her children, one of whom is her daughter, Ms
respect to the first adjournment of the trial in November 2024 she felt unwell
and saw a doctor in Vietnam who advised her not
to travel. She asked her
daughter, Ms Ha, to email the plaintiff's solicitors requesting an adjournment
of the trial and, when that
adjournment was not agreed to, on 18 November,
she asked her daughter to file a letter in the District Court. As an
aside, this
letter is dealt with in my earlier Reasons at [28].
18 November 2024 she received a letter from the District Court
Registry enclosing a copy of orders made by the court vacating the
dates and re-listing the matter for trial commencing on 10 February 2025.
was going to represent herself at the trial and, in doing so, '
was going to
explain to the court my side of the story
'. She had planned to come back to
Perth and would have stayed with her daughter, Ms Ha, but she did not buy
plane tickets, intending
to do so a few days before the
late January she said that she was bedridden in her home in Ho Chi Minh City, on
2 February 2025 was hospitalised and on or around
5 February 2025 she
said she was advised by a doctor to not travel to
5 February 2025 she asked Ms Ha to send an email to the plaintiff's
solicitors requesting an adjournment which occurred on 6 February
an aside, I note that the affidavit does not deal with the correspondence
between the court and Ms Ha exchanged on 4 February
further letter was submitted to the court on her behalf on 8 February 2025
(which is set out in full in my earlier Reasons at [37]).
next correspondence she received was an email which attached the final orders
for judgment and the earelir Reasons delivered on
18 February 2025.
22 February 2025 she was discharged from hospital.
to the affidavit is a translation of a hospital discharge certificate,
translated from Vietnamese, such translation having
been procured on
15 March 2025. The discharge certificate refers to the defendant having
been admitted to hospital at 10.48 am on
2 February 2025, discharged
at 4.00 pm on 22 February 2025. The certificate reads in part and the
preliminary diagnosis
Preliminary diagnosis: Severe autonomic nervous disorder (Dysautonomia),
unstable blood pressure, profuse sweating, irregular heartbeat,
respiratory
failure and repeated fainting.
Treatment: Hospitalisation for monitoring and treatment.
Note: Re-examination at the hospital on 22/03/2025 or when the patient has
abnormal symptoms such as unstable blood pressure, excessive
dizziness, shortness of breath, must be re-examined immediately.
certificate is sealed and signed by two doctors.
defendant has not sought to obtain a report from any doctor in Vietnam who
treated her at the hospital nor to confirm that it
was not possible for her to
travel from Vietnam to Perth for medical reasons.
the commencement of the hearing before me, the plaintiff, by counsel,
sought leave to cross-examine the defendant on the terms
of her affidavit sworn
30 May 2025.
defendant was not present in court, and assuming I granted leave to the
plaintiff to cross-examine the defendant that would have
resulted in an
adjournment and a further delay of this matter. I refused the application for
leave to cross-examine the defendant,
primarily on the basis that there would be
further delay and expense, an interpreter would be required, and that the
information
before the court is that the costs of this matter for the plaintiff
are already approaching the amount in issue.
plaintiff, as I will turn to, also submitted that no significant weight should
be placed upon the discharge summary attached
to the affidavit. The plaintiff
made some observations relating to these documents and raised doubts as to their
authenticity, such
that little or no weight should be attached to them.
an aside, the plaintiff also sought to rely upon an affidavit of the plaintiff
which had not previously been filed or served.
That affidavit seemed to
suggest, based upon Facebook posts, that the defendant was in Perth during
January 2025 and until shortly
before the trial, if not during the trial.
that affidavit had not been filed or served and counsel for the defendant had
already completed her submissions in support
of the application before the
affidavit was referred to, I refused the plaintiff leave to rely upon the
reasons I gave for refusing leave to rely upon the affidavit were similar to the
reasons for which I refused the plaintiff leave
to cross-examine the defendant
on her affidavit. Namely, allowing the plaintiff to rely on a new affidavit
would further delay the
matter and an adjournment would necessarily be required
to allow the defendant's legal representatives to take instructions and
potentially
put on further affidavit evidence. Further, on the face of the
matter there did not seem to be any adequate explanation for the
late delivery
of the material given that this application has been on foot since 9 June 2025.
to the defendant's affidavit, no reference was made in any of the letters from
the defendant's daughter sent in February
2025 to the court or the plaintiff's
lawyers that the defendant was in hospital.
I have outlined in my earlier Reasons the defendant's daughter sent letters to
the court. There was nothing within those letters
which would lead to an
inference that the defendant was in hospital or unable to travel to Perth.
Rather, the email sent on 4 February
by Ms Ha referred to her mother's
flight back to Perth would be on 27 February 2025 and seeking a
rescheduling of the trial date
the court received that communication from Ms Ha, the listings coordinator
informed the defendant's daughter that if the defendant
sought to change the
trial date, she would have to bring an application to adjourn the trial and to
seek legal advice.
defendant refers to a letter which she prepared on 8 February 2025 and
which was accompanied by a typed translation by Ms Ha
which I have set out
in full in my earlier Reasons at [37]. The letter concluded that the defendant
sought the court to transfer
the case to Vietnam and to allow her time to
'negotiate and resolve this case in Vietnam'. The letter did say that she
was in poor
health and unable to appear in court but did not make it initially
clear that she was in hospital.
the trial was heard and after judgment, the defendant was emailed the orders and
earlier Reasons on 18 February 2025 and on
the same day Ms Ha
responded to the communication by an email to my associate which said in
We want to appeal the court's decision on this case. How should we fill out the
form and which department we need to seek advice
I have noted in [14] the defendant was represented by Tan and Tan Lawyers, who
entered an appearance on her behalf on 6 May 2022
and remained on the
record as her solicitors until 24 June 2024 when the defendant filed a
notice of intention to act in person.
Tan and Tan filed a notice of appointment
for the defendant on 19 March 2025 whereby that firm got on the record
again and has been
on the record since that time. In my view, there is no
satisfactory explanation for the delay in making and why it took until June
for the present application to be filed.
11 March 2025 the defendant's solicitors, Tan and Tan filed a notice
of appeal with respect to this court's judgment and sent
a copy of that to the
court and also to the plaintiff's
21 May 2025 the plaintiff filed in the District Court a request in the form
of a Form 6 document under the
Civil Judgments Enforcement Act 2004
seeking the issue of a property (seizure and sale) order. Subsequently, on
13 June 2025 the District Court issued a Form 25
property (seizure and
sale) order directed to the Sheriff of Western Australia that he was authorised
and commanded by the order
to seize and sell the saleable interest of the
defendant in a property in Morley, Western Australia.
note that the notice of appeal that was filed on 10 March 2025 was within
the time limit prescribed by the rules of procedure that
apply in the Court of
Appeal. It is not clear (and no explanation is given as to) why, the current
application was not filed more
promptly, as it should have been made within 14
days of trial, and waited until 9 June 2025.
defendant has not in her affidavit set out her position on the merits of the
case by reference to my earlier Reasons. The submissions
filed by counsel
simply referred to an application for summary judgment being dismissed on
27 October 2023. This fact is relied
upon to support the submission that
the defendant accordingly has an arguable case on the merits which was
established by the dismissal
of the summary judgment application by Deputy
Registrar Harman in October
which as an
aside, upon my search of the court record I could not find any reasons for
Legal principles
application relies upon O 34 r 3 RSC which provides:
Any judgment, order, or verdict obtained where one party does not appear at the
trial may be set aside by the Court upon such terms
as the Court thinks just
upon application made within 14 days after the trial.
this respect the application is now significantly out of time. Any application
should have been made by no later than 4 March
may be noted, the rule confers an unfettered, though judicial, discretion.
Acting Master Gething (as his Honour then was) identified five specific factors
which the court should consider in the exercise of
its discretion,
The reason why
the party did not attend.
Any delays in
bringing the application.
Whether some
useful purpose would be served by setting aside the judgment, requiring an
analysis of the merits of the case.
The injustice to
the applicant if the judgment is not set aside.
The injustice to
the respondent if the judgment is set aside, including whether orders can be
made to minimise the possibility of
any such injustice.
similar rule exists in New South Wales. It has been noted that the questions
posed by Jordan CJ in
Vacuum Oil v
appropriate and that for an application to set aside a
judgment entered for a
failure to attend a trial, it is necessary to consider:
(a) whether
any useful purpose would be served by setting aside the judgment; and
(b) how it came about that the applicant became bound by a judgment
has been said by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in the case of
Pham v Gall
that the discretion to set aside the judgment is encapsulated by the question
whether there was 'a real likelihood that it would
be unjust to the defendant to
allow the judgment to
the party in default needs to explain the reason for the default and the nature
of the proposed defence and that those
matters inform the exercise of the
discretion.
Further, the discretion is also guided by consideration of the importance of
finality of litigation, such that 'controversies, once
resolved, are not
reopened except in a few, narrowly defined,
circumstances'
citing the High Court case in
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal
How it came about that the defendant became bound by a judgment regularly
this case the defendant became bound by a judgment because she failed to attend
trial. She had notice of the trial. She was
in Vietnam. Although she seems to
have been in hospital when the trial took place, no steps were taken to notify
the court, or the
plaintiff's solicitors of that fact. Nor did the defendant
take any steps to put on proper evidence that could have allowed the
she was in hospital to have been considered at the time that the trial was
the only criteria was whether there was a proper explanation as to how the
applicant became bound by a regularly entered judgment,
the facts put forward by
the defendant may, on their own, be sufficient. However, as I will turn to,
there is no proper description
of a reasonably arguable
Lack of evidence of a reasonably arguable defence
this respect the plaintiff's case at trial was as follows and I have derived
this description from my earlier Reasons at [6]:
19 April 2019 the plaintiff and the defendant entered into an oral agreement for
the exchange of currency (April agreement).
were express terms of the April agreement to the effect that:
plaintiff would deposit to the defendant's nominated bank account in Vietnam the
amount of 3.5 billion VND.
defendant, within two days of receiving the payment would repay to the plaintiff
in Australia the equivalent value of 3.5 billion
VND in AUD.
exchange rate applicable for the deposit was 1 AUD = 16,500 VND,
accordingly a sum of $212,121.
to the agreement the plaintiff caused 3.5 billion VND to be
transferred to the defendant's nominated bank account in Vietnam.
or about 20 May 2019 the parties entered into a further oral agreement for the
exchange of currency (May agreement). Express terms
of the May agreement
plaintiff would deposit to the defendant's nominated bank account in Vietnam
3 billion VND.
defendant would, within two days of receiving the payment of
3 billion VND, pay the plaintiff the equivalent value of that sum
exchange rate applicable for the deposit was
1 AUD = 16,180 VND, accordingly a sum of
to the agreement on 20 May 2019 the plaintiff caused 3 billion VND to
be transferred to the defendant's nominated account
in Vietnam.
reduction of the amounts she was obliged to pay the defendant, she has paid the
plaintiff $286,401.
breach of the May agreement the defendant has failed to pay the plaintiff
$111,134 being the balance owing under that agreement.
plaintiff's evidence was given on oath as was the evidence from a second witness
being Thi My Diem Ho (
accepted the evidence given by the plaintiff of the payments made by the
plaintiff to the defendant and repayments made by the
defendant to the
to the defendant's position, she swore an affidavit in opposition to an
application for summary judgment on 8 September
2023. In that affidavit,
she deposed as follows:
denied making any agreement with the plaintiff to exchange currency with
seemingly accepted that the plaintiff transferred 3.5 billion VND on
19 April 2019 and 3 billion VND on 20 May 2019 but she
these 'transactions ... did not belong to the plaintiff and was not for the
purposes of the purported currency exchange'.
payments were for business purposes in Vietnam unrelated to these proceedings
and she could not recall what those transactions
were for as she runs a busy
garment import and export business and those transactions 'could relate to any
payments at the
not know Ms Ho and is unsure of any relationship between Ms Ho and the
defendant then deposed 'The Plaintiff has no privity of contract and has brought
a claim under the incorrect jurisdiction in relation
to Vietnamese
transactions'.
She said that the payments she made were not repayments of the loan, but were
moneys that she had loaned the plaintiff for unrelated
matters between
April 2019 and February 2021.
matters that were deposed to by the defendant in her summary judgment
application were later distilled into an amended defence
filed on her behalf by
Tan and Tan Lawyers. In my earlier Reasons at [8] I summarised the amended
defence. I summarised the amended
defence because it informed the issues which
arose on the pleadings which I also described in [9] of my earlier Reasons. I
in my earlier Reasons that in substance, by the amended defence the
(a) pleads there was never an agreement between the
plaintiff and the defendant to exchange currency at any
(b) admits that 6.5 billion VND was transferred to her bank account in
Vietnam by two instalments in April and May 2019 but denies
that 'that sum of
money originated from or belonged to the plaintiff';
(c) pleads the amount 6.5 billion VND was transferred to her by a third
party, Ms Ho for a separate business transaction;
(d) admits paying the plaintiff $286,401, but claims it was for
a separate loan given in March 2019, for which the plaintiff was repaid
(e) pleads that Vietnam has exclusive jurisdiction over the dispute.
my earlier Reasons I identified the issues which arose on the pleadings as
there any agreement between the parties for the April and May remittances?
so, what were the terms of that agreement (or agreements)?
deposited the sum of 6.5 billion VND into the defendant's bank account? If
it was Ms Ho, did she act as the plaintiff's agent
in making the deposit?
the payments totalling $286,401 made by the defendant to the plaintiff made to
reduce the amount owing under a loan agreement
as claimed by the plaintiff, or
were they intended for another purpose or in accordance with a different
arrangement between the
plaintiff and the defendant?
my earlier Reasons, I noted the documentary evidence
included payment orders from a bank in Vietnam, BIDV, which evidenced the
payments made to the bank account of the defendant,
SMS messages between the
plaintiff and the defendant and between the plaintiff and Ms Ha. I also
outlined the oral evidence given
by the plaintiff and Ms Ho.
this respect, the plaintiff gave evidence of the discussions he had with the
defendant relating to the currency swap and the payment
terms as to the currency
swap which was that the agreement was for an immediate exchange of money. I
also referred to Ms Ho's evidence
which I summarised that in my earlier
Reasons at [60], specifically that for each payment to the defendant, the
plaintiff had asked
her to transfer the sums 3.5 billion VND and
3 billion VND to the defendant, that she went to a branch of BIDV, and
arranged the
transfer of the money to the bank account of the defendant that the
plaintiff had provided to her. The bank issued a payment order
confirming and
evidencing each transaction. Further the plaintiff was required to pay to Ms Ho
the money she paid to the defendant's
Vietnamese bank
plaintiff's claim at trial was that he had advanced a total amount of VND which
was valued at approximately $397,500 and that
the defendant had repaid to him
$286,401 leaving a balance of $111,134. It was not in issue, by virtue of the
amended defence, that
the defendant had paid the plaintiff $286,401. The
issue was whether the payment made by the defendant to the plaintiff of that
amount related to another transaction, such that the payments should not be
construed as repayments of a sum of $397,500 she owed
the plaintiff for the
currency swap (which was the plaintiff's case). The other transaction was,
according to the defendant, a loan
she made to the plaintiff which the plaintiff
repaid in full.
my earlier Reasons, I made express findings that there was no other relevant
business or commercial arrangement between the plaintiff
and the defendant other
than the currency swap which was in issue on the plaintiff's claim. In this
respect, the plaintiff gave
oral evidence of those matters and, as I have said
in my earlier Reasons at [74.8], a fair reading of the SMS messages
between the parties did not indicate any other business arrangement
for transactions between the plaintiff and the defendant from
which it could be
inferred that the plaintiff related to another purpose.
this respect, the voluminous SMS messages between the plaintiff, the defendant
and the plaintiff and the defendant's daughter
corroborated the sum of money
paid by the defendant to the plaintiff and what the purpose of those
payments were, namely it was a
repayment of a loan. Further, as I set out
at [73] of my earlier Reasons there were various acknowledgments by the
defendant in
SMS messages of her indebtedness to the plaintiff. I set out three
examples of that in my earlier Reasons at [73] before making
the factual
findings at [74] which led me to the conclusion that the plaintiff's claim had
been made out.
also dealt with in the final part of my earlier Reasons, the defendant's
pleaded position that Vietnam had exclusive jurisdiction.
this application, the defendant has not engaged with the factual findings I made
in my earlier Reasons. She has not sought to
provide any elaboration (or
documentary evidence) of the loan she says she made to the plaintiff which the
plaintiff repaid in full.
One would have expected evidence in the form of the
defendant's own bank statements, which, on her version of events of there being
a loan, would have proved the money flowing from her bank account to the
plaintiff and being repaid by the plaintiff to her. Nor
has she sought to
explain the SMS messages referred to in my earlier Reasons and put on evidence
which would cast doubt on the inferences
I have drawn from the messages to reach
the findings I made in my earlier Reasons.
my opinion, the defendant cannot for the purposes of this application rely upon
a summary judgment application and affidavit that
took place some years ago and
an affidavit which contained assertions of what the payments she made was for
and to deny the advances
of money as being for other unstated business purposes.
light of the earlier Reasons I delivered for the judgment being entered against
the defendant, it was, in my view, incumbent upon
the defendant to deal with the
evidence that was led at trial including the contemporaneous SMS messages
and then put before the
court her own evidence of why those SMS messages should
not be interpreted the way in which I interpreted them in the earlier Reasons.
observations relate to putting on documentary evidence of the other
business transaction which the plaintiff had denied,
whereby she had made a loan
to the plaintiff for the amounts which matched the payments which the plaintiff
has said were in reduction
of the amount owing for the currency swap.
simply, without swearing an affidavit condescending to particulars of what her
defence would be if the judgment were set aside,
leads me to a conclusion that
the defendant has no reasonable or arguable defence to the plaintiff's claim.
significant court time already engaged in this case being two days of hearing
which has resulted in the entry of a judgment with
written reasons
outlining the nature of the plaintiff's case, the evidence to support his claims
and why his claims should be accepted.
lack of evidence from the defendant of her defence to the plaintiff's claim
which is the subject of the judgment entered on 18
February 2025, including why
the facts and evidence put forward by the plaintiff should not be accepted (or
should even be doubted).
fact that eight months has now passed since the judgment was entered and during
which time the defendant has not presented a defence
to the claim, or an
alternative version of the events propounded by the plaintiff.
delays in bringing this application from the time when Tan and Tan was
briefed in March 2025, notwithstanding that an appeal was
paramount objective of litigation is the just resolution of disputes in a timely
and efficient manner and the importance of finality
of litigation, such
that 'controversies, once resolved, are not reopened except in a few, narrowly
defined, circumstances'.
expense incurred by the plaintiff to obtain the judgment and commence execution
combined with the obvious costs to reconduct a
trial in circumstances where the
defendant has not sought to engage with the factual findings that I set out
based on the plaintiff's
evidence at trial.
conclude that no useful purpose would be served by setting aside the judgment.
The end result of the hearing on 10 and 11 February
2025 cannot be doubted
on the materials before me. In all of the circumstances, it is not unjust to
the defendant to allow the judgment
to stand. For these reasons, I dismiss the
defendant's chamber summons.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
Associate to His Honour Judge Curwood
28 OCTOBER 2025
[2025] WADC 4
earlier Reasons [10] - [43]
Defendant's affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, par
Defendant's
affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, par
Defendant's
affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, pars 9 -
Defendant's
affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, pars 19 -
Defendant's
affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, pars 22 -
See earlier
[34] - [36].
Defendant's affidavit sworn 30 May 2025, page
See earlier
Reasons [35].
See earlier Reasons
Affidavit of Hoang Huy Tran sworn 1 October 2025, page
Defendant's
submissions filed 8 October 2025, par
Bevan v Bevan
[2016] WASC
Vacuum Oil Co Pty Ltd v Stockdale
[1942] NSWStRp 31
(1942) 42 SR (NSW)
Northey v Bega Valley Shire Council
[2012] NSWCA 28
Pham v Gall
[2020] NSWCA 116
[55], [108],
Pham v Gall
[43], [55] - [56],
Pham v Gall
Zhengzhou Lvdu Real Estate Group Co Ltd v Shu
[2025] NSWSC 405
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
earlier Reasons [46] -
Defendant's summary judgment affidavit, par
Defendant's summary judgment affidavit, pars 21 -
Defendant's summary judgment affidavit, par
Defendant's summary judgment affidavit, par
defence, par 1.
defence, par
See earlier
Reasons [47].
See earlier Reasons [48] - [53].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter