URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHOWDHURY -v- ISS SECURITY PTY LTD [2025] WADC 65 (26 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
CHOWDHURY -v- ISS SECURITY PTY LTD
[2025] WADC 65
CURWOOD DCJ
3, 18 SEPTEMBER 2024, 9 APRIL 2025, WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
23 APRIL & 30 APRIL 2025
DELIVERED :
26 SEPTEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
APP 35 of 2024
MOINUL CHOWDHURY
ISS SECURITY PTY LTD
WORKERS COMPENSATION ARBITRATION SERVICE
ARBITRATOR WALLBRIDGE
File Number :
Appeal - Workers' compensation - Whether
appellant suffered an 'injury' within the meaning of
Compensation and Injury Management Act 1981
(WA) - Expert evidence -
Credibility findings made by arbitrator - Acceptance of expert evidence -
Whether arbitrator made error
of law in failing to find that the appellant's
psychiatric disease was caused by his employment -
Legislation:
Workers' Compensation Act 1987
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act 1981
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act 2023
Leave to appeal granted on ground 2
appeal refused on grounds 1, 3 - 14
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Mr C C Rimmer
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Anderson v Mercy Hospital Mount Lawley
[2020] WASCA 42
Atanasoska v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 17
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond (1990) 170 CLR 321
Beer v Duracraft Pty Ltd
[2004] WASCA 192
BHP Billiton Iron Ore Pty Ltd v Brady
[2008] WASCA 250
Department of Education v Azmitia
[2014] WADC 85
Federal Broom Co Pty Ltd v Semlitch
[1964] HCA 34
(1962) 110 CLR 626
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 32
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Kipoi Holdings Mauritius Ltd v Robert Michael Kirman and Robert Conry Brauer
as joint and several administrators of Tiger Resources
Ltd (subject to Deed of
Company Arrangement) [No 4]
[2024] WASCA 145
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[2021] WASCA 176
Paridis v Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
[2007] WASCA 97
(2007) 33 WAR
Pilbara Iron Company (Services) Pty Ltd v Suleski
[2017] WADC 114
Skinner v Broadbent
[2006] WASCA 2
St Mary's School v Askwith
[2011] VSCA 90
(2011) 206 IR 414
State Transit Authority of New South Wales v Fritzi Chemler
[2007] NSWCA
Summit Rural (WA) Pty Ltd v Lenane Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA 122
Introduction and overview
appellant, Moinul Chowdhury was employed by the respondent, ISS Facility
Services Australia Pty Ltd (ISS), as an 'aviation protection
officer' at Perth
Airport from 2016 until May 2022. Before 2016 he worked for ISS at Darwin
airport. He moved to Perth looking
for further employment opportunities with
ISS after ISS lost its contract for services at Darwin airport.
Mr Chowdhury
claimed he suffered physical injury and a stress-related mental disorder in
the course of his employment with ISS.
On 6 May 2022 Mr Chowdhury
submitted to ISS a workers' compensation claim form in which he sought weekly
payments of compensation
for a total incapacity to work, pursuant to the
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act 1981
(the Act), with effect from 29 April 2022.
disputed Mr Chowdhury's claim, and it proceeded to an arbitration hearing
before Mr M Wallbridge, an arbitrator of the Workers
Compensation
Arbitration Service appointed under the Act. Mr Chowdhury represented
himself in the arbitration hearing (and in this
appeal). The arbitrator
dismissed Mr Chowdhury's claim.
Chowdhury's claim before the arbitrator was that he was defamed, bullied,
harassed and discriminated against during his employment
Mr Chowdhury identified 14 separate incidents as workplace stressors which
caused him to contract a stress-related mental disorder,
or psychiatric disease,
and secondly, musculoskeletal
incidents identified by Mr Chowdhury informed the issues for determination
at the arbitration hearing.
arbitrator stated that it was not in dispute that Mr Chowdhury contracted a
mental disorder or psychiatric disease (which I will
sometimes refer to in these
reasons as the (or Mr Chowdhury's) 'condition' or 'mental health
condition'). The arbitrator found that
Mr Chowdhury's mental health
condition was a new condition and consequently, not a recurrence, aggravation or
acceleration of any
pre-existing
the finding that Mr Chowdhury had contracted the condition, the arbitrator
relied upon and accepted medical evidence from
(Mr Chowdhury's GP) and Dr Madadeniya and Dr Cheng (both
psychiatrists).
accepting the existence of Mr Chowdhury's mental health condition, the
arbitrator framed the issue which he had to decide as
being whether
Mr Chowdhury's employment with ISS contributed to a significant degree
to the contraction of the
arbitrator examined the evidence called by the parties on the 14 incidents
which were at issue in the arbitration. The arbitrator,
in going through
each specific incident, found ISS had not engaged in conduct comprising
bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination
as Mr Chowdhury had
alleged (or at all). Further, the various incidents relied upon by
Mr Chowdhury in support of his claim did
not occur in the way that
Mr Chowdhury had described those incidents in his workers' compensation
application or in the way he gave
evidence about them at the hearing.
assessing the various incidents, the arbitrator found Mr Chowdhury was not
a credible witness, that he had a tendency to exaggerate
the significance of
ordinary workplace events, misstate events or documents and inflate (or
exaggerate) the significance of incidents
in an attempt to bolster his claim and
attribute ailments he had to his employment without any factual
arbitrator also noted that there was a lack of contemporaneous records from his
general practitioner supporting his claims of
psychological impact, little or no
objective evidence of workplace stress prior to him ceasing work in
March 2022 and no objective
evidence supporting claims about the various
incidents and their effect on
the arbitrator did not accept Mr Chowdhury's evidence on the 14 incidents
which were at issue in the arbitration, he held
that Mr Chowdhury had not
proved the factual foundation upon which medical practitioners gave opinions of
the cause of his condition
being employment related. Put another way, because
the arbitrator did not accept Mr Chowdhury's evidence on the various
upon which he based his claim, regardless of his subjective perception
and reaction, the objective facts of the various incidents
remained unproven
such that the arbitrator was not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury on the balance
of probabilities that his employment
with ISS contributed to the contraction of
his condition to a significant
a consequence of not accepting Mr Chowdhury's evidence, the arbitrator
held that Mr Chowdhury failed to prove, on the balance
of probabilities,
that his mental health condition was contributed to 'a significant degree'
by his employment as required under
of the Act. The arbitrator
noted that regardless of his subjective perception and reaction 'the objective
facts remain unproven
and he cannot succeed in proving his case on the balance
of probabilities'.
His application was therefore dismissed, and he was not entitled to weekly
payments of compensation or payment of his reasonable
medical or other expenses.
Mr Chowdhury
commenced this appeal on 17 May 2024. At the time that the appeal was
heard, the Act had been repealed and replaced
Workers Compensation and
Injury Management Act 2023
(WA) (the 2023 Act). In this appeal,
Mr Chowdhury relies on 14 separate grounds of appeal. The
arbitrator's credibility findings
loom large over the determination of
Mr Chowdhury's appeal grounds. Most of the appeal grounds were developed
to challenge the arbitrator's
factual findings, and thereby, they do not raise
questions of law. However, one of the appeal grounds, ground 2,
contends that the
arbitrator made an error of law in not accepting, or giving
weight to, a medical opinion of Dr Victor Cheng, a psychiatrist
by ISS. Dr Cheng's opinion was that Mr Chowdhury's
mental health condition was significantly contributed to by his employment.
the reasons that follow, I consider ground 2 gives rise to a question
of law and leave to appeal should be granted for ground
2. However, for
the reasons I set out in [82] - [92] below, no weight can be attached to
Dr Cheng's opinion that Mr Chowdhury's
mental health condition was
significantly contributed to by his employment because the arbitrator did not
accept Mr Chowdhury's evidence
Mr Chowdhury had not proved
on the balance of probabilities that any
defamatory rumours were being spread about Mr Chowdhury as he had alleged.
Accordingly,
ground 2 should be dismissed.
other 13 grounds fall into two categories: first, seeking to challenge factual
findings, or, second, raising a false issue of
whether the arbitrator should
have considered the terms of s 5(4) of the
Section 5(4) excludes certain psychological and psychiatric conditions from
the definition of 'injury'. Section 5(4) has no application
dispute. That provision would only have been relevant if the arbitrator had
found that Mr Chowdhury's employment with ISS
did contribute to a
significant degree to the contraction of his injury (being his mental health
condition) and if ISS had then sought
to argue that his condition was excluded
by one of the parts of s 5(4). Because of the finding that his employment
with ISS did
not contribute to a significant degree to the contraction of the
mental health condition, the provisions of s 5(4) were irrelevant
case. Accordingly, for the reasons that follow, leave to appeal is refused for
all of the grounds of appeal save for ground
2. Before turning to an
analysis of the various grounds of appeal I will summarise the arbitrator's
The arbitrator's Reasons
arbitrator framed the essential question for his determination as being, did
Mr Chowdhury contract a disease in the course of
his employment, to which
the employment was a contributing factor, and had contributed to a
significant
I have already noted, the arbitrator resolved this question, which has two
aspects to it, against Mr Chowdhury. He found Mr Chowdhury
contracted a disease, being the mental health condition, but held that
Mr Chowdhury had not proved that his employment contributed,
contributed to a significant degree, to the contraction of his disease. For
that reason, Mr Chowdhury's claim failed.
arbitrator found that the factual basis of Mr Chowdhury's claim was that he
worked as an aviation protection officer with ISS
at Perth Airport from
December 2016 and that in March 2022 he claimed that he was defamed by
rumours in the workplace that greatly
distressed him. Further, that he
described this as 'the last straw' and that this was the precipitating event
that caused his mental
health condition.
arbitrator said that the factual basis of Mr Chowdhury's claim was that he
was defamed, bullied, harassed, intimidated and discriminated
against during his
employment with
On the basis
that none of these words were defined in the Act, the arbitrator outlined the
ordinary meaning of these words by reference
to dictionary
definitions.
arbitrator noted that on or about 9 March 2022 Mr Chowdhury informed
ISS that he required stress leave. Following this, representatives
with him to determine what was causing him stress and Mr Chowdhury
explained that defamatory rumours were being spread
Further, that he had not personally heard these rumours, but colleagues had
told him about them. Mr
Chowdhury said that he had suspicions as to who
was spreading these rumours and named a few people. At the conclusion of the
Mr Chowdhury was asked to provide more detail so that ISS could properly
investigate his
allegations.
Subsequently,
Mr Chowdhury provided ISS, in the course of several emails, what he
described as 'useful information' that would assist
with its investigation. The
arbitrator said that this information consisted of a series of grievances
Mr Chowdhury had with ISS
dating back to the beginning of his employment at
Perth Airport in December 2016. The arbitrator noted Mr Chowdhury
'had never raised
most of these grievances
previously'.
arbitrator then dealt with these matters individually in his Reasons, being
events described by Mr Chowdhury by reference to
the following short
descriptions:
dispute with ISS about Mr Chowdhury's relocation from Darwin and ISS's
failure to contribute to relocation costs which caused financial
Mr Chowdhury's
complaints in June 2017 that he was given a shorter meal break than other
disagreement Mr Chowdhury had with a work colleague about a passenger
standing in a wrong access position when explosive trace detection
being undertaken.
and unreasonable discipline which occurred as a consequence of an incident
on 17 December 2017 when Mr Chowdhury and another
employee were
disciplined as a consequence of a knife being undetected in security
screening of a passenger.
pain and leg cramps that Mr Chowdhury suffered on or around 9 March
incident in which the appellant requested an ambulance stop at a gate and
bullying and harassment with respect to that request
by a supervisor,
Mr Richardson.
treatment in the form of an email sent by ISS on 7 August 2018 about
absenteeism when Mr Chowdhury had been diagnosed as having
pneumonia or
bronchitis.
incident on 29 December 2019 where Mr Chowdhury had to pat down more
than 100 people because screening machines were faulty.
Discrimination
that Mr Chowdhury contended occurred when he was consistently rostered to
busier gates than other employees and what
he described as dangerous rosters.
Mr Chowdhury identified as a promotion whereby he was promoted to a 'two IC
position' and then what he described as a demotion
position and level which occurred between August and November 2021.
Mr Chowdhury
being stood down for a delay in having a COVID-19 vaccination.
Mr Chowdhury's
complaints about delays in approving his annual leave.
Mr Chowdhury
complaining on 26 February 2022 that he was given conflicting information
he believed he was a close contact
of a person with COVID.
rumours being spread about him which he requested his management to investigate.
It was these rumours that led to him taking
stress leave and ultimately not
returning to work after annual leave.
I have already noted at [8] - [9] above, the arbitrator considered
Mr Chowdhury's allegations with respect to each of the 14 incidents.
He found that Mr Chowdhury's evidence should not be
Incident 14 - Workplace rumours (March 2022)
the final incident outlined by Mr Chowdhury brings into consideration
all of the earlier incidents, I will commence by describing
arbitrator's Reasons on incident 14. On 9 March 2022
Mr Chowdhury, after he said that he heard from one of his colleagues that
there were rumours being spread about him in the workplace, told ISS he
needed to take stress
Mr Chowdhury claimed that some of his colleagues had spread defamatory
rumours about him, including that he had performed explosive
trace detection on
an ambulance that an Australian Federal Police (AFP) officer threatened to
arrest him and that he collapsed during
pat downs and was taken to hospital.
18 March 2022, Mr Chowdhury said another colleague told him about
these same rumours. Mr Chowdhury said he realised he was 'being
by a group of his co-workers' who were 'conspiring against him and working as a
syndicate'.
believed the colleague he had complained about on 11 September 2017, and
who was working on the X-ray machine on 17 September
2017, had 'something
to do with the
or about 20 March 2022, Mr Chowdhury became 'stressed and depressed
this trauma caused him 'stress, anxiety, depression, shame, guilt, and a
staggering sense of injustice' and was 'the
last straw that left him
incapacitated for
20 March 2022 Mr Chowdhury sent a text message to his manager
requesting that ISS book him off on stress leave for the next day.
next day, 21 March 2022, Mr Chowdhury sent a grievance letter to
Ms Nagpal (ISS people and cultural manager) and a Ms Simpson
email. That letter explained the background of his stress leave and requested
an investigation into the rumours being spread
that he said amounted to slander.
The letter stated he wanted the rumours investigated immediately to find out who
the staff members
were who had engaged in defamation and jeopardised his
reputation and to bring them immediately under disciplinary actions. The
concluded 'until the investigation is complete and culprits are found,
I will remain in stress
Ms Nagpal's
evidence was that Mr Chowdhury's letter was the first occasion she had
heard anything about his complaints. Her evidence
was that she and
Ms Simpson acted straight away and asked Mr Chowdhury to come into the
office to discuss the claims. They asked
him if he knew who was spreading
the rumours, and he provided some names. They also asked him what resolution he
wanted. Mr Chowdhury
advised he wanted an investigation and for the
persons responsible to be punished for what they had done, saying that they had
witnesses who testified before the arbitrator, being ISS employees and managers,
Ms Marisa Goss (people and culture general manager),
Mr Nazir Siddique (a security duty manager), Mr Timothy Richardson (an
access control supervisor) and Mr Singh (a supervisor)
gave evidence
that they had not heard any rumours about Mr Chowdhury in the workplace.
The arbitrator said that no witness apart
from Mr Chowdhury gave evidence
that Mr Chowdhury's
evidence about the rumours was hearsay and there was no
direct evidence from any witness about what the rumours were or who was
arbitrator referred to two emails Mr Chowdhury sent on 24 and
28 March 2022 entitled 'useful information'. Attached to those
emails were
details of the workplace stressors detailed in the earlier incidents which the
arbitrator set out and dealt with in his
Mr Chowdhury
took annual leave from 8 April 2022. He was due to return to work on
9 May 2022. On 4 May 2022, Ms Nagpal emailed
Mr Chowdhury
querying the extensive list of the workplace grievances that were unrelated to
his original complaint in the interview
stated in the email it would take time to investigate all the matters he had
raised and she needed
more clarity from Mr Chowdhury about what exactly he
wanted them to investigate as part of his stress-related grievance.
concluded the
Whilst we are investigating your alleged concerns, we do require you to return
to work. To mitigate any conflicts, we have amended
your working roster to be
at T4 EIA points 4 on 4 off commencing from 9 May 2022 which is your return
back after annual leave.
Your Kronos will also be adjusted accordingly.
I will communicate with you if I require further information for the
investigation.
Mr Chowdhury
said he was frustrated and depressed when he read this email and shocked and
panicked when he thought about a return
to 'that unhealthy work environment'.
By email on 5 May 2022, Mr Chowdhury
First one was the defamation issues, I was targeted by a group of co-workers and
supervisors.
Second one was the supporting document, in which I gave you the clues in
different situations and scenarios, that could be a valuable
investigation.
Now I am going to attach the third document, which is related to the management.
I believe, this document would be extremely valuable
and helpful for this
investigation as well.
Please note that after going through the medical assessment, my GP declared
'no capacity for work' from 29/04/2022 to 28/05/2022.
The ongoing bullying, harassment, intimidation, defamation and discrimination by
a group of co-workers, supervisors and management,
which have had a serious
mental impact on me and ultimately has developed
Musculoskeletal
disorders (MSD). The result of this disease has been impacting
severely on me not only
in psychologically (i.e., stress, depression, anxiety
but also in physically, such as:
ongoing headache, foot pain,
arthritis, backpain.
After careful reading of the attached document and the previous ones,
I believe that it would be comprehensible for you to understand
I am totally incapable to return to work under these
circumstances.
arbitrator also observed that there were discrepancies between the alleged
rumours and the actual events Mr Chowdhury gave evidence
arbitrator held that there was no basis to conclude that any rumours, even if
these matters were spoken of and discussed,
objectively attacked his good name
or reputation or were
slanderous.
arbitrator also noted there was no contemporaneous medical evidence by
Mr Chowdhury's GP that mentioned workplace rumours as
a stressor of his
psychiatric disorder. Rather, Mr Chowdhury's GP, Dr Akula, reported
Mr Chowdhury as being stressed with poor sleep,
low self-esteem, normal
mood, anxiety, stress at work, irritability and irrational
arbitrator concluded with respect to the ISS investigation into
Mr Chowdhury's complaint about rumours being spread about him
Mr Chowdhury
has also not persuaded me that the delay in investigating his workplace
stressors, or the rumours was unreasonable such
that it amounted to bullying,
harassment, intimidation, or discrimination. This is because
Mr Choudhury [sic] was told the investigation
would take time, he provided
additional historical information about many unrelated matters compared to
his original allegation to
ISS about the rumours and his stress. Consequently,
this made the investigation more complex.
the whole of the evidence, I am not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury that ISS
acted unreasonably in wanting to personally clarify exactly
what he wanted from
the investigation upon his return from leave given his own attempts at assisting
the investigation had the opposite
effect and did not assist in clarifying the
Principles relating to granting leave to appeal
turning to the grounds of appeal, I remind myself of the relevant principles
which apply to appeals from decisions of arbitrators
under the Act and its
successor, the 2023 Act.
Mr Chowdhury
requires leave to appeal against the arbitrator's decision. The District Court
must not grant leave to appeal unless
a question of law is
appeal involves '
a question of law
where either an error of law,
or an error of mixed fact and law is alleged by an
the extent that a question of law is involved, an error arising from the
question of law must be material to the decision in the
sense that the
arbitrator's decision would have been, or might have been, different if the
error had not been
sufficient for an appellant to satisfy the court that a decision other than that
made by the arbitrator is correct and
preferrable. Some material error of fact
or law, or some other miscarriage of justice, must be established.
The determination of
whether an error or some other miscarriage of justice
is established is made on the material before the arbitrator. Once an error
a miscarriage of justice is established then the appellate court, if it is in a
position to do so, substitutes its own decision
for that of the
arbitrator.
from the requirement that the appeal relates to a question of law, the power to
grant leave to appeal is not expressly confined.
Leave to appeal should be
granted if, in all the circumstances, it is in the interests of justice that
there be a grant of leave.
Relevant matters include, but are not limited to,
whether the decision was wrong, or attended with sufficient doubt to
justify leave,
and whether a substantial injustice would be done by leaving the
unreversed.
leave is granted and a review is undertaken, the appellant must still, for the
purposes of the review, provide a proper basis
for disturbing the arbitrator's
decision by pointing to some error in it. An appellant may not simply
invite the court to just ignore
the arbitrator's decision and start again with a
view to having the court substitute its own decision for that of the
arbitrator.
a ground of appeal properly analysed does not involve a question of law,
linguistic gymnastics in the formulation of the ground
cannot alter the
error of law, or error of mixed fact and law, arises simply because an
arbitrator prefers one version of events over
Put another way, there is no error of law simply in making a wrong finding
error in the assessment of weight given to expert medical evidence does not
involve an error of law and there is no error that
involves a question of law
merely because the arbitrator makes a finding of fact wrongfully or on a
doubtful basis.
Further, where an arbitrator has made findings based on credibility, generally
speaking the finding cannot be challenged unless
an appellant establishes that
there were 'incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony' to the contrary or,
more rarely, where
the finding was 'glaringly improbable' or 'contrary to
inferences'.
I turn to an analysis of the appeal grounds, I will set out the statutory
provisions to the extent that they are relevant
to the grounds of appeal and
some relevant parts of the arbitrator's Reasons.
Legislative provisions
s 18 of the Act, if a worker sustains an 'injury', the employer shall,
subject to the Act, be liable to pay compensation to the
worker. 'Injury' is
defined in s 5. Where the injury is a disease caused by stress, certain
exclusions apply to the extent that
the injury is caused by those exclusions.
Relevantly, s 5 of the Act defines 'injury' and the exclusions for injury
as follows:
(c) a disease contracted by a worker in the course of his employment at or
away from his place of employment and to which the employment
was a contributing
factor and contributed to a significant degree; or
(d) the recurrence, aggravation, or acceleration of any pre-existing disease
where the employment was a contributing factor to that
recurrence,
aggravation, or acceleration and contributed to a significant degree;
but does not include a disease caused by stress if the stress wholly or
predominantly arises from a matter mentioned in subsection
(4) unless the matter
is mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of that subsection and is unreasonable and
harsh on the part of the employer;
(4) For purposes of the definition of
, the matters are as
(a) the worker's dismissal, retrenchment,
demotion, discipline, transfer or redeployment; and
(b) the worker's not being promoted, reclassified, transferred or granted
leave of absence or any other benefit in relation to the
employment; and
(c) the worker's expectation of -
(i) a matter; or
(ii) a decision by the employer in relation to a matter,
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).
(5) In determining whether the employment contributed, or contributed to a
significant degree, to the contraction, recurrence, aggravation
or acceleration
of a disease for purposes of the definitions of
relevant employment
, the following shall be taken into
(a) the duration of the employment;
(b) the nature of, and particular tasks involved in, the employment;
(c) the likelihood of the contraction, recurrence, aggravation or
acceleration of the disease occurring despite the employment; and
(d) the existence of any hereditary factors in relation to the contraction,
recurrence, aggravation or acceleration of the disease;
(e) matters affecting the worker's health generally; and
(f) activities of the worker not related to the employment.
Mr Chowdhury's grounds of appeal
Mr Chowdhury
raises 14 grounds of appeal. Each of the grounds expressly raises an error of
law and couples with it an error of fact.
I remind myself of what I have
already set out that if a ground of appeal properly analysed does not involve a
question of law,
linguistic gymnastics in the formulation of the ground cannot
alter the position and convert a factual error to an error of law.
contends the arbitrator made an error of law by misdirecting himself as to the
correct legal test of whether an 'injury'
had occurred within the definition of
the Act because he did not take into account the terms of s 5(4) and
'matters such as transfer,
discipline, demotion and instead labelled all matters
by the terms bullying, harassment, intimidation and discrimination' and whether
ISS's actions were 'unreasonable and harsh'.
question of whether the arbitrator applied the correct test is a question of
law. I consider the arbitrator applied the correct
test. The arbitrator
determined that Mr Chowdhury's mental health condition was a disease which
would be an 'injury' within the
meaning of the Act, providing Mr Chowdhury
proved that his employment was a contributing factor to the contraction or onset
The arbitrator set out the legal principles that a worker had the onus of
proving to the requisite standard that their employment
was a contributing
factor and contributed to a significant degree to the contraction of the
disease. In that respect the arbitrator
was referring to the definition of
'injury' which I have set out above. The arbitrator then considered the
requirements of s 5(5)
of the Act.
arbitrator ultimately found that Mr Chowdhury failed to prove the objective
facts comprising his versions of the incidents upon
which he based his claim.
Namely, they were the objective facts upon which his claim was brought and those
facts were not proved
on the balance of probabilities. Accordingly, having
reviewed all of that evidence the arbitrator was not persuaded that
Mr Chowdhury
had discharged the onus that his employment had
contributed and contributed to a significant degree to the contraction of his
This also required a consideration of the medical evidence which
I discuss in ground 2.
Mr Chowdhury's
use of the words 'unreasonable and harsh' and references to dismissal,
retrenchment, demotion, discipline, transfer
or redeployment do not assist him
in the determination of this appeal. The words 'unreasonable and harsh',
when used in the context
of conduct of an employer, only apply when considering
factors of exclusion under s 5(4). Namely, where a stress-related disease
has been caused by the worker's dismissal, retrenchment, demotion, discipline,
transfer or redeployment. Mr Chowdhury's claim failed,
not because of any
consideration or lack of consideration as to whether ISS's actions were
'unreasonable and harsh' but because the
arbitrator found that
Mr Chowdhury's employment with ISS was not a contributing factor to a
significant degree to him contracting
the stress-related disease which the
arbitrator found that he suffered from.
ground 1 on its face raises a question of law, in my view, it has no
arguable basis. It has no arguable basis because Mr
Chowdhury presented
his case relying on a number of incidents in the workplace which he says caused
his stress. The arbitrator found
those incidents did not occur or did not occur
in the way in which Mr Chowdhury alleged.
arbitrator ultimately found that the factual basis of Mr Chowdhury's claim
that he was defamed, bullied, harassed, intimidated
and discriminated against
during his employment was not made out. Further, that occasional differences of
opinion, problems and
conflicts in working relationship can happen in a
workplace but not constitute bullying, harassment, intimidation or
discrimination.
Similarly, reasonable management action carried out in a fair
way is not bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination and
employers have a right to direct and control how work is done, and that managers
and supervisors have a legitimate responsibility
to monitor work and practices
and give objective feedback on
performance.
Leave to appeal on ground 1 should be refused.
said, in part, as follows:
learned arbitrator erred in fact and law by asserting that he is not satisfied
as to the factual basis of the expert medical reports
and placed little or no
weight on those reports as to the cause of the appellant's mental disorder or
psychiatric
... Dr Victor Cheng examined the appellant on 13 and 21 September
2022. In his independent psychiatric assessment he
(i) Appellant's mental state examination
findings was consistent with the history that he presented.
(ii) In my opinion, at the time of the assessment he would meet the criteria
for the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder as pursuant
(iii) I am of the opinion that his employment has significantly contributed
to the development of his psychological condition.
also referred to a number of legal authorities as to the proof of an expert
opinion by admissible evidence and the requirement
under s 188(2)(b) of the
Act which requires the arbitrator to act according to equity,
good conscience and substantial merits of
the conclusion of hearing evidence in the arbitration, the arbitrator ordered
the parties to provide written closing submissions
rather than presenting oral
submissions. Mr Chowdhury relied upon Dr Cheng's report in his
written closing submissions before the
arbitrator to support his argument that
his condition was significantly contributed to by his employment. The
arbitrator did not
in his Reasons discuss or analyse Dr Cheng's opinion and
report beyond his diagnosis which I have referred to in [5] above.
ground 2, Mr Chowdhury's complaint is that the arbitrator did not
review and consider Dr Cheng's report and opinion as to the
causes of his
mental health condition. To assess whether the complaint raises an error of
law, I note the following principles derived
When deciding
between competing versions of the facts, it is necessary for an arbiter of fact
to explain why one version has been
preferred over another. In doing so, a
trial judge (or arbitrator) should refer to relevant evidence and, when one
set of evidence
is accepted over a conflicting set of significant evidence, set
out his or her findings as to how he or she has come to accept the
one over the
Further it is a
decision-maker's duty to consider all of the evidence in a case and, where
important or critical evidence is not referred
to, an appellate court may infer
that it has been overlooked or that the trial judge failed to give consideration
For a judge (or
arbitrator) to ignore evidence critical to an issue of fact found against a
party may promote a sense of grievance
and create a litigant who is both
disappointed and disturbed, because it tends to deny both the fact and the
appearance of justice
having been done.
consider ground 2 raises a question of law and I treat the ground as
alleging an error of law by the arbitrator in not evaluating
the expert medical
evidence, specifically Dr Cheng, and specifically explaining why that
evidence (and Dr Cheng's opinion) was rejected.
I take into account that
Mr Chowdhury is self-represented in this appeal and some flexibility is
permitted in construing the way
in which his grounds of appeal are expressed.
The arbitrator's approach and key findings
I have noted in [5] - [6] above, there was no dispute that
Mr Chowdhury had contracted a mental health disorder and which the
arbitrator implicitly accepted would constitute an 'injury' within the meaning
of the Act, subject to Mr Chowdhury proving that his
employment with ISS
contributed to a significant degree to him contracting the
arbitrator then turned his inquiry as to whether Mr Chowdhury's mental
disorder or psychiatric disease was contracted in the
course of his employment
and to which the employment was a contributing factor and contributed to a
significant
noted, when considering the primary issue of whether employment was a
contributing factor (and contributed to a significant
degree) to the onset of
Mr Chowdhury's mental health condition, the arbitrator held that
Mr Chowdhury had failed to prove this on
the balance of probabilities
because he did not accept Mr Chowdhury's evidence on the 14 incidents
which were at issue in the arbitration
and found Mr Chowdhury was not a
credible witness. Having reviewed all the evidence and having observed
Mr Chowdhury in the hearing,
the arbitrator was not persuaded that Mr
Chowdhury's employment contributed, and contributed to a significant degree, to
the contraction
arbitrator made these findings:
(a) there was no evidence as to the
likelihood of Mr Chowdhury's contraction of a disease occurring despite his
employment with ISS,
or that he was more likely to contract a mental disease
just because he worked for
(b) there was no evidence about activities not related to the employment that
had contributed to his
(c) he was not persuaded about the significance of the workplace stressors as
causing the mental disorder and found no objective evidence
to support a
conclusion that employment contributed to the mental disorder to a significant
(d) because there was little or no objective evidence of alleged workplace
stress prior to Mr Chowdhury visiting his general practitioner
24 March 2022, and because of his assessment of Mr Chowdhury's
credibility, he attributed little or no weight to allegations of
defamation,
bullying, harassment, intimidation and
discrimination;
(e) he was not satisfied as to the factual basis of the expert medical
reports that relied on the history provided by Mr Chowdhury
that he was
defamed, bullied, harassed, intimidated and discriminated against in his
workplace and placed little or no weight on
those reports as to the cause of his
mental health
The report from Dr Cheng, consultant psychiatrist
Victor Cheng is a consultant psychiatrist. On 13 and 21 September 2022
Dr Cheng reviewed Mr Chowdhury at his rooms. He reviewed
Mr Chowdhury at the request of ISS lawyers and prepared a detailed report
running to 31 pages which is dated 23 September
report he answered questions which had been requested by ISS lawyers. In the
first part of the report, comprising some 13
pages of content,
Dr Cheng largely sets out the factual matters of the 14 incidents that
were considered by the arbitrator. I approach
what is set out in those
pages of Dr Cheng's report on the basis of the arbitrator's findings that
he did not accept Mr Chowdhury's
version of those events. Further, the
arbitrator's ultimate credibility finding was that he did not accept
Mr Chowdhury's evidence.
the next part of his report, Dr Cheng detailed Mr Chowdhury's history
of psychological symptoms, emotional symptoms, past medical
and psychiatric
history (including a denial of any family history of mental health issues) and
his personal history. In his report
He was quite animated in his body language and at times emotionally aroused,
speaking loudly. At other times, he did appear to be
anxious about not being
able to provide the information and would repeat sentences and also seemed to
take time to choose his words.
He proceeded to describe the events that he had been subject to in very
significant detail and at times wished for me to refer to
various documents that
His speech was accented and it was normal in rate, loud in tone and modulation.
I could note that at times there were significant
pauses as he seemed to be very
careful not to provide the wrong information or information out of order.
His mood was described as being depressed.
answer to a question as to whether Mr Chowdhury was suffering from any
recognised psychological condition Dr Cheng
When considering the history that he presented, Mr Chowdhury described a
number of difficulties at work which would fall under a
- he described a past history of back pain which he attributed to physical
aspects of his work.
- Feelings of stress in relation to being stood down in 2017 and subsequently he
reported a change in his work role and work status
during a period where this
was investigated.
- Dissatisfaction with his work duties and roster.
- Feelings of dissatisfaction with regards to his lack of progress to higher
levels of seniority and duties within the organisation.
- Stress over being mistakenly stood down for not receiving a covert [sic]
19 vaccination.
- Stress in relation to application of leave.
- Feelings of stress in relation to rumours that he felt had been spread about
He reported taking 2 weeks stress leave prior to his period of annual leave
which was for the purposes of a religious celebration.
During this time he
submitted complaints with regards to his work colleagues and then subsequently
grievances against his managers.
He then described progressing on his annual leave.
He then appears to have had significant stress in relation to his perception
that his employers had not adequately responded to his
concerns by
investigating the matter around rumours that had been spread against him.
Subsequently he has had significant stress in relation to the progress of the
claim and also the result in uncertainty surrounding
his future work prospects.
response to a question about the cause of Mr Chowdhury's psychological
symptoms and complaints, Dr Cheng answered as
I am of the opinion that his employment has significantly contributed to the
development of his psychological condition.
I am not able to conclude that the events prior to learning of the rumours being
spread about him resulted in a psychological condition.
He does appear to have had symptoms of stress, in particular
irritability outside of work however I am not of the opinion that he
has met the
criteria for the diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder as he does appear to have
been able to continue to work. He did
not appear to have reported any
particular psychological symptoms to his treating practitioners and does not
appear to have received
appreciable psychological or psychiatric treatment
prior to his cessation from work.
In terms of distress in relation to the rumours being spread about him, he did
appear to be distressed by this. I am not able to
conclude that he was
suffering from a psychiatric disorder at that time. He does appear to have
been significantly dissatisfied
and had placed a complaint. He then
proceeded [to] stress leave and then his annual leave.
Mr Chowdhury then appears to have experienced more significant distress in
relation to his perception that his employers had not
adequately responded to
his complaints and had responded by changing his roster.
Subsequent to this the process of the claim and the uncertainty surrounding his
future work prospects, he has had a further worsening
of his mood and anxiety
symptoms and at the time of the assessment he would meet the criteria for the
diagnosis of an Adjustment
The onset of his psychological condition is likely to be dated from the time
that he learnt that his complaints had not been adequately
responded to.
He did describe taking stress leave, placing a grievance and then proceeded on
annual leave with expectations of returning back to
work in May 2022 with a
resolution of his grievances.
At the present time in my opinion his predominant cause of his current
psychological symptoms was related to his perception that
his employers had not
adequately responded to his concerns and also the uncertainty surrounding his
future work prospects.
If he felt that his employers had not adequately responded or recognises [sic]
concerns that this is likely to cause ongoing distress.
It is likely that he will continue to have psychological symptoms whilst he
continued to experience uncertainty surrounding the outcome
of his grievances,
the uncertainties that he faced with respect to the process of the claim and
also his future work prospects.
arbitrator did not address in his Reasons the parts of Dr Cheng's report I
have set out. It appears that the arbitrator did
not deal with the report in
any detail because of his factual finding that Mr Chowdhury was not a
credible witness, therefore, his
versions of the workplace events were not
credible and, accordingly, there was no factual foundation in his evidence for
to express any admissible opinion on the cause of Mr Chowdhury's
For the reasons that I will set out in the next paragraphs, whilst the
arbitrator referred to cases involving a worker's subjective
perception to
workplace events, (
Anderson v Mercy Hospital
he did not consider the question of whether, by reference to Dr Cheng's
report, there was any reality in the workplace events Mr
complained about such that his subjective perception could be of those events
could be considered for the issue of causation.
Specifically, whether
Mr Chowdhury's employment caused his mental health condition.
Psychological disorder caused by a worker's subjective reaction to workplace
aside statutory exclusions, a worker is entitled to compensation under the Act
where he or she contracts a stress-related
disease 'in the course of his
employment at or away from his place of employment and to which the employment
was a contributing factor
and contributed to a significant
stress-related disease or recognised psychological disorder which may satisfy
the definition of 'injury' under the Act may be caused
by a worker's subjective
reaction to events and circumstances actually occurring in the workplace,
provided that the reaction 'has
a real connection [with those events] - as
distinct from an event [that the worker] simply imagined was connected with
[the] employment'.
significance of a worker's perception of events or the relevant state of affairs
in the context of a workers' compensation claim
(and workers compensation
legislation) originates from a Federal Court decision of
In that case, it was explained that provided a worker is exposed to some
incident or state of affairs in the course of the employment,
irrespective of
whether the worker's perception of that incident or state of affairs is
idiosyncratic, it is something to which the
'employment'
contributed.
However, if the worker wrongly believed that something arose out of the
employment when it did not, then the employment could not
have been said to have
contributed in spite of the worker's
State Transit Authority of New South Wales v
Spigelman CJ (Bryson AJA agreeing) discussed a worker's 'perception'
of events occurring in the workplace and emphasised that whether
an injury arose
out of or in the course of any employment 'gave rise to a test of
causation'.
Chief Justice went on to say
Employers take their employees as they find them. With respect to psychological
injury, there is a 'eggshell psyche' principle which,
like the equivalent
'eggshell skull' principle is a law of compensation not
a liability.
the same case Basten JA noted that compensation for 'injury' depended upon
causation and 'to focus on the concept of 'perception'
may obscure the real
Basten JA also referenced the judgment of Windeyer J in
Federal Broom Company Pty Ltd v
that an 'incident which precipitated or stimulated, however irrationally,
the worsening of [the worker's] condition could be regarded
as a factor
contributing to
law requires no 'objective measure of reasonableness' test for a worker's
perception of
necessary that the worker's reaction to the events must have been 'rational,
reasonable and proportionate before compensation
recovered'.
However, a worker's perception must be based on events or a state of
affairs that actually occurred or existed. In
Doussa J observed that a perception meets a 'reality' test if it concerns
an incident or state of affairs that actually
, von Doussa J
All that is required is that the employee is exposed to some incident or state
of affairs in the course of the performance of his
duties and to which he would
not otherwise have been exposed, which is a contributing factor to the
ailment or an aggravation of
the ailment suffered by the employee. A perception
held by the employee will meet a 'reality' test for the purpose of the
of disease if it is a perception about an incident or state of
affairs that actually happened.
The arbitrator made an error in not considering Dr Cheng's opinion
reference to the principles set out in
Skinner v Broadbent
I have referred to at [55] above), I consider that the arbitrator made an error
of law in failing to consider the medical
opinion of Dr Cheng and to
explain in his Reasons why he did not accept the opinion Dr Cheng formed that
Mr Chowdhury's employment
had significantly contributed to the development
of his psychological condition. Further, by reference to the legal principles I
have set out in [66] - [70], the arbitrator should have assessed the
evidence of Dr Cheng in a context of whether Mr Chowdhury held
perception which caused his condition which was about an incident or state of
affairs in the course of employment with ISS that
actually happened.
Accordingly, I will grant leave to appeal on ground 2.
the next paragraphs I undertake an assessment of the evidence before the
arbitrator. In doing so I do not simply ignore the arbitrator's
decision and
start afresh. The effect of the error in not considering the opinion
Dr Cheng's opinion that Mr Chowdhury's employment
had significantly
contributed to the development of his psychological condition, and, whether any
other result might occurred but
for the error, must be considered in the context
of the factual findings made by the arbitrator. Those factual findings,
the credibility findings the arbitrator made with respect to
Mr Chowdhury's evidence, were made on the basis of the arbitrator's
obvious advantage in hearing the evidence at the arbitration.
Causation legal principles
turning to an evaluation of the cogency of Dr Cheng's opinion that
Mr Chowdhury's psychological condition was significantly
contributed by his
employment, it is important to consider the legal principles of causation. The
arbitrator set out, in my opinion,
the correct question that had to be
determined on the issue of causation. Mr Chowdhury had to prove on the
balance of probabilities
that his employment was a contributing factor and
contributed to a significant degree to the contraction of his disease, being his
mental health
Further, a worker must point to either some event or occurrence in the course of
employment or some characteristic of the work performed,
or the conditions in
which it was performed, that is a contributing factor to the injury for which
compensation is
a worker's employment contributed, to a significant degree, to an injury
suffered by the worker is a question of fact. To
contribute to a
significant degree requires a causal link that exists in fact. 'Significant' in
this context means not insignificant
or negligible but material. It is not
necessary that the employment be the only contributing factor. Further, the
factors outlined
in s 5(5) of the Act must be considered in determining
whether the worker's employment contributed to a significant degree to the
contraction of the
questions of causation must be determined by applying common sense to the facts
of each case.
Namely, the question of causation is determined by applying common sense
criteria and not philosophical or scientific theories of
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty
New South Wales Court of Appeal considered
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) which established a test of
causation requiring that 'the employment concerned was a substantial
contributing factor to the
injury'. Any distinction between the
Western Australian and New South Wales legislation as to whether employment
is a substantial
contributing factor or contributed to a significant degree is,
for present purposes, not important.
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
the court upheld a first instance
decision which used the notion of common sense when assessing causation under
s 9A of the New South
Workers Compensation Act
court held the use of the notion of common sense did not manifest any erroneous
understanding of the legal test to be applied.
Further, there is no reason to
adopt a different approach to the common sense test of causation adopted at
common law in relation
to the issue of causation posed by the words 'arising out
of'. Rather, the question of fact is whether there is such a connection
the worker's personal injury and his employment that, as a matter of ordinary
common sense and experience, the injury should
be regarded as having arisen out
employment.
Legal principles - weight to be given to expert evidence
to the weight to be accorded to Dr Cheng's opinion, a starting point
is to assess, by reference to the facts he has relied
upon to form his opinion,
whether those facts were proved or found to exist by the arbitrator. I will not
set out the well-known
principles relating to the admissibility of and weight to
be given to expert evidence other than to make a few observations.
expert must either prove by admissible means the facts on which the opinion is
based or explicitly state the assumptions as to
fact on which the opinion is
involving medical expert evidence, the relevant history supplied by a claimant
provides the factual foundation for the
statement of expert opinion. In many
cases there is not an exact correlation between the facts proven in evidence and
relied upon by the medical specialist upon which his or her opinion is
based. A decision-maker must examine any variation between
the two in order to
assess whether any unproven fact relied on by the medical practitioner, or any
omission from the material given
to him or her, renders the opinion inadmissible
or of no weight.
is recognised that a discrepancy between the facts as proved and the assumed
facts underpinning a medical opinion does not inevitably
inadmissibility of the opinion or that the opinion should be afforded no weight.
If admissible evidence establishes that
the matters assumed by the expert are
'sufficient like' to the matters proved so as 'to render the opinion of the
expert of any value'
the opinion will be admissible and may be relevant even
though the matters assumed and proved may not correspond with complete
In these circumstances, a trier of fact must examine the variation
to assess whether an unproven fact relied on by the expert or
any omission from
any information given to the expert renders the opinion inadmissible or of no
No weight should be placed on Dr Cheng's opinion because the factual foundation
was not proved
factual foundation of Dr Cheng's opinion requires careful analysis. The doctor
concluded that, while distressed, Mr Chowdhury's
psychological
developed prior to him learning about the rumours allegedly spread about him.
Nor did it develop at the point of him learning
the rumours. As an aside, that assessment is somewhat different to
Mr Chowdhury's own evidence
that described his learning about rumours about
him as 'the last straw' and that this was the precipitating event that
contraction of his mental health
Cheng's opinion places the onset of Mr Chowdhury's psychological disorder
to have occurred from the time he formed the perception
that his complaints to
his employer were not being adequately addressed, or, had not been adequately
responded to.
Further, Dr Cheng in his report diagnosed Mr Chowdhury 'at the present
the criteria for the diagnosis of an Adjustment Disorder and this condition
primarily related to his perception that his employers had not responded
adequately to his complaints and had not conducted appropriate
investigations
That is, by September 2022 the cause of Mr Chowdhury's Adjustment
Disorder was his perception of the inadequacy of ISS response to
his complaints
which originated on 21 March 2022, being the date of his grievance
Mr Chowdhury's
evidence was that unnamed colleagues had told him about what he described were
rumours against him concerning the
time he stopped an ambulance at Gate 00, that
he was threatened with arrest by an AFP officer, that he collapsed while doing
downs and was taken to
arbitrator made a finding that none of the witnesses who gave evidence had heard
rumours circulating about
Mr Chowdhury.
He made reference to Mr Chowdhury talking about a conspiracy or
syndicate behind rumours against him and that he believed ISS was
cover up what had happened and that is why the investigation was not progressed
while he was on
arbitrator also said that Mr Chowdhury's evidence about the rumours was
hearsay, there being no direct evidence from any witness
rumours were and who was spreading
the arbitrator's Reasons as a whole, the arbitrator has concluded as a matter of
fact that there were no rumours spreading
Accordingly,
to the extent Dr Cheng based his opinion that rumours being spread about Mr
Chowdhury in the workplace contributed to
his psychiatric condition, no proved
factual basis supported this aspect of his medical opinion.
Dr Cheng referred in his opinion, to Mr Chowdhury developing '
significant distress in relation to his perception that his employers had not
adequately responded to his complaints and had
responded by changing his
Dr Cheng has relied upon, as a first step, Mr Chowdhury being stressed
increasing, namely,
that there was more 'significant distress' caused by Mr Chowdhury's
perception that his complaints had not been
adequately responded to.
have set out in [18], [23] - [34] above, the arbitrator concluded that the
investigation ISS undertook in response to Mr Chowdhury's
involved no significant delay and that ISS had not acted unreasonably in
undertaking the investigation.
opinion was that the onset of Mr Chowdhury's psychological condition
corresponded with his perception that his employer
had not adequately responded
to his complaints (and had responded by changing his roster). It is difficult
to treat the factual
basis for this opinion in isolation (or on a 'standalone'
basis which is separate) from Dr Cheng's assumption (or assumed factual
foundation) that Mr Chowdhury was first distressed by rumours circulating
mind that Mr Chowdhury's distress escalated (or worsened) according to
Dr Cheng after he perceived his complaints were
not taken seriously. The
first objective date of his perception that his complaints were not being taken
seriously was on or around
6 May 2022 when he said he would not return to
work and lodged his workers' compensation claim.
fairly, the fact that rumours were being spread about Mr Chowdhury in the
workplace was integral to Dr Cheng's opinion. His
opinion of the
development of a mental disorder starts with Mr Chowdhury's distress about
rumours being spread about him. Without
accepting, as a matter of fact, that
rumours were being spread about Mr Chowdhury, the weight that can be
attached to Dr Cheng's
ultimate opinion is diminished to a point where it
cannot be relied upon.
events after 20 or 22 March 2022, on a reading of Dr Cheng's entire
report, cannot be the sole cause, or factual foundation,
for a medical opinion
that Mr Chowdhury's condition was significantly caused by his employment,
without acceptance of the foundational
fact that rumours were being spread about
Mr Chowdhury before 20 or 22 March 2022. Otherwise, the doctor's
opinion would seemingly
be that the condition was caused by Mr Chowdhury's
response to an investigation by his employer into a meritless complaint which
had not occurred as a matter of fact or reality. This is a sufficient basis to
conclude that no weight should be accorded to Dr
Cheng's opinion that
Mr Chowdhury's employment contributed significantly to his psychological
Conclusions on ground 2
arbitrator's findings were that the incidents described by Mr Chowdhury to
prove bullying, harassment, intimidation and discrimination
did not occur as he
described. Next, actions taken by ISS constituted reasonable management action.
Further, Mr Chowdhury was not
a credible witness, no rumours were being
spread about him in the workplace, and the investigation ISS undertook was
neither unreasonably
delayed nor unreasonably handled. As I have noted these
factual findings loom large over all grounds of appeal. The factual findings
are not, in my view, infected by any legal error.
noted, Dr Cheng's opinion requires a cumulative factual foundation to give
it weight. Initially, Mr Chowdhury allegedly suffered
distress about
workplace rumours, which distress was insufficient for Dr Cheng to conclude
he was suffering from a psychiatric disorder
at that time. The onset of his
mental health condition was then attributed to more significant distress arising
from his perception
that his complaints were not being adequately addressed.
However, the basis of those complaints was the alleged workplace rumours.
absence of any factual foundation for rumours being spread about
Mr Chowdhury renders Dr Cheng's ultimate opinion unsafe to
There is a material discrepancy between the facts as proved and the assumed
facts underpinning the medical opinion.
applying the notion of common sense to causation, the arbitrator's factual
findings that Mr Chowdhury was not a credible witness
and his evidence
could not be relied upon, together with the objective findings about the
investigation not being unreasonably delayed,
are such that Dr Cheng's
opinion should not be accepted on the balance of probabilities. For employment
to be a significant factor
in the contraction of a mental health condition
requires such a connection between the worker's injury and employment that, as a
matter of ordinary common sense and experience, the injury should be regarded as
having arisen out of that employment. In this case,
the evidence establishes
that Mr Chowdhury's employer responded appropriately to his complaint about
'non-existent rumours'.
impose legal liability to make weekly payments of compensation where the
arbitrator found that Mr Chowdhury's underlying allegations
had no merit,
tied only to his subjective perception that the investigation did not take his
concerns seriously, fails the common
sense test of causation. An investigation
into a complaint which had no factual basis cannot, as a matter of common sense,
the test that employment contributed significantly to the onset of
Mr Chowdhury's injury. It is not sufficient for Mr Chowdhury
to ISS's investigation of his unsupported complaints and claim the investigation
took too long when the arbitrator held
objectively it had not.
consideration of all evidence before the arbitrator and consistent with the
arbitrator's factual findings, which are not infected
by the error I consider he
made in failing to consider Dr Cheng's report, I am not persuaded that the
outcome would have been, or
might have been different. Dr Cheng's opinion,
in light of the credibility findings regarding Mr Chowdhury's evidence,
be given any weight in determining whether Mr Chowdhury's mental
health condition was significantly contributed to by his employment.
reasons, whilst leave to appeal should be granted for ground 2, the appeal
on ground 2 is dismissed.
The remaining grounds of appeal
now turn to the other grounds of Mr Chowdhury's appeal being
grounds 3 - 14. In broad terms, the remaining grounds, in
challenge to the arbitrator's factual findings and credibility
assessment of Mr Chowdhury. These grounds assert that the arbitrator
should have accepted Mr Chowdhury's evidence over that of ISS witnesses on
various issues, including:
(a) the entitlement to relocation costs
(grounds 3, 4);
(b) the reasonableness of management actions regarding discipline, rosters,
and stand-downs (grounds 5, 6, 10, 12);
(c) the cause of alleged physical injuries without supporting medical
evidence (grounds 7, 9);
(d) the characterisation of the end of a temporary acting position as a
'demotion' (ground 11); and
(e) miscellaneous factual findings (grounds 13, 14).
Grounds 3 and 4
is convenient to deal with grounds 3 and 4 together as they relate to
findings of fact made by the arbitrator about Mr Chowdhury's
Darwin to Perth in 2016. Ground 3 concerns findings made by the arbitrator
in respect of Mr Chowdhury's claim that he
suffered his first symptoms of
musculoskeletal conditions or
14 December 2016 because of financial stress.
challenges the findings made by the arbitrator in his Reasons at
[51] - [55] to the effect that Mr Chowdhury was not entitled
any expenses incurred as a consequence of his relocation from ISS Darwin
operations to the Perth operations and that he suffered
knee and neck pain
resulting from financial stress from not receiving relocation costs.
which also relates to Mr Chowdhury's relocation from Darwin to Perth,
asserts that the arbitrator made an error of law
in holding there was no expert
evidence to support financial stress or his employment caused his neck and knee
arbitrator made the following findings of
operations at Darwin International Airport ceased as its contract ended;
Darwin offered staff, including Mr Chowdhury, opportunities at other
recruited Mr Chowdhury for a role in Perth;
Mr Chowdhury
upon being recruited by ISS to its Perth operations was not entitled to
relocation costs, immediate shifts on arrival
or the costs he incurred in
obtaining his medical clearance to commence employment; and
neck and knee pain Mr Chowdhury said that he suffered did not result from
financial stress caused by ISS.
arbitrator based his factual findings on the evidence of Mr Chowdhury,
Ms Goss (who is the ISS Darwin human resources manager)
and documentary
evidence. The arbitrator considered the evidence of Ms Goss was
corroborated by an ISS email dated 18 November 2016.
The arbitrator found
on the basis of Ms Goss' evidence and the email of 18 November 2016
that Mr Chowdhury, upon being recruited
to Perth, was not entitled to
relocation costs nor immediate shifts on arrival or the costs of his medical
in my view seeks to challenge the arbitrator's factual findings. In my view,
there is no basis to challenge the factual
findings that the arbitrator made.
contends that the arbitrator made an error of law in holding there was no expert
evidence to support his claim that his
employment with ISS caused his neck and
knee pain. Whilst Mr Chowdhury seemingly did consult a general
practitioner for neck, knee
and other joint pain on 14 December 2016, the
general practitioner's records made no diagnosis of what caused the pain.
the general practitioner's records did not attribute the complained
pain to financial stress or Mr Chowdhury's employment.
his appeal submissions Mr Chowdhury made reference to the word 'transfer'
in s 5(4) of the Act. However, for the same reasons
as set out in
ground 1, s 5(4) has no application to the dispute given the
arbitrator's finding that Mr Chowdhury's employment with
ISS did not
contribute to a significant degree to the contraction of his injury.
as the arbitrator noted, Mr Chowdhury did not call any evidence from
medical practitioners supporting any connection between
financial stress and
knee or neck pain. The arbitrator had the advantage of considering the evidence
at the time it was given.
There is no basis to conclude any error of law as
asserted in ground 4.
and 4 do not raise a question of law or any issue of law. Leave to appeal is
refused for grounds 3 and 4.
relates to the arbitrator's findings about two incident reports that
Mr Chowdhury completed on 8 and 9 June 2017. Mr Chowdhury
complained about receiving shorter meal breaks than other employees. He claimed
these events demonstrated discrimination by ISS.
arbitrator reviewed the incident reports (and the lack of other evidence of any
other action by Mr Chowdhury took at the time)
and concluded that ISS had
on each occasion docked Mr Chowdhury 10 minutes of his break time
because he took too long to complete
tasks allocated to him.
arbitrator did not consider that either of these incidents amounted to
unreasonable conduct of ISS or bullying, harassment, intimidation
discrimination by his
arbitrator also noted that employers have a legal right to direct and control
how work is done, and managers and supervisors
have a legitimate responsibility
to manage and monitor work and provide feedback on performance. The arbitrator
found these incidents
were insignificant and reasonable management action.
Further, for Mr Chowdhury to equate these incidents to discrimination
his credibility and demonstrated a willingness on his part to
exaggerate in retrospect the significance of events that he had complained
to bolster his claim.
is, in substance, a challenge of a factual finding of the arbitrator. The
arbitrator had to make factual findings based
upon considering competing
evidence. To the extent that the arbitrator overlooked or disregarded relevant
evidence or made a finding
involving any incorrect inference from the facts,
made a finding against the other evidence, or the weight of evidence, no error
or question of law arises.
my view, there is no error of law made out by ground 5 of the appeal
grounds. Accordingly, there is no question of law. Leave
to appeal is refused
on ground 5.
relates to findings made by the arbitrator about an incident on
17 September 2017 when Mr Chowdhury and a colleague were
disciplined
after a knife passed through security screening undetected. On
20 September 2017, ISS gave Mr Chowdhury a written warning
directed him to undertake 20 hours of on-the-job training. He claimed this was
harsh and unreasonable treatment that 'turned
his life upside
arbitrator concluded that Mr Chowdhury had not persuaded him that ISS's response
to the incident was not reasonable management
ground 6 Mr Chowdhury contends that the arbitrator made an error in fact
and law in concluding ISS's response to the incident
was fair and the outcome
was not disproportionate.
appeal ground asserts that the arbitrator made an error of law because he ought
to have considered that the actions ISS took
against him was before an
investigation and were in breach of s 5(4) of the Act. Further, the
arbitrator failed to properly construe
the word 'discipline' in s 5(4)(a).
As I have noted, that section is not applicable to the question of causation. I
have made comments
reasons as set out in ground 1, s 5(4) has no application to the
dispute given
the arbitrator's finding that Mr Chowdhury's employment with
ISS did not contribute to a significant degree to the contraction of
his injury.
Mr Chowdhury
also says with respect to ground 6 that the arbitrator made errors of fact.
He submits that the arbitrator ought to
have considered certain evidence of a
witness, Ms Nagpal, in which she said for that kind of incident if it had
happened at the date
of hearing, she would impose administrative action of
standing down only (necessarily not requiring further training). Ground 6
also seems to contain an implicit assumption that Mr Chowdhury denied that
he had breached any workplace procedure.
arbitrator concluded that from a review of the incident, ISS conduct was
reasonable management action and not evidence of bullying,
harassment,
intimidation or discrimination.
appeal ground does not allege any error of law. Simply because
Mr Chowdhury denied he breached any relevant employment procedure
mean the arbitrator's finding is wrong or that any error of law arose. The
arbitrator has simply made a finding of fact
that an alleged 'disciplinary
measure' was not bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination and the
finding was open to him
on a review of the evidence. Leave to appeal on
ground 6 is refused.
Ground 7 and ground 9
and ground 9 can be considered together. The grounds relate to what is
described in the appeal grounds as 'first back pain'
ground 7 and 'second
back pain' (caused by 'pat downs') ground 9.
Mr Chowdhury
attributed physical symptoms (being back pain and leg cramps) starting in
March 2018 to psychological causes from the
disciplinary measures imposed
by ISS after the security screening incident in September 2017, claiming it
had an 'enormous psychological
impact'. The arbitrator did not accept the
unqualified opinion of Mr Chowdhury on this issue and noted there were no
contemporaneous
records of psychological impact from Mr Chowdhury's
Mr Chowdhury
challenges the arbitrator's findings about what he calls the 'first back pain
and leg cramps' in ground 7. In his ground
he refers to various other
evidence from which an inference could be drawn about his back pain and leg
respect to ground 9, on 29 December 2019 Mr Chowdhury had to
conduct over 100 pat downs due to faulty screening machines (referred
reasons as 'faulty ETD machines'). He said these physical pat downs caused
him back pain. The arbitrator noted no medical
evidence was called to support
his complaint and found the incident did not have any effect on
Mr Chowdhury apart from a sore knee
that resolved after he finished his
Mr Chowdhury
challenges these findings of the arbitrator in ground 9. By ground 9
he referred to various factual issues including
evidence of Mr Richardson
alleges an error of fact and not
an error of law (or mixed error of law and
is said that the arbitrator made
[E]rror of discretion ... by asserting that despite no medical evidence the
appellant attributes his back pain and leg cramps to
physical and psychological
causes resulting from the incident on 17 September 2017.
Mr Chowdhury
did not produce any medical evidence in the arbitration, commenting on a
connection between psychological condition
and musculoskeletal injury. The
arbitrator said that 'despite no medical evidence, Mr Chowdhury
attributes his back pain and leg
pain to physical and psychological causes
resulting from the incident on 17 September 2017 (and that) the incident
had an enormous
psychological impact on him and his pain did not occur straight
away, but it was gradual and happened slowly over
arbitrator did not accept Mr Chowdhury's opinion or description of the incident
on 17 September 2017 which I have referred to
in my discussion of
ground 6. The arbitrator also noted there were no contemporaneous records
of complaining about the psychological
impact of the 17 September 2017
respect to 'the second back cramps', which allegedly occurred after
29 December 2019 being the day that he had to pat down more
people, the arbitrator noted there was no medical note or certificate in respect
of the incident, and he found that Mr Chowdhury
was fit to return to work
the next day. The relevance of the finding appears to be that the incident did
not demonstrate bullying,
harassment, intimidation or discrimination by ISS or
that the incident had any effect on Mr Chowdhury apart from a sore knee
resolved after he finished his shift. Mr Chowdhury did not lodge any
claim seeking entitlements for lower back or knee pain because
of his work
duties. There was no evidence to support the assertions made by
Mr Chowdhury which the arbitrator dealt with in these
paragraphs.
and 9 do not raise any question of law. On my review of the evidence before the
arbitrator, there was no evidence to support
Mr Chowdhury's assertions of
any connection between a psychological condition and his alleged musculoskeletal
injuries or the alleged
back pain and back cramps. I repeat the observations I
have made with respect to factual findings. In my view, no error of law
question of law is raised by grounds 7 and 9. Leave to appeal is refused
on grounds 7 and 9.
Ground 8 - pneumonia and bronchitis
alleges the arbitrator made an error of law in concluding that Mr Chowdhury
had not proved his roster was dangerous or resulted
in him contracting pneumonia
or bronchitis.
place ground 8 in its context, Mr Chowdhury received a generic email
from ISS about absenteeism after a period of time when he
had been off work on
sick leave. Mr Chowdhury alleged that this generic email was harsh. He
received the email on 7 August 2018
after he had been diagnosed as having
pneumonia or bronchitis. Mr Chowdhury in his claim before the arbitrator
contended that he
contracted pneumonia and bronchitis because of his roster
(which he described as dangerous) which required him to attend work early
morning in winter.
arbitrator noted that Mr Chowdhury did not tender any medical evidence to
support his claim. With respect to the email the arbitrator
said it was generic
in its terms requesting him to attend a meeting during work hours in relation to
his level of absenteeism and
reminded him of his obligations to provide medical
certificates in support of any personal leave applications. The arbitrator went
on to find that not only was the generic letter not harsh nor unfair, but rather
was a reasonable management action carried out in
a fair way. Further, he
was not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury that his roster was dangerous or resulted
in him contracting pneumonia
and bronchitis.
arbitrator found the email Mr Chowdhury complained of was not harsh and did
not evince bullying, harassment, intimidation or
discrimination.
seeks to challenge these factual findings.
my view, ground 8 does not involve a question of law or an error of law on
the part of the arbitrator. Leave to appeal is refused
on ground 8.
Ground 10 - request for roster changes
the hearing before the arbitrator, Mr Chowdhury claims that he suffered
psychological impact by being rostered onto busier gates,
being treated less
favourably than other employees and 'dangerous rosters'. The arbitrator weighed
evidence as to these issues in
his Reasons at [89] - [96]. The
arbitrator found no evidence of dangerous rosters and noted Mr Chowdhury
had made only one request
for a roster change for family reasons.
arbitrator found that the reason why Mr Chowdhury wanted a roster change
was so he could either drop off or pick up his children
from school. His wife
was sick and financially they were paying for an Uber for her to take their
children to school. The arbitrator
held that Mr Chowdhury had not
persuaded him that what he referred to as the dangerous and discriminatory
rosters amounted to bullying,
harassment and intimidation, concluding this did
not demonstrate bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination by ISS.
seeks to attack a finding made by the arbitrator that on a review of the
evidence he was not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury
that his roster was dangerous
and not persuaded his roster and a single request to change it that was
responded to demonstrates that
he was bullied, harassed, intimidated or
discriminated
my view, ground 10 does not raise a question of law. The findings
made by the arbitrator were open to him on an assessment of
the evidence. No
error of law is made out.
Ground 11 - demotion
26 August 2021, a general ISS memorandum was circulated to staff to the
effect that each security restricted area team would be
allocated a '2IC'
position. Mr Chowdhury was appointed one of seven 2ICs. At the time, ISS
stated that the changes would last until
31 October 2021. A further email
was circulated on 10 November 2021 to the effect that all 2IC positions
would cease with effect
from 8 November 2021 and, upon that date, all
affected staff would revert to their previous position or
Mr Chowdhury's
role as a temporary 2IC ended after the trial period. He claimed shock and
psychological impairment when the trial
period ended. The arbitrator
accepted this was clearly a trial position and found no objective evidence that
Mr Chowdhury suffered
any psychological impact from the role
seeks to challenge these findings. Specifically, he contends that the
arbitrator made an error in fact and law by finding
there was no objective
evidence that his claim that demotion affected him psychologically and caused
impairment. The arbitrator
held that he was not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury
that his 'demotion from a 2IC position amounted to bullying, harassment,
intimidation
or discrimination'.
brief terms, for a short period of time Mr Chowdhury worked in, what was
referred to in the evidence, as a 2IC position on a trial
basis knowing it was a
trial period. That finding was not challenged by this ground of appeal. The
arbitrator found that the return
to his normal substantive position was not
bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination. That is ultimately a
fact and is again informed by competing versions of events and the
arbitrator's preference to contemporaneous and other evidence
evidence contradicted Mr Chowdhury's evidence. Further, Mr Chowdhury
did not produce any medical evidence that the demotion
affected him
psychologically or caused any impairment.
challenge by ground 11 is really a challenge as to the weighting of
evidence given by ISS witnesses Ms Goss and Ms Simpson.
It does not
raise any error of law. The ground also refers to the notion of an employer's
conduct being unreasonable and harsh which
only applies to considering an
exclusion under s 5(4) of the Act. Because of the arbitrator's findings
that the mental health condition
was not caused by employment, whether the
conduct was unreasonable or harsh was a different consideration to the
consideration of
causation for the reasons I have outlined in ground 1.
Ground 11 does not raise an error of law and leave to appeal is refused.
Ground 12 - an instance of being stood down
ground 12 Mr Chowdhury contends that the arbitrator made an error in
fact or law with respect to a claim he had made before the
arbitrator that he
was stood down in circumstances that were unjust or unreasonable.
factual context for ground 12 is that by 1 December 2021, all ISS
staff at Perth Airport were required by State government mandate
initial COVID-19 vaccination. By 30 November 2021, Mr Chowdhury had
not had an initial COVID-19 vaccination. Mr Chowdhury
was stood down for
delaying his COVID-19 vaccination. The arbitrator found ISS had given ample
warning and the action of standing
Mr Chowdhury down was reasonable, with
no objective evidence of effect on emotional
Chowdhury in his ground of appeal and submissions contends that he submitted his
vaccination certificate 'on time'. Further the
'stand down' was a form of
discipline within the meaning of s 5(4)(a) of the Act.
arbitrator found that Mr Chowdhury left it until the last minute to get his
initial COVID-19 vaccination and that was the reason
why he was stood down. The
arbitrator made a finding that he was not persuaded by Mr Chowdhury that
being stood down, despite obtaining
his vaccination certificate within the
deadline, amounted to bullying, harassment, intimidation or discrimination by
ISS or that
it affected his emotional wellbeing.
challenges findings of fact. The findings of fact were open on the evidence for
the arbitrator to make. With respect
to the error of law Mr Chowdhury
seeks to invoke that the action taken by ISS was unreasonable and harsh. I
repeat the observations
I made on ground 1. These matters are only
relevant for a consideration of the exclusionary factors under s 5(4) after
is made that employment significantly contributed to the onset of the
injury. For the reasons that I have already outlined, the
arbitrator did not
need to consider these issues given his finding that Mr Chowdhury had not
persuaded him that employment had significantly
contributed to the onset of the
injury. Leave to appeal is refused on ground 12.
Ground 13 - assumptions made by the arbitrator
seeks to challenge 'assumptions' (more properly factual findings) made by the
arbitrator in his Reasons at [114], [124],
[126], [130], [132] and [140].
their highest, these are alleged 'weighting' errors in considering all of the
evidence and inferences to be derived from the evidence.
I dealt with the
substantive complaint about the lack of acceptance of the expert evidence in
ground 2. At their highest, these
matters allege errors of fact. They are
in no way material to the ultimate decision reached by the arbitrator.
Ground 13 does not
raise any error or question of law. Leave to appeal is
refused on ground 13.
alleges that the arbitrator made findings of fact in contradiction of witnesses
and made errors of fact and law by reaching
the conclusions he did at
[94] - [95] of his Reasons which related to roster changes.
have already dealt with these arguments on the roster change ground of appeal,
ground 10. Ground 14 challenges the weight the
arbitrator placed on
certain evidence. It is a challenge of factual findings. In effect,
Mr Chowdhury contends that the arbitrator
should have accepted his evidence
over the other evidence led at the arbitration. The arbitrator found that
Mr Chowdhury was not
a credible witness. Ground 14 does not raise any
error of law. Leave to appeal is refused on ground 14.
end result is that leave to appeal is refused on all grounds other than
ground 2. For the reasons I have already outlined, while
I will grant
leave to appeal on ground 2, the appeal should be dismissed. Upon
publication of these reasons, I will hear from the
parties as to the appropriate
orders to dispose of this appeal including as to costs.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to His Honour Judge Curwood
26 SEPTEMBER 2025
Arbitrator's
reasons for decision dated 22 April 2024 [40]
Reasons [2]; Appeal Book filed 16 August 2024, pages 3 -
Reasons [18].
Reasons [18],
Reasons generally [35], [55], [57], [69], [84] - [85], [96],
Reasons generally [31], [32], [72] - [73], [85], [88], [129] -
[35]. When referring to Mr Chowdhury's subjective perception, the
arbitrator footnoted references to the cases of
Department of Education v
[2014] WADC 85
Anderson v Mercy Hospital Mount
[2020] WASCA 42
[41] - [45].
Reasons [40] -
example, Reasons [56] -
Reasons [114].
Reasons [114].
Reasons [115].
Appeal Book, page
Book, pages 378 -
[131] and [134].
Section 391(2) of the 2023
Paridis v Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
(2007) 33 WAR 361
Marks v Coles Supermarkets
[6], [134], [136], [163] (
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v
(1990) 170 CLR 321, 353 (Mason CJ);
BHP Billiton Iron Ore Pty Ltd v Brady
[2008] WASCA 250
Engine Protection Equipment Pty Ltd v Miller
[2018] WASCA 55
Pacific Industrial Co v Jakovljevic
[2008] WASCA 60
[19] - [20].
Catholic Education Office of WA v Granitto
[2012] WASCA 266
[56] - [57].
BHP Billiton Iron Ore Pty Ltd v Brady
Waterford v The Commonwealth of Australia
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
Atanasoska v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 17
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[28] - [29].
See Reasons [22] -
Skinner v Broadbent
[2006] WASCA 2
[37] - [38]
Reasons [18],
[19], [21] -
[23] - [34].
Reasons [35].
Reasons [31].
Reasons [34].
Reasons [135].
Reasons [136].
Reasons [137].
Appeal Book,
pages 324 -
Book, pages 344 -
Book, pages 347 -
Book, pages
Appeal Book, page
[35], [135] -
above and footnote
of the Act, definition of
St Mary's School v Askwith
[2011] VSCA 90
(2011) 206 IR
[12] (Ashley JA with whom Warren CJ & Kyrou AJA
Wiegand v Comcare
[2002] FCA 1464
[23] - [31].
[23] - [24].
State Transit Authority of New South Wales v
Fritzi Chemler
[2007] NSWCA
Federal Broom Co Pty Ltd v Semlitch
[1964] HCA 34
(1962) 110 CLR 626
Federal Broom
Federal Broom Co
Pilbara Iron Company (Services) Pty Ltd v Suleski
[2017] WADC 114
Pilbara Iron Company
Iron Company
[67] - [69]; Reasons
arbitrator considered these factors in his Reasons at [28] -
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
(509), (515), (516);
Summit Rural (WA) Pty Ltd v
Lenane Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA 122
[161] - [171]
Summit Rural
) including a lengthy discussion of the New South
Wales Court of Appeal decision in
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA
Fisher v Nonconformist Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA
[113]; see also
Summit Rural
[161] - [171] which discussed the principles of common sense
in the assessment of loss caused by a breach of
Beer v Duracraft Pty Ltd
[2004] WASCA 192
Kipoi Holdings Mauritius Ltd v Robert Michael Kirman and Robert Conry
Brauer as joint and several administrators of Tiger Resources
Ltd (subject to
Deed of Company Arrangement) [No 4]
[2024] WASCA 145
[547], citing
Which Dr Cheng diagnosed as a Major Depressive disorder pursuant to DSM 5.
Appeal Book, page
[24] - [25] above, and Reasons
Book, pages 348 -
date of Dr Cheng's report, 23 September
in Reasons as 'msk symptoms'
[51] - [55].
Reasons [56] -
Reasons [70] - [73].
[86] - [88].
Appeal Book, page
[80] - [85].
Reasons [97] - [101].
Reasons [102] - [104].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (687 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter