URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/470.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- JYD [2025] WASC 470 (11 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- JYD
[2025] WASC 470
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
SO 14 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Application
for a restriction order under the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act 2020
(WA) - consideration
of whether the State has met the requisite criterion for the court to fix a date
for the hearing of the State's
application - consideration of whether an interim
detention order or interim supervision order should be made
Legislation:
Protection (Offender Reporting) Act 2004
Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act 2020
Date set for hearing of
application and ancillary orders made for the provision of expert evidence at
that hearing
Interim detention
Representation:
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
Legal Aid WA
referred to in decision(s):
reasons were delivered orally on 31 October 2025. They have been amended to
include full citations and to correct matters of
9 September 2025, the State of Western Australia applied for a restriction order
in respect of the respondent under the
Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
respondent is currently in custody serving a term of imprisonment of 4 years and
6 months backdated to 17 June 2021. He is due
to be released from custody
on 16 December 2025. The term of imprisonment is in respect of a 'serious
offence' under the HRSO Act,
being an offence of sexual penetration of a child
under 13 years of age. The respondent is therefore a serious offender
under custodial
sentence within the meaning of that phrase as defined in
s 3 of the HRSO Act. Thus, s 35(1) of the HRSO Act applies to
35 of the HRSO Act only permits the State to make its application if there is a
possibility that the respondent might be
released from custody within the period
of one year after the application is made. That possibility arises here.
43(1) of the HRSO Act
requires that
there be a preliminary hearing in respect of the State's application, which is
the hearing listed before me today
The State has provided helpful written submissions for the purposes of
today's hearing.
Preliminary hearing
main purpose of the preliminary hearing before me today is for me to decide
whether there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the court might find,
pursuant to s 7 of the HRSO Act, that the respondent is a high risk serious
offender within the meaning
If I am not so satisfied, then I cannot fix a date for the hearing of the
State's application for a restriction order. The State
also seeks an
interim detention order until the final determination of the application.
'high risk serious offender' is a person in relation to whom the court is
satisfied by acceptable and cogent evidence and to a
high degree of probability,
that it is necessary to make a restriction order to ensure adequate protection
of the community against
an unacceptable risk that the person will commit a
A restriction order is made under s 48 of the HRSO
in the form of either a continuing
detention order or a supervision order. A supervision order permits an offender
to be in the community
subject to conditions.
7 of the HRSO Act
sets out the matters
to which the court must have regard in assessing whether a person is a high risk
serious offender. These matters
are comprehensively addressed in the State's
written submissions.
or not a risk that an offender will commit a 'serious offence' is 'unacceptable'
is a question which requires the court's
judgment as to the nature and extent of
the possible harm. The assessment of the nature and extent of the possible
harm directs attention
to the possible serious offences that might be committed
and the harm they may cause. It also directs attention to the likelihood
the offender might commit such offences (that is, the likelihood the risk might
eventuate).
the risk is found to be 'unacceptable', the nature and extent of that
unacceptable risk then informs the assessment of whether
a restriction order is
necessary to ensure adequate protection of
the community.
respect of the issue before me on this preliminary hearing, Quinlan CJ
observed in
The State of
Western Australia v
that it is sufficient if there are reasonable grounds for believing that
respondent is represented today by counsel, Mr Hager, who is very experienced in
this area. Mr Hager properly concedes that the
criterion set out in s 46 of
the HRSO Act is met. In respect of the interim detention order, Mr Hager
says that an interim supervision
order, in effect, provides adequate protection
of the community in circumstances which I will come to shortly.
the reasons which I will now give, I am satisfied that the criterion in
s 46 is met. I will address the making of the interim
detention order after
explaining my reasons for being so satisfied.
The evidence
support of the application, the State relies upon an affidavit of Ms Fleur
Allen, affirmed 9 September 2025. Her affidavit contains
the details of the
respondent's criminal history, as well as several reports and assessments in
relation to him.
The respondent's personal circumstances
respondent's personal circumstances are set out in detail at paragraph 87 of the
State's submissions. The respondent's childhood
in his early years was
extremely traumatic. The respondent then had a significant period of stability
in his life, living with his
grandparents from when he was about four or five
years of age until he was 16. Unfortunately, though, he started using
methylamphetamine
at about 15 years of age and in his late teens and early
twenties used a number of other illicit substances.
completed year 10 of school and at 17 years of age worked for about eight months
in a manual labour type role but otherwise has
not been able to sustain regular
employment.
respondent's serious offences
respondent is now 36 years of age, being born on 10 June 1989. He has
committed six serious offences as that term is defined
in the HRSO Act.
offences are three offences of possessing child exploitation material, contrary
to s 220 of the
Criminal Code
), two offences of sexual
penetration of a child under 13, contrary to s 320(2) of the Code and one
offence of procuring a child under
13 to engage in sexual behaviour, contrary to
s 320(3) of the Code.
respondent committed the first serious offence on 10 June 2007, which was
the day he turned 18. The victim was his then 6‑year‑old
stepbrother. The respondent woke the victim up, performed fellatio on him, and
the respondent put his penis into the victim's mouth.
He was sentenced to a
total effective sentence of 26 months.
sexual penetration offence for which the respondent is currently in prison was
committed on 31 May 2018. The respondent was
living with the victim's mother.
The victim was then 4 years old. The respondent forcibly placed his
penis in the victim's mouth,
despite the young victim physically resisting and
saying no. The respondent's sentencing took place on 5 August 2022.
He was sentenced
on the basis that he either ejaculated or urinated into the
victim's mouth.
offences of possession of child exploitation materials were committed on 16
October 2012, 31 March 2016 and 17 December 2018.
The latter two offences
were the most serious and he was sentenced on 7 April 2020 for both offences.
In respect of the offence
committed on 31 March 2016, the respondent's mobile
phone was analysed, and 740 images of child exploitation material were
identified.
They identified children from babies to teenagers of about
16 years of age in various sexual ways. In respect of the offence
on 17 December 2018, the respondent's tablet was taken by police
and analysed. It had 1800 files containing images in categories
with category 5 being the most serious. For these two offences, was
sentenced to a total effective sentence of 2 years 6
nature of the offending and the period over which it has been committed
demonstrates on the material presently before me that
the respondent has an
enduring sexual interest in children, and is prepared to act on it, and to
grossly abuse positions of trust
in doing so.
The most recent program and treatment reports
most recent program that the respondent has participated in is the Sex Offender
Intensive Program. He did 48 out of a possible
49 sessions in 2024
and 2025. The report in respect of his participation in that program said
[The respondent] disclosed motivations to engage in the program inclusive of
gaining emotional coping skills. Throughout the program,
[the respondent]
demonstrated a pattern of low participation and an avoidance of completing
activities and tasks. Whilst he was somewhat
receptive to exploring factors
preceding the offending, he became particularly resistant and hostile when
exploring factors immediately
preceding the offending.
was removed from the program on 24 April 2025 because he was unable to
demonstrate a shift in his ability to explore the offending.
most recent psychological report is dated 24 July 2022. It was provided
for the purposes of the respondent's sentencing for
the most recent sexual
penetration offence. The psychologist said
[The respondent] likely has child related sexual interests, although this is
difficult to fully understand because he disputes any
sexual intent in his
offending behaviour. His offending and other interpersonal problems seem to be
underpinned by personality disruptions
as a result of ongoing trauma and
instability in his childhood.
psychologist said that the combined results of the assessments undertaken of the
respondent were that he fell into the 'well
above average' category of risk. As
Mr Hager points out, this is not at a high level of risk, however it is still at
a well above
average category of risk. And the psychologist also said that the
respondent presented with a number of factors known to underpin
an individual's
risk for sexual or general
the respondent's sentencing on 5 August 2022, his then counsel said that the
respondent accepted that he had a sexual interest
However, at his parole assessment interview on 27 October 2023 he denied
that was the
This change of position undermines the respondent's prospects of rehabilitation,
as it affects his ability to understand the factors
that have led to his
My assessment
Conclusion on the preliminary hearing
all of these circumstances, and having regard to the matters outlined in the
State's written submissions, I am satisfied there
are reasonable grounds to
believe that the court might find that the respondent is a high risk serious
offender within the meaning
of the HRSO Act. In coming to that view, I have had
particular regard to the nature of the respondent's offending, the harm such
offending causes to victims, his lack of treatment gains and the current
assessment of his risk of reoffending.
Interim detention order
State also seeks an order that the respondent remain in custody pending the
determination of these proceedings. In that respect,
s 46(2)(c)(i) of the HRSO Act provides that the court
... if the offender is in custody and might otherwise be released from custody
before the restriction order application is finally
decided, order that the
offender be detained in custody for the period stated in
make an interim detention order, I must be positively satisfied that such an
appropriate.
I set out the applicable principles in
The State of Western
Australia v
which I adopt without repeating.
the information before me, the nature and extent of the harm which the
respondent presents a risk of causing if released into
the community is
significant, that being a risk of sexual offending against children, and of
encouraging the distribution of child
exploitation material, such encouragement
arising from his obtaining it. Also, three of the serious offences were
committed while
the respondent was subject to reporting obligations under the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting)
(WA). So the existence
of those obligations did not prevent serious offending occurring.
Hager points out that the respondent has available accommodation with his
mother, who is a very supportive influence on the respondent.
Even so, there is
presently a young infant who lives at those premises. Mr Hager suggests that the
respondent's mother can monitor
his behaviour and ensure that he does not have
any unsupervised contact with that young infant. However, as a matter of
practicality,
the respondent's mother cannot supervise him 24 hours
my view, the absence of significant rehabilitative gains and of suitable
accommodation are important factors in assessing whether
or not an interim
detention order ought to be made. In my view, those factors point towards the
need for such an order at this point
in time. Further, on the information before
me at this stage, the State's case is relatively strong that the respondent is a
risk serious offender.
regard to these matters, taken together, I am positively satisfied that an
interim detention order is appropriate. I will
make the order to operate until
the final determination of the application, or further order, which gives to the
respondent the ability
to seek an interim supervision order if circumstances
change, pertaining to treatment gains and/or suitable accommodation becoming
these reasons, I am satisfied that the criterion in s 46 of the HRSO
I will therefore make an order
fixing the date for hearing of the State's application for a restriction order
and the usual ancillary
orders for the preparation of reports for that hearing.
I also make an interim detention order in the terms I have just set
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
11 NOVEMBER 2025
HRSO Act, s
HRSO Act, s
The State of Western
Australia v Williams [No 2]
[2024] WASC 215
The State of Western
Australia v Williams [No 2]
The State of Western
Australia v Winder
[2021] WASC 65
[16] (Quinlan CJ). See also
The State of Western
Australia v PAS
[2020] WASC 405
[20] ‑ [21]
(Allanson J).
Ms Allen's affidavit, page
Ms Allen's affidavit, page 316, par
Ms Allen's affidavit, page 318, par
Ms Allen's affidavit, page
Ms Allen's affidavit, page 328.
The State of Western
Australia v JPA
[2024] WASC 225
The State of Western
Australia v XDR
[2025] WASC 354
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter