URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
"I" [2022] WACIC 10 (3 October 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2022] WACIC 10
DELIVERED :
3 OCTOBER 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 1271 of 2020
Domestic violence - Sexual
assault - Neglect - Alleged offences (no person
charged) - Assessment of damages - Burden of
proof - Extension
of time - Mental and nervous
shock - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Child and Community Services Act 2004
Criminal Code
CriminalInjuriesCompensationAct2003
, s 3, s 6, s 9, s 17, s 19, s
27, s 31, s 33, s 35
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not Applicable
Solicitors:
CLP LEGAL PTY LTD
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
(1994) 11 WAR 481
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
, 549 (Toohey & Gummow JJ)
[2018] WADC 148
[2022] WACIC 7
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC 25
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC 93
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA 104
Hunia v Kwan
[2002] WADC 117
[2019] WACIC 16
[2010] WADC 6
M v J and J v J (Unreported WASC, Library
No 920598, 19 November 1992) (Scott J)
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
[170] - [171];
(1992) 222 CLR 612 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ)
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
(Barwick CJ, Kitto & Menzies JJ)
[2017] WADC 76[28]
(1984) 4 SR (WA)
and MES v KG
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
Re Jackamarra
[2014] WADC 9
[2014] WADC 92
[2016] WADC 74
[2011] WADC 10.
[6] (Braddock DCJ)
RJE v Bandy (Unreported WASC, Library No 1365; 31
May 1974.) 3 (Burt J)
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC 14.
[12] (Stone DCJ)
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13[117]
Winiarczyk v Tsirigotis
[2011] WASCA 97
for Decision
application dated 14 May 2019 the applicant claimed compensation for
injuries sustained as a consequence of alleged offences committed
by "AW", his
mother's partner. On 25 June 2021 I made an award of $33,293 in favour of
the applicant. On 28 June 2021 the applicant
accepted the award made.
Pursuant to
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
(the Act) I provide reasons for my decision, which I set out
support of the application, the applicant's solicitors provided a statement of
effects dated 9 August 2019, a supplementary statement
of effects dated
12 March 2021, the applicant's handwritten statement dated 14 May
2019, a supporting statement from "FY" dated 14
May 2019, a subsequent
undated statement from "FY", a copy of the Court order appointing FY the
guardian of the applicant, a bundle
of records from WA Police, a medical
report from Dr Frederick Ng dated 12 September 2019, a report from
Miss Jenny Elliot, psychologist,
dated 27 September 2005, and a medical
report from Andrea Way, Child Development Centre. In addition, the applicant
submitted a
bundle of school records which I do not mention by name so as not to
identify the primary schools attended by the applicant, plus
a tax invoice and
receipt from Dr Ng and submissions with respect to the claims.
to section 19 of the Act I obtained additional police records of incidents
involving the applicant and his parents.
Format of the application
applicant's solicitors submitted four separate applications with respect to
"AW", as follows:
(a) 28 August 2015, Beeliar – secondary
victim of alleged sexual assault;
(b) 7 October 2015, Beeliar – secondary victim of alleged sexual
(c) Between 2012 and 2015, Hamilton Hill – Primary victim of physical
and emotional abuse;
(d) Between 2012 and 2015, Hamilton Hill – Secondary victim of physical
and emotional abuse.
applications were made pursuant to section 17 of the Act. An award of
compensation for an alleged offence can be made if an
Assessor is satisfied the
claimed loss and injury occurred as a consequence of an alleged offence.
Pursuant to section 3 of the
Act 'satisfied' means 'satisfied on the
balance of probabilities'. It must be more probable than not that the alleged
An applicant who claims compensation under the Act where no conviction has
been entered bears the burden of proving the
me to be satisfied the alleged offences occurred "clear and cogent proof" is
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
Court stated (endnotes and citations omitted):
The ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil
litigation in this country is proof on the balance
of probabilities. That
remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or
fraud. On the other hand, the strength
of the evidence necessary to establish a
fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
is sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been
made to the effect that clear or cogent proof is necessary 'where
so serious a
matter as fraud is to be found'. Statements to that effect should not, however,
be understood as directed to the standard
of proof. Rather, they should be
understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our
society do not ordinarily
engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a
judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the
of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such
of the four applications submitted were based on the applicant being the
secondary victim to the alleged offences. An applicant
is entitled to a
compensation award for mental and nervous shock in limited circumstances which
are set out in section 35 of the
Act. These include where the applicant is
personally present when or immediately after the offence
the applicant is a close relative (which includes child or step-child) of the
person who suffered injury and is living
with that person immediately before the
Circumstances giving rise to the claims
applicant was born on 29 November 2000. The applicant has been in the care of
"FY" from when he was three weeks old. "FY" has
been in a relationship with
"AW" since before the applicant's birth, and "AW" was in a parental role to the
applicant, although the
materials before me indicated "AW" was not always
resident with "FY" and the applicant. On 20 October 2003 Family Court
Orders were
made granting "FY" sole responsibility for the long-term care,
welfare and development of the applicant. In his statement dated
2019 the applicant described a difficult childhood in which his relationship
with his father, "AW", deteriorated when he
was about 12 years old. The
applicant described "AW" becoming increasingly abusive towards the applicant and
his mother and AW would
drink excessive alcohol and taking drugs. During this
time period, the applicant recalled his father often lifting him off the ground
and screaming insults at the applicant. The applicant also recalled witnessing
his father attempting to stab himself with a knife,
and stated he did not feel
safe in his own house until his father left the family home in about 2015.
response to a request to the applicant's solicitors for clarification of the
alleged offences, the applicant provided a supplementary
statement of events
dated 12 March 2021. This recorded the following additional incidents:
one instance, my dad pushed me against the wall and shouted at me. He called me
"little shit", "dickhead: and said "fuck off".
This happened in 2012 as I was at
[redacted] Primary School.
another incident in 2012, my dad was talking to me, I was fed up with my dad for
abusing my mother, which was always on my mind.
I walked away and he rushed up
to me and punched me in the back.
had another incident in 2012. I argued with my dad. I told him "you are not my
father". "Why are you abusing my mother". He punched
me on my left cheek. It
was not a hard punch
2013, I was wagging in school. My parents had to come to school and speak to
the teacher. I was suspended from school. When we
got home, my dad used a belt
and hit me in the leg a few times, leaving marks on my legs.
these instances, I became terrified of my dad. He continued to abuse my mother
and I could not do anything about it except
to console my mother after the
applicant advised Dr Ng, consultant psychiatrist, he could not recall any
abuse prior to the age of 12 years. He recalled at
times being verbally
abused by the alleged offender and at times the offender did "Scrap me" which he
clarified as meaning handled
him roughly. He recalled the alleged offender
verbally abusing him and calling him bad names. He denied being fearful of the
offender but noted he had not had any contact with the alleged offender
for several years. He reported witnessing abuse of "FY"
but advised his memory
of those occurrences was at times unclear and vague. He recalled the alleged
offender calling "FY" derogatory
names, swearing at her and shouting at her, and
"FY" usually did not shout back at the alleged offender. He could not recall
being physically abused by the alleged offender. He recalled an instance of
sexual abuse of "FY" in which he walked into her room,
seeing the alleged
offender on top of "FY", recalling the alleged offender had "put his thing in
her bum" and "FY" was crying.
her statement dated 14 May 2019 the applicant's mother, "FY", commented
"AW" should not have been around the applicant due to
"AW's" drinking and
smoking "dope". She commented "AW" would argue, swear and push her around. "AW"
would smash things in the house
or pot plants outside. Although "FY" said she
would call the police, but after they left, she would take "AW" back if he
apologised.
"FY" also referred to "AW" using profanities in front of the
children, calling her family "blacks" and refusing to let her and the
associate with them. "FY" described the applicant changing over time as a
result of his exposure to his father's conduct
including fighting at school,
using profanities, and avoiding being in the family home.
respect to a specific incident of alleged sexual assault of "FY" the applicant
recalled the following events in his statement
dated 14 May 2019:
When I walked in, he was on her aggressively, she wanted him to stop, but he
wouldn't listen, when he saw me walked (sic) in he swore
at me and started
yelling stop. So I walked off and went about my business. When it was all over,
I spoke to my mother to see what
happened, She told me what he did and I
couldn't help it but to be disgusted in him.
detail in relation to the alleged sexual assaults was contained in an undated
and unsigned statement by "FY". This statement
commences with an incident of
sexual assault on 27 August 1999 but as this predates the birth of the
applicant I do not need to consider
it. The statement referred to FY's fear of
the alleged offender, which was based upon the alleged offender previously
having been
in prison for assaulting a former partner and so she put up with
abuse from him as she was concerned he would "flog" her. She described
of assaults by the alleged offender, plus incidents of the offender engaging in
self-harm and of name calling and other
demeaning behaviour towards her, drug
use and poor behaviour towards "the kids". I had a number of concerns with this
which was unsigned and lacked specificity in relation to the
allegations made.
in a police statement dated 28 October 2016 "FY" repeated many of the above
allegations in more detail. "FY" stated she
would buy "dope" for "AW" which he
would consume straight away, "AW" would call her names and engaged in
self-harming behaviours,
including stabbing himself in the stomach and cutting
his wrist. "FY" described "AW" having a preference for having anal sex with
her, which she did not enjoy and described a specific incident of non-consensual
anal intercourse with and being strangled by the
alleged offender which occurred
on about 27 or 28 August 2015 when the applicant was present in the house.
"FY" also recorded an
additional incident of non-consensual anal intercourse
with the offender which occurred on 7 October 2015.
records indicate "FY" made a report to police on 5 November 2015, the Incident
report (051115 1400 12968) relevantly stated:
Compl has phoned the Sex Assault Squad to report during the evenings of 28
August and 7 October 2015, the POI has performed non-consensual,
penile/anal
penetration with Compl at her home address of [redacted]. On one incident, [the
applicant] and [redacted] were in the
next bedroom, and on the other incident,
[the applicant] and [redacted] were in the next bedroom. The Compl repeatedly
told the POI
"No" when he first attempted penile/anal after engaging in
consensual penile/vaginal intercourse. The POI grabbed the Compl by the
and forced penile/anal penetration. The POI stated to the Compl he could do it
as they have been together for 15 years.
note whilst "FY" reported the incidents to police on 5 November 2015
(approximately one month after the most recent alleged offending)
she withdrew
her complaint on 16 November 2015. "FY" separated from "AW" in about
March 2016 and subsequently contacted police to
proceed with her complaint
against "AW". However, police documents indicate the alleged offender was not
charged with any offences
due to "insufficient evidence". The alleged offender
admitted he had previously had consensual anal intercourse with the applicant
but denied the incidents occurred. On 8 December 2016 when interviewed by
police the alleged offender advised he had not seen "FY"
since the death of his
daughter 22 months prior and when they separated she had threatened to make
allegations to the police about
alleged sexual offences committed by "AW".
The applicant's injuries
his statement dated 9 August 2019, the applicant described the impact of
the incidents upon him included a difficulty focusing
at school because of
concerns about his mother's safety. The applicant said he had no good memories
from living with his parents
and considered himself to have become socially
isolated with difficulties trusting people.
applicant advised Dr Ng he occasionally experienced bad dreams, (but was
vague about the content of the bad dreams) and stated
he did not think very much
abusing him. The applicant
reported feeling somewhat sad and being somewhat
worried a lot of the time, but was not particularly
Consideration of the alleged offences
Alleged offences of aggravated sexual penetration without consent
applicant has brought a claim in relation to witnessing two alleged offences of
aggravated sexual penetration without consent.
"FY" alleged "AW" on two
separate occasions engaged in non-consensual sexual penetration. Police
investigated the circumstances
of each incident and no charges were preferred
against "AW" on the basis of insufficient evidence.
elements of the offence of aggravated sexual penetration without consent
pursuant to section 326 of the
Criminal Code
(a) Sexual intercourse occurred;
(b) There was no consent to the sexual intercourse;
(c) There was a circumstance of aggravation.
was able to accept in relation to the incident on 28 August 2015 the sexual
penetration occurred as the applicant recalled walking
in and seeing the
incident on 28 August 2015. With respect to the incident on 7 October
2015, the only evidence is "FY's" uncorroborated
version of events. "FY" spoke
to the applicant about the alleged offence shortly after it occurred and
reported the alleged offence
promptly to police. Whilst this supports "FY's"
allegation, it is not determinative of the offending having occurred,
particularly
in absence of other evidence. Police records indicated they were
unable to locate any independent corroborative evidence of either
of the alleged
offences. Concerns about "FY's" evidence were noted in the police running sheet
and the medical records she provided
to police and/or police obtained including
from Beeliar Medical Centre did not corroborate her reported complaints of
injury or support
the history of physical and sexual abuse from "AW" which she
reported to police. I did not consider I had sufficient evidence to
satisfied the incident on 7 October 2015 occurred.
was able to accept a circumstance of aggravation applied to each incident,
namely "FY" and "AW" were in a 'family and domestic
relationship'.
relation to the issue of consent, although "FY" advised police she did not
consent to the sexual penetration, the alleged offender
advised police "FY" had
not only consented to, but initiated, anal sex during their relationship. In a
case where an incident has
occurred in circumstances which are contested and
there is no independent corroborative evidence, without conducting a hearing,
is no reliable way in which I can determine which of the two accounts
represents the truth. For me to be satisfied the alleged offences
"clear and cogent proof" is
. I was not
satisfied on the evidence before me there was a lack of consent in relation to
the incident on 28 August 2015. However,
given the nature of the
application before me, I considered I did not need to obtain additional
evidence. However, I considered
I did not need to seek additional evidence
despite my finding the incidents on 28 August 2015 and 7 October 2015
did not comprise
offences of aggravated sexual penetration without consent
because I found the circumstances of the incidents on 28 August 2015 and
7 October 2015 could comprise an alternate offence and I set this out
Alleged offences of primary victim of physical and emotional abuse and as
secondary victim of physical and sexual abuse
it was alleged the applicant and "FY" were physically assaulted and verbally
abused by the alleged offender, and also in the
case of "FY" sexually assaulted
by the alleged offender, save for the two incidents which occurred on
28 August 2015 and 5 October
2015 I was not provided with sufficient
specificity of any incident to be persuaded the conduct of "AW" comprised
alleged offences
Criminal Code.
The applicant provided limited
particularisation of this claim, with the applicant's solicitors referring to
the applicant's statement
dated 9 August 2019 for details and stating "FY"
was verbally, physically and sexually assaulted by the alleged offender on many
occasions. Having regard to the materials submitted in support of the
application, I formed the view the claim would best be categorised
for "child neglect".
relation to the categorisation of the offences I adopt the reasoning of Assessor
[2022] WACIC 7
The task for the assessor is to determine the nature of the behaviours outlined
in the papers submitted in support of the various
applications lodged. There are
no formal pleadings under the Act and by reason of section 18(2) of the Act I am
not bound by rules
or practice as to evidence or procedure. In addition, I have
power to amend an application of my own initiative pursuant to section
of the Act. It follows notwithstanding multiple applications are lodged and/or
multiple submissions are made in relation
to the nature of the claims made, it
is for the assessor to ultimately determine how those alleged behaviours should
be treated with
reference to the relevant legislation. In effect, the scheme of
the Act requires me to determine any claim for compensation having
the substance of the claim rather than the form.
Section 101
of the CCS Act states:
101.Failing to protect child from harm
(1) A person who has the care or control of a child and who engages in
(a) knowing that the conduct
may result in the child suffering harm as a result of any one or more of the
following —
(i) physical abuse; or
(ii) sexual abuse; or
(iii) emotional abuse as defined in section 28(1); or
[(iv) deleted]
(v) neglect as defined in section 28(1);
(b) reckless as to whether the conduct may have that result,
is guilty of a crime, and is liable to imprisonment for 10 years.
(2) In subsection (1) —
engage in conduct
(a) to do an act; or
(b) to omit to do an act;
has the meaning given to that term in
section 28(1).
terms "emotional abuse", "harm" and "neglect" are defined in section 28(1)
of the CCS Act:
28.When child in need of protection
(1) In this section —
emotional abuse
psychological abuse
being exposed to family violence
, in relation to a child, means any detrimental effect of a
significant nature on the child’s wellbeing, whether caused
(a) a single act, omission or
circumstance; or
(b) a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances;
includes failure by a child’s parents to provide,
arrange, or allow the provision of —
(a) adequate care for the child; or
(b) effective medical, therapeutic or remedial treatment for the child.
(emphasis added)
establish an offence under section 101 of the CCS Act it is necessary to
establish :
(1) The alleged offender had the care or control of the
(2) The applicant was a child;
(3) The alleged offender:
to provide adequate care for the child or effective medical, therapeutic of
remedial treatment for the child; and/or
harm to the child as a result of:
to domestic violence;
abuse; and/or
reckless as to whether that omission may result in the child suffering harm as a
result of neglect or knew that omission would
result in the child suffering
Section 28(1)
of the CCS Act defines harm as any detrimental effect of a significant nature on
the child's wellbeing, whether caused
by a single act, omission or circumstance;
or a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances. The consequence
of multiple
acts or omissions constituting a single offence is, notwithstanding
such an offence may involve several acts of behaviour or ill
treatment, pursuant
to sections 31 and 33 of the Act the maximum payment available is no greater
than the single statutory maximum
which applies as at the date of the
Findings in relation to offences
to the Family Court Order dated 20 October 2003 "FS" had responsibility for
the day to day care, welfare and development
of the applicant. In addition, I
found "AW" had care and control over the applicant by reason of his relationship
with the "FY"
and his role in the applicant's life, which included the applicant
referring to "AW" as his father, "AW" residing with the applicant
and "FY" (at
times), "AW" attending school meetings and being able to disciple the applicant.
I found "AW" and "FY" committed an
alleged offence of failing to protect a child
from harm pursuant to section 101 of the CCSA Act as a result of the
following acts
or omissions:
assaults by "AW" including lifting him off the ground, punching him to the face,
pushing him, punching him to the back and
hitting him with a belt;
to "AW's" sexual activities with "FY" including witnessing the incident on
28 August 2015. I note the applicant having witness
his mother and "FY"
engaging in anal intercourse, in circumstances where he recalled his mother
crying and "AW's" hands being around
her throat would have been distressing,
irrespective of whether this was a consensual or non-consensual sexual act. I
being told by FY about the alleged incident on 7 October 2015 would
have been distressing for the applicant;
to domestic violence via "AW's" relationships with "FY, including abusive
language, demeaning language, pushing "FY" and
strangling her during the
incident on 28 August 2015;
to emotional harm as a result of "AW's" reported self harming behaviours;
to emotional harm as a result of "AW's" abusive and derogatory language towards
the applicant;
comprising:
to "AW's" drug taking activities.
is apparent from the above, whilst I did not accept the alleged sexual offences
which allegedly occurred on 28 August 2015 and
5 October 2015 comprised an
offence under the
Criminal Code
I was prepared to accept those incidents
comprised behaviour by "AW" which caused the applicant to suffer harm as defined
28(1) of the CCS Act.
considered the alleged offence committed under the CCS Act was committed against
the applicant and so he was eligible to claim
for mental and nervous shock
pursuant to section 35(2)(b) of the Act. I did not consider the applicant
to be the secondary victim
of the alleged sexual offences as I was not satisfied
on the balance of probabilities they were committed.
I considered "FY" and "AW" to be co-offenders with respect to the alleged
offence under the CCS Act. Whilst the actions
of "AW" were the primary cause of
harm to the applicant, and the applicant described a positive and caring
relationship with "FY"
her actions (particularly in advising the applicant who
was a child about the incident on 7 October 2015) and omissions in failing
to remove the applicant from the harmful conduct of "AW" contributed to the
injuries he sustained.
Extension of time
to section 9(1) of the Act an application for compensation must be made
within three years after the date on which the offence
to which it relates was
committed or, if it related to more than one offence the date on which the last
of those offences was committed.
However, an assessor may allow an application
for compensation after the three year period if he or she thinks it is just to
last of the offences against the applicant was in 2015 and his application was
required to be lodged prior to 2018 but was lodged
on 30 July 2020.
Accordingly, the applicant requires an extension of time within which to bring
his applications.
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC
[14], Herron DCJ wrote:
Factors that may be relevant to the
exercise of the court’s discretion under s 9(2) include (
[2014] WADC 9
[2014] WADC 92
Error! Bookmark not defined.
(a) the history of and background to the proposed application;
(b) the length of the delay;
(c) the reasons for the delay;
(d) the nature of the proposed application;
(e) the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of an extension of
time, including the extent of any prejudice to the
respondent;
(f) the prospects of the compensation application succeeding; and
(g) whether injustice will be suffered if an extension of time is
applicant's explanation for the delay in bringing his application was he was a
child when the last offence occurred. The applicant
was aged 20 years when the
application was brought. The delays in bringing the application prior to the
applicant attaining adulthood
cannot be attributed to the applicant's conduct.
it was accepted the applicant's youth resulting in an inability to
understand how to deal with the matter at the time, and being a
child at the
expiry of the limitation period were reasons to support an extension of time. I
considered if the extension was not
granted the applicant would be denied
compensation. That on its own does not justify granting an extension of
. However I
considered, for the reasons set out above, the prospects of the applicant
succeeding on a timely application would have
been high. I considered leave
should be granted to bring the application out of
Method of assessment
of the Act sets out the general powers of an assessor. It provides 'on
application in respect of injury suffered by a
victim as a consequence of the
commission of an offence, an assessor may award such compensation that the
assessor is satisfied is
just for the injury and for any loss also suffered'.
Under section 3 of the Act, 'satisfied' means 'satisfied on the
probabilities'.
assessing the amount of compensation I should have regard solely to the injury
suffered by the applicant in consequence of the
commission of the alleged
offence. The amount of compensation is not to be fixed as punishment of the
offender or as an expression
of sympathy for the
correct approach to adopt in assessing the amount of compensation under the Act
is to apply the ordinary tortious principles
for assessment of damages, subject
to the limitations imposed by the definitions of 'injury' and 'loss' in the Act,
and to the jurisdictional
limit of the
Assessment of the applicant's claim
to section 17 of the Act a victim who suffers injury as a consequence of
the commission of an alleged offence may apply
for compensation for the injury
and any loss suffered. 'Injury' is defined in section 3 of the Act as
'bodily harm, mental and nervous
shock, or pregnancy'.
amount of damages for injury must be fair and reasonable compensation for the
injuries received by the applicant and the disabilities
caused, having regard to
current general ideas of fairness and
moderation.
amount must be proportionate to the particular situation of the
his report dated 12 September 2019, Dr Ng, psychiatrist,
Based on the history elicited, the mental status examination, having perused the
documentation provided, taking into account the
content of this report and from
my clinical experience, I form the view that your client currently suffers from
a persistent depressive
disorder (DSM 5) (used to be called dysthymic disorder),
with associated anxiety, currently largely untreated.
There are indications that he currently lacks in self confidence and self
esteem, and that he currently lacks in a direction in his
Although the history would indicate that he would have been emotionally
traumatised by what he had witnessed, (as a secondary victim)
of his mother
figure being verbally, emotionally, physically and sexually abused by the
offender, and also of him being the primary
victim of verbal and physical abuse
by the offender, your client did not report sufficient psychiatric symptoms to
diagnose post
traumatic stress disorder.
regard to the medical evidence outlined above, I found, as a result of the
alleged offences, the applicant suffered from a
psychological injury, comprising
anxiety and depression
addition, I noted the applicant had been subject to physical harm at times, when
assaulted by "AW". The only injuries identified
as having occurred from those
physical assaults were marks to the applicant's legs after being hit with a belt
in 2013. However,
I accepted in relation to each separate incident the
applicant would have experienced a degree of pain and discomfort, albeit of
short duration. I considered an appropriate allowance for the applicant's
physical and psychological injuries to be $30,000.
Loss of earnings
applicant is entitled to compensation for 'loss of earnings as a direct
consequence of the injuries' he
earnings includes loss of earning
applicant sought an allowance for loss or earning capacity. In submissions made
by the applicant's solicitors I was referred
to his Western Australia
Certificate of Education dated 31 December 2018 which indicated the
applicant did not demonstrate the reading,
writing or numeracy standards
required by the State and to the report of Dr Ng dated 12 September
2019 who comments the applicant
was unable to attend any form of education or
employment for the next three years.
also considered the report of Dr Anne Kehow, paediatrician dated
12 September 2005 which noted at the age of 57 months (4¾
the applicant was in receipt of speech therapy due to language delay and
behavioural difficulties. These difficulties were
noted in his school reports
in 2009 and 2010 and his literacy and numeracy were noted to be "limited" in
Semester 1 2012. By Semester
1 2013 his attendance at
school had reduced to 48% but I had no evidence as to the cause of this decline
in attendance. His attendance
was reported as 93% at another primary school for
that same semester and so the poor attendance at the first primary school may
have been a recording error. I was not provided with the applicant's
school reports for high school and had no additional evidence
of the impact of
the alleged offences upon his ability to study. I was also not provided with
any financial documents, such as payslips
or tax returns which set out the
applicant's earnings since leaving high school. In his statement dated
9 August 2019 the applicant
the end of 2018, I started part time employment at Officeworks in city
) doing packing work stop. I received $180 a fortnight
at the start of this year, I stopped working there after two (2) months as I
felt it was not for me. The job involved dealing
with paperwork which I found
difficult to complete and understand. I needed someone to explain in break it
down for me.
explanation provided by the applicant for ceasing work was therefore as a result
of his language and cognitive issues. I noted
the applicant's language and
learning difficulties were identified at a young age and I was provided with no
evidence those learning
difficulties were exacerbated by the alleged offences.
I was not satisfied the alleged incidents had a sufficient impact on the
applicant's ability to learn, or upon his mood so as to impair his earning
capacity and so declined to make an award for loss of
Report fees
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that arise in obtaining any
report from a health professional or counsellor
in relation to the injury
suffered by the
applicant incurred the cost of obtaining the medical report from Dr Ng in
the amount $1,793. I allowed this expense.
Future treatment expenses
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that are likely to be
reasonably incurred for any treatment the applicant
is likely to need as a
direct consequence of the injury suffered by the
Dr Ng recommended the applicant undertake at least 12 – 16 sessions
of psychological treatment. I made an allowance of $1,500
psychological treatment.
Summary of assessment
assessed the applicant's injury and losses as
Injury or Loss
CIC 1552/2020
Report expenses
Future treatment expenses
Loss of earnings
made an award in favour of the applicant in the amount of $33,293.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
3 OCTOBER 2022
[2016] WADC
(1984) 4 SR (WA)
(1995) 12 SR (WA)
, 331 - 332;
Hill v Clarke
WADC 76[28].
Hunia v Kwan
[2002] WADC 117
Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
[170] - [171];
(1992) 222 CLR 612 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron
35(2)(c) of the
35(2)(e) of the
Hunia v Kwan
[2002] WADC 117
[2019] WACIC 16
9(2) of the
[2018] WADC
Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
, 549 (Toohey &
Gummow JJ).
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Error! Bookmark not
(Unreported
WASC, Library No 920598, 19 November 1992
Error! Bookmark not
RJE v Bandy
(Unreported WASC,
Library No 1365; 31 May 1974.
Error! Bookmark not defined.
[2011] WADC 10.
Bookmark not defined.
(Braddock DCJ);
Robertson v Baker
Error! Bookmark not defined.
[12] (Stone
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR
Error! Bookmark not defined.
, 125 (Barwick CJ, Kitto & Menzies
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA
Error! Bookmark not defined.
[107] (Newnes JA with whom Pullin
& Miller JJA
Winiarczyk v Tsirigotis
Error! Bookmark not defined.
[71] (Judgment of the Court)
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC
(1994) 11 WAR 481
Error! Bookmark
not defined.
s6(2)(a)(ii).
The Act, s6(2)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (388 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter