URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/466.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THOMPSON -v- WA POLICE [2025] WASC 466 (5 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- WA POLICE
[2025] WASC 466
NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
SJA 1054 of 2025
JULIAN THOMPSON
law - Single judge appeal - Appeal against sentence - Breach of family violence
restraining order - Appellant sentenced to
6 months 1 day immediate imprisonment
- Immediate imprisonment not reasonably open - No further sentence given time
spent in custody
Legislation:
Appeals Act 2004
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
to appeal granted
Sentence of 6 months and 1 day
immediate imprisonment set aside
further sentence imposed on appellant
Representation:
D T Shackles
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (WA)
State Solicitor's
referred to in decision(s):
(This judgment was delivered extemporaneously on
5 November 2025 and has been edited from the transcript.)
Introduction
25 June 2025, the appellant, Peter Thompson, was convicted for a breach of a
family violence restraining order 2847 of 2024
) on his plea of guilty. The
appellant was sentenced to a term of immediate imprisonment of 6 months and 1
day with eligibility for
appellant seeks to appeal the sentence on the ground that the sentence was
manifestly excessive as to type or that the sentence
ought to have been
appeal has been listed for an urgent hearing in circumstances where the
appellant has been in custody since 25 June 2025 for
this offence.
the reasons that follow, I grant leave to appeal and allow the appeal. The
appellant is resentenced to no further sentence pursuant
Sentencing Act 1995
appellant's children are persons protected under the FVRO, which was served on
the appellant on 16 May 2024 and expires on 15
conditions of the FVRO included that 'the appellant must not communicate or
attempt to communicate with the person protected
by any means whatsoever,
including SMS or text messages or any other electronic means'.
20 November 2024, the appellant was remanded in custody (on unrelated charges)
in Casuarina Prison (
During the day, the appellant posted a letter via the internal letterbox within
his unit at Casuarina.
letter was provided to security for investigation after the prison staff
identified that the intended recipients of the letter
were the appellant's
children and were protected by the FVRO.
three‑page letter expressed the appellant's love for his children,
apologies for past incidents and a desire to have contact
with his children.
Appellant's submissions in the Magistrates Court
appellant was represented at the hearing before the learned magistrate on
25 June 2025. The appellant pleaded guilty. Counsel
for the appellant
submitted that:
(1) the letter was intercepted prior to receipt by the appellant's children;
(2) the appellant was feeling depressed and wanted to reach out to his children
to apologise for his past behaviours and let them
know he loved them;
(3) the appellant understood he should not have sent the letter;
(4) the appellant pleaded guilty at a very early opportunity after obtaining
legal advice; and
(5) the appellant had commenced Family Court proceedings seeking to have contact
with his children.
The learned magistrate's sentencing of the
learned magistrate took into account as mitigating factors the appellant's early
plea of guilty, affording him a 20% discount,
and his acceptance of
responsibility.
learned magistrate noted the appellant's previous offending and said that while
it was not an aggravating factor, it highlighted
the need for specific
deterrence, that is the need to discourage the appellant from engaging in this
In this regard, the relevant offending history
of the appellant was that he had previously been convicted in 2019 of multiple
of a family violence restraining order in relation to his
ex‑partner, who is also the mother of his children to whom he sent
letter. The appellant was fined for each of those offences. The appellant also
had convictions for breaching a violence restraining
order, not in the context
of a family relationship, for which he was also fined. The appellant had been
convicted of violent offences
- the offence of endangering the health, life or
safety of a person in 2024 for which he received a conditional suspended
imprisonment
order and the offence of assaulting a public officer in 2014 for
which he received a fine. The appellant also had been convicted
of offences
committed in Victoria - an offence of arson in 2023 and multiple breaches of
family violence restraining orders in 2020
for which he was fined.
learned magistrate characterised the appellant's present offending as a 'brazen
breach of the order' and as indicating a 'desire
to, essentially, do what [the
appellant wanted] despite the existence of the
learned magistrate determined that, in all of these circumstances, only a term
of immediate imprisonment was appropriate. After
discounting the term by 20%
for the appellant's plea of guilty, the learned magistrate sentenced the
appellant to a term of immediate
imprisonment of 6 months 1 day.
learned magistrate also declared the appellant a serial family violence offender
pursuant to
Sentencing Act
Ground of appeal
ground of appeal is
The sentence of 6 months and 1 day is manifestly excessive in the light of the
maximum penalty prescribed by law for the offence,
the standard of sentencing
customarily observed for that type of offence, the level of seriousness of the
circumstances of offending,
and the personal circumstances of the [appellant].
Legal principles
is an appeal under the
Criminal Appeals
CA Act, by s 7(1), allows an aggrieved party to appeal to a single judge of
this court in respect of a decision made by a court
of summary jurisdiction. A
sentence imposed as a result of a conviction is a decision which may be
8(1) of the CA Act sets out the grounds upon which an appeal under s 7 is
made. Those grounds include where there has been
an error of
the sentence imposed was inadequate or
and/or there has been a miscarriage of
appellant must obtain leave to
If leave to appeal is not granted, the appeal is taken to have been
The court must not grant leave to appeal on a ground of appeal unless the court
is satisfied that the ground has a reasonable prospect
succeeding.
appellate court may not substitute its own opinion for that of the sentencing
magistrate merely because the appellate court would
have exercised its
discretion in a different manner. It must be shown that the sentencing
magistrate has made an error in exercising
discretion.
if a ground of appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant, the court may
dismiss the appeal if it considers that no
substantial miscarriage of justice
ground of appeal alleging that a sentence is manifestly excessive is asserting
an implied error, as opposed to an express
An appeal alleging a sentence is manifestly excessive will only succeed if the
appellant can demonstrate that the sentence imposed
was so unreasonable or
unjust that the court must conclude that a substantial wrong has
A sentence may be excessive because the wrong type of sentence has been
or because the length of the sentence is manifestly
determining whether a sentence is manifestly excessive as to type or length, the
appellate court must examine the sentence having
regard to the maximum sentence
for the offence, the standards of sentencing customarily observed with respect
to that offence, the
seriousness of the offence with reference to the scale of
seriousness of offences of that kind, and the personal circumstances of
was noted by Martin CJ in
Rubin v The State of
A sentence will not be characterised as unreasonable or unjust if it was within
the range of sentences reasonably open in the exercise
of a sound discretionary
judgment. Once it is accepted that there may be cases in which different types
of sentence are reasonably
open in the exercise of a sound discretionary
judgment, it follows that an appeal against sentence on the ground of error to
from the type of sentence imposed can only succeed if it is
established that the type of sentence imposed was not reasonably open
exercise of a sound discretionary judgment.
Section 6(1)
Sentencing Act
requires that a sentence imposed on an offender be
commensurate with the seriousness of the offence. By
Sentencing Act
, the seriousness of the offence must be determined by taking into
account the statutory penalty for the offence, the circumstances
commission of the offence, any aggravating and mitigating factors, and the
vulnerability of any victim of the offence.
Sentencing Act
provides that
does not prevent the
reduction of a sentence because of any mitigating factors or totality
principles. According to
Sentencing Act
, a mitigating factor
is one which, in the court's opinion, decreases the moral culpability of the
offender or decreases the extent
to which the offender should be punished.
Sentencing Act
, a court must not impose a sentence of
imprisonment on an offender unless it decides that the seriousness of the
offence is such
that only imprisonment can be justified or that the protection
of the community requires it.
court must not impose a term of immediate imprisonment unless it is the only
appropriate sentencing option - that is, the court
must be positively satisfied
that suspended and conditionally suspended imprisonment are not appropriate
sentencing options before
imposing a term of immediate
imprisonment.
In deciding whether it is so satisfied, the court must have regard to the
sentencing principles in
div 1 of the
Sentencing Act
HNA v The State of Western
, the court
Where a sentence is said to be manifestly excessive as to type, the question for
this court is whether it was reasonably open to
the sentencing court, upon
application of the relevant sentencing principles and considerations and in all
the circumstances, to
be positively satisfied that earlier listed sentencing
options were not appropriate.
Additional evidence on appeal
accordance with s 39(1) of the CA Act the appeal court must decide the
appeal on the evidence and material that was before the
lower court. However,
s 39(1) does not affect this Court's power as contained in s 40(1)(e)
of the CA Act to 'admit any other evidence'
for the purposes of dealing with an
appeal: CA Act s 39(3).
appellant sought to adduce additional evidence by way of the affidavit of David
Thomas Shackles affirmed on 3 November 2025.
The affidavit annexes the
letter that the appellant sent to his children, a copy of the FVRO and an email
from the Sentencing Information
Unit regarding time spent in custody by the
respondent did not object to the admission of the additional evidence. I admit
the additional evidence on the basis that it
is relevant to the issues arising
on the appeal.
Application of the law
appellant contends that the learned magistrate's sentence involved an implied
error in two alternative ways. First, that the
sentence was excessive as to
the alternative, if a
sentence of imprisonment was reasonably open, the term
ought to have been suspended and the order that it be immediately served was
reasonably open.
relation to the second contention, the respondent concedes that leave to appeal
and the appeal should be granted.
the reasons I outline below, I find that the sentence of imprisonment was
reasonably open, but the term of imprisonment ought
to have been suspended. The
respondent's concession as to the second contention was rightly made in my view.
Maximum sentence prescribed by law
61(1) of the
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) provides that the maximum sentence for breach of a family
violence restraining order is 2 years imprisonment and a fine of
is not in dispute that a wide range of factual circumstances can apply to
breaches of family violence restraining orders, and
therefore, that every
sentencing option is
Customary sentences for offences of this type
it is not possible to discern a customary range of sentences imposed for
offences of this kind given the large range of
circumstances in which breaches
of family violence restraining orders occur, the following principles arise from
cases involving
a breach of a family violence restraining
(1) there is an emphasis placed on general deterrence for violent offences
committed by men against women in domestic
environments;
(2) offences at the lower end of the range of seriousness are usually dealt with
by penalty other than immediate
imprisonment;
(3) serious offences will incur a term of imprisonment to be served immediately
or suspended, if the offender's personal circumstances
favourable;
(4) actual violence, a threat of violence where the offender is in a position to
carry out that violence, and/or invasion of the
protected person's home are
regarded as offences at the serious end of the
(5) where an offender has repeatedly breached family violence restraining orders
or court orders, a sentence of imprisonment is open
to the court.
The circumstances of this offending
appellant's offending did not involve violence or threats of violence, nor was
it manipulative or derogatory in nature. Given
the letter was intercepted, the
protected persons were not subject to any contact from the appellant.
appellant did not engage in subterfuge or deceit. The appellant attempted to
post the letter to the protected persons via the
internal letterbox within his
unit at Casuarina. While this demonstrates a lack of complex planning, it also
demonstrates the appellant's
blatant disregard for the law and of the orders of
am of the view that the appellant's offending falls towards the lower end of the
scale of seriousness. However, his blatant disregard
for orders of the court
make personal and general deterrence important sentencing considerations.
is also important to recognise that a breach of a family violence restraining
order towards the lower end of the scale of seriousness
is still likely to cause
the protected persons to be fearful and
distressed.
my view, it was open to the learned magistrate to impose a sentence of
imprisonment for this offence. In coming to that decision,
the learned
magistrate had regard to the appellant's personal circumstances, the
circumstances of the offending, the mitigating factors
that the learned
magistrate outlined and the importance of personal deterrence given the relevant
prior convictions of the appellant.
The learned magistrate also had regard to
the importance of general deterrence in sentencing the appellant to a term of
imprisonment.
nature of the appellant's offending, that being his blatant disregard of the
FVRO in circumstances where he had been previously
convicted of breaches of
court orders, means that it was not unreasonable or unjust for the learned
magistrate to conclude that a
term of imprisonment was appropriate.
learned magistrate then considered, after evaluating all of the circumstances,
that only a term of immediate imprisonment was
appropriate and the option of
suspending the term was not open.
Sentencing Act
provides that a court must not impose a term of
immediate imprisonment unless it is satisfied that no other sentencing option
be appropriate. A sentence of immediate imprisonment is often described
as a 'last resort' when no other disposition would be
appropriate.
The judicial officer sentencing an offender must be positively satisfied that it
is not appropriate to suspend a term of imprisonment
before the term can be
ordered to be served
immediately.
find that it was not reasonably open to the learned magistrate, upon application
of the relevant sentencing principles and considerations
and in all of the
circumstances of the appellant's case, to be positively satisfied that suspended
imprisonment was not appropriate.
That is because the appellant's offending
objectively falls towards the lower end of the scale of seriousness for offences
therefore grant the appellant leave to appeal and allow the appellant's appeal
on the sole ground of appeal.
Resentencing the appellant
set aside the appellant's sentence of 6 months and 1 day immediate imprisonment
upon charge PE 3214 of 2025.
must now resentence the appellant.
take into account the mitigating factors in the appellant's case - the appellant
pleaded guilty at an early opportunity, for which
I afford him a 20% discount,
and that his offending was of a non‑threatening nature.
the breach of a FVRO is a serious offence given the prevalence of domestic
violence in the community. This makes general
deterrence an important
sentencing consideration. In the appellant's case, personal deterrence is also
an important sentencing consideration
given the brazen nature of the offending
and the fact that the appellant has previous convictions for breaches of court
am satisfied that the appellant's offending was at the lower end of the scale of
seriousness for offences of this kind given that
it was not violent or
threatening behaviour. Further, the protected persons did not receive the
letter. However, his offending
was of an inherently serious nature.
am satisfied that the appropriate sentence at the time that the appellant was
convicted was a term of suspended imprisonment of
6 months and 1 day.
are, however, some practical difficulties that arise that prevent me from
sentencing the appellant to a term of suspended imprisonment
at the date of this
appeal. If a term of imprisonment is suspended, there is no power to backdate
at 25 June 2025, the appellant had already spent 123 days
(approximately four months) in custody in relation to a charge that
discontinued. Since he was sentenced on 25 June 2025, the appellant has
spent a further four months and 12 days in custody.
In total, the
appellant has spent over eight months in custody. This is a matter that I may
take into account in resentencing the
It is because the appellant has spent that time in custody that I consider that,
pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, no further sentence should be
imposed on the appellant.
declaration that the appellant is a serial family violence offender pursuant to
Sentencing Act
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
5 NOVEMBER 2025
Amended appeal notice dated 22 July
CA Act s 6(f) and
8(1)(a)(i).
8(1)(a)(iii).
v The State of Western Australia
[2005] WASCA
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR
Mikulic v The State of
Western Australia
[2009] WASCA
v The State of Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 44
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
v The State of Western Australia
[2020] WASCA 197
Vagh v The State of
Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 17
Rubin v The State of
Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 2
Sentencing Act
HNA v The State of Western
[2016] WASCA 165
Sentencing Act
WA Police v CFB
[2025] WASC 107
[82] (McGrath
The State of Western
Australia v Winch
[2024] WASCA 79
Dennis v Lanternier (No
[2017] WASC 5
[150] (Jenkins
Dennis v Lanternier (No
Dennis v Lanternier (No
WA Police v CFB
AH v The State of Western
[2014] WASCA 228
Ness v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
[2013] WASCA 56
[26] ‑ [27].
Dragon v The State of
Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 252
s 41(4)(a).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter