URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RZ [2025] WASAT 119 (27 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
RZ [2025] WASAT 119
MS R BUNNEY, MEMBER
9 AND 15 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
27 OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
27 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
GAA 5336 of 2025
Represented Person
Prospective Purchasers
PUBLIC TRUSTEE
Third Party
Administration - Represented person signed
contract to sell real property - Appointment of Public Trustee as emergency
administrator
- Role of emergency administrator - Parties to proceedings in the
Tribunal - Open justice - Application for costs from prospective
purchasers of
property - Application for costs against the Public Trustee - Application for
costs dismissed - Application from prospective
purchasers to access documents -
Access to documents refused
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
, Sch 1, cl 11, cl 13(2)(a),
State Administrative Tribunal Act
Application for costs dismissed
Application to
access documents refused
Representation:
Represented Person
Prospective Purchasers
Third Party
Ms S Clutterbuck
Solicitors:
Represented Person
Prospective Purchasers
Third Party
Public Trustee
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Medical Board of Western Australia v A Medical Practitioner
[2011] WASCA 151
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
is aged in his late 70s. He is retired but previously worked as a real estate
agent. RZ signed a contract to sell his rural
could not remember important details about the transaction, such as who he
listed the Property with.
to those concerns, RZ's son EZ applied to the Tribunal for the appointment of a
guardian and administrator pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
). The Tribunal
appointed the Public Trustee as RZ's emergency administrator to protect and
secure the Property until the hearing
occurred on 9 October 2025
prospective purchasers of the Property, NB and JB (
) considered
that EZ's application was without merit. They advised EZ that they would
attend the Hearing to make submissions about
the Contract and would seek that EZ
pay their legal costs.
Tribunal ordered that the Hearing be held in private and directed that only RZ,
his wife AZ, EZ and the Public Trustee would
attend. The day before the
Hearing, the Purchasers filed submissions with the Tribunal claiming that they
were being denied procedural
fairness by being excluded from the Hearing and
again sought that their legal costs be paid.
the Hearing, the Public Trustee was appointed as RZ's plenary administrator. A
few days later, the Tribunal held a directions
hearing with the Purchasers to
clarify aspects of their application for costs and their subsequent request to
access documents held
by the Tribunal.
have decided to dismiss the Purchasers' application for costs and refuse to
allow access to documents held by the Tribunal. These
are the reasons for my
Legislation and principles
primary concern of the Tribunal when making decisions under the GA Act is the
best interests of the person for whom the application
was made, RZ.
Tribunal will take all facts and circumstances into account when determining
RZ's best interests. The Tribunal may inform itself
on any matter as it sees
fit, and is not bound by rules of evidence, which ensures, as far as possible,
that all relevant information
can be considered by the Tribunal to make the
correct decision in RZ's best
application for guardianship and administration is made pursuant to s 40 of the
GA Act. When considering such an application,
the Tribunal must first determine
whether the person concerned lacks the capacity to make decisions about their
personal and financial
matters. If so, the Tribunal will next consider
whether it needs to make an order, or whether there is another way for decisions
to be made for the person that is less restrictive on their freedom of decision
and action.
orders are needed, the Tribunal will next decide who the guardian or
administrator will be, the functions or powers they require
and when the order
will be reviewed.
s 40 application (
) was determined at the Hearing, where I
appointed the Public Trustee as RZ's plenary administrator. The further
issues for the Tribunal
to resolve are:
(a) whether the Purchasers
are parties to the Proceeding;
(b) whether the Purchasers should receive a costs order in their favour;
(c) whether the Purchasers should be given access to documents held by the
Tribunal for the purposes of the Proceeding?
Findings of fact
facts set out in [13] to [27] below are not controversial and I make
findings in accordance with those facts.
signed an enduring power of attorney on 19 April 2017 to appoint AZ and EZ as
his joint and several attorneys (
signed a listing authority to list the Property for sale with the real estate
) on 17 August 2025.
September 2025
11 September, RZ signed the Contract to sell the Property to the Purchasers for
22 September, EZ filed the application to the Tribunal to seek the appointment
of an administrator and guardian for RZ. On 23
September, initial
case management orders were prepared by the Tribunal, as was an order to the
Agent to produce to the Tribunal
a copy of all documents relating to the sale of
the Property (
on 23 September, a medical certificate was filed with the Tribunal that recorded
that RZ scored 21 out of 30 on a Montreal Cognitive
Assessment Test. A score
below 26 may indicate some degree of cognitive impairment.
24 September, the Tribunal appointed the Public Trustee as RZ's emergency
administrator.
order stated that the Public Trustee was appointed as the limited administrator
to protect and secure the Property including
lodging a caveat on the title to it
Section 65 Order
25 September, the Purchasers instructed their solicitor to write to EZ to
require that EZ, among other things, amend the orders
sought in the application
to withdraw all orders seeking to set aside, vary or restrain completion of the
Contract. The letter also
be advised that if you do not consent to the variation of orders as requested
above, we will enter an appearance and attend
the hearing on 9 October 2025 to
oppose your application. We will seek an order that you pay our clients'
costs of the proceeding
pursuant to
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(WA), on the basis that your application is without merit and
has caused unnecessary expense and delay to our clients who are acting
faith as purchasers for adequate consideration.
confirm by return email that you will file an amended application consistent
with [the request] above and provide a copy of
the lodged amendment. If we do
not receive confirmation by the stated deadline, our clients will act to protect
their contractual
rights and seek their costs be paid.
may be contacted on [telephone number and email address] should you wish to
query anything set out above.
did not respond to the letter or contact the solicitor. EZ filed a copy of the
letter with the Tribunal.
of the Property was scheduled for 16 October 2025. The same settlement
Settlement Agent
) was engaged to act for both RZ and the
Purchasers.
Public Trustee informed the Settlement Agent that the Settlement Agent was not
to take any further steps in relation to the settlement.
October 2025
1 October, I ordered that the Hearing would be held in private so that only RZ,
AZ, EZ and the Public Trustee were to be present
day before the Hearing, the Purchasers filed 11 pages of submissions in which
they sought their costs and assurances that no
adverse findings would be made
against their interests at the
the Hearing of 9 October, I made an order, among others, to appoint the Public
Trustee as RZ's plenary administrator.
next day, the Tribunal contacted the Purchasers' solicitor to obtain his and his
clients' availability to attend a directions
hearing to clarify the
Purchasers' costs application. The Purchasers instructed their solicitor to
write to the Tribunal to seek
urgent access to documents held by the Tribunal,
and that all parties file further submissions.
directions hearing occurred on 15 October 2025. At this hearing, the
Purchasers' solicitor confirmed that:
(a) the Purchasers were
seeking that the Public Trustee pay their costs; and
(b) the Purchasers had received copies of the Section 65 Order and the Agent
Order. These two orders formed the basis of the Purchasers'
understanding of
the Proceeding. They concluded that because the Agent was asked to provide
copies of documents relating to the
sale of the Property, and the Public Trustee
was appointed to protect the Property, the purpose of the Proceeding was to stop
sale of the Property.
The Purchasers' case
Purchasers contend that EZ made the application to the Tribunal for the sole
purpose of preventing the sale of the Property.
They say it is artificial
to view the s 40 application as a 'stand-alone' application that was unrelated
to the Contract. The Purchasers
say they are parties to the Proceeding as their
interests have been affected.
Purchasers say they have been treated unfairly and had no choice but to
intervene and file submissions to protect their interests.
They claim they are
entitled to an order for their substantial legal costs and compensation for the
distress and uncertainty caused
by having to defend their position.
Purchasers say there are three reasons they have incurred costs.
they were denied procedural fairness because the Privacy Order prevented
them from attending the Hearing. The Purchasers say their
submissions
determination of whether RZ has capacity. In addition,
they wanted to make
submissions about whether the Public Trustee should be appointed as RZ's
administrator or whether an attorney
should manage RZ's estate using the EPA.
the Purchasers say that the conduct of the Public Trustee caused them to
incur costs. The Purchasers allege that the Public Trustee
has not engaged
openly with the Purchasers' solicitor.
Purchasers contend that the Public Trustee acted beyond the legal authority
provided by the Section 65 Order by telling the Settlement
Agent to halt work on
the settlement. The Purchasers assert that the Public Trustee was 'stepping
into the shoes' of RZ, which goes
beyond protecting his estate. The Purchasers
say that lodging a caveat, which was anticipated by the order, was within power
directing the Settlement Agent not to effect settlement was
and caused an immediate detriment to the Purchasers.
the Purchasers contend that because the Public Trustee has not made an
application to the Tribunal pursuant to s 82 of the
GA Act, there was no basis
for the Public Trustee to prevent settlement occurring on 16 October.
Section 82 of the GA Act provides
for the Tribunal to set aside a transaction if
the following circumstances:
Transactions
may be set aside
(1) Subject to subsection (2), where
a person within 2 months before being declared under section 64(1) to be a
person in need of
an administrator of his estate has entered into a disposition
of any property (including a gift) or taken on lease, mortgaged, charged,
purchased any property, or agreed to do so, the State Administrative Tribunal
may, on the application of the administrator of
that person's estate and on
notice to such persons as the Tribunal may direct, set aside the transaction and
make such consequential
orders as it thinks fit for the purpose of adjusting the
position or rights of the parties and other persons.
(2) The State Administrative Tribunal shall not set aside any transaction
under this section where —
(a) the application is not brought within the period of 2 years commencing on
the day of the completion of the transaction or, in
the case of a lease taken,
is not brought before the expiration of the lease; or
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied, in the case of a transaction that is not a
gift, that —
(i) the other party acted in good faith and without notice of any incapacity
to which the represented person was then subject; and
(ii) the consideration for the disposition was adequate or, in the case of a
purchase, not excessive or, in the case of a lease taken,
the rent is not
(3) For the purposes of an application under this section, the represented
person shall be deemed to have been a person who was in
need of an administrator
of his estate, at the time when he entered into the transaction or agreed to do
so, until the contrary is
the Purchasers say that they were required to urgently engage senior legal
representation to protect their substantial property
rights in circumstances
where they have been denied procedural fairness and advance notice of potential
adverse consequences. The
Purchasers expected that a determination would be
made about the Contract at the Hearing and believed their rights would be
without knowledge of the case against them or the opportunity to be
will next set out the basis upon which the Privacy Order was made.
The power to hold hearings in private and closing hearings to the public
the common law principles of open justice apply to courts, the Tribunal is a
creature of statute and has distinctly different
described at the 'enabling
Act' in the
State Administrative Tribunal Act
). Proceedings in the Tribunal are governed
by both the SAT Act and the enabling Act, which in this case is the GA Act. The
and review jurisdiction. Applications made pursuant to the GA
Act come within
the Tribunal's original jurisdiction.
SAT Act directs that the Tribunal is bound by the rules of natural justice,
except to the extent that the SAT Act or the enabling
Act expressly or by
implication allow a departure from those
If there is a
conflict between the SAT Act and the enabling Act, the enabling Act
question of whether a proceeding should be conducted in private is therefore not
determined by the general principles of open
justice, but by a construction of
the enabling Act.
Unlike other matters in the original jurisdiction of the Tribunal, such as
disciplinary proceedings that relate to professional
people, there is no public
interest in the transparency of guardianship and administration matters, which
necessitate the examination
of the private history and medical records of the
person concerned, thereby exposing their vulnerability.
Tribunal also has different procedures to that of a court, and if the practice
and procedure is not prescribed under the SAT
Act or the enabling Act, the
Tribunal can determine its own practice and
61 of the SAT Act provides the Tribunal with the power to direct that only
specific persons be present at a hearing:
to be public; exceptions
(1) Unless another provision
of this Act provides otherwise, hearings of the Tribunal are to be held in
(2) On the application of a party or on its own initiative the Tribunal may,
in the circumstances described in subsection (4), order
that a hearing or any
part of it be held in private and that only specified persons may be
(3) The Tribunal's power to make an order under subsection (2) is
exercisable by —
(a) a legally qualified member; or
(b) the presiding member if the Tribunal as constituted for a hearing does
not consist of or include a legally qualified member.
(4) The Tribunal may make an order under subsection (2) if the Tribunal
considers it is necessary to do so —
(a) to avoid endangering the national or international security of Western
Australia or Australia; or
(b) to avoid damaging inter-governmental relations; or
(c) to avoid prejudicing the administration of justice; or
(d) to avoid endangering the physical or mental health or safety of any
(e) to avoid offending public decency or morality; or
(f) to avoid endangering property; or
(g) to avoid the publication of confidential information or information the
publication of which would be contrary to the public interest;
(h) for any other reason in the interests of justice.
discretion in subsection (4) to make an order pursuant to subsection (2)
can only be exercised if the Tribunal is satisfied that
it is 'necessary' to
make the order to avoid one of the consequences set out in subsection (4).
GA Act contains its own provision to direct whether a hearing, or part of a
hearing, will be closed to the public. Clause 11
of Schedule 1 of the GA
Act provides that the Tribunal can direct that a specific person is not present
at a hearing, with the discretion
based on the best interests of the person
11 of Schedule 1 of the GA Act provides as
(2) Where, in a particular case, the State Administrative Tribunal determines
that it would be in the best interests of the person
to whom proceedings
commenced under this Act relate for the hearing or part of the hearing to be
closed to the public, the Tribunal
may, subject to subclause (3), direct that a
person shall not be present at the hearing unless —
(a) in the opinion of the Tribunal, he is directly interested in the
proceedings; or
(b) he has been authorised by the Tribunal to be present.
(3) Any person bona fide engaged in reporting or commenting upon the
proceedings of the State Administrative Tribunal commenced under
for dissemination through a public news medium shall not be excluded from the
place where the hearings are being held.
is a vulnerable person. I was satisfied that it was likely that the discussion
at the Hearing about the difficulties he is experiencing,
the medical
evidence and the decisions he had made would be distressing for him. It was
also necessary for the parties that attended
the Hearing to feel comfortable to
speak openly and honestly in RZ's best interests.
on the robust correspondence from Jebb Legal, I was satisfied that the Hearing
would have been more upsetting for RZ if the
Purchasers attended to made
submissions about the formation of the Contract and who should be RZ's
decision-maker. It was in RZ's
best interests, in terms of his mental health
and safety, that he be protected from contact with the Purchasers and that the
occur in private with only specified people to attend.
do not accept that the Purchasers' understanding of the events surrounding the
formation of the Contract would provide any relevant
evidence about RZ's
capacity. They do not know RZ and I was satisfied that they did not have any
first-hand knowledge of his decision-making
capacity that would have assisted
the Tribunal. The most relevant evidence in respect of RZ's capacity was filed
by his geriatrician
in the days prior to the Hearing.
also do not accept that the Purchasers' opinion about who the administrator
should be, or whether an attorney should manage RZ's
finances, would have been
relevant to my determination.
the Purchasers told EZ that he was at risk of a costs order if he did not amend
the orders sought in his application. The
orders sought by EZ related to
guardianship and administration, so the Purchasers' requirement that EZ amend
the orders relating
to the Contract was misconceived. I am satisfied that EZ
was acting in RZ's best interests when making the application to the Tribunal
and the Purchasers' attempts at interfering with the Tribunal process to protect
their interests, with the threat of costs, meant
it was inappropriate that they
have any involvement in the Proceeding.
held the Hearing in private to protect RZ's mental health and in the interests
of justice, as it was imperative that the Hearing
was emotionally safe for the
family and did not put EZ at risk of further demands for costs from the
Purchasers.
will next discuss the Public Trustee's powers when appointed as the emergency
administrator and the allegation that they acted
beyond those powers.
The powers of an emergency administrator
Tribunal can appoint an emergency administrator in the following circumstances:
Where it appears to the State Administrative Tribunal that
(a) a person may be a person in respect of whom a
declaration should be made under subsection (1) of section 64; and
(b) it is necessary to make immediate provision for the protection of the
person's estate,
then, pending the determination of the question whether the person is, in fact,
a person in respect of whom a declaration should
be made under that subsection,
the Tribunal may exercise such of the powers conferred on it by this Act as may
be necessary for enabling
that provision to be made.
(1) of s 64 of the GA Act provides that:
...where the State Administrative Tribunal is satisfied that a person in respect
of whom an application for an administration order
is made under section 40
(a) is unable, by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in
respect of matters relating to all or any part of
his estate; and
(b) is in need of an administrator of his
the Tribunal may by order declare the person to be in need of an administrator
of his estate, and if it does so shall appoint
(c) a person to be the administrator; or
(d) persons to be joint administrators,
as the case may require, of the estate of the person in respect of whom the
application is made.
decision about whether to appoint an emergency administrator can be made at any
time and is often made at the case management
stage when an application is
filed, particularly if the person concerned has signed a contract to dispose of
Section 65 Order was limited to protecting and securing the Property only. The
pressing issue for the Tribunal was to protect
and secure the Property pending
the outcome of the Hearing.
administrator appointed under s 65 must act in the person's best interests,
which includes protecting the person from financial
abuse, neglect and
exploitation.
GA Act allows the administrator to take a liberal interpretation of the person's
best interests.
do not accept the Purchasers' contention that the Public Trustee acted beyond
the power of the Section 65 Order. It was entirely
within the legislative
framework of the GA Act, guided as always by the best interests of the person
concerned, for the Public Trustee
to notify the Settlement Agent, who at the
time was acting for both RZ and the Purchasers, that they were to take no
further steps
in respect of settlement until advised to do so by the Public
this may delay settlement, the Public Trustee needed more time to obtain
evidence to make a decision, in RZ's best interests,
should occur or whether to make an application pursuant to s 82 of the GA
Act to have the Contract set aside.
Public Trustee was not required to lodge a caveat; a caveat was one of many
options the Public Trustee could consider when acting
in RZ's best interests to
secure the Property. There are legal costs involved with preparing and lodging
a caveat. If the Public
Trustee decided that settlement should occur, further
costs would be incurred to withdraw the caveat, with all costs being borne
RZ. It is not in RZ's best interests to incur costs unnecessarily.
for the Public Trustee confirmed that two letters were sent to the Purchasers'
solicitor. The first letter was sent prior
to the Hearing to advise that the
Public Trustee was not the applicant and could not amend the orders sought in
the application.
The second letter was sent after the Public Trustee was
appointed as the plenary administrator and advised that a decision could
made immediately in relation to whether a s 82 application would be made,
as more evidence was required. I am satisfied that,
on the basis of these
communications, the Public Trustee did engage openly with the Purchasers'
am further satisfied that the Public Trustee acted within the authority of the
Section 65 Order and took reasonable steps to protect
RZ's interests in a timely
manner. I am satisfied that the Purchasers contention that the Public Trustee
has acted beyond power
is misconceived, failing as it does to understand the
aims of the GA Act as a whole, and therefore has no merit.
will next discuss whether the Purchasers are parties to the Proceeding, as only
a party can claim costs from another party.
Are the Purchasers parties to the Proceeding?
parties to an application under the GA Act
... the applicant, the represented person or person in respect of whom an
application is made, a person to whom notice of an application
is required by
this Act to be given, or to whom such notice is given, and any person who is
heard by the State Administrative Tribunal
under clause 13(2)(a) of Schedule
persons the Tribunal is required to give notice of an application include the
nearest relative of the person for whom the application
was made, the Public
Trustee, the Public Advocate, the proposed guardian, the proposed administrator
and any other person that has
a proper interest in the
13(2)(a) of Sch 1 of the GA Act states that the Tribunal may 'hear any person
who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a proper
interest in proceedings
commenced under' the GA Act.
Purchasers would need to satisfy the Tribunal that they had a proper interest in
the matter to be considered parties to the proceedings.
The matter relates to
an application for guardianship and administration, which involves evidence
being examined by the Tribunal
in relation to RZ's decision-making capacity,
whether he needs orders, and if so, who should be appointed, what functions they
and when the orders should be reviewed.
am satisfied, and I find, that the Purchasers do not have a proper interest in
the Proceeding. I find that the Purchasers' interest
is to finalise the
purchase of the Property, which is not a 'proper interest' in the Proceeding.
position under the SAT Act should also be considered. Section 36 of the
SAT Act sets out who are parties to proceedings in the
(1) A person is a party to a proceeding before the Tribunal if the person is
(a) the applicant; or
(b) a person joined under section 38 as a party to the proceeding; or
(c) a person intervening in the proceeding; or
(d) specified by this Act or the enabling Act to be a party to the
proceeding.
(2) If the proceeding is in the Tribunal's original jurisdiction, anyone else in
respect of whom a decision of the Tribunal is sought
respect of s 36(1)(b) of the SAT Act, the Tribunal may order that a party be
joined to a proceeding if the Tribunal is satisfied
that the person's interests
are affected by the proceeding or for any other
consider that the Purchasers' interests were affected by the Proceeding, which
concerned RZ's best interests and protection.
The Purchasers therefore
were not joined to the Proceeding by the Tribunal.
respect of s 36(1)(c), the Purchasers advised EZ of their intention to attend
the Hearing, but no application was made to the
Tribunal for the Purchasers to
formally intervene. Had such an application been made, I would not have granted
leave for the Purchasers
issued the Privacy Order because my view was that the presence of the Purchasers
at the Hearing was inappropriate.
36(2) directs that when exercising the Tribunal's original jurisdiction, such as
applications under the GA Act, anyone seeking
a decision of the Tribunal is also
a party. The Purchasers are seeking that the Tribunal make a decision in
relation to their costs.
However, s 36(2) needs to be read in light of s 5
of the SAT Act, which states that in the event of any inconsistency between the
SAT Act and the enabling Act, the enabling Act will prevail.
am therefore satisfied that the Purchasers are not parties to the Proceeding as
they do not have a proper interest in the Proceeding
as required by the GA Act.
Should the Purchasers receive costs?
87 of the SAT Act sets out the starting point in relation to costs in Tribunal
proceeding, which is that each party should
bear their own costs.
of parties and others
(1) Unless otherwise specified
in this Act, the enabling Act, or an order of the Tribunal under this section,
parties bear their own
costs in a proceeding of the Tribunal.
(2) Unless otherwise specified in the enabling Act, the Tribunal may make an
order for the payment by a party of all or any of the
costs of another party or
of a person required to produce a document or other material on the application
of the party under section
(3) The power of the Tribunal to make an order for the payment by a party of
the costs of another party includes the power to make
an order for the payment
of an amount to compensate the other party for any expenses, loss,
inconvenience, or embarrassment resulting
from the proceeding or the matter
because of which the proceeding was brought[.]
I have determined that the Purchasers are not parties to the Proceeding, they
are not entitled to seek costs against another party.
The Purchasers were
not asked to participate in the Proceeding. They chose to insert
themselves into the Proceeding by instructing
their solicitor to file
submissions with the Tribunal and write to EZ, the Tribunal and the Public
Trustee based on their wish to
complete the Contract.
I will not make an order pursuant to s 87 of the SAT Act and the Purchasers will
bear the costs relating to the actions
they have taken.
the Contract was the catalyst for the application to the Tribunal, as it exposed
RZ's vulnerability, the Tribunal was not going
to consider whether the Contract
should be set aside in the Proceeding. This is evident from:
(a) the Agent Order and the Section 65 Order, both of which were
provided to the Purchasers' solicitor. It is apparent on the face
of the orders
that the relevant application was an 'Application to appoint a guardian and/or
administrator';
(b) the terms of s 65 of the GA Act, which allow the Tribunal to appoint an
interim administrator pending the determination of whether
the person concerned
is someone for whom an administrator could be appointed; and
(c) the terms of s 82 of the GA Act, which requires:
(i) an administrator to make the application; and
(ii) the Tribunal to give notice to anyone affected by the application
including the other party to the transaction.
Should the Purchasers be given access to documents held by the Tribunal?
accepted an oral application at the directions hearing from the Purchasers'
solicitor pursuant to s 112(4) of the GA Act which
(4) The State Administrative Tribunal may on the application of any person
(a) by order, authorise any person, whether
conditionally or unconditionally, to inspect or otherwise have access to any
or material lodged with or held by the Tribunal for the purposes of any
application; and
(b) make any other order contemplated by this section.
Purchasers sought orders that the Tribunal direct that all parties provide Jebb
Legal with copies of documents they had filed
with the Tribunal and that the
Purchasers have access to documents held by the Tribunal that relate
adequacy of the Contract price;
(b) the selling process and marketing campaign conducted by the Agent;
(c) any valuation evidence;
(d) the circumstances surrounding the Contract formation and execution;
(e) evidence regarding RZ's capacity when the Contract was signed; and
(f) all submissions made by EZ regarding the transaction.
will not make an order for the parties to provide the Purchasers with documents
or authorise the Purchasers to have access to the
documents held by the
Tribunal. I am satisfied that it is not in RZ's best interests to do so as the
Purchasers are on the 'other
side' of the transaction involving RZ.
the event that the administrator made a s 82 application to set aside the
Contract, the administrator would be required to disclose
to the Purchasers the
documents and evidence it sought to rely on to support that application.
The Tribunal orders:
application of [NB] and [JB] for costs pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) is dismissed.
application of [NB] and [JB] to access to documents pursuant to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) is refused as it is not
in the represented person's best interests.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MS R BUNNEY, MEMBER
27 OCTOBER 2025
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
), s 32(2)(a) and
Act, s 35(1).
Letter dated 25 September 2025 from Jebb Legal to EZ.
61(2), s 61(4)(d) and s 61(4)(h).
Submissions
dated 8 October 2025 filed by Jebb Legal.
Medical Board of Western Australia v A Medical Practitioner
[2011] WASCA 151
Section 17 of the GA Act states that the provisions of Schedule 1 have effect
with respect to proceedings of the State Administrative
Tribunal commenced under
the GA Act.
Act, s 71(5) referring to s 4(2).
GA Act, s 3.
GA Act, s 41.
Submissions dated 10 October 2025 filed by Jebb Legal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (326 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter