URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAGAB/2004/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re MB [2004] WAGAB 25 (9 June 2004)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION BOARD
[2004] WAGAB 25
HON JUSTICE M L BARKER
MS JO STANTON
19 MAY 2004
DELIVERED :
9 JUNE 2004
FILE NO/S :
AP 2 of 2004
APPLICATION TO FULL BOARD TO REVIEW DETERMINATION OF THE
BOARD REFUSING INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS
Catchwords:
Guardianship and administration - Application for
review of determination refusing application to inspect and have access to
and materials held by the Board -
Guardianship and Administration
- Limited access granted but
application otherwise refused
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Re MCB, unreported reasons for determination of Guardianship and
Administration Board delivered 30 March 2004 in Applications
(2001) 28 SR(WA) 320
Case(s) also cited:
JUDGMENT OF THE BOARD
Introduction
1 The applicant, Mr MB, seeks review of the determination of a single
member of the Board refusing to permit him to inspect
have access to the
file of the Board relating to applications concerning the guardianship and
administration of the estate of
late Mrs MCB, his mother. The review
application is made under
Guardianship and Administration
(WA). The circumstances in which the application to inspect and
have access initially came before the single member and the review
application
came before us are a little unusual, for at the time the request to inspect and
have access was made by Mr MB his
2 On 17 November 2003, an application concerning the administration of the
estate of Mrs MCB was lodged with the Board
by GR, Clinical
Nurse Manager,
Cabrini Nursing Home. An application concerning the guardianship of
Mrs MCB was later lodged
by AH, Clinical Director
of the nursing home on
25 November 2003.
3 On 5 December 2003, following a hearing that afternoon, a Board
constituted of three members (Mr Erik Leipoldt, Presiding
Ms Felicity Child and Rev Canon Leslie Goode) made a guardianship
order in respect of Mrs MCB in favour of
the Public Advocate and
administration order in respect of Mrs MCB in favour of the Public Trustee.
At that stage, the Board
did not publish detailed
reasons for these
determinations. Under the Act, the Board is not bound to publish reasons for
determination
immediately on making
a determination. However, under cl 5
of Pt B of Sch 1 of the Act, the Board is bound to publish
a request for reasons
is made within 30 days of a determination by a party
to the proceedings.
4 At the time the orders were made, Mrs MCB was resident at the Cabrini
Nursing Home and subject to the day-to-day care, control
and management of the
nursing home. She had been at the nursing home for some time. However,
Mr MB regularly saw his mother
desired to be involved in her continuing
care and management. As matters transpired, relations between the nursing home
gradually deteriorated to the point where they no longer
communicated effectively. At that point, the nursing home decided
necessary to make an application to the Board.
5 After these proceedings were commenced, Mr MB lodged his own application
(by lodging a form 2C) in the Board for guardianship
of his mother. He
entertained a proposal that, with the assistance of various agencies, his mother
could return to live with and
be cared for by him at his home.
6 At the hearing of 5 December 2003, the Public Advocate proposed that she
be appointed guardian and the Public Trustee administrator,
and that questions
relating to care and management could be determined over time with all
relevantly concerned persons, including
7 In the event the Board made the orders referred to.
8 Mr MB was aggrieved by the failure of the Board to award him
guardianship of his mother. He was also aggrieved by the refusal
of the Board
at the outset of the hearing on 5 December to accede to his request for an
adjournment of the hearing to permit
to make arrangements for his mother to
attend the hearing. He was additionally aggrieved that the Board did not
consider it
to receive evidence from his mother at the hearing.
9 Thus, soon after the hearing Mr MB requested the Board to publish
reasons for the making of its orders. The Board published
Determination on 30 March 2004: see
, unreported
reasons for determination of Guardianship and Administration Board delivered
30 March 2004 in Applications ADO659/03
and PG0033/04.
10 However, before the reasons were delivered, on 19 January 2004,
Mr MB also made a review application under the Act
determinations of the Board of 5 December 2003.
11 On 19 January 2004, the Public Advocate also made an application under
the Act for leave to apply for and for review of
the guardianship
Public Advocate requested the Board to decide whether certain measures taken or
proposed for Mrs MCB
by the Public Advocate
as her newly appointed
guardian, and medication prescribed by a general practitioner, were considered
to constitute
physical and
chemical restraints and, if so, for the additional
authority of the Board to use or administer such restraints.
12 The review applications of Mr MB and the Public Advocate were listed
for hearing by the Board on 8 March 2004.
13 Unfortunately, on 29 February 2004 at Royal Perth Hospital, prior to
the date set for the hearing of the review applications,
Mrs MCB passed
away. Her death caused Mr MB considerable anguish and, having regard to
the submissions made by him at
the hearing
of this review application before us,
he plainly continues to suffer much distress from his mother's
Initial application to inspect
14 Soon after his mother's death, on 3 March 2004, Mr MB made an
application for inspection of documents held by the Board.
application was
of the Act. Mr MB stated that the class of
documents he wished to inspect or have access to
"All documents held by the Guardianship and Administration Board in relation to
[Mrs MCB] and [Mr MB] All recorded conversation
notes in relation
to [Mrs MCB] and [Mr MB] All material, including file notes, records
of telephone calls, recorded
opinions which
relate to [Mrs MCB] and
15 On 3 March, when Mr MB made his application for inspection of
documents, the Board which had made the guardianship
and administration
in respect of Mrs MCB had not yet published its Reasons for Determination.
As of that date, Mr MB
remained aggrieved by the
determination of the Board
of 5 December 2003, and the making of the guardianship and administration
orders in respect of his mother,
and had not received the detailed reasons for
the Board's determination. He also remained aggrieved
that, when the Board
application for guardianship and administration orders on
5 December 2003, his request for an
adjournment of the proceedings on that
day, so that he could arrange for his mother to attend the hearing, had been
refused by the
Board, and that the Board did not hear
from his mother before
making the orders.
16 The circumstances in which Mrs MCB did not attend the hearing should at
this point be referred to. Prior to the hearing
December 2003,
the Board had determined, from a review of medical and nursing information
provided to it, that by
reason of her condition
there was no need for
Mrs MCB to attend the hearing. Such a determination is often made by the
when a proposed represented
person is elderly, infirm and, by reason of
their medical condition, unlikely to be able to contribute
meaningfully to the
proceedings.
The Board, in such cases, endeavours to cause as little
inconvenience to the proposed represented
person as possible. As a result,
prior to the date set for the hearing, the Board caused a letter dated
21 November 2003 to
be delivered to Mrs MCB advising her of
hearing date (as it was required to do by
of the Act) and that the
Board did "not require" her attendance.
17 Mr MB called at the nursing home at about 1.30 pm on
5 December 2003 to collect his mother and take her to
the hearing
for 2 pm. When he did so, according to Mr MB, a
representative of the nursing home informed him
that he was not to take his
to the hearing scheduled for 2 pm. The full circumstances in which
this event occurred are
not clear to the Board. However, the
upshot of it was
that Mr MB left his mother at the nursing home and proceeded to the hearing
at the Board without her.
18 When the hearing before the Board commenced on 5 December 2003,
Mr MB immediately raised the issue of his mother's
non-attendance
Board in the following terms [see transcript of proceedings at p 2]:
"Excuse me, can I just say something before we start? It was arranged that my
mother should have been here at the hearing. I wanted
her here. I have an
application also. At the last minute the nursing home stopped me from bringing
her here. It was my mother's
wishes to be here as she could have had a say.
Even though she's dementia'd [
], she still communicates with me and I
wanted to demonstrate this to the board. She also has some bruising on her arms
which I would
have liked to ask, 'Where did you get these bruisings?' It's when
they pick her up like this, and I don't think it's fair that at
the very last
minute - actually, the police were called on me when I went to pick her up. I
arranged for a car for her to be picked
up. In all the discussions I've had it
was always agreed that my mother would be at the
Then a little later Mr MB told the Board, [transcript p 6]:
"Just going back to her doctor, who is her doctor currently, I inadvertently
made the mistake - I thought the hearing was for 9 o'clock
and I would have
liked my mum to attend without any medication, because she is a lot clearer
without medication, and he gave me a
letter here saying that she didn't have to
take her medication until midday, but then I realised that I had made a mistake
was 2 o'clock, the hearing, so I didn't pursue this, and I was told
at 1.30, when I went to walk out the door, I was stopped
she said that
Gillian had been in touch with a board member and my mother was not to come. I
said, 'Well, please get the board
on the phone.' She said no, and this
caused me to get agitated
19 One of the members of the Board then advised Mr MB [transcript
p 7] as follows:
"It's often our normal practice if the person doesn't attend and we feel that we
need more information or that we could benefit from
visiting that person, we can
often go out to the nursing home and see the person if at the end of the hearing
we feel we're not well
informed enough about the situation and we need more
information or we need to speak to the person directly. So if we need to at
end of the hearing, we are able to do that, to adjourn this matter and go out
and see her."
Mr MB indicated that, "I would ask that that be done, yes"
20 The hearing then proceeded and eventually the orders for administration and
guardianship were duly made. As matters developed,
the Board did not find it
necessary to hear from or see Mrs MCB before making those orders.
21 As noted, subsequently Mr MB remained aggrieved about both the making
of the orders, particularly the guardianship order,
favour of the Public
Advocate and not himself, and also at the failure of the Board to grant him an
adjournment and to hear directly
from his mother.
22 The Board's view so far as the attendance of Mrs MCB and the reception
of her evidence in the proceedings was concerned,
dealt with by the Board in
some detail when it published its Reasons for Determination in
) on 13 March 2004. At p 3 of its Reasons the
Board stated:
"The Board refused the request for adjournment on the basis that there was a
need to resolve the present situation with regard to
whether an appointed
decision maker was needed and who that should be. Based on the applications,
the relevant conditions appeared
to be a breakdown in relationship between the
son and service providers, opposing views from the nursing home and MB as to
Mrs MCB should live. It was considered that it was in Mrs MCB's
best interests to resolve this situation sooner rather
than later.
considered it had sufficient information to proceed. MB again requested an
adjournment at the commencement
of this hearing.
He wanted his mother to be
present as he said that was her wish and he would demonstrate how she could
communicate
through him.
He said he was prevented from collecting his mother at
the nursing home by its staff: 'The police were called on me
when I went
pick her up'. The Board decided to proceed with the hearing on the basis that
it could decide to adjourn at any time
Board find it necessary to
hear from the proposed represented person directly. Following the hearing and
reviewing all
the written
material available, the Board decided to make orders
without hearing from the proposed represented person
The Board also explained in its Reasons, at p 4,
"The proposed represented person, Mrs MCB, was not required by the Board to
attend the hearing at the Board premises upon advice
received from a General
Medical Practitioner Dr Papaelias (dated 17 November 2003). The
report stated that attendance
by her would
be detrimental to her health, she was
likely to be able to make no contribution, and was 'easily confused' and 'very
excitable'.
This was the sole medical advice with regard to attendance that was
received by Board for purpose of the hearing of
5 December 2003.
Dr Papaelias stated that he had known Mrs MCB for one year and he had
seen her last on 17 November
2003. The 'Notice of hearing'
letter to the
represented person of 21 November 2003 advised: 'You may attend this
you wish to do so, but the Board does
not require your
attendance'."
23 In his application for inspection of documents dated 3 March 2004,
Mr MB set out the following explanation as to why
to inspect or
have access to the documents and materials identified by him in the application,
in these terms:
"I would like to understand why you made your decision on 5th December
2003. My mother was taken away from my care through
the negligence
concerned, she was murdered and died after 2 1/2 months of the decision of
the guardianship & administration
to appoint a public guardian. My
mother wanted her own flesh and blood to make her medical decisions. But she
didn't have
in the matter as she was prevented from attending a hearing
which made a decision on her life. Now she is dead through
the negligence
the guardian your tribunal appointed."
24 The application for inspection of the documents made by Mr MB was duly
considered by a member of the Board and was refused
or about 12 March
2004. Mr MB was notified in writing of this decision and was further
advised that the reason for
the refusal was
that the application "is in
substance a request for reasons for decision requested on
2 January 2004".
Application to review
determination refusing inspection
25 As noted above, at the time Mr MB made his application for inspection
of documents, and indeed at the date of its refusal,
Reasons for the
Determination of the Board on the making of the guardianship and administration
orders had not been published.
any event, Mr MB then made an
application dated 18 March 2004, to request the Full Board of the Board to
determination
of the single Board member refusing his application to
inspect documents. It is this application for review that is
now before this
Full Board.
26 In his application for review of the determination refusing him the right to
inspect the Board's documents, Mr MB states:
wish to inspect the whole
file." He then sets out the grounds upon which he seeks the review:
"I do not accept that even though my mother wanted to attend her hearing, she
was denied her natural right - I would like to know
I do not accept that even though my mother's wish was to come back and live with
her son, as was her son's wish, the tribunal determined
that a public guardian
was necessary to be appointed. I would like to know why.
I do not accept the manner in which my mother died after only 2 1/2 months
of your decision. If I had of been her guardian,
would still be alive
I do not accept the manner in which I was completely shut out of my mother's
ongoing care. It is for this reason that my mother
is deceased.
I would like to see all reports to make sure that they are correct, as I had a
report from my mothers' doctor which stated that she
could attend the hearing.
This was dated for 4/5/03."
27 It may be appreciated from this background, that Mr MB remains highly
aggrieved about the sequence of events and decisions
resulted in him
ceasing to have a continuing active role in the care and management of his
mother in the latter part of her
28 At the hearing of the application to review the determination refusing the
application to inspect documents, which was held before
us in the Board on
Wednesday 19 May 2004, Mr MB's sense of grievance remained strong, as
did his anguish at the death of
his mother.
29 At the hearing, Mr MB explained to the members of the Board how he felt
passing and raised a
number of questions, some of which have been set out above, that he would like
answered. Many of these were
quite outside the areas that the Board has
knowledge or experience of and are otherwise outside its statutory area of
responsibility.
Some related to the role of the Public Advocate both before and
after the making of the guardianship and administration orders,
others related
to the ongoing medical care and treatment given to his mother after the making
of the guardianship order and prior
to her death, yet others related to
Mr MB's dealings with medical practitioners both before and after his
mother's death and
and after the making of the guardianship order, and
another concern expressed by Mr MB related to the function of the
whether or not he should conduct an inquest into the circumstances in which
Mrs MCB died.
The question before the Full
30 The Board explained to Mr MB at the hearing, and repeats in these
reasons, that as a result of the unfortunate death of
there was no
need for a formal review by the Board of the making of the guardianship and
administration orders. Under
the Act the
Board only has authority to review
such orders where they continue to apply. On the death of a represented person
guardianship
order no longer applies. Thus, the hearings of the applications
for leave and review made by both Mr MB and the
Public Advocate
for 8 March 2004 were vacated upon the passing of Mrs MCB.
31 The Board also explained to Mr MB at the hearing, and repeats in these
reasons, that the hearing of this application for
of the determination
refusing the application to inspect documents does not and is not intended to
provide an occasion to
the earlier determination of the Board to make the
guardianship order, or the decisions of the Board in the course of the
leading to the making of the order not to adjourn the proceedings and not to
hear directly from Mr MB's mother.
32 The question before the Board on the hearing of the present application
must, in the end, be narrowly confined to whether it
is appropriate for the
Board to grant Mr MB access to the whole of the Board file, as he initially
requested, or to particular
of documents that he identified in his
initial application to inspect documents, which classes of documents were
by Mr MB during the course of the hearing before us to
include any notes of a telephone conversation between any person
the Board and GR from the nursing home as of or about 1.30 pm on
5 December 2003, that being the date and
time at which Mr MB
was told by a person at the nursing home that GR had been told by a member of
the Board that his
mother was "not to come".
33 Mr MB also refined another class of documents that he wished to inspect
to include any notes of the conversation between
person on behalf of the
Board and a medical practitioner who was acting as a locum with the Australian
Locum Service in the period
13 to 16 March 2004, after his mother's death.
Mr MB said that he had a conversation with such a locum who refused to
divulge certain
information to him on the basis that the "Guardianship Board was
conducting an inquiry".
The Board powers under
to permit inspection
34 The circumstances in which a person is entitled to inspect or have access to
documents or other materials held by the Board are
limited. This is to be
expected in the administration of an Act that provides for the guardianship of
adults who need assistance
in their personal affairs and the administration of
the estate of persons who need assistance in their financial affairs.
Section 4(2)(a)
provides that the primary concern of the Board in the
performance of its functions "shall be the best interests of any represented
person, or of a person in respect of whom an application is made". By reason of
, a guardianship order will only be made where a person, amongst
other things, is incapable of looking after their own health and
safety; unable
to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to their person or
is in need of oversight, care or control
in the interests of their own health
and safety or for the protection of others, and is in need of a guardian.
Documents and other
materials held by the Board very often go to matters that
are highly confidential in respect of the health and safety of the person
may be in need of a guardianship order. In those circumstances it is to be
expected that only a limited class of persons would
ordinarily be entitled to
inspect documents held by the Board.
35 Indeed, the relevant provisions of the Act reflect this policy.
Section 112
deals with the inspection of records in this context.
Sections 112(1)
, (2) and (4) deal with the question of access and
inspection in particular contexts. As observed by the Board on an earlier
the provisions of
reinforce two important policies:
firstly, the protection of the privacy of the person involved in the proceedings
before the Board
and in particular a proposed represented person or a
represented person; and secondly, the public interest in the integrity of the
Board processes which relies on the ability to obtain sensitive information from
a variety of sources: see
(2001) 28 SR(WA) 320
Section 112(1)
provides as
"The represented person, a person in respect of whom an application under this
Act is made or a person representing any such person
in any proceedings is,
unless the Board otherwise orders, entitled to inspect or otherwise have access
(a) any document or material lodged or
held by the Board for the purposes of any application in respect of that person;
(b) any accounts submitted under
by the administrator of the
estate of that person."
37 This provision makes it clear that for the purposes of any application a
represented person or proposed represented person (person
representing them)
ordinarily is entitled to inspect or have access to documents and materials.
38 As the Board noted in its decision in
at 331, the entitlement is to "inspect" and have "access" and does not
specifically give a right to take copies. However,
in appropriate
circumstances
the Board may well adopt the practice of authorising a copy of a document to be
provided to the legal
practitioner
for a represented person or proposed
represented person. There may also be occasions where a person who is not
represented
is entitled
to a similar indulgence. In all such cases, the Board
is likely to make it a condition of the provision of the copy
to the Board at the conclusion of the hearing when it is no longer
required for the purposes of the application.
39 On its proper construction, the right given by
to relevant
persons to inspect relevant documents and materials, unless the Board in any
case otherwise orders, is exercisable in
the course of pending proceedings and
is no longer relevant once proceedings have been determined and a matter is not
review or appeal. It is a right given to facilitate a proper hearing
of an application before the Board.
40 Similar principles would apply in respect of an entitlement to inspect or
have access to accounts submitted under
by the administrator of the
estate of a person in the course of proceedings concerning the represented
person or the proposed represented
41 In the present case, as the proceedings concerning Mrs MCB are
complete, Mr MB is unable to rely upon
in order to inspect or
have access to documents or materials lodged with or held by the Board.
Section 112(2)
provides that:
"Any other party to any proceedings, or a person representing any such party,
is, unless the Board otherwise orders, entitled to
inspect or otherwise have
access to any document or material lodged with or held by the Board for the
purpose of those proceedings,
other than a document or material that is or
contains a medical opinion not being an opinion concerning that
43 This provision thus entitles a person who is not the represented person or
the proposed represented person or their representative
but who is otherwise a
party to proceedings to inspect or otherwise have access to documents or
materials for the purpose of those
proceedings.
44 However, the exception in respect of medical opinions not concerning that
party itself emphasises the privacy concerns of the
Act. The primary rule is
that a medical opinion about one party is not something that other parties in a
proceeding may inspect
or have access to on demand.
45 The terms of
also raise the question of precisely who is a
"party" to proceedings. The term "party" is defined by
of the Act in
the following terms:
"'party' in relation to an application under this Act means the applicant, the
represented person or person in respect of whom an
application is made, a person
to whom notice of an application is required by this Act to be given, or to whom
such notice is given,
and any person who is heard by the Board under
clause 13(2)(a) of Part B of
Schedule 1;"
46 This definition means that the question as to who a "party" is in the
context of any particular proceedings needs to be determined
on a case-by-case
basis. While the applicant, the represented person or the proposed represented
person in each case will readily
be identifiable, the other persons mentioned
will not be. Whether there are any persons who are required to be served with
of a hearing under the Act raises both a question of law and fact, and
whether there are persons who have been heard by the Board
cl 13(2)(a) of the schedule raises a question of fact.
47 So far as the range of persons who must be given notice of a hearing is
provides that the Executive Officer shall, at least
14 days before the day on which the application for a guardianship or
administration
order is to be heard cause notice of the hearing to be given to
"(a) in every case -
(i) the applicant;
(ii) the person in respect of whom the application is made;
(iii) the nearest relative of that person;
(iv) the Public Advocate; and
(v) any other person who in the opinion of the executive officer has a proper
interest in the proceedings;
(b) in the case of an application for a guardianship order -
(i) any proposed guardian (including a proposed alternative guardian) of the
person in respect of whom the application is made; and
(ii) the administrator (if any) of the estate of that person;"
48 Where the proceedings involve an application for an administration order,
notice of the hearing must be given
(i) any proposed administrator;
(ii) the Public Trustee; and
(iii) the guardian (if any) of the person in respect of whom the application
49 The fact that the Executive Officer may form the opinion that there is a
person who has a proper interest in the proceedings
and thus is obliged to give
notice of the hearing to that person, means that in some cases, but not in
others, particular persons
may become parties to that proceeding.
50 Similarly, in some cases, but not in others, there may exist a reasonably
available "nearest relative", as that term is defined
of the Act.
If there is, then that person will also have to be served and will thereby
become a party to that proceeding.
51 Clause 13(2)(a) of Pt B of Sch 1 of the Act provides that the
Board may -
"Hear any person who, in the opinion of the Board, has a proper interest in the
proceedings;"
52 This means that the Board has the power to effectively include as a party a
person with an interest different from those already
identified as a "party" by
the other provisions already referred to.
53 It may seem a little bit strange that the Board, by agreeing to give a
person a limited right to be heard in proceedings, should
thereby constitute
that person a "party" for the purposes of the proceeding. However, that is the
literal effect of the Board deciding
to grant such a right to be heard under
cl 13(2)(a). Thus, a person who is so heard under that clause would be
entitled, on
face of it, under
to inspect or to have access to
documents and materials other than medical opinions not concerning them.
54 However, it must be remembered that at all times the entitlement created by
in the parties to whom it extends is subject to the Board
otherwise ordering. It is open to the Board in an appropriate case to
party's right to inspect and to have access to particular documents or materials
on a need to know basis. Thus, a person
given a right of hearing by the Board
under cl 13(2)(a) might only be entitled to a limited right of inspection
or access to
and materials commensurate with the nature of their
interest in the matter before the Board.
55 As in the case of the right created by
, the right given by
is for the benefit of parties to pending proceedings to facilitate
a proper hearing of an application before the Board.
56 In the present case, as the proceedings concerning Mrs MCB are no
longer pending, Mr MB is unable to rely upon
in order to
inspect or have access to documents or materials lodged with or held by the
Section 112(3)
of the Act reinforces the limited inspection and access
rights by making it an offence, except as provided in the section, for a
unless authorised to do so by order of the Board, to inspect or otherwise have
access to a document or material lodged with
or held by the Board for the
purposes of any application, or to any accounts admitted under
58 However,
provides the Board with what appears to be a broad
discretion to allow a wide range of persons to inspect and have access to
going beyond the limitation of
and (2) to pending
proceedings. It provides that:
"(4) The Board may on the
application of any person, or of its own motion –
(a) by order, authorise any person, whether conditionally or unconditionally,
to inspect or otherwise have access to any document
or material lodged with or
held by the Board for the purposes of any application; and
(b) make any other order contemplated by this section."
59 We agree with the observation of the Board in
), at 332, that
provides the Board with a broad
discretion on the application of any person or on its own initiative to allow
inspection of or access
to documents lodged with or held by the Board for the
purposes of any application.
60 We also agree with the further expression of opinion of the Board in
, at 332, that
is not limited in its terms
and, in an appropriate case, may include inspection or access to relevant
documents or materials for
purposes other than proceedings before the Board,
although the circumstances in which the Board would ordinarily consider
this power may be considered limited. As the Board said in
" ... given the sensitive and confidential nature of much of the
material held by this Board, we are of the view that where
an applicant
the Board to exercise its discretion under
for purposes not
related to proceedings before the Board, he or she must provide very cogent
reasons and demonstrate a particular
need as to why the inspection should be
allowed (see generally
DeHass v Murcia
and Associates
Court of Western Australia Library No 980633, per Templeman J.) It is
not sufficient to rely on a general desire
61 In agreeing with what the Board in
said about the nature
(4) power, we would first note that the power to grant any
person the right to inspect or have access is expressed by reference to
particular class of documents or materials, that is to say, documents or
materials "lodged with or held by the Board for the purposes
application." Documents or materials held by the Board not answering this
description are not documents or materials in respect
of which the Board may
permit inspection or access under
62 If there are such documents or materials, the Board may permit any person to
inspect them or have access to them if the Board
is satisfied in all the
circumstances that such inspection or access is appropriate. This will be so
even where the applicant is
not a "party" to an application to which the
documents or information relates.
63 We also think that the Board may permit a person to inspect or have access
to documents or materials that relate to an application
that is no longer
pending before the Board; in other words, an application that has been
determined and is not the subject of any
review or appeal proceedings under the
Act. While it might be contended that, by reason of the use of the words in
"for the purposes of any application" the documents and materials
to which access is sought must relate to an application which is
pending, not
determined or not the subject of review or appeal proceedings, we do not think
that this is the appropriate way in which
to construe the power.
64 We note that the expression "application" is defined by
"An application to the Board under this Act, and includes a review under
which is initiated by the Board of its own
Nothing in this definition suggests that such an application must be one that
remains pending. An application previously made and
determined still answers
this description.
65 Nothing in the particular words used in
, or the context in
, compels the view that
may only be exercised in relation to a pending application or for the purposes
of determining an application before the Board.
66 Indeed, we think there are good reasons, relating to good public
administration, why the Board's power to grant access to relevant
documents and
materials under
should not be construed narrowly. It is possible
to envisage a number of circumstances in which, for example, persons charged by
law with the responsibility to conduct investigations in the public interest may
seek to inspect documents or materials that were
lodged with and are held by the
Board for the purpose of an application. The Board should be able to determine
on an application-by-application
basis whether the request for access by a
person should be granted. But as the Board said in
), the reasons advanced in support of a request for access under
will need to be cogent and be justified on a "need to know"
67 What is clear, is that
empowers the Board, if it forms the
view that an order permitting inspection or access to relevant documents and
materials is appropriate
in the circumstances of the application, to permit that
inspection or access to occur. The Board's discretion to allow or reject
application is very wide. It is for the Board in every case to decide if there
are very good reasons to permit inspection or
access having regard to the facts
and circumstances raised in the application before it. In some cases, the
exercise of the discretion
may be constrained by the principle expressed in
of the Act, namely, that in the performance of its functions "the
primary concern of the Board shall be the best interests of any
represented
person, or of a person in respect of whom an application is
Mr MB's application
68 In the present case, Mr MB initially made his application for
inspection of documents by application dated 3 March
2004, because
wished "to understand why you [the Board] made your decision on
5th December 2003." As the member of the Board
said in the initial
determination refusing Mr MB's application for inspection, that request was
really in the nature of a request
for reasons for decision.
At that stage, the
Reasons for Determination had not been delivered but were in the process of
preparation.
They were given on
30 March 2004. It is understandable that
the member refused the application of Mr MB in those circumstances.
is because an
application for access under
should not be used as a
substitute for seeking reasons for determination or for seeking review of a
determination. The Act already
makes special provision for a party to request
reasons and that is the appropriate manner in which to obtain reasons for a
determination.
69 Accordingly, we think that it is not appropriate to allow a person who is or
has been a "party" to earlier proceedings, as Mr
was in respect of the
hearing of the application concerning his mother on 5 December 2003, to
have a right to inspect and have
access to the file of the Board or particular
documents and materials in order to decide what he thinks may have been the
of the Board in making an earlier guardianship and administration order.
The appropriate way for Mr MB to obtain the reasons
Board for the
determination of 5 December 2003 was by requesting reasons, which he in
fact did soon after the decision
70 At the hearing of his application for review before us, however, Mr MB
suggested other reasons for his request to have access
to the Board's file,
namely that he wished to ascertain whether the Board was holding documents that
shed light on particular events
involving the Board or others with whom he had
had dealings in relation to his mother. Thus, he desired to discover whether
Board held documents that disclosed whether, and if so what, the Board or
any representative of the Board advised a member of the
nursing home concerning
the need for his mother to attend the hearing on 5 December 2003. By such
inspection Mr MB believed
establish whether what he says he was
told by a representative of the nursing home at about 1.30 pm on
2003 was correct
or not. Secondly, he wished to access any
documents that the Board held concerning anything that the Board or any
representative
of the Board may have conveyed to a locum medical practitioner in
the period of 13 to 16 March 2004, after the
death of his mother,
inquiry the Guardianship Board was holding concerning his mother's death, in
order to determine whether
the Board was in
fact holding some inquiry or to
ascertain whether what he says he was told by the locum was correct or not.
71 At the hearing before us, Mr MB also claimed that the transcript of
proceeding of the hearing of 5 December 2003, that
supplied to him
by the Board, was not accurate. He claimed some things said at the hearing did
not appear in the transcript
been supplied with, and that some things
that did appear in the transcript were not in fact said at the hearing. Indeed,
hearing of the review application before us, Mr MB wrote to the
Board and added to his request for access to particular
the right to
have access to the tape-recording of the hearing, so that he could verify for
himself the accuracy of the
of the hearing with which he has been
72 As we have already explained, it is possible that in some circumstances, for
example, in relation to the conduct of some official
investigation in the public
interest, the Board might find it relevant and appropriate to permit a properly
authorised person to
inspect or have access to relevant documents and materials.
However, we do not think the reasons for Mr MB's request fall into
his concerns about conduct he alleges against
organisations or persons
that have to do with either the hearing of the application concerning the
guardianship of his mother
the care and management she received following the
making of the guardianship order on 5 December 2003. That does not appear
us, in all the circumstances of the case, to be a sufficient reason for
allowing Mr MB to inspect or have access to documents
materials held by
the Board in relation to the proceedings that were before the Board concerning
his late mother but are now completed.
73 In any event, the Board has closely considered the documents and materials
that it currently holds that relate to the applications
and other proceedings
made concerning Mrs MCB and Mr MB. The Board is able to indicate
there is no document or other material
suggests that, on 5 December
2003 at about 1.30 pm, or at any other time prior thereto, any member of
the Board or
representative
of the Board advised any officer or person
representing the nursing home at which Mrs MCB was then resident that
"was not to
come" to the Board for purposes of the hearing. In other words,
there are no documents or other materials falling
into the class
of documents
specifically identified by Mr MB in his oral submissions to the Board at
the hearing for this review
application.
74 Similarly, the Board has examined the documents and materials held by the
Board in respect of the same applications to ascertain
if there is any document
or other material falling into the class of documents or material described by
Mr MB that shows any
communication
between a member of the Board or
representative of the Board and a locum medical practitioner or the agency for
such a person
apparently worked, in the period 13 to 16 March 2004.
The Board is able to indicate there is no document falling
into that class
either in that period or in any other period before or after those dates.
Indeed, there is no documentary or other
record showing
that any member of the
Board or representative of the Board had any dealings whatsoever with any such
locum or agency.
75 In these circumstances, the Board is of the view that this is not an
appropriate case in which the applicant Mr MB should
given a general
right to inspect documents and materials held by the Board in respect of the
various applications concerning Mrs
or touching on Mr MB, or a
specific right to search the Board's files for documents falling in to the
particular classes identified
by Mr MB at the hearing of this application
before the Board.
76 As to the claims made by Mr MB during the course of the hearing of this
review application before us, that the transcript
the proceedings of the
Board of 5 December 2003, with which he has been supplied is not accurate,
we feel confident that
mistaken and that his recollection of
events and of what was in fact said at the hearing is incomplete. In the
circumstances,
think it would assist Mr MB if he were able to listen to
the tape-recording of the hearing of 5 December 2003 to refresh
of what then occurred and was said. To that end, and for that limited purpose,
we are prepared to allow Mr MB to
have access to
the tape-recording of the
hearing of the hearing of 5 December 2003 and to listen to it at the
offices of the
Board at a time and
date convenient to both Mr MB and the
Executive Officer of the Board.
77 For the sake of completeness, we should also note that in the course of his
oral submission at the review hearing before us,
Mr MB suggested that the
file of the Board may have been tampered with or otherwise falsified. This is a
serious allegation.
are bound to say there is no foundation to his
allegations. We can only think that Mr MB made them because of the extent
distress following the passing of his mother. We only mention the
allegations now for fear that, if we remained silent about
reasons, Mr MB might think that, by our silence, we were giving some
measure of authenticity to them.
Conclusion and
78 In conclusion, for these reasons, we would dismiss Mr MB's review
application dated 18 March 2004, for access to the
of the Board
or the right to search the file for particular documents.
79 However, the Board would permit Mr MB to have access to the
tape-recording of the hearing of 5 December 2003 concerning
and to that end to listen to the tape-recording at the offices of the Board at a
time and date that suits the convenience
of both Mr MB and the Executive
Officer of the Board.
80 Mr MB should make arrangements with the Executive Officer for the
purpose of listening to the tape-recording.
I CERTIFY that this and the preceding twenty-one pages
comprise the reasons for decision of the members who heard this
The Hon Justice M L Barker
Presiding member
Dated 10 June, 2004
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (100 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter