URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Suzanne Galloway -v- SIGNCRAFT (AUST) PTY LTD [2025] WAIRC 33; (24 January 2025)
CONTRACTUAL BENEFIT CLAIM
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
COMMISSIONER T B
FRIDAY, 31 MAY 2024
DELIVERED :
24 JANUARY 2025
B 61 OF 2023
SUZANNE GALLOWAY
SIGNCRAFT (AUST) PTY LTD
contractual benefits – entitlements under a contract of employment –
probation – casual – annual leave
accrued – personal and
carer’s leave – public holidays – national employment
standards – clean hands
– misconduct of employee – breach of
employment contract
Legislation
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Application
Representation:
Ms Suzanne Galloway
Mr Gregory Morgan
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Belo Fisheries v Dennis Terence
(1983) 63 WAIG 2394
Charles (Carmelo) Parrella v FBM Corporation Pty Ltd
WAIRC 00903
(2012) 92 WAIG 1988
Civil Service Association of Western Australia Incorporated v Director
General, Ministry of Justice
[2003] WAIRC 08587
(2003) 94 WAIG 215
Lai Corporation Pty Ltd v Steinberg
(1986) 28 AILR 492
Matthews v Cool or Cosy Pty Ltd & Anor
[2004] WASCA 114
(2004) 84 WAIG 2152
Perth Finishing College Pty Ltd v Susan Watts
(1989) 69 WAIG
Reginald Simons v Business Computers International Pty Ltd
(1985) 65 WAIG 2039
Waroona Contracting v Usher
(1984) 64 WAIG 1500
Reasons for Decision
Suzanne Galloway (the applicant) brings a claim for denied contractual benefits.
The applicant claims $4,560.00 being for one month
pay in lieu of notice,
$1,140.00 being for 38 hours carers leave and $1,527.63 being for 50.92
hours annual leave accrued but not
taken. The applicant also claims that she
was underpaid by $2.00 per hour in the first week of her employment and seeks
of $80.00. The total amount claimed is $7,307.63.
respondent, Signcraft (Aust) Pty Ltd (Signcraft) is the applicant’s former
employer. It opposes the claim and says the applicant
was paid her
entitlements due under the terms of the contract of employment. The respondent
also says the applicant misconducted
herself and was in breach of her employment
contract and contends that in the circumstances of the applicant’s
misconduct,
it would be unfair to grant the applicant’s claim.
Factual background and Evidence
applicant was employed by the respondent as a signwriter from 28 February 2023
until the employment relationship ended on or around
28 July 2023.
respondent wrote to the applicant on 23 January 2023 offering her a position of
Signwriter/Installer starting on 13 February 2023.
The terms of the employment
set out in the letter stated the position was casual, then full time after three
months’ probation.
The letter further stated that the applicant’s
‘employment is on a contractual basis for a period of three months subject
to renewal’.
parties agree that the applicant was subsequently employed under a written
contract dated 20 March 2023. The contract terms provided
she was full
time and was appointed for a probationary period of three months from the
commencement date of 24 February 2023 during
which time the employment may be
terminated by the employer with two weeks’ notice. The terms of the
contract provided four
weeks annual leave, ten days paid personal or
carer’s leave accrued on a pro-rata basis per year, and up to two days
carer’s leave for each occasion an immediate family or household
member required care or support because of personal illness
or injury or an
unexpected emergency, and one months’ notice of termination of the
employment. The contract operated from
24 February 2023.
respondent says that the applicant was employed on a casual basis and commenced
full time employment on 20 May 2023. The respondent
contends that the applicant
was not entitled to annual leave and paid sick leave prior to 20 May 2023
because she was a casual employee
at that time. Therefore, the
applicant’s claim for any accrued leave and personal leave accrued prior
to 20 May 2023 are not
entitlements which have been denied.
parties disagree on the circumstances of the termination. The applicant says
she was dismissed at the initiative of the respondent,
and she is entitled to
payment of notice. The respondent says the applicant effectively resigned
without notice.
respondent’s evidence is that on the morning of 28 July 2023 the applicant
was swearing, behaving angrily and aggressively
to staff and customers, and
being disruptive. The applicant was informed that her behaviour was not
acceptable, and to go home and
adjust her attitude when she returned to the
workplace on Monday. The applicant left the workplace and then shortly after
and removed her Signcraft uniform T-shirt, threw it on a bench and
demanded a separation certificate and her final pay.
respondent’s evidence is that later that day the applicant contacted
Signcraft staff and insisted on receiving a separation
certificate and payment
of her final pay. On the same day the applicant visited the principal of the
respondent, Mr Morgan, at his
manner demanding to speak with Mr Morgan.
that day, Mr Morgan emailed the applicant stating that she is not to phone or
1 August 2023, Signcraft emailed the applicant advising that it accepted her
resignation and had paid her entitlements and provided
her a separation
certificate as she had requested.
the applicant had left the workplace, it was noticed by one of the staff that
the cameras in the print room were not working.
On investigating the cause of
the dysfunction, it was found that grease had been smeared over the camera
camera recordings made on 27 July 2023 were submitted into evidence and the
recordings show the applicant smearing the camera
lenses. The respondent
contends that the applicant’s actions were deliberate and were done to
prevent observation of her subsequently
using the business equipment for her own
personal use.
applicant says that she did not intentionally smear the cameras with grease and
that she was cleaning the cameras.
camera was damaged and replaced at a cost of $465.00 to the respondent.
find that the Ms Galloway deliberately smeared grease on the cameras. I do not
find the applicant to be credible when she says
that she was instructed to clean
the cameras and somehow mistakenly used grease to do so. The recordings show
that after applying
the grease to the camera lenses, the applicant observed the
display monitors. It is clear from the video recording of her observing
camera’s video display, that she would have noticed the display for each
camera was obscured. Her reaction is not consistent
with that of a person
realising a significant problem had occurred, if the purpose of the applicant
had been to clean the camera
therefore find that this was a deliberate act by the applicant to prevent the
observation and recording of her subsequent activities
in the print work
respondent says that the applicant used one of the printers to undertake private
work. The respondent says that the applicant
had been told that she was
not to undertake private work using Signcraft equipment unless she had prior
approval. The respondent
says that previously the applicant had been told not to
use the printer and that she was not trained on the equipment. The respondent
says the applicant damaged the printer and the repair cost $6,088.50.
the balance of probabilities, I find that the applicant used a specialised
printer for her personal use. I find that the contract
of employment clearly
states that using equipment for personal use is grounds for termination of
employment without notice, unless
the use was agreed. Given this, the applicant
must have understood that she needed to have approval to use the printer. I
that the applicant deliberately obscured the camera lenses so that she
would not be observed using the equipment for personal use.
respondent’s evidence is that on 3 August 2023 he received an email from
Kent Knight of Image Sign Group Pty Ltd, informing
him that the applicant had
communications with Signcraft.
Mr Knight had understood that the work
undertaken by the applicant was being done as part of Signcraft’s
services. It was
only discovered that the work had been undertaken by the
applicant directly and independently of Signcraft, when Mr Knight requested
Signcraft rectify issues with the installation of the signs by the
applicant says that she was engaged directly by Mr Knight following her response
to a general invitation by Mr Knight to a number
Consideration
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) to hear and
determine a claim.
Section 29(1)(b)(ii)
of the Act provides standing to an
employee to bring a claim concerning entitlements under a contract of
employment:
Matthews v Cool or Cosy Pty Ltd & Anor
(2004) 84 WAIG 2152.
Full Bench in
Reginald Simons v Business Computers International Pty
(1985) 65 WAIG 2039
found that the jurisdiction of the
Commission in matters pursuant to
s 29(1)(b)(ii)
is judicial:
The jurisdiction of the Commission which is
founded by proceedings brought under
(b) (ii) of the Act is
judicial. It is not arbitral or legislative. The Commission’s
ascertainment of existing rights by a
determination of whether or not an employee has been denied a benefit, not being
under an award or an order, to which the employee is entitled under a
contract of service.
applicant making an application pursuant to
s 29(b)(ii)
of the Act must,
therefore, establish that their claim is for a benefit to which he/she is
entitled under his/her contract of employment.
The Commission must determine
the terms of the contract of employment and decide whether the claim constitutes
a benefit which has
been denied under this contract, having regard to the
obligations of the Commission to act according to equity, good conscience,
the substantial merits of the case (see
Belo Fisheries v Froggett
63 WAIG 2394
Waroona Contracting v Usher
(1984) 64 WAIG 1500
Perth Finishing College Pty Ltd v
(1989) 69 WAIG 2307).
meaning of ‘entitled’ in the context of the section must mean
entitled as a matter of legal right, because it refers
to benefits under the
Perth Finishing College Pty Ltd v Watts
establish that there is a claim for a benefit under the contract the terms of
the contract must be considered.
parties agree that there was a written contract dated 20 March 2023 and this
document sets out the terms of employment of the
am satisfied that the applicant has established that a written contract of
employment applied and contained the following express
written contract of employment commenced on 24 February 2023;
rate of pay is $30.00 per hour;
probation period of three months from 24 February 2023 until 23 May
days paid annual leave per year of service to be taken within one year of
falling due;
days paid personal or carer’s leave per year of service accrued on a
pro-rata basis and any portion not taken is carried
over each year; and
two days’ unpaid carer’s leave per occasion an immediate family or
household member requires care or support
because of personal illness or injury
or unexpected emergency.
is the evidence of Signcraft that the term probation was understood to mean that
the applicant was employed on a casual basis during
a period of probation. The
payslips show that the category of employment as ‘casual’ from 18
February 2023 to 26 May
2023 and then the employment category recorded on the
payslips changes to ‘full time’ from 3 June 2023.
employment contract is dated 20 March 2023. The commencement date of the
contract is back dated to 24 February 2023. The express
terms of the written
contract under the clause entitled ‘Employment Conditions’ on page
2, state that the applicant was
engaged as a full time employee from the
commencement date of 24 February 2023.
applicant’s evidence is that she regularly raised the matters of the
payslips stating she was ‘casual’ and not
full time. The applicant
says she also raised the issues of the payslips omitting annual leave accruals,
she was not paid for public
holidays nor paid personal leave at the time of
receiving the relevant payslips or taking the personal leave.
respondent says that the applicant was told that she was employed as a causal
and knew she was engaged on a casual basis during
the three months of her
probationary period.
and casual are not synonyms. An employee may be engaged on a permanent or
ongoing employment contract and be on a period
of probation.
express terms of the written contract made between the parties on 20 March 2023
supersedes the contract made on 23 January 2023.
find that in accordance with her contract of employment dated 20 March 2023 the
applicant was entitled to paid annual leave per
year of service. The terms of
the contract do not refer to an entitlement to the progressive accrual of the
annual leave, nor do
they refer to an entitlement to be paid any portion of
annual leave accrued and not taken at the termination of the employment
Lai Corporation Pty Ltd v Steinberg
(1986) 28 AILR 492, the
Supreme Court held that a contractual entitlement to annual leave cannot be
converted to a cash entitlement
unless there is an express term in the contract
that provides for the payment.
applicant has not established that her contract of employment expressly provided
for access to pro rata annual leave before completing
one year of service, nor
that annual leave may be paid out.
Fair Work Act
Fair Work Act
for annual leave minimum standards of employment and
specifically sets
out that any unused annual leave must be paid out at the end of employment. The
terms of the written contract
do not provide for the provisions of the
to be read into the terms of the contract. As such, it has not been
established by the applicant that there is an entitlement or
benefit under the
contract of employment to annual leave prior to completing one year of service,
nor to payment of any portion of
leave untaken, that she has been denied. The
Commission does not have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the
express terms of the written contract do not include any reference to public
holidays. The
Fair Work Act
provides for minimum standards for public
holidays and
specifically sets out the circumstances in which an
employee absent from duty on a public holiday is to be paid. The terms of the
written contract do not provide for the provisions of the
Fair Work Act
be read into the terms of the contract. As such, it has not been established by
the applicant that there is an entitlement or
benefit under the contract of
employment to payment of public holidays. The Commission does not have
provisions of the
Fair Work Act
the claim for personal and/or carer’s leave, I find that the contract of
employment provided for paid leave to care for an
immediate member of the
applicant’s family or for the applicant’s illness and inability to
attend the workplace.
the claim for payment in lieu of notice, I have listened to the evidence of the
applicant and the respondent carefully.
I prefer the evidence of the
respondent. I find that the respondent advised the applicant to leave the
workplace and return on
the following working day with an adjusted
. I find the applicant responded by
effectively resigning and demanding her termination pay and a separation
certificate. The respondent
subsequently discovered the applicant had
misconducted herself in a manner that was in breach of her contract of
employment during
her employment. The terms of her employment contract provided
for her employment to be terminated without notice.
am not satisfied that the applicant was entitled to be paid, but was denied, a
contractual benefit by way of four weeks’ pay
in lieu of notice. I find
the applicant effectively resigned from her employment on 31 July 2023 without
notice. In any event,
the respondent had the ability to terminate her
employment without notice given the misconduct of the applicant.
despite the applicant partly establishing she may have an entitlement to at
least some benefit under her contract, and that
with the submission of further
evidence, established this benefit was denied, I do not consider I ought to make
the orders sought
by the applicant. In my view the applicant’s conduct
disqualifies her from the remedy she seeks because she does not come
‘clean hands’.
Unclean Hands
doctrine of unclean hands means that a party who seeks equitable relief and has
themselves acted unconscionably in connection
with the same subject matter out
of which they claim a right to relief may be denied the relief sought because of
that conduct.
Civil Service Association of Western
Australia Incorporated v Director General, Ministry of Justice
WAIRC 08587
(2003) 94 WAIG 215
CSA v Ministry of Justice
matter concerning disciplinary proceedings concerning a government employee, the
Commission considered the issue of whether the
Commission’s jurisdiction
has general equitable jurisdiction. Kenner C said:
[55] In relation
to the nature of the Commission's jurisdiction, in response to submissions by
the applicant, counsel for the respondent
also submitted that the Commission's
conferred upon the
Commission or the Commission constituted as an Arbitrator
under the Act. Whilst it is trite to observe that the Commission is not
of equitable jurisdiction, in my view, given that the touchstone of the
Commission's jurisdiction is to enquire into and
deal with industrial matters
“in accordance with equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case” under
of the Act, it is appropriate for the
Commission to have regard to relevant equitable principles, as part of
“inquiring into
and dealing with” an industrial matter.
[56] The injunction in
, governs the manner of the exercise of
the Commission's jurisdiction, and somewhat tritely, is not a source of power in
However, what it does permit is the departure from strict legal
entitlement, in circumstances where the equity and good conscience
compels such
a conclusion. For example, in a contractual benefits claim, in circumstances
where the applicant may be strictly entitled
to a benefit under his or her
contract of employment, but the circumstances of the case reveal that
the applicant engaged in some form of misconduct or
deceit in relation to the matter the subject of the claim, the Commission is
in my opinion, pursuant to
, to deny an applicant relief.
This approach would appear to accord with the two important maxims of equity,
they being that “he
who seeks equity must do equity and that “he
must also come with clean hands”. In my opinion, there is nothing
inconsistent
with the Commission's jurisdiction, for the application of these
broad principles, having regard to
of the Act.
Charles (Carmelo) Parrella v FBM Corporation Pty Ltd
[2012] WAIRC
(2012) 92 WAIG 1988
), in a claim for a
denied contractual benefit, the Commission considered the question of an
applicant’s conduct that caused
loss and damage to an employer. Beech C
[9] Whether Mr Parrella acted in breach of his contract
of employment will be an important consideration in both this Commission and
the Supreme Court proceedings. It is directly raised in FBM’s Notice of
Answer in this matter and it is central to the
action taken by FBM in the
Supreme Court. Although this Commission will decide whether Mr Parrella
has not been allowed by FBM benefits
to which he is entitled under his contract
of employment, his claim for an order that FBM pay him any benefits will be
decided according
to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the
Sargant v Lowndes Lambert Australia Pty Ltd
81 WAIG 311; and the appeal which was dismissed:
[2001] WAIRC 02603
(2001) 81 WAIG 1149).
This means that if
Mr Parrella did act in breach of his contract of employment and caused loss
and damage to FBM, he does not come
here with clean hands. The Commission would
be slow to order FBM to pay him a benefit due under the very contract of
of which he himself was in breach which caused loss and damage to his
former employer.
terms of the applicant’s employment contract specifically addressed the
issue of using the equipment of the business for
Termination
The company may terminate your employment at any time without notice if:
● Using company equipment for personnel [sic] use unless agreed
otherwise with myself (Greg Morgan).
contract of employment specifically references the use of company equipment for
personal purposes. The severity of the consequences
for using company equipment
without the agreement of the principal of the company clearly conveyed to the
applicant the significance
of such conduct.
behaviour of the applicant in obscuring the lenses of the cameras and confirming
the outcome of her efforts demonstrates the applicant’s
concern should her
subsequent activities in the print room be discovered. The applicant went to
considerable lengths to avoid detection
and to deceive the respondent. I find
that the applicant’s conduct is not consistent with an employee’s
duty of good
faith to an employer.
the matter of the use of confidential information by the applicant, I have
listened carefully to the witness testimony of both
the applicant and the
respondent, and I have considered the documentary evidence submitted by the
parties. I prefer the evidence
of the respondent and find that the applicant
deliberately directed work meant for Signcraft to her own business
operations.
contract of employment expressly provides that information relating to the
business is confidential and is the sole property of
Signcraft. The contract
states that the applicant shall not either during or after employment divulge or
use confidential information
for her own benefit or another benefit without the
prior consent of the respondent. The applicant’s use of confidential
information
of the respondent to procure a benefit for herself and her action
are clearly in breach of the expressed terms of the contract of
employment.
find that the applicant engaged in misconduct in breach of the terms of the
contract of employment and, consistent with the decisions
Ministry of Justice
, ought to be denied
relief sought.
this conclusion I hereby dismiss the application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter