URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- PICCIONI [2025] WADC 69 (3 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CRIMINAL
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- PICCIONI
[2025] WADC
18 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
3 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
IND 673 of 2021
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
TOMMASO NICOLA PICCIONI
Criminal law - Evidence - Admissibility of DNA
evidence - Where investigator mediated contamination occurred during execution
warrant - Whether a jury would be able to make a reliable
assessment as to direct transfer of DNA - Competing inferences of direct
indirect transfer - Whether evidence is relevant - Whether prejudicial
effect of evidence exceeds probative value - Whether prejudicial
effect causes
Legislation:
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Evidence inadmissible
Representation:
The State of Western Australia
Mr S M Stocks
Mr M A Perrella
Solicitors:
The State of Western Australia
State Director of Public Prosecutions
Perrella Legal
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Chamberlain v The Queen [No 2]
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Creusot v The State of Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 117
Edwards v The Queen
[1993] HCA 63
(1993) 178 CLR 193
Festa v The Queen
[2001] HCA 72
(2001) 208 CLR 593
Goldsmith v Sandilands
[2002] HCA 31
(2002) 76 ALJR 1024
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
Mukevski v The State of Western Australia
[2010] WASCA 138
Pennington v The State of Western Australia
[2013] WASCA 98
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
(2016) 258 CLR 308
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618
Roach v The Queen
[2011] HCA 12
(2011) 242 CLR 610
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Smith v The Queen
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR 650
Zoneff v The Queen
[2000] HCA 28
(2000) 200 CLR 234
way of application dated 8 August 2025 (the application), the accused
applies pursuant to
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(the Act) for directions excluding the admissibility of 'DNA evidence
sought to be adduced by the prosecution' in the trial of
the seven charges
presented against him by way of indictment dated 1 August 2024
(indictment).
indictment charges the accused with four counts of possessing firearms and three
counts of possessing ammunition, located by
police at a storage container on
21 August 2019 and is listed to commence trial on 13 October 2025. He
was first charged on 14 October
2019. It is unnecessary for me to
undertake a detailed analysis of the causes of the delay other than to note the
history of these
proceedings has been unfortunate and protracted. It is the
delay itself and the effect it has upon the reliability of human memory
relevant to the resolution of this application. This is a matter that I will
'DNA evidence' sought to be excluded is the PathWest testing of
swab F0915160-0 which provided a mixed profile assumed to have
four contributors. From that mixed profile, a profile consistent with the
accused's DNA reference sample was identified.
The statistical weighting
attributed to that analysis was calculated to be more than 100 billion to
one. The mixed DNA profile
was not suitable for further interpretation.
accused was originally jointly charged with his co-accused, Darcy Doyle.
On 13 February 2024, just prior to the matter proceeding
Gething DCJ (as his Honour then was) severed the indictment. The State
proceeded to trial against Mr Doyle in relation
to associated charges that
related to Mr Doyle alone.
1 August 2024 the State discontinued five of the seven charges that
Mr Doyle had been jointly charged with the accused. By way
discontinuance dated 17 September 2025, the State discontinued the
remaining two charges against Mr Doyle. Consequently, in relation
seven charges the subject of the indictment, the State now proceeds solely
against the accused. It is notable that no forensic
evidence was obtained from
DNA testing of the exhibits which connected Mr Doyle to any of the firearms
or ammunition with which he
was jointly charged with the accused. This perhaps
gives some preliminary indication as to the significance of the DNA evidence
the prosecution case against the accused.
application is founded on the basis that the prejudicial effect of admitting
this evidence outweighs any probative value it might
possess, owing to what is
described as 'mass contamination' during the search and seizure of the exhibits
later submitted for forensic
testing. While the prosecution concedes that
deficiencies in the conduct of the search may have impacted the forensic
of the seized material, it maintains that these shortcomings do not
amount to 'mass contamination', and instead should be regarded
as, at most,
'incompetence'.
be able to make a proper assessment of the strength of the DNA evidence, it is
necessary to examine the significance it holds
in the prosecution
Overview of prosecution case
21 August 2019, West Australian police (WAPOL) officers executed a search
warrant at 100 Cutler Road in Jandakot. This is the
location of a storage
facility known as 'Billabong Self Storage'. Their area of interest was
storage unit 8.
Mr Doyle. At that stage, the accused was not a suspect and
was therefore
not present. Although the execution of the search was recorded, consistent with
what is often referred to as 'standard
practice', the recording did not capture
the entirety of the search.
recording commenced at 4.58 pm when officers arrived at the scene. Upon
arrival the unit was locked. At 5.04 pm, the camera
was switched off
whilst officers endeavoured to gain entry. It was turned back on very shortly
thereafter when officers managed
to successfully unlock the unit.
5.04 pm 'and a bit' a camera pan of the unit was conducted which showed it
contained various items and belongings. The contents
could broadly be described
as including a collection of car parts, multiple storage tubs containing various
parts and equipment,
and items that were covered by blankets and sheets. The
recording was again suspended at 5.05 pm after the pan was completed.
5.15 pm the recording was switched back on. The officer in charge of the
of minutes ago' as officers
had located what they believed to be firearms during the search. Four of the
firearms that were found
are the subject of counts 1 - 4 on the
indictment.
is clear from the recording that when it was switched back on the firearms were
no longer '
' and had been moved, along with the remaining contents
of the unit. Some of the firearms were within cases or containers that
had already been opened by the time the recording commenced at
5.15 pm. Given the search had been stopped 'a couple of minutes'
the recording resuming, the search of the entire storage unit and the removal of
its contents had been conducted in less
than 10 minutes.
1 relates to one of two rifles located within a black firearms case. The count
particularises a repeating rifle as being the
subject of the charge. The
accused was also, at one stage, charged with being in possession of the second
rifle, being a Francotte
single shot rifle. However, on 22 November 2022
that charge was discontinued. What can be seen on the recording is the
already been opened, as well as a gun bag in which one of the rifles
was located.
2 particularises the firearm the subject of this charge as being a Zoraki
9 mm pistol. This firearm was located within a grey/green
which had been removed from the storage unit and placed on the bitumen road out
front. When examined, it was picked up
and placed on the bare concrete of the
storage unit. Inside the bag were two other pistols, a revolver which was
incapable of firing
and an imitation pistol, neither of which the accused has
been charged with. After going through these items, the recording was
5.43 pm to 'allow the exhibits officer to catch up' as they were concerned
the items seized.
recording resumed nine minutes later at 5.52 pm. By that time, a black
case had been placed on the bare concrete floor of the
storage container. It
was clear the case was not originally in situ, as it now occupied the same
spot where the firearms case containing
the two rifles had earlier been
positioned. The first firearm retrieved was a Smith & Wesson Magnum
revolver, the subject of
count 3 and the focus of the disputed DNA
evidence. The revolver is visible inside the case, lying loosely beneath a
flap of fabric
that required lifting to access it. After examining and handling
the firearm, the officer is observed changing into a new pair of
under a second flap was a second pistol which is the subject of count 4.
At the time of removing the pistol from the case,
the pistol was loaded.
The recording unexpectedly finishes whilst the officer is still holding this
5 - 7 concern ammunition of various calibres seized from different
locations within the storage unit. Each count represents
the total quantity of
ammunition of a particular calibre, rather than its specific location. For the
purposes of this application,
these counts carry little relevance. A partial
pistol was also found within a blue lunch bag along with a black
fabric glove. The
accused was not charged with this partial pistol. None of
the firearms the subject of counts 1 - 4 were located inside this
bag and it has little relevance to the determination of the application
other than to note similar handling difficulties were observed
when dealing with
this exhibit.
the recording, it is the same officer who can be seen handling and dealing with
each of the firearms and ammunition the
subject of the seven counts. In the
various materials received (discussed in further detail below) this person, who
is not identified,
is referred to as the 'primary examination officer'
(PEO). To maintain consistency in terminology, I will adopt this phrase when
referring to this person.
Circumstantial case
State's case regarding possession in relation to all seven counts is a
circumstantial one. The proposed DNA evidence forms a
significant part of
the State's written submissions dated 15 September 2025 (State's
submissions), the State submits the DNA evidence 'complements
an existing
circumstantial case, and is not an indispensable link in the chain of
reasoning'.
be seen, the State suggests that the DNA evidence operates as part of the
circumstantial case as a 'strand in the rope' in
the way described in
Chamberlain v The Queen [No
opposed to a 'link in the chain' being a reference to the indispensable
intermediate fact reasoning discussed in
Shepherd v The
circumstantial case was outlined as part of further correspondence provided to
the court on 17 September
significant component of the prosecution's circumstantial case is directed
towards establishing the accused's connection and access
to unit 8. For
the purposes of determining the application, it was not disputed that this
inference was available and capable of
being drawn from those collection of
facts. This is of course relevant towards establishing the accused's access to,
and ability
to exercise control over, one or more of the firearms the subject of
the indictment.
during oral submissions, the State quite properly acknowledged that the evidence
available as part of its circumstantial
case to establish knowledge and an
intention to exercise control was much more
establish this aspect of the accused's possession, the State primarily relied
(a) the proposed DNA evidence;
(b) a lie, or lies, which the State contends was told by the accused out of a
consciousness of guilt (commonly referred to as
(c) what the State suggests is post-offence conduct by the accused 'clearing
out' unit 8 on 1 September 2019 following him becoming
aware of the
police search on 21 August 2019.
lie, or lies, contended by the State as amounting to an
not specifically identified in any degree of detail when hearing the
application. The State submitted, broadly, that the
accused 'tells
lies when police ask him questions about unit no.8 on
19 September 2019' and that 'the only reasonable inference for telling the
lies is that [the accused] lied to distance himself from unit no.8 because he
well knew admitting he was accessing the unit would
implicate him in these
defence submit what is characterised as being 'an
lie' is rather
that is, a lie
going towards the accused's credibility only and not capable of permitting an
inference of guilt being drawn against
the accused. The defence were unable to
respond in any detail to the alleged post-offence conduct as it had not been
prior to the directions hearing that the State would rely upon this
conduct in this way. However, by way of correspondence sent
to the court after
the directions hearing had concluded, the defence
... the weight of the available evidence cannot reasonably support the State's
suggestion that the alleged 'post offence' conduct
can be used in reasoning
towards guilt, and it ought to be excluded from his Honour's determination, so
far as it might have been
relevant, on the admissibility of the DNA
defence submit that when the evidence characterised by the State as being
'post-offence conduct' is considered in its proper
context, at its highest what
it is capable of showing is the accused attending and 'cleaning out' the unit
after being requested
to do so by the operators of Billabong Self Storage due to
the lease being unilaterally terminated.
accused person's post-offence incriminating conduct, including lies, is
circumstantial evidence that a jury can accept and act
upon if the conduct
constitutes an implied admission against interest. A jury is not required to be
satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the post-offence conduct establishes
guilt. That is, a jury need not be satisfied there is no other explanation of
post-offence conduct reasonably open on the facts, unless the post-offence
conduct is an indispensable link in the chain of reasoning
on which proof of
the purposes of determining the application, I must consider the inferences that
are available collectively from the evidence
available to the
Ordinarily, where competing inferences are available, the assessment of the
plausibility and resolution of those competing inferences
is a question for the
jury rather than as part of the resolution of a preliminary question as to
admissibility.
Nevertheless, it will be necessary for a trial judge to be satisfied conduct is
capable of establishing an inference as to consciousness
of guilt before it can
be left to a jury to use in that
deciding whether the conduct of 'cleaning out the unit' alleged by the State is
capable of constituting 'post-offence conduct',
I am prepared to accede to
the defence request that it be disregarded for the purposes of this application.
In my view, consideration
of the alleged post-offence conduct does not
materially strengthen any inference that the accused knew of, or intended to
control over, the firearms found in the unit, beyond what is already
potentially established by the alleged
for the defence submission that what the prosecution submits is an
lie is in fact a
lie, ultimately that will be a question for
the trial judge to determine. For the purposes of assessing the current
application,
I proceed on the basis that it is capable of being used as an
lie (without determining that it is) and consider the
significance of the DNA evidence as part of the circumstantial case in that
regardless of whatever status any lie, or lies, the accused may allegedly have
made during his interview with police on
19 September 2019, both sides
appear to accept that the proposed DNA evidence forms a significant aspect of
the State's circumstantial
Analysis of the proposed DNA evidence
support of the application, and annexed as part of the Outline of Defence
Submissions dated 22 August 2025 (Defence submissions),
I received the
following material:
Forensic Biology Report dated 25 November 2020 prepared by
Mr Ross Hedley (PathWest report) annexed as
Biology Witness Statement of Mr Samuel Cornwell, senior forensic
scientist at PathWest, dated 30 November 2023 (Cornwell
from Ms Helen Roebuck, principal forensic scientist at Roebuck
Forensics, dated 9 May 2025 (Roebuck report) annexed as TP3.
email from Mr Cornwell dated 20 August 2025 in response to matters
raised in the defence report (Supplementary Cornwell report)
annexed as TP4.
PathWest report confirms swabs were taken from all eight firearms seized from
the unit and tested against the accused's reference
sample. The accused's
reference sample was the only reference sample provided for testing. With the
exception of the swab taken
from the Smith & Wesson Magnum revolver which is
the subject of count 3, the remaining seven swabs all were reported as
produced a mixed profile that was unsuitable for further analysis
due to the complexity of the profile recovered.
was not referred to any evidentiary material as to how the firearm swabs were
taken beyond what was contained in the
Roebuck report.
No issue was taken with the accuracy of what was described in that report. On
that basis, it appears all eight swabs provided to
PathWest were taken by WAPOL
officer(s) who adopted a process of swabbing the entire surface of each firearm,
rather than specific
locations on the firearm.
no issue was taken with the accuracy of what was reported, the State did suggest
Ms Roebuck's criticism of officers swabbing
the firearms in this manner was
indicative of a particular 'approach' she had taken when assessing, overall, the
adequacy of WAPOL's
handling and seizure of the
Notwithstanding, counsel for the State confirmed Ms Roebuck was not
required for
cross-examination
and the application proceeded on an apparent acceptance of what was contained
within her report. Accordingly, there appears to be
no challenge to the
credibility of the opinions she offered within the Defence report despite
whatever 'approach' she may have adopted.
is perhaps more significant from Ms Roebuck's criticism of this swabbing
method is the consequences that come from it. Because
the swabs were taken
across the entire surface of each firearm, rather than specific locations, it is
likely to have the following
consequences:
(a) it increases the
likelihood of recovering a mixed DNA sample from multiple sources, and
potentially multiple contributors, on
the firearm surface;
(b) a greater complexity in any such mixture reduces the prospects of being
able to make a reliable comparison;
(c) it eliminates any ability to determine the precise locations on the
firearm where particular DNA profiles were deposited; and
(d) there is a reduced capacity to show the implausibility of secondary
transfer because of contamination, since it cannot be shown
that the identified
DNA profiles were absent from areas where secondary transfer might have
the Cornwell and Roebuck reports were prepared for the purposes of offering
opinion as to what effect, if any, suggested deficiencies
in the handling and
seizure of the firearms may have had on the forensic integrity of the exhibits
and/or risk of secondary transfer.
Secondary transfer, also commonly referred
to as indirect transfer, is the process by which biological material containing
be transferred from one person to an object or surface through an
intermediate source, as opposed to direct transfer whereby biological
is deposited through direct contact by the donor. Thus, through indirect
transfer, a person's DNA can be found on the surface
of an object even though
that person never physically touched it.
the Roebuck report Ms Roebuck called the process of causing indirect
transfer through exhibit handling as 'investigator mediated
contamination' which
she described as
15.3 When an investigator inadvertently contaminates the crime scene (or
exhibits) with DNA, this is referred to as investigator
contamination.
15.4 Investigator mediated contamination can involve introduction of the
individual's own DNA into the crime scene. However, this
form of contamination
is often less problematic as it can often be detected through comparison of the
DNA profiles obtained from
the crime scene, against databases of police and
laboratory staff.
15.5 Investigator mediated contamination also includes transferring DNA from one
part of the crime scene to another, or from one
exhibit to another. For
example, this can occur as a result of not changing gloves between each sample
collected, or by utilising
tools that are not cleaned between exhibits.
15.6 Investigator mediated contamination is problematic, as it is not possible
to determine through DNA analysis alone whether the
DNA profile obtained is from
DNA introduced by contamination at the crime scene.
15.7 Current DNA analysis methodologies are very sensitive and require only a
small number of cells to obtain a DNA profile. Therefore,
it is imperative that
the investigator takes precautions to minimise the risk of contamination. These
precautions are commonly referred
to as DNA anti-contamination precautions.
experts in their reports provide numerous examples of occasions where
investigator mediated contamination can be seen occurring
during the search of
unit 8. Those opinions were based upon a review of what was captured in
the approximately 40-minute audiovisual
recording of the search. Having
reviewed the recording, I can confirm the accuracy of those descriptions.
During oral submissions,
the State also ultimately conceded no issue was taken
with the observations as to the various failings by WAPOL officers in preserving
the forensic integrity of the
commenting on the effect of those failings in the Cornwell report,
Mr Cornwell
Whilst the above outlines flaws in the contamination minimisation techniques
employed in this instance, there is no expectation that
DNA transfer
(contamination) has occurred as a result of such flaws. ...
respect to Mr Cornwell, the wording of his opinion was regrettably, and no
doubt unintentionally, ambiguous given one possible
interpretation of what he
has said is that, despite the 'flaws in contamination minimisation', the risk of
secondary transfer remained
unlikely. Fortunately, that ambiguity was clarified
in the Supplementary Cornwell report where he
Given the multi-faceted complexities involved with any DNA transfer event (or
contamination event in this case), it is possible that
either DNA transfer has
or hasn't occurred, however I cannot determine nor do I have an expectation as
to which of these two outcomes
is true. My position is also that DNA
contamination is possible in this scenario given the opportunities for DNA
transfer occurring
Ms Roebuck,
in providing her opinion, is both more explicit, as well as more accurately
aligned with the evidentiary onus being upon
the prosecution. In the
Roebuck report, she
The extensive flaws in the crime scene procedure demonstrate numerous pathways
for [the accused's] available DNA to have been transferred
by officers at the
premises. I cannot conclude in these circumstances that contamination of the
Smith and Wesson firearm has not
can be seen, both experts agree that:
(a) flaws in the
contamination minimisation techniques were present; and
(b) those flaws have introduced the risk of secondary transfer through the
process of investigator mediated contamination.
there is no conflict in the opinions offered, no resolution is required.
However, to the extent that Ms Roebuck's opinion
more accurately reflects
the significance of secondary transfer through investigator mediated
contamination by reference to the operation
of the standard and onus of proof
placed upon the prosecution, I prefer and adopt her formulation.
for the State's oral submissions proceeded on an implicit, if not explicit,
acceptance that the way the search and handling
of the firearms was conducted
did introduce a risk of investigator mediated contamination. However, the State
submits that because
this crime scene examination involved the investigation of
firearms that necessitated the need to make those firearms safe
The prospect that you could do that in a completely
sterile manner is setting a standard that would be unachievable. ...
State's submission has some merit, particularly given one of the firearms was in
fact loaded. But a proper reading of both the
Cornwell and Roebuck reports
shows that neither author suggests that a 'completely sterile manner' was
what was required.
his report, Mr Cornwell outlines the protocols in place at the PathWest
laboratory to minimise the risk of DNA contamination.
Both experts accept,
and I agree, that such laboratory standards cannot realistically be applied or
maintained at a crime scene,
given its dynamic and often evolving nature.
Necessarily, something less than laboratory standards will apply. But both
also agree that certain minimum standards will need to be met if the
forensic integrity of the evidence is to be preserved.
the Cornwell report, Mr Cornwell recognises that '[r]egardless of the
examination environment, minimum requirements should be
adhered to'.
Unfortunately, Mr Cornwell does not elaborate upon what those minimum
standards require, other than noting they need
to apply to the 'use of
gloves and clean working
environments'.
However, the fact Mr Cornwell acknowledges there must be
standards to apply to the use of gloves suggests that something
more than the mere use of gloves would be required.
is said much more explicitly in the Roebuck report where Ms Roebuck
opines 'the wearing of PPE (e.g. gloves) alone does not,
in and of itself,
mitigate the risk of DNA contamination'. She provides a clearer indication
of what those 'minimum standards' may
require when she states
The wearing of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as gloves, is one
critical procedural step. However, it is imperative that
the examiner is
continually minded towards minimising DNA contamination throughout their
interactions with the crime scene and the
exhibits. ...
Undoubtedly,
there will be occasions where, even with an officer who remains consistently
mindful of minimising DNA contamination,
the circumstances of a crime scene
examination may provide good reason to depart from the procedures ordinarily
required to avoid
the risk of investigator mediated contamination. Here, as the
State submits, 'there's no getting around' the fact the firearms needed
evidence was to retain forensic integrity, that process of rendering the
firearms safe would have to be done in a way that
minimised the risk of
investigator mediated contamination.
officers attended unit 8 without any expectation of locating firearms, it
is unclear to me why upon discovering the first
firearm, or what was
believed to be a firearm, officers could not have suspended the search until the
arrival of a suitably qualified
forensic officer. Such an officer could then
have supervised the continuation of the search and provided guidance on how to
forensic integrity while ensuring that any firearm located was rendered
Ultimately,
however, for the purposes of resolving the application, I do not need to decide
what might be an appropriate procedure
that obtains the correct balance between
preserving the safety of WAPOL officers and protecting the forensic integrity of
the evidence.
My role in determining this application is to determine whether
the prejudicial effect of the proposed DNA evidence outweighs any
value it might hold.
respect to the PEO, if he was 'continually minded towards minimising DNA
contamination throughout [his] interactions with the
crime scene and the
exhibits', the audiovisual recording of the search made clear that the
procedures he adopted were not consistent
with what was required to avoid
investigator mediated contamination. Having reviewed the recording, I accept
for all of the reasons
as outlined in the Roebuck report, the risk of
investigator mediated contamination is real and necessarily affects the
reliability
and weight to be attached to the significance of the proposed DNA
Applicable legal principles
primary rule of evidence is that a court will receive, and only receive,
evidence that is relevant to the issues at the
will be relevant if it can rationally affect the jury's assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in
directly or
indirectly.
way evidence may indirectly affect the assessment is if it assists in the
evaluation of other
However, if evidence is not relevant, then it is inadmissible. This is not
discretionary.
found to be relevant, the common law rules for exclusion will then apply. The
court has a discretion to exclude what would
otherwise be relevant and
admissible evidence on the ground that its prejudicial effect exceeds its
probative value. Examples of
where the prejudicial effect may exceed the
probative value arise where:
(a) the jury are likely to give the
evidence more weight than it
(b) the evidence is inherently weak and
non-conclusive.
Submissions
accused submits as part of the Defence
submissions:
... [I]t would not be possible for a trier of fact to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the DNA of the accused was deposited
by direct transfer to
the revolver. Accordingly, there is no probative value, which could be derived
from the admission of the DNA
oral argument, the submission was developed further with it being contended
'before [the evidence] could go to the jury, the cogency
and reliability of
that DNA must be established beyond reasonable
respect, this submission reflects a conflation between the threshold test for
relevance and admissibility with the jury's function
as fact finder.
the distinction between the role of judge and jury and
the functions each were to undertake was made
As a general rule, it will be for the jury to decide, on the basis of the
evidence as a whole, whether the post-offence conduct of
the accused is related
to the crime before them rather than to some other culpable act. It is also
within the province of the jury
to consider how much weight, if any, such
evidence should be accorded in the final determination of guilt or innocence.
trial judge to interfere in that process will in most cases constitute a
usurpation of the jury's exclusive fact-finding role.
noted above at [54], the test for relevance is simply whether the evidence can
rationally affect the jury's assessment of the
probability of the existence of a
fact in issue. Whether that evidence is accepted by the jury, what weight to
attribute to it and
whether it satisfies them in the manner that is contended
are all matters for the jury to determine. They are not part of the threshold
test of relevance. During oral submissions, counsel for the accused accepted
the correctness of this
Ultimately,
as the submission was developed, the objection appears to be more properly
characterised as a complaint that due to the
established presence of
investigator mediated contamination, the probative weight is so severely
diminished that it cannot establish,
directly or indirectly, the fact the
prosecution invites. Alternatively, the submission is made it would be
'dangerous to convict...because
of the significant risk of
contamination'.
Again, as I understand from this submission, the complaint really is one that
the risk is the jury will place undue weight upon
what is suggested can be
concluded from the DNA evidence, as opposed to what the DNA evidence is capable
of establishing.
response, the prosecution
The weight of the DNA evidence is determined by reference to the objective
circumstances. In this case, the secondary transfer argument
is a matter that
can be out (sic put) to a jury and dealt with by direction as to the
intermediate findings that the jury would need
that submission was developed in oral
... [I]t is ultimately a factual assessment by the jury as to whether or not
they accept that there's a real risk [secondary transfer]
might have occurred in
this case. ...
... [T]he State says here that it's for the jury to determine whether or not
it's gone over the hill [of proving direct transfer].
And the State says it can
get over the hill by pointing to the inherent improbability of that secondary
transfer having occurred.
essence, the State submits that determining between the two competing
inferences, whether the DNA was deposited by direct or secondary
transfer, is a
matter properly for the jury, and not part of the preliminary exclusionary
question as to relevance.
Disposition
contested facts in issue in this matter are the accused's knowledge and
intention to exercise control over one or more of the
firearms located within
unit 8. To be relevant, the proposed DNA evidence must be capable of
rationally affecting the jury's assessment
of the probability of the existence
of one or more facts underpinning either or both of those issues.
the jury are satisfied that the component of the mixed profile consistent with
the accused's DNA was the result of him directly
depositing that material onto
the Smith & Wesson Magnum revolver, this could rationally inform their
assessment of the likelihood
that he had actual knowledge of the firearm's
presence in a location under his control. However, if the DNA was not deposited
the firearm directly, then it appears to have no further relevance. The
State has not sought to identify any other uses the DNA
may have to the jury's
assessment of the facts in issue. Accordingly, as can be seen, the way in which
the DNA was deposited upon
the firearm is central to its relevance.
Accordingly,
the State invites the jury not only to accept that a DNA profile consistent
with the accused's was found on the Smith
& Wesson firearm, but
also to conclude, when considered with the expert evidence on direct and
indirect transfer, alongside the
other available evidence, namely the evidence
of the search captured in the audiovisual recording, that the presence of that
is only explicable by direct transfer. This is not a question of
elevating the significance of the DNA evidence to being a 'link
in the chain'
as opposed to a 'strand in the rope', it is simply an outline of the only
basis this evidence could have bare relevance.
of the State's case will consist of the accused's mixed statement containing
admissions against interest during which he explained
he would use unit 8
to store personal items, such as car
plausible basis on which the accused's biological material was already present
within the storage unit. This forms part
of the assessment of the State's
circumstantial case.
this into account, along with the lies the accused purportedly told out of a
consciousness of guilt, the collective aspects
of the State's circumstantial
case can establish either of the following scenarios:
(a) Both the
accused and Mr Doyle had access to unit 8. The accused used the
unit to store his own items including his firearms there.
When interviewed
fact he knew he stored his firearms
there. The accused's DNA profile, later
found on one of the firearms, was deposited when he stored the firearm there at
point (the primary scenario).
(b) Both the accused and Mr Doyle had access to unit 8.
The accused used the unit to store his own items and knew that
Mr Doyle also
stored firearms there. When interviewed about the unit, the
accused denied his involvement to distance himself from the unlawful
Mr Doyle's firearms. The accused's DNA profile, later found on one of
the firearms, was deposited not by direct contact
but through investigator
mediated contamination, transferred from his belongings in the unit during the
(the secondary scenario).
primary scenario depends on the jury accepting that the DNA was deposited
directly. The remainder of the State's circumstantial
case, even taken as a
whole, does not assist in resolving that issue. While the circumstantial
evidence is consistent with the primary
scenario, it is equally consistent with
the secondary scenario. Accordingly, for the purpose of assessing whether the
proposed DNA
evidence can rationally influence the jury's determination of
whether it was deposited by direct transfer, the remainder of the State's
circumstantial case is entirely neutral. Accordingly, the jury's ability to
assess whether the DNA profile was placed there through
direct transfer or not
comes from the DNA evidence itself, assessed in the context of what the jury
will be able to determine regarding
possible investigator mediated
contamination.
State submits that juries are often required to assess whether DNA was deposited
directly or indirectly and, again, that is undoubtedly
correct. However, to
frame the task as choosing between competing binary inferences, or as deciding
whether secondary transfer is
plausible or implausible, while a convenient
shorthand, risks obscuring the true nature of what the jury must determine
in the context
of the prosecution's onus and standard of proof. Counsel for the
State fairly acknowledged in oral submissions that, at times, the
argument had been expressed in a way that appeared to reverse the onus, by
focusing on the implausibility of secondary transfer
rather than considering
whether the evidence could plausibly establish direct transfer. This perhaps
reflects an unconscious tendency
to adopt a process of reasoning that favours
direct transfer unless secondary transfer is established as a credible
alternative and
exposes some of the potential risks with this type of evidence.
be relevant to the jury's task the jury, after assessing all the evidence, need
to accept that the accused's DNA was deposited
through direct transfer. As I
understand the evidence of both Mr Cornwell and Ms Roebuck, neither go
so far as excluding the possibility
of direct transfer. Given what I anticipate
the expert evidence is likely to be regarding direct and indirect transfer, the
DNA evidence is at least capable of establishing the possibility of
direct transfer. This satisfies the basal issue of relevance.
a jury will still be required to determine whether they accept that evidence.
The jury will need to do so in the context
of the other evidence they hear. The
only other evidence the jury will hear that can inform them regarding the
operation of direct
and indirect transfer will be from the experts. The jury
will then need to apply that evidence when considering and assessing the
evidence in the trial. As noted above, the State's circumstantial case is
unlikely to assist to any material degree as it
appears intractably neutral on
this point.
Consequently,
in carrying out a determination of whether they accept that the proposed DNA
evidence establishes direct transfer,
the only other evidence that can
materially assist the jury in that task is what can be seen in the audiovisual
recording of the
experts accept that what is seen in the recording amounts to a possible
contamination event that could have resulted in investigator
contamination. Both experts agree that from DNA analysis alone, the mechanism
by which DNA is deposited, either directly
or indirectly, cannot be determined.
Both experts can offer their own opinions, based on what is seen in the footage,
plausibility or implausibility of direct or indirect transfer.
what is seen in that recording, when considered in the context of the expert
evidence the jury will hear about the risks of secondary
transfer and
investigator mediated contamination, causes the jury to disregard the proposed
DNA evidence regarding potential direct
transfer, then this evidence has no
further relevance. Up to this point, I agree with the State's submission
that this is within
the jury's exclusive fact-finding role as per
even if, after viewing the audiovisual recording of the search, the jury were to
conclude that there is nothing indicating
secondary transfer occurred, this
would not justify concluding that the DNA profile must have been deposited by
direct transfer.
To reason in such a binary way would amount to the kind of
impermissible reasoning, and reversal of the onus, that I have outlined
the proposed DNA evidence to be relevant to the facts in issue, the jury would
still need to consider whether it accepts the
evidence that the DNA profile was
directly deposited.
commencement of the recording makes it apparent that various exhibits had
already been moved. It is also evident that not only
were the exhibits shifted,
but so too were crates and other equipment in the storage unit that may have
belonged to the accused and
potentially carried his DNA. Most, if not all, of
the cases containing the firearms appear to have been opened at a time not
on camera. Given the expert consensus that the procedures visible in
the recording fell short of what was required to minimise the
contamination, and in fact increased the risk of investigator mediated
contamination, there is no basis to assume that the
procedures followed
off-camera were free from similar shortcomings. The fact the search and removal
of relevant items within the
unit was conducted in less than 10 minutes
reinforces the likelihood this process was not executed in a way that properly
the forensic integrity of the exhibits.
noted above at [2], the purpose of me outlining the history of this matter was
not to express criticism, but to highlight the
well-recognised difficulties
extended delay will cause to human memory. Those difficulties are compounded
further when the witnesses
in question are police officers who, undoubtedly
since 2019, have carried out countless investigations that would affect their
to recall with any degree of reliability or precision what procedures
and handling occurred off-camera during the search on 21 August
I am not satisfied the officers would be able to do so in a manner that
would be sufficient to allow a jury to reliably make
an assessment as to the
prospect of direct transfer.
absence of reliable evidence regarding the handling of the relevant exhibits
prevents the jury from being in a position where it can
properly assess the weight that should be given to the proposed DNA evidence.
This inability creates an inherent risk that the jury may attribute greater
weight to the DNA evidence than it warrants, giving
rise to the kind of
unfairness specifically contemplated in
, as referred to
my view, this unfairness is contributed to by a combination of the following
(a) The passage of time eliminates any realistic chance of
any reliable evidence being adduced that would overcome this prejudice
allow a jury to carry out a proper assessment of what weight should be
attributed to this evidence.
(b) The accused was not present when the search was conducted and so he
cannot, from his own account, remedy this deficiency. Regardless,
passage of time, significant difficulties would attend to the reliability of any
purported recollection by the accused.
(c) Because of both the passage of time and the unavailability of any
reliable evidence regarding what took place off-camera, the
ability to properly test the evidence that the DNA was directly deposited is
(d) The inability to properly test this evidence further compounds the risk a
jury will attach a greater weight to this evidence than
what it warrants.
the reasons I have outlined above, I am satisfied the prejudicial effect of this
evidence outweighs the limited probative value
it holds, given the risk the jury
is likely to give the evidence more weight than it deserves.
admit this evidence into any trial of the accused would result in an unfairness
that cannot be cured by direction. Because of
this, the evidence is
inadmissible.
accused's application to exclude the admissibility of the proposed DNA evidence
is granted.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to Judge Astill
3 OCTOBER 2025
submissions, par
Chamberlain v The Queen [No 2]
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
See email from
DPP dated 17 September 2025 at 11.24 am.
Edwards v The Queen
[1993] HCA 63
(1993) 178 CLR
from DPP dated 17 September 2025 at
Zoneff v The Queen
[2000] HCA 28
(2000) 200 CLR 234.
See email from
defence counsel dated 19 September 2025 at
Creusot v The State of Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 117
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
Pennington v The State of Western Australia
[2013] WASCA 98
Prosecution
brief (PB), page 525.
report, page 4, par 7.
report, page 7.
report, page 7.
report, page 11, par 21.
report, page 2.
report, page 8, par
Goldsmith v Sandilands
[2002] HCA 31
(2002) 76 ALJR 1024
Smith v The Queen
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR 650
Roach v The Queen
[2011] HCA 12
(2011) 242 CLR 610
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
Festa v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 593
, 609 - 610
Mukevski v The State of Western Australia
[2010] WASCA 138
submissions, page 10, par
submissions, page 2, par 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (368 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter