URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/167.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- TODD [2025] WASCA 167 (17 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- TODD
[2025] WASCA 167
NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACR 85 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
KAL IND 63 OF 2024
law – Sentencing – State appeal against sentence – Where
respondent convicted of one count of indecent
assault of a child between age of
13 and 16 years and three counts of sexual penetration of a child
between age of 13 and 16 years
– Total effective sentence
imposed of 4 years and 10 months imprisonment, wholly suspended
– Plea of guilty – Whether
sentencing judge erred in suspending the
terms of imprisonment – Resentencing of respondent
Legislation:
(WA), s 321(2),
to appeal granted on grounds 1 and 2
The appeal is
The sentences imposed by
Cleary DCJ are set aside
respondent is
resentenced
Representation:
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
Aaron Plenderleith
referred to in decision:
of Contents
OF THE COURT
Introduction
and overview
Saturday, 6 April 2024, a girl (who we will refer to as Millie) held a
party for her 17th birthday at her house in Boulder. Millie
invited the
respondent, Blake Riley Todd, to the party. Mr Todd was 20 years old
at the time.
approximately 9.30 pm that night, Millie contacted Mr Todd by Snapchat
to see if he was still coming to the party. In the course
of that Snapchat
conversation, Mr Todd sent the following message to
Millie asked 'which one', Mr Todd
arrived at the party shortly after 10.00 pm.
a few hours of arriving at the party, Mr Todd had sexually penetrated a
14‑year‑old girl (who had been at the
party since 4.30 pm)
three times. Mr Todd sexually penetrated the victim's mouth with his penis,
he sexually penetrated her vagina
with his fingers and he sexually penetrated
her vagina with his penis.
was not in dispute that when Mr Todd first asked the victim to give him
oral sex, the victim said 'no'. It was also not in dispute
that the victim had
been drinking at the party and was intoxicated to some degree. Mr Todd also
agreed that, after roughly five minutes
of him having sex with the victim, she
shoved him, saying 'No, no. Stop' and ran off.
pleaded guilty to one count of indecently dealing with a child between the age
of 13 years and 16 years and three counts
of sexual penetration of a
child between the age of 13 years and 16 years.
a trial of issues to determine the factual basis upon which Mr Todd would
be sentenced, the learned sentencing judge concluded
that, while she could not
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the victim told Mr Todd that she
was under 16 years of age, she
was not satisfied that Mr Todd
positively believed that the victim was 16 years old. The learned
sentencing judge rejected Mr Todd's
evidence that he had turned his mind to
the victim's age.
learned sentencing judge was also not satisfied (on the balance of
probabilities) that the victim consented to being sexually
penetrated by
Mr Todd, although she could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the victim did
consent. In that
regard, her Honour appears to have accepted that there was a reasonable
inference available to the effect that the
victim 'reluctantly consented' before
the first act of sexual penetration.
learned sentencing judge sentenced Mr Todd to a total effective sentence of
4 years and 10 months imprisonment, which her Honour
wholly suspended for a
period of 2 years. In deciding to suspend the term of imprisonment, the
learned sentencing judge referred
to the isolated nature of the offending,
Mr Todd's youth and his otherwise prior good character.
State now appeals on the basis that the learned sentencing judge erred in
imposing a suspended sentence. While there are two
grounds of appeal, the
grounds amount to essentially the same contention: that it was unreasonable or
plainly unjust to impose a
sentence of suspended imprisonment in light of the
serious nature of the offending.
the reasons that follow, we have concluded that the appeal must be allowed.
While the offence of indecent dealing, considered
in isolation, would have
justified a suspended sentence in light of Mr Todd's youth and good
antecedents, the totality of his offending,
including the three offences of
sexual penetration of a child, was simply too serious to justify anything other
than a term of immediate
imprisonment.
was alone with a girl who was much younger than him, in the early hours of the
morning. At 14 years of age, the victim was,
by definition, vulnerable to
exploitation, and the fact that she was intoxicated (to any degree) could only
add to that vulnerability.
In persisting with his desire to have sex with
someone that night, Mr Todd took advantage of that vulnerability. If the
'reluctantly consent' to the sexual activity (which the learned
sentencing judge accepted was an available inference), that only
emphasise the fact that the capacity of children to resist moral, social,
emotional or other pressure from persons more
mature than themselves may be very
limited. The law must protect children from such exploitation.
justice of this case and the maintenance of proper standards of sentencing
require that Mr Todd be resentenced by this Court.
In all of the
circumstances, the appropriate sentence for all of the offences is a total
effective sentence of 3 years and 6 months
imprisonment, to be served
immediately. Mr Todd will be eligible for
5 February 2025, Mr Todd pleaded guilty to an indictment containing four
charges. Those charges, together with their maximum penalties,
dealing with a child over the age of 13 years and under the age of
16 years, by touching her breasts, contrary to s 321(4)
Criminal Code
imprisonment
penetration of a child over the age of 13 years and under the age of
16 years, by introducing his penis into her mouth, contrary
to s 321(2) of
Criminal Code
imprisonment
penetration of a child over the age of 13 years and under the age of
16 years, by penetrating her vagina with his fingers,
contrary to s 321(2)
Criminal Code
imprisonment
penetration of a child over the age of 13 years and under the age of
16 years, by penetrating her vagina with his penis, contrary
to s 321(2) of
Criminal Code
imprisonment
pleas of guilty were entered at the first reasonable
opportunity.
Circumstances
of the offending
disputed a number of the facts alleged by the State for the purposes of
sentencing. As a result, a trial of issues was held
before the learned
sentencing judge on 29 and 30 May 2025. The State called the victim to give
evidence as well as Millie, the girl
who invited Mr Todd to her party on
6 April 2024. Mr Todd also gave evidence.
turning to the findings of the learned sentencing judge on the trial of issues,
it is convenient to set out the facts that
were not in dispute. What follows is
taken from the statement of material facts and undisputed evidence at the trial
Uncontentious
was aged 20 years old at the time of the offences. He was 175 cm tall
and of medium build.
victim was aged 14 years old at the time of the offences. She was
155 cm tall and of slim build.
address in Boulder for her friend Millie's 17th birthday
approximately 9.30 pm, Millie and Mr Todd had a conversation over
Snapchat in relation to Mr Todd attending the party. Mr Todd
following message to Millie:
in the conversation the following exchange occurred (with Mr Todd's entries
marked in red and Millie's entries marked in
expression 'moin' in this exchange is a common Aboriginal word in Western
Australia and is used beyond the Aboriginal community
to refer to sex. The
letters 'idk idc' mean 'I don't know. I don't care'.
arrived at the party shortly after 10.00 pm.
the course of the evening, the victim and others at the party, including
Mr Todd, consumed alcohol. There was a dispute as
to the extent of the
victim's intoxication to which we will return.
the night, Mr Todd, the victim, and others left the house and went for a
walk in Boulder.
the walk, Mr Todd held the victim's hand and placed his hand around her
waist while walking. At some point, everyone decided
to return to the house and
go to sleep.
midnight and 5.00 am on Sunday, 7 April 2024, Mr Todd, the victim and
Millie sat on couches located in an outside area at
the house. The others stayed
inside the house. Mr Todd went over to where the victim was sitting and
started to kiss her.
The victim and Millie got up,
went to the bathroom and had a conversation, before returning outside to sit on
the couches again. Mr
Todd asked the victim to come and sit next to him.
She went over and sat on his lap. Mr Todd kissed the victim again on her
and neck. Mr Todd also squeezed her breasts with his hand over her
clothing numerous times while he was kissing her.
touching of the victim's breasts over her clothes constituted count 1 on the
indictment.
Mr Todd got up and walked off. The victim followed him, and they had a
conversation in which he asked her to come back to his
place with him. The
victim declined and went back outside and lay on the couches again.
later, the victim got up from the couch and went to the toilet. After she left
the toilet, the victim and Mr Todd were in
the bathroom. There was a
dispute as to what happened next. In light of the learned sentencing judge's
findings, it is sufficient
to record Mr Todd's own evidence of what
occurred (which is the account most favourable to
Then what happened?---I then asked her if it was all right to perform
What were the words you said?---'Can I have some head, please?'.
Okay. And what did she say? Try and use the words – exact words, if you
can remember?---I asked her for head. She said, no.
I then persisted and asked
her again, and then revealed myself, and then she decided she wanted to –
Okay. Why did you ask her a second time?---I don't know. I just thought I would
give it another crack.
Okay. How many times did you ask her?---Twice.
And how long – so when you said she gave you head, can you tell me what
happened?---She – I would say she put my –
the knob of my penis in
her mouth for five seconds.
And then what happened?---She said, 'No. I can't. I don't want to do this. I
can't do this'. And I said, 'That's fine', pulled my
pants up and decided to
act of fellatio constituted count 2 on the indictment.
and the victim returned to the couch, where Mr Todd started to kiss the
victim on the neck and tried to put his hands down
her pants. Mr Todd
managed to put his hand down the victim's pants and penetrated her vagina with
his fingers. There was a dispute
as to what occurred at this point, but again,
it is sufficient to record Mr Todd's own evidence of what
And are you saying that [the victim's] mistaken when she said in her evidence
that she was trying to push your hand away?---She push
– she pushed it off
When?---At the very end. When I was fingering her.
Was that when you had your penis inside her vagina?---No. When I was fingering
her, she tried to push my hand away, and that's it.
Okay. So she pushed your hand away when you were fingering her, right? And then
after that you sexually penetrated her with your
penis, is that
right?---Yes.
Okay. Before – so before you sexually penetrated her with your penis, she
pushed your finger away, or your hand away?---Yes.
Okay?---Wouldn't say push, but yes.
Not push?---No. I wouldn't say push.
What – what would you say?---She just grabbed it and put it, like, further
down her thigh.
Away from her vagina?---Yes.
penetration of the victim's vagina with his fingers constituted count 3 on the
indictment.
then pulled down the victim's pants and underwear and penetrated the victim's
vagina with his penis. Once again, while there
was a dispute as to what occurred
at this point, it is sufficient to record Mr Todd's own evidence of what
And then what happened?---I put my hand actually underneath her clothing,
grabbed her breast and then asked her if we could fuck.
And what did she say?---She didn't really give me an answer.
Did she say anything?---She asked if I would take care of her.
And what did you say to that?---I said yes, of course, why wouldn't I?
Sorry?---Of course, why wouldn't I? Yes, okay.
Then what happened?---I then pulled her pants down.
Pulled whose pants down?---[The victim's].
And then what happened?---Then I started to fuck her.
Okay. And how did she seem at this point in time, before – so before you
started fucking her?---She seemed fine.
Tell me – use your words. Describe how she seemed?---She definitely wasn't
head floppy and disoriented and blurred vision.
She was responsive. She knew
what she was doing - - -
Okay?--- - - - and she was fine with it at the time.
So you said that you started having sex with her. How long did that last
for?---Not long at all.
Do you know roughly?---I would give it maybe long as five minutes.
Okay. And then what happened?---She – she then shoved me, saying, 'No, no.
Stop', and pretty well ran off.
penetration of the victim's vagina with his penis constituted count 4 on the
indictment. The victim said that Mr Todd did
not use protection and there
was no evidence to the contrary.
this the victim went to the bathroom where she messaged a friend for help. Her
friend walked to the address and picked her
up, before returning home.
victim's mother was called and she took the victim to hospital. The victim
received minor bruising and marks on her neck from
Mr Todd giving her love
9 April 2024, Mr Todd was arrested at Kalgoorlie Police
we have already noted there were a number of disputed facts that were the
subject of the trial of issues.
were five main areas of dispute, which were identified by the learned sentencing
judge in her reasons.
first issue was whether Mr Todd was aware of the victim's age. The State
contended that Mr Todd knew that the victim was under
16 years of age,
whereas Mr Todd contended that he had an honest and reasonable but mistaken
belief that the victim was at least
second issue concerned the victim's level of intoxication. The State contended
that the victim was so intoxicated that her head
felt 'floppy' and she was
struggling to stand up due to her intoxication. Mr Todd denied that the
victim was intoxicated to that
third issue concerned whether, prior to the act of fellatio that constituted
count 2, Mr Todd had pulled, or forced, the victim
into the bathroom, as
alleged by the
fourth issue concerned whether the victim had pushed Mr Todd's hand away
from her vagina to stop him from further penetrating
her vagina, between count 3
As can be seen from the passage at [
] above, Mr Todd agreed that the
victim had grabbed his hand and moved it away from her vagina.
the issue of the victim's actual consent to the sexual penetration in counts 2,
3 and 4, was in
The victim gave evidence that she did not want to have sex with Mr Todd,
that she said 'no' a number of times and that she tried
to stop him.
Mr Todd said that the victim did agree to the sexual activity. The learned
sentencing judge correctly observed that
the State bore the onus of proving
beyond reasonable doubt that the victim did not consent to the three acts of
sexual penetration
and that, conversely, Mr Todd bore the onus of proving,
on the balance of probabilities, that the victim did consent.
relation to this final issue, of course, the absence of consent was not an
element of the relevant offences. As the victim was
only 14 years old,
actual consent was irrelevant to whether Mr Todd was guilty of the
offences. Nevertheless, the learned sentencing
judge recognised that the
victim's willingness (or otherwise) to engage in the sexual activity was a
matter relevant to sentence.
will address the learned sentencing judge's findings in relation to each of
these issues in turn.
doing so, we are bound to observe that a number of the learned sentencing
judge's conclusions in relation to the circumstances
surrounding the offences
were, with respect to her Honour, less than entirely clear. In that regard, a
number of the findings made
by her Honour are difficult to understand or are
difficult to easily reconcile with other findings.
significance of this difficulty for the purposes of the appeal is that neither
party sought to challenge the learned sentencing
judge's factual findings in the
appeal. This Court must proceed on the basis of those factual findings.
Nevertheless, the fact that
a number of those findings are not clearly expressed
means that it is necessary for this Court to undertake an exercise in
construction
of her Honour's reasons to determine what those factual findings
actually were.
then to the issues identified by the learned sentencing
of the victim's age
learned sentencing judge's findings in relation to whether Mr Todd was
aware of the victim's age were relatively straightforward.
learned sentencing judge found that the victim's evidence that she discussed her
age with Mr Todd was equivocal. Her Honour also
considered that, in light
of the victim's intoxication and her evidence that she had not been arm in arm
with Mr Todd during the
walk referred to at [
] above (a photograph depicting them
arm in arm was adduced in evidence as Exhibit 2), she should treat the victim's
evidence that
she unequivocally told Mr Todd that she was under
these reasons, the learned sentencing judge was not satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the victim told Mr Todd that she was
the same time, however, the learned sentencing judge rejected Mr Todd's
evidence that he believed that the victim was 16 years
old or that he
specifically turned his mind to the question of her
In addition, her Honour concluded that, even if Mr Todd had believed that
the victim was 16 years old, she was not satisfied that
such a belief was
reasonable. In that context, her Honour said that Mr Todd was considerably
older than the victim and that it was
not reasonable to expect that all of the
people at the 17th birthday party would be, at least, 16 years
victim's level of intoxication
relation to the victim's level of intoxication, there was no doubt that she was
affected by alcohol during the night of the offences.
Early in her reasons on
the trial of issues, the learned sentencing judge said that she was satisfied
that 'from time to time over
the evening, [the victim] was affected by alcohol
and she was not behaving as a sober person would, having times of being blurry
Honour's ultimate conclusions in relation to the issue of the victim's
intoxication were
To accept the State's contention that she was so intoxicated that she was very
vulnerable to Mr Todd, particularly in relation to
the bathroom incident in
count 2, I would have to accept [the victim's] evidence that she could not keep
her head up and was continually
falling asleep and that that was due to her
intoxication when they were – when she was on the couch and that that was
sufficiently
close to the time of going to the bathroom that she was still
suffering from those effects.
However, there was no sufficient time frame given [in] her evidence for me to
make such a finding and having regard to the answers
in cross‑examination,
I cannot be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that at the time or around the
time of going into the
bathroom, she was so intoxicated that it would be an
aggravating factor against the accused in relation to that particular
It is the case, however, that overall as I have found, she was intoxicated to
some degree, as was Mr Todd and accordingly, there
was, in my view, to a
limited extent, advantage taken of [the victim] being a young woman without
adult support and from time to
time, over the course of the evening being drunk.
From her own evidence, I'm certainly unable to make a finding that she was so
intoxicated
that she was, in fact, unable to react or resist Mr Todd's
advances, but in general, in my view, she was intoxicated over the
findings, in our view, require some unpacking.
it is clear that the learned sentencing judge found that the victim was
intoxicated to some degree during the night and could
'from time to time' be
described as being drunk. That, in itself, is a significant finding to which we
will return. Mr Todd agreed
in his evidence that the victim was 'definitely
intoxicated' (including 'starting to feel sick') but said that she was not
in our view the learned sentencing judge's reference to whether the victim was
'so intoxicated that she was
vulnerable to Mr Todd', must be understood as a reference to whether the
victim was so intoxicated that she was
unable to resist
Mr Todd's advances. This is apparent from the fact that her Honour
conditioned such a finding on being satisfied
that the victim 'could not keep
her head up and was continually falling asleep'. That is the kind of
vulnerability that comes from
a person being so intoxicated as to be unable to
maintain conscious awareness of their surroundings.
Intoxication
occurs, however, on a continuum and a person may well be vulnerable to
exploitation by others at levels of intoxication
that are less than the point at
which they can no longer keep their head up, or are falling asleep. A lesser
degree of intoxication
may affect a person's inhibition, their judgment or their
capacity to resist moral or social pressure. Especially if that person
14‑year‑old girl.
do not understand the learned sentencing judge to have suggested that the victim
in the present case did not have that kind of
vulnerability from her level of
intoxication. Indeed, as we will come to, in her sentencing remarks the learned
sentencing judge
specifically referred to the victim's intoxication having made
her vulnerable, in addition to her age.
the victim was pulled into the bathroom
issue as to whether the victim was 'pulled' into the bathroom was an unusual
issue appears to have arisen because the interviewer in the victim's initial
child witness interview used that expression (i.e.
'pulled') in one of her
fact the victim never said that she was 'pulled' into the bathroom. In the child
witness interview, she said that Mr Todd 'brought
me into the bathroom
and 'wiggled me into the bathroom
The victim agreed in cross‑examination that she had walked into the
those circumstances, unsurprisingly, the learned sentencing judge was not
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Todd pulled
the victim into the
the victim pushed Mr Todd's hand away from her vagina
fourth issue concerned whether, as alleged by the State, the victim pushed
Mr Todd's hand away from her vagina to stop him from
further penetrating
her vagina during the commission of count 3. The victim had said in her child
witness interview that, at the
time that Mr Todd was 'fingering' her, she
'kept trying to push his hands
In that context, the victim also said that she was saying 'Toddy, no. No,
the learned sentencing judge expressed some caution about accepting the victim's
evidence in relation to that matter, her Honour
recognised that Mr Todd had
accepted in his evidence that the victim had pushed his hand away at this
In any event, the pushing away is somewhat corroborated by Mr Todd himself.
She did push his hand away. Mr Todd sought to distance
himself though from
her evidence by saying that his hand was simply put down her thigh, but I do
accept that there was some kind
of pushing away that occurred. Having accepted
that there was some pushing away, the question is whether it was a sign that
victim] did not want sexual penetration.
I am unable to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that that is the way in
which events on the couch unfolded. That is, that there
were a number of pushing
away. While it might be that [the victim's] proposition in general is a sound
one that she recalled these
details because it was traumatic, I'm unable to find
that her recollection is what occurred and that is because of all of the things
that I have mentioned before, her unreliability in relation to her intoxication
and her distancing herself from some of the other
evidence, such as that shown
in exhibit 2.
So if she did push his hand away I'm not satisfied that that was because she did
not want to have sexual activity with him in general.
Accordingly,
her Honour did not find, as a fact, that the victim's actions in pushing
Mr Todd's hand away from her vagina was because
she did not consent to the
sexual activity. Her Honour did not make any positive finding as to why, in
fact, the victim pushed Mr
Todd's hand away from her
the victim consented to the acts of sexual penetration
fifth issue concerned whether the victim 'consented' to the acts of sexual
penetration constituting counts 2, 3 and 4 on the
indictment. Of course, as we
have said, it is necessary to approach the matter of 'consent' in relation to an
offence against s 321
with some caution. The absence of consent is not an element of the
offence and in that sense, and as we have discussed in more detail
references to 'consent' for the purposes of sentencing must be understood to
refer to the particular circumstances of the
offence which either increase, or
mitigate, its seriousness.
the present case, as will be apparent from the evidence we have already
identified, the victim said that she was not a willing
participant in the acts
of sexual penetration committed by Mr Todd. She described saying 'no' to
Mr Todd on multiple occasions and
indeed, in relation to count 4, said in
her child witness interview 'he had sticked his dick in me without my
learned sentencing judge expressed caution in relation to the victim's evidence
that she had repeatedly said 'no' to Mr Todd
and, ultimately, her Honour's
findings in relation to consent were as
So effectively whether he asked her several times or once, her evidence is then
that she gave up and engaged in fellatio with him.
Consent must be freely and
voluntarily given. Reluctant consent, though, may still be consent when it has
not been elicited by force,
threat, intimidation, deceit or fraudulent
There's probably a fine line between reluctant consent and submission, though.
In this case I'm satisfied that given the messages,
Mr Todd was somewhat
persistent, but I'm unable to find satisfaction beyond a reasonable doubt that
what occurred in relation to
count 2 in the bathroom was without [the victim's]
Given her recantation of her evidence that she was pulled into the bathroom and
the other evidence I've expressed caution over, I'm
unable to accept beyond a
reasonable doubt that she did either reluctantly consent or merely
Sorry. I'll say that again. I'm unable to accept that she merely submitted. It
may have been reluctant consent, but I am satisfied
that it was consent freely
and voluntarily given. Sorry. No. I'll rephrase that. I'm simply not satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt
that she did not consent to fellatio. I'll address the
question of actual consent in a moment.
In relation to count 4, the finger
) in the vagina, as I said when it
was put to her that she had a conversation with Mr Todd about him saying,
'Will you take care of
me', she said that she was not sure and she did not
remember. Now, of course that might be a witness who is acknowledging her lack
of memory, but in this particular issue the lack of memory is of considerable
The lack of memory suggests that it is possible that this occurred. That there
was a conversation. That there was a question about,
'Will you take care of me',
and that there was a discussion about that. And in the face of that and with all
of the other things
that I've mentioned in relation to [the victim's] evidence,
they again lead me to being unable to be satisfied beyond a reasonable
that she did not consent to the sexual activity in counts 3 and 4, but neither
am I satisfied, in relation to counts 2, 3,
and 4 that she did positively
The evidence is such that it is equivocal about her consent. Everybody's
memories are unreliable, in my view, in relation to the
night. And, accordingly,
in my view, the question of consent – and even though what I said before
– what I said, I wasn't
reading my notes correctly. In relation to counts
2, 3, and 4, in my view, the question of consent is neutral. I'm not satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that she did not consent, but neither am I satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that there was consent.
it is necessary for us to set out what we understand to be the findings of the
learned sentencing judge in this passage.
the learned sentencing judge was not satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that the victim actually consented, in the
sense of giving free and voluntary
consent, to any of the acts of sexual penetration committed by
the learned sentencing judge concluded that she was not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the victim did
consent to those three acts of
sexual penetration.
relation to count 2, which was the first act of sexual penetration, it is
apparent that the reason for that conclusion was that
her Honour could not
exclude as a reasonable inference that the victim had 'reluctantly consented' to
the sexual penetration. That
is consistent with her Honour's reference to the
victim's evidence that she 'gave up and engaged in fellatio with him' and that
'may have been reluctant consent'.
is clear, in that context, that the learned sentencing judge's focus was on the
'fine line between reluctant consent and submission',
and that her Honour could
not exclude that it was the former rather than the latter. We will return to the
significance of that conclusion
later, but it suffices to note that, in our
view, the finding of fact is to the effect that any consent to the first act of
penetration was, at best, 'reluctant'.
reason for the learned sentencing judge's conclusion that she could not be
satisfied that the acts of sexual penetration constituting
counts 3 and 4 were
committed without the victim's consent are not as clear. In that regard, her
Honour appears to have concluded
that it was possible that the victim had said
words to the effect of 'Will you take care of me' before the act of penile
penetration
(count 4). That reasoning, of course, could not apply to the act of
digital penetration constituting count 3, which occurred before
the point at
which Mr Todd said that the victim had said those words. More broadly, the
learned sentencing judge said, in relation
to counts 3 and 4, that the 'evidence
is such that it is equivocal about [the victim's] consent' and that 'everybody's
memories are
unreliable'.
victim read her victim impact statement to the Court. She said that she suffered
from worsening panic attacks following the offences.
The victim said that her
confidence had suffered as a consequence of Mr Todd's actions. She
I can still feel his hands on me and stuff, and I kind of hated myself for a
long period of time. I had feelings of hatred, disgust
– hatred and
disgust towards myself. I felt emptiness, sadness, and numb. I kept thinking it
was my fault, and I should have
tried harder to stop it.
I try not to think about what happened. At random times a thought about it will
just pop into my head when I'm really stressed out.
After it happened, I felt
invisible, like no one really understood what I had been through. I felt lonely
and angry most of the time,
lashing out at everyone. This had a big effect on my
relationship with mum.
I also felt different, like nothing was ever going to be the same again. It felt
like my body was different, that it had changed,
and the way I saw myself as
well. I avoided things that reminded me of him, and avoided doing a lot of
learned sentencing judge commenced her sentencing remarks by identifying the
applicable maximum penalties for the offences, being
a maximum penalty of
7 years imprisonment for the offence of indecent dealing with a child
between 13 and 16 years, and 14 years
imprisonment for the offences of
sexual penetration of a child between 13 and
Honour turned first to the vulnerability of the victim, observing that she was a
young girl who was drinking on the night. The
learned sentencing judge stated
that even the age difference between 20 years and 17 years (it being a
17th birthday party) was an
important difference, and that, being an adult,
Mr Todd was responsible for others at the party. Her Honour said that 'more
importantly,
her intoxication makes her
vulnerable'.
learned sentencing judge said, in relation to aggravating factors, that 'in a
sense' Mr Todd's offending was persistent and that
he continued sexual
activity without concern for the victim's age. Her Honour said that, while not
specifically aggravating, Mr Todd's
messages showed a disregard for young
women at the party, and young women in general.
Honour found that there was a significant age gap between Mr Todd and the
victim, as indeed there would have been even if he
had believed that the victim
was 16 years of age.
relation to Mr Todd's personal circumstances and matters in mitigation, the
learned sentencing judge found that Mr Todd pleaded
guilty at the earliest
reasonable opportunity. In relation to the utilitarian benefit of the pleas of
guilty, her Honour noted that
the victim and Millie were still required to give
evidence and that the State case was strong. Her Honour stated that she allowed
a discount of 20% from the head sentence she would otherwise have imposed.
relation to remorse, the conclusions of the learned sentencing judge were rather
nuanced. Her Honour said that while she '[didn't]
know that there was anything
there from which I can find that [Mr Todd was] genuinely remorseful', she
was prepared to give Mr Todd
credit for remorse in terms of his plea of
guilty and insight. Her Honour said that the fact that Mr Todd's friends
said that he
would learn from the experience showed that he had the capacity to
be remorseful 'and that you probably
21 years of age, the learned sentencing judge considered that Mr Todd
was 'very young still' and had the benefit of youth. Her
Honour accepted that
Mr Todd's age at the time of the offending meant that he was probably less
able to exercise mature reflection
and proper judgment on the day.
Honour considered that Mr Todd had good prospects of rehabilitation and
that he did not have a prior criminal record and came
to be sentenced as a
person of prior good character. That good character, combined with his youth,
her Honour concluded, were powerful
factors in Mr Todd's prospects of
rehabilitation.
Her Honour also referred to a number of references which spoke highly of
Mr Todd's personal qualities.
completed year 10 at school before commencing trade qualifications through TAFE
and then moving to his father's concreting
business, where he had been employed
on a wage and, when not working, had been supported by his family. He did not
describe a problematic
use of alcohol or illicit drugs but admitted that on the
day of the offending he had consumed 'about 12 beers earlier that day, and
further six beers and vodka shots at the
referring to the general sentencing considerations in relation to sexual
offending against children, the learned sentencing
It has been said that it is only in rare and exceptional circumstances that a
non‑custodial sentence should be imposed for
an offence of sexual
penetration of a child between the ages of 13 and 16. I accept that there was no
perversion or deviance in your
offending. However, it does involve a number of
different acts over a period of time with a girl who you knew had been
Having said that, you did not groom her or ply her yourself with alcohol to get
what you wanted. Your age difference is considerable,
between 14 and 20, and as
I've said, even if you had not turned your mind to how old she was, even the
difference between 16 and
20 is significant in those years.
You are not in a position of trust or authority over [the victim] I accept that.
I've referred to [the victim's] victim impact statement.
I accept that you have
not contributed, by the commission of your offending, to her corruption as such.
But as I said, it has had
wide‑ranging and long‑lasting effects on
I do accept that although the offending went through some time period through
the evening and in different places in the house, this
was, on the whole, an
isolated incident, in terms that it was only over that night at the party. And I
remind myself that you are
21 and therefore still very young. I do accept, as I
said, that you have some remorse.
Honour concluded that while the offending was not at the very lowest scale of
offending, she was satisfied that it was 'close
to the lowest level of example
of seriousness of such
offending'.
learned sentencing judge concluded that the seriousness of the offending was
such that a sentence of imprisonment was the only
appropriate sentence.
all of the circumstances the learned sentencing judge imposed a total effective
sentence of 4 years 10 months imprisonment. The
sentences for the
individual offences (together with their concurrency or cumulacy) were as
Concurrent/cumulative
month imprisonment
and 5 months imprisonment
imprisonment
and 5 months imprisonment
Honour then turned to the question of
suspension:
Having regard to all of these factors, some of which I will shortly outline
again, I consider that both your interests and the interests
of the community
would be served better if your sentence of imprisonment was suspended. In
particular, I refer to your pleas of guilty,
and I say that despite the trial of
issues, but as has been pointed out, I have made findings not necessarily in
your favour, but
against the State in relation to those trials of
The isolated nature of this offending, your youth, which is a very powerful
mitigating factor, your support in the community, and
particularly your friends
who, as I said, seem to understand the nature of your offending and the
consequences, more than simply
supporting you, but seem to have some investment
in your rehabilitation and your acknowledgement of your mistakes. Your otherwise
input into the community and your good standing in the community, the fact that
you have no other offending on your record, and the
fact that you did not use
all of that to in any way commit this offending.
Also, in my view, what has persuaded me is my findings, that I could not make
findings in relation to lack of consent.
Honour concluded in those circumstances that the sentences of imprisonment
should be unconditionally suspended for a period of
are two grounds of appeal,
learned sentencing judge erred by imposing sentences of suspended imprisonment
in relation to counts 2, 3 and 4 that were so
inadequate as to manifest error,
having regard to the:
(a) maximum penalty for the offences;
(b) serious nature of the offending;
(c) need for the sentences imposed to adequately reflect general deterrence as
well as appropriate punishment for offending of
this nature; and
(d) requirement that the sentences be consistent with standards of sentencing
customarily observed for offending of this type.
learned sentencing judge erred by imposing a total effective sentence of
4 years and 10 months' suspended imprisonment which
was so disproportionate
to the overall criminality of the respondent's offending conduct as to infringe
the first limb of the totality
grounds of appeal allege an implied error. Implied error arises where the end
result is so unreasonable or unjust that the court
must conclude that a
substantial wrong has occurred. It is important to recall that this Court cannot
substitute its own opinion
for that of the sentencing court merely because the
appellate court would have exercised the sentencing discretion
differently.
assessing whether a sentence (including a total effective sentence for multiple
offences) is unreasonable or plainly unjust, this
Court will have regard to the
standards of sentencing customarily imposed with respect to the crime or crimes
in question. It is
well established that the range of sentences customarily
imposed for a crime does not establish the range of a sound exercise of
sentencing discretion. Sentences customarily imposed in comparable cases provide
a yardstick or reference point for ensuring
broad consistency in sentencing,
bearing in mind the scope for significant variations in relevant sentencing
factors, and that there
is no single correct sentence. What is important is the
unifying principles which sentences imposed in comparable cases reveal and
the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the State confirmed that, in relation to
both grounds of appeal, it was the decision of
the learned sentencing judge to
suspend the terms of imprisonment that the State contended was in error, rather
than the length of
the individual sentences for counts 2, 3 and 4, or the total
effective sentence of 4 years and 10 months imprisonment. Indeed, counsel
accepted that if this Court was satisfied that the only appropriate sentence was
a term of immediate imprisonment, that it would
be open to this Court, on a
resentencing, to impose an immediate term of imprisonment that was less than
4 years and 10 months
imprisonment.
that reason, consistent with the way in which the parties argued the appeal, the
ultimate question in the appeal was whether
the decision to impose a suspended
term of imprisonment was unreasonable or plainly unjust. In that respect, there
is no real difference
between ground 1 and ground 2.
turn first to the legal principles applicable to suspended
imprisonment.
imprisonment – general principles
imprisonment (suspended wholly or in part), pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, or conditional
suspended imprisonment, pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1995
sentencing options which, subject to exceptions and qualifications, apply where
a court sentences an offender to a term
of imprisonment, or aggregate terms of
imprisonment, of 60 months or
general principles in relation to whether suspended imprisonment is appropriate
were summarised by this Court in
Miorada v The State of
Western Australia
A sentence of immediate imprisonment is the final option and cannot be imposed
unless the court is satisfied that it is not appropriate
to impose any other
sentence. In particular, immediate imprisonment cannot be imposed if conditional
suspended imprisonment is an
appropriate option. In determining whether to
exercise the power to suspend a term of imprisonment, the court must look to all
relevant to the circumstances of the offence and the personal
circumstances of the offender. The discretion to impose a suspended
sentence of
imprisonment is not confined by considerations relating to rehabilitation,
though that may be an important factor in
a particular case. Nonetheless, there
may be cases that are so serious that an immediate sentence must be imposed,
notwithstanding
that the offender has good prospects of
rehabilitation.
reflected in these general principles, in determining whether to suspend a term
or terms of imprisonment, a sentencing court must
look again at all matters
relevant to the circumstances of the offence and the personal circumstances of
Other than a term or aggregate terms of imprisonment of more than 60 months
imprisonment, there is no
restriction on the kinds of offences that may be the subject of suspended
imprisonment. In every case in which a term or terms of
imprisonment of 60
months or less is imposed, the sentencing court must be satisfied that it is not
appropriate to suspend the term
or terms of
imprisonment.
as the principles also recognise, there may be cases that are so serious that an
immediate sentence must be imposed, notwithstanding
that the offender has good
prospects of rehabilitation. In the case of sexual penetration without consent,
for example, this Court
has said that, ordinarily, a term of immediate
imprisonment is the only appropriate penalty for such offences. Cases of
imprisonment for such offences, while not wholly unheard of, are
exceedingly rare. In
State of Western Australia v
for example, this Court's research revealed only one such appellate decision:
the 2004 decision of the former Court of Criminal Appeal
has also been said, in this Court (and its predecessor) that it is only in rare
and exceptional cases that a non‑custodial
sentence should be imposed for
an offence of sexual penetration of a child between the ages of 13 and
16 years, contrary to s 321(2)
As counsel for the State recognised, however, while the imposition of a
suspended sentence for offences against s 321(2) of the
Criminal Code
is indeed rare, there
are, as a matter of historical fact, more examples of such cases than in the
case of offences of sexual penetration
a large extent, the parties' submissions in this appeal were directed towards
identifying, to the extent possible, the unifying
principles that may serve to
identify those cases in which suspended imprisonment has been considered
appropriate, and those in which
it has not.
is to the customary standards of sentencing in relation to offences against
s 321(2) of the
Criminal Code
which we now turn.
321(2) of the
Criminal Code –
customary sentencing standards
commence with some general observations concerning the prohibition of sexual
penetration of a child between the ages of 13 and
16 years. In
Deering v The State of
Western Australia
, Wheeler JA made the following observations as to
the legislative purpose of the
prohibition:
It is, no doubt, undesirable that young people should embark upon sexual
activity at an age at which they may be unable to fully
comprehend or to cope
with the social and emotional consequences of that activity. To that extent, the
legislation is intended to
protect young people 'from themselves'.
However, the legislation is also, and, in my view, more importantly, directed to
ensuring that those who do not consent to sexual
activity are not required to
engage in it. In this context, it is recognised that the capacity of a person in
this age group to resist
moral, social, emotional or other pressure from a
person more mature than themselves may be very limited. I set out some of the
legislative
background in
Marris v The Queen
[2003] WASCA 171.
of that decision, I noted the comment by the Hon J M
Berinson, the then Attorney‑General, that ' ... the clear intention and
target is not sexual activity as such, but sexual activity involving some
element of abuse'. I said there, and I repeat, that that
is a concept of
considerable importance in relation to sentencing in respect of offences of this
kind. The greater the element of
abuse, as evidenced by matters such as
disparity in age, or the use of force, or other types of pressure, or of a
pattern of 'grooming'
behaviour, or a betrayal of trust, the greater the
culpability.
to the 'element of abuse' in offences against s 321(2) has remained an
important touchstone in the sentences customarily
imposed. 'Abuse', in this
context, is not a term of art: it is intended to capture all of those elements
of harm, exploitation or
mistreatment revealed by the particular offending
is in that context, for example, that the notion of 'consent' or 'willing
participation' by the complainant to the sexual activity
has been identified as
a relevant consideration in assessing the seriousness of the offence. As we have
already said, it is necessary
to approach the notion of 'consent' in this
context with some caution given that the Court is, by definition, dealing with
in which consent is not an element. As Wheeler JA said in
The State of Western
Australia v
It would indeed be unfortunate if legislative reforms which were designed to
ensure that it was easier to convict, and appropriately
punish, those who have
abused children had the result that erroneous assumptions were made in many
cases about a child's consent,
or even acquiescence. It would equally be
unfortunate if reforms designed in part to reduce the need for children to
undergo the
ordeal of a trial, resulted in many cases in the trial of an issue
of consent.
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
, Wheeler JA said the following, as to the issue of
Proved absence of consent or, particularly, knowledge of absence of consent is
aggravating:
Poulton v The
State of Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 97
per McLure P at [3]. I would
add that it may be aggravating that the consent has been procured through what
might be described as
persistent grooming or persuasion, or by the use of some
other sort of influence falling short of coercion. Absence of evidence
consent is, of course, neutral. However, knowledge of free and
voluntary consent, particularly where the child has initiated the
question, would appear to me to be mitigating, when regard is had to the
legislative structure and purpose described above.
Whether a fact is aggravating
or mitigating is to be considered in connection with the purpose for which it is
to be used:
[1998] 1 VR 359
at 371, cited in
Weininger v The
[2003] HCA 14
(2003) 212 CLR 629
, 638. If the primary purpose of
the legislation is to protect children from 'abuse', actual absence of abuse,
would appear, necessarily,
to be mitigatory.
The State of Western
Australia v WRH
, this Court, having repeated what Wheeler JA said in
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
, made the following additional
observations:
In this case, the sentencing judge used the terminology of 'willing participant'
rather than 'free and voluntary consent'. The differing
implications identified
by Wheeler JA arise in cases where, as a matter of fact, a child instigates
sexual activity or agrees to
engage in sexual activity without pressure or
grooming. A situation of that kind is sometimes referred to as a case where
free and voluntary 'consent' or where the child victim is a 'willing
participant'. For example, there are references to a child victim
'willing participant' in
Amedi v The State of
Western Australia
RHW v The State of Western
Neither label is entirely satisfactory. In many circumstances it will not be
meaningful to refer to a child who does not have the
maturity to lawfully
consent to or understand the nature and consequences of the activity as
consenting to or being a willing participant
in the activity:
The State of Western
Australia v MGA
. It should be remembered that the purpose of the
statutory provision is the protection of children. It is the responsibility of
not to engage in sexual activity with children who are under the age of
In any particular case, the important thing is to
recognise that criminality is to be assessed by focusing on the detail of the
circumstances of the case, rather than a label which may be applied
to describe those circumstances.
last observation is, in our respectful view, crucial. It is vitally important,
in this context, not to become distracted by
labels that may be inapt to the
particular circumstances of the case.
the present case, for example, as we have set out above, the learned sentencing
judge described the circumstances of at least
count 2 as potentially involving
'reluctant consent' on the part of the victim. That is, while the learned
sentencing judge was not
satisfied, on balance, that the victim had consented to
any of the acts of sexual penetration, her Honour could not exclude that
victim may have given 'reluctant consent' rather than 'merely submitted'.
label 'reluctant consent' in this context is troubling. We accept that there are
circumstances in which it may be apt to describe
a person as 'reluctantly
consenting' to sexual activity, without doing any violence to the notion of
'free and voluntary consent'.
An adult in a long‑term committed
relationship, for example, might properly be said to 'reluctantly consent' to
sexual activity,
in circumstances in which he or she freely and willingly
engages in that sexual activity out of a sense of mutual commitment or
rather than a sense of desire.
is altogether a different thing to meaningfully apply the label 'reluctant
consent' to a 14‑year‑old girl engaging
in sexual activity with a
20‑year‑old man she hardly knows, after she had already said 'no' to
such sexual activity.
The label 'reluctant consent' in that context elides the
limited capacity of the victim to resist moral, social or emotional pressure
from the offender, or indeed, her social group. The learned sentencing judge in
the present case, for example, described there probably
being 'a fine line
between reluctant consent and submission'. While that may be correct as an
abstract proposition, in the case of
a 14‑year‑old girl (affected by
alcohol) that fine line becomes vanishingly thin.
Nevertheless,
as we have noted above, there have been a number of decisions in which the
circumstances of the case, including the
willingness of the victim to engage in
the sexual activity, have resulted in a sentence of suspended imprisonment for
offences against
s 321(2) of the
Criminal Code
. The parties in this
appeal referred to a number of cases in that category including
Sunfly v The State of
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
Simon v The State of
Western Australia
Pallister v The State of
Western Australia
Nayna v The State
of Western Australia
. In addition the parties identified a number of
other decisions in which immediate terms of imprisonment were imposed, including
Deering v The State of
Western Australia
Poulton v The State of
The State of Western
Australia v
is not necessary to set out the circumstances of each of these cases in detail.
Considered as a whole, however, certain themes
do emerge from the cases in which
suspended imprisonment has been considered appropriate. It is, for example,
common to see in such
cases that the offences occurred in the context of what
could properly be described as a mutual 'relationship' in which, despite
difference in age, the offender and the complainant have a degree of equality
(either because of the relative immaturity of
the offender or the relative
maturity of the child). In
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
for example,
the respondent and the complainant were in what was described as a 'loving
relationship',
in which the child said of the respondent 'he's sort of a child in his own
Similarly, in
Sunfly v The State of
Western Australia
, the offences occurred in the course of a relationship
in which the child was willingly engaged and in which the appellant believed
reasonable grounds that she was aged
in cases in which suspended imprisonment has been imposed for an offence against
s 321(2) of the
Criminal Code
generally there is a positive finding that the complainant actively consented
to, or instigated, the sexual activity in question.
That was the case in
Sunfly v The State of
Western Australia
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
Pallister v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
circumstances in
The State of Western Australia
were unusual in this respect, as in that case there was a finding that a
single act of digital penetration of the complainant's vagina
occurred without
her consent. The appellant and the complainant had, however, engaged in
consensual sexual behaviour both before,
and after, the particular act of
penetration, which was described as a 'momentary' act that surprised the
complainant.
The appellant in
The State of Western Australia
was described as an 'immature'
18‑year‑old at the time of the offence, and the complainant, who was
13 years old, as 'physically
mature for her age'.
the hearing of the appeal, counsel for Mr Todd, while recognising these
themes in the previous cases, submitted that it was not
necessary as a matter of
principle, for there to be 'either a finding of an ongoing consensual
relationship, and/or a positive finding
of consent' before a case can fall into
the exceptional category in which a suspended sentence is appropriate for an
offence against
s 321(2) of the
much may be readily accepted. As we observed at [
] above, there is no
restriction on the kinds of
offences that may be the subject of suspended imprisonment. The categories of
case in which suspended
imprisonment may be an appropriate sentencing option are
not closed. Each case must be determined according to its own individual
and circumstances.
significance of the matters identified in the previous cases – the
existence of an ongoing consensual relationship, the
willing participation of
the complainant, a comparable level of maturity (despite a difference in age)
– is that they are each
circumstances relevant to an assessment of the
'element of abuse' that has long been identified as a touchstone in cases under
321(2) of the
Criminal Code
While those matters have emerged as important considerations in that context, it
remains the case that no single factor or combination
of factors can be
identified which will determine the result in a particular case.
is to this particular case that we now turn.
Consideration
the reasons that follow, in our view, notwithstanding Mr Todd's young age,
his prior good character and his good prospects of
rehabilitation, the totality
of his offending was simply too serious to justify anything other than a term of
immediate imprisonment.
In our assessment, the seriousness of the offences was
such that it was not open to the learned sentencing judge to impose a sentence
of suspended imprisonment.
that regard, we are unable to agree with the learned sentencing judge's
conclusion that Mr Todd's offending was 'close to the
lowest level of
example[s] of seriousness of such
offending'.
On the contrary, while certainly not at the high end of such offending, there
were in our view a number of features of 'abuse' in
this case, that elevate its
seriousness and which place it in a more serious category than those generally
rare cases in which a
term of suspended imprisonment is appropriate.
is significant that, in the context of the learned sentencing judge's decision
to suspend the terms of imprisonment, her Honour
expressly stated that 'what has
persuaded me is my findings, that I could not make findings in relation to
Her Honour had also earlier said that 'the question of consent is
understood, however, the issue of consent in this case was not 'neutral'. This
was not a case, such as that described by
Wheeler JA in the passage reproduced
] above, for example, where
there was an 'absence of evidence concerning consent'. In this case, there
evidence concerning consent and
there are a number of conclusions that could be drawn in relation to the
willingness, or otherwise,
of the victim at the time of the offences.
the learned sentencing judge could not be satisfied that the victim consented to
any of the acts of sexual penetration, let
alone that she enthusiastically
consented. That, in and of itself, is a significant matter. This is not a case,
Sunfly v The State
of Western Australia
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
Pallister v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
where the complainant positively consented to, or indeed instigated, the
sexual activity.
while the learned sentencing judge could not find beyond reasonable doubt an
absence of consent, the reasoning behind that
conclusion reveals that any
consent by the victim to (at least) the first act of sexual penetration was, at
best, 'reluctant'. Mr
Todd's evidence itself confirms the victim's general
reluctance: she said 'no' and he 'persisted', to the point of taking his penis
out of his pants. It is not difficult to appreciate the emotional pressure that
a 14‑year‑old girl, affected by alcohol
and alone with an older man,
would experience in those circumstances.
we have said above, to apply the label 'reluctant consent' in that context
elides the limited capacity of the victim in this case
to resist moral, social
or emotional pressure. Indeed, in our view, the line between 'reluctant consent'
and 'mere submission', to
the extent that it exists in a case such as the
present, is so thin that it makes little difference to the seriousness of the
for the purposes of sentence. The circumstances in which Mr Todd
persisted with his request for sexual favours involved a significant
'element of
circumstances included, of course, the significant difference in age between
Mr Todd and the victim. He was six years older
than her and, while
still a young man, had reached adulthood two years earlier. There was
nothing to suggest that Mr Todd was, as
in some other cases, sexually
immature for his age. He said in evidence, for example, that he had just come
off a break‑up
and thought 'fuck it ... I might as well see if I can get
back in the
The degree of inequality between Mr Todd and the victim, both in terms of
age and maturity, was therefore significant and contributed
to the 'element of
to one side the issue of actual consent, the messages sent by Mr Todd
shortly prior to attending the party on 6 April 2024
reveal a disregard for
any of the women and girls that he might seek out for his own gratification that
night. While his sense of
entitlement and disregard for the women and girls at
the party was, of course, not in itself an offence, it does serve to explain
lack of interest, for example, in the victim's age. As the learned sentencing
judge found, Mr Todd did not turn his mind to her
age, and if he had, he
could not reasonably have believed that she was 16 years old.
Mr Todd's indifference to the victim's age was
reflective of his disregard
for her interests and preferences generally.
addition, the victim was, as the learned sentencing judge said, rendered more
vulnerable by her intoxication. While her Honour
was not satisfied that the
victim was so intoxicated as to be unable to maintain conscious awareness of her
surroundings, her level
of intoxication would clearly have affected her capacity
to respond to the difficult situation in which she found herself. As a result,
like so many young victims, the victim in this case unfairly blamed herself for
Mr Todd's offending and thought (as she said in her
victim impact
statement) that she 'should have tried harder to stop it'. That self‑blame
and the victim's sense of self‑loathing
highlight the damage caused by
offending such as Mr Todd's and confirm the point made in relation to
'reluctant consent' at [
of these matters, in our view, reveal elements of abuse that significantly
increased the seriousness of Mr Todd's offending.
that seriousness, of course, there were substantial matters of mitigation in
Mr Todd's favour. He pleaded guilty at the first
reasonable opportunity, he
was still a young man and was of prior good character. His familial and
community supports also bode well
for his future rehabilitation. Those matters
were worthy of real weight and, indeed as we will come to, justified a lesser
effective sentence than the 4 years and 10 months imposed by the
learned sentencing judge. What those matters could not justify,
however, was
that Mr Todd's total effective sentence be suspended. The seriousness of
the offences and the need for the sentences
to provide general deterrence, and
to make clear that the treatment of children in the way that the victim was
treated in this case
will not be tolerated, required that Mr Todd serve a
sentence of immediate imprisonment.
these reasons, the grounds of appeal have been made
Criminal Appeals
(WA), this Court has a discretion to dismiss a State appeal
against sentence even though a ground or grounds of appeal have been
established. The onus is on the State to negate any reason why the residual
discretion of this Court not to interfere should be exercised.
did not identify any particular matter in support of a contention that the Court
should dismiss the appeal notwithstanding
the errors that have been established.
the present case we are positively satisfied that this Court should not exercise
the residual discretion to dismiss the appeal.
The sentence imposed by the
learned sentencing judge was wrong in type and should be corrected. Having
regard to the responsibility
of this Court to maintain proper sentencing
standards, it may also be observed that a number of the decisions in this area
were decided
some time ago. It is therefore appropriate for this Court to
restate, and confirm, the relevant sentencing standards in this appeal.
Resentencing
Court has all the necessary material to resentence Mr Todd. Counsel for
Mr Todd submitted that there was no new material that
needed to be placed
before the Court and, quite properly, accepted that if the appeal was allowed
there was no basis for submitting
that the period of time that Mr Todd has
already spent under the suspended sentences was such that an order for
suspension could
reinstated.
Nevertheless, we have taken into account the time that Mr Todd has spent
under his current sentence in determining the new sentences.
have already addressed the seriousness of the offences as a whole and the need
for general deterrence. In terms of the individual
offences, in our view, count
4 was the most serious offence, involving as it did the risk of pregnancy and
sexually transmitted infection.
Count 2 also had the additional seriousness that
it was the first of the acts of sexual penetration, in relation to which the
expressly communicated her reluctance before Mr Todd persisted.
have also referred to the significant matters of mitigation. In relation to his
pleas of guilty, in our view, it is appropriate
to reduce the head sentence for
each offence by 15% for Mr Todd's pleas of guilty. While Mr Todd did
plead guilty at the first reasonable
opportunity, as the learned sentencing
judge concluded, the State case was very strong and a number of the utilitarian
benefits that
would ordinarily follow from pleas of guilty were lessened by the
need for a trial of issues (including the need for the victim to
give evidence),
the results of which did not go substantially in his favour.
other matters of mitigation, especially Mr Todd's age, are also deserving
of significant weight. We have taken all of those matters
into account.
our view, having regard to all relevant sentencing factors, the appropriate
sentences for each of the individual counts is as
(a) in respect of count 1: 1 month imprisonment;
(b) in respect of count 2: 2 years and 9 months imprisonment;
(c) in respect of count 3: 2 years and 6 months imprisonment; and
(d) in respect of count 4: 3 years
imprisonment.
terms of totality, in our view, the total effective sentence that properly
reflects the overall criminality involved in all of
the offences, viewed in
their entirety, having regard to all relevant facts and circumstances including
those referable to Mr Todd,
is one of 3 years and 6 months
imprisonment. We would achieve that result by reducing the sentence with respect
to count 3 to 6 months
imprisonment (for reasons of totality) and ordering that
the sentence for count 3 be served cumulatively on the sentence for count
other sentences will be ordered to be served concurrently with the sentence for
we have already concluded, we are positively satisfied that this is not an
appropriate case to order that any of the terms of
imprisonment be suspended.
should be made eligible for parole. The effect of the sentence is that
Mr Todd will be eligible for parole after he has served
1 year and 9
months from today. Whether he is released is a matter for the Prisoners Review
lifetime violence restraining order made by the learned sentencing judge is not
set aside and will remain in place.
the foregoing reasons, there should be orders as
to appeal is granted on grounds 1 and 2.
appeal is allowed.
sentences imposed by Cleary DCJ are set aside.
respondent is resentenced on District Court Indictment KAL IND 63 of 2024 as
(a) in respect of count 1: 1 month imprisonment;
(b) in respect of count 2: 2 years and 9 months imprisonment;
(c) in respect of count 3: 6 months imprisonment (reduced from 2 years and
6 months imprisonment for reasons of totality); and
(d) in respect of count 4: 3 years
imprisonment.
new sentence for count 4 is the head sentence. The new sentence for count 3 is
to be served cumulatively on the sentence for count
4. The new sentences for
counts 1 and 2 are to be served concurrently with the new sentence for count
respondent is eligible for parole.
certify that the preceding paragraphs comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Principal Associate to the Hon
Chief Justice Quinlan
14 NOVEMBER 2025
Millie's real name has been redacted from this
Kabambi v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 44
(Buss P, Mitchell & Pritchard
P, Mitchell & Pritchard
Sentencing Act
Miorada v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 143
[32] (Buss P, Mazza & Hall
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
Dinsdale v The
) [85] (Kirby
Dinsdale v The
[13] (Gleeson CJ & Hayne
The State of Western
Australia v Syred
[2020] WASCA 185
[27] (Buss P & Mitchell JA); [107]
Simon v The State of
Western Australia
[2009] WASCA 10
Simon v The State of
Western Australia
) [22] (Steytler P);
Nayna v The State of
Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 169
Nayna v The State of
Western Australia
) [45] (Buss P, Mazza & Mitchell
Deering v The State of
Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 212
Deering v The State of
Western Australia
) [17] - [18] (Wheeler
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
[2010] WASCA 40
(2009) 200 A Crim R 228
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
) [66] (Wheeler
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
[69] (Wheeler
The State of Western
Australia v WRH
[2025] WASCA 29
The State of Western
Australia v WRH
) [61] - [63] (Buss P, Mitchell & Vaughan
Sunfly v The State of
Western Australia
[2009] WASCA 22
Sunfly v The State of
Pallister v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
[2015] WASCA
Poulton v The State of
Western Australia
[2008] WASCA
The State of Western
Australia v Lee
[2008] WASCA
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
[27] (Wheeler
The State of Western
Australia v SJH
[15] (Wheeler
Sunfly v The State of
Western Australia
[2] (McLure JA, Steytler P & Miller JA
Nayna v The State of
Western Australia
[15], [19] (Buss P, Mazza & Mitchell
Appeal ts 41.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (9.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter