URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G [2022] WACIC 1 (23 February 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2022] WACIC 1
DELIVERED :
23 FEBRUARY 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 1271 of 2021
Allege offence - Injury to unborn child - Is
unborn child a person under the Act
Legislation:
Crimes Act 1900
(NZ), s 182
Crimes Amendment (Grievous Bodily Harm) Act 2005
Crimes Amendment (Zoe's Law) Bill 2019
Legislation Amendment (Loss of Foetus) Act 2021
Criminal Code Act
Compilation Act 1913
, s 1(4A), s 290, s 269
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 2003
Interpretation Act
Restraining Orders and Related Legislation Amendment
(Family Violence) Act 2016
Compensation refused
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
CLP LEGAL PTY LTD
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Attorney-General (QLD) (Ex rel Kerr) v T
[1940] ArgusLawRp 50
(1983) 46 ALR
Barrett v Coroner’s Court of South Australia
[2010] SASCFC 70
Lee & Hutton
[2013] Fam CA 745
Mansell v The Queen
[2004] WASCA 111
Martin v The Queen (No 2) (1996) 86 A Crim Rep 133, 138
Paton v BPAS Trustees
[1979] 1 QB 276
Preston v Parker
[2010] QDC 264
R v Bayliss and Cullen
(1986) 9 Qld Lawyer Reps 8
[2005] NSWCCA 178
[2005] 63 NSWLR 278
[2005] NSWCCA 178
R v Lippiatt (Unreported, District Court of Queensland, Hoath J, 24 May
R ν Woolnough
[1976] NZCA 51
[1977] 2 NZLR 508
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
Re the estate of the late K
(1996) 5 Tas R 365
Watt v Rama
[1972] VicRp 40
[1972] VR 353[10]
Yunghanns v Candoora No. 19 Pty Ltd
[1999] VSC 524
for Decision
12 June 2018 "H", the mother of "G" (the applicant), made application
(CIC 1356/2018) on her own behalf seeking compensation for
injuries arising
out of a violent relationship with "I" (the alleged offender). In her
application her solicitors outlined injuries
arising from 11 incidents,
comprising two applications in respect of proved offences pursuant to
section 12 and nine applications
for alleged offences pursuant to
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
On 28 May 2019 I made an award in favour of "H" in respect of those proved
and alleged offences. Of particular relevance
to this application is "H"
included in application CIC 1356/2018 a claim in respect of an alleged
offence which took place on 22
June 2015. In a supporting statement
provided with her application, "H" recited details of that incident. She said,
inter alia,
in relation to the incident on 22 June 2015 (the
was pregnant with our first child together (G).
(the alleged offender) was coming down from a high again and he said that the
baby wasn't his and it was the African men who lived
down the road.
wanted money for drugs and I didn't give it to him and that's what made him
hit me a few times and my placenta tore. I felt it tear and I didn't realise
that I was bleeding then.
was so scared. I was terrified for my pregnancy and scared that I was going to
lose my baby.
smashed the window and left the house.
alleged offender) is the kind of person who would hide from the police and keep
coming back. He would keep continuing and continuing
and I needed to get to
safety for the sake of my children.
called Crisis Care and asked them to send a taxi to take me to a safe
taxi arrived at my house. When the taxi turned up ["I] ran to scare the taxi
off because he didn't want my children and me to
police then turned up to speak to me.
didn't give the police a statement because I was scared that it would make him
even madder and he would come back and hurt me or
went to hospital about 7 August 2015. I was away from my kids for a week
because my waters had broken.
had my baby in [
] 14 August 2015. She was born at 25 weeks
gestation and weighed 580 grams.
baby's name is ["G"].
had my baby early because of the tear in my placenta. There was a blood clot
that went from 2 cm to 5 cm in a week. t ended up
had a chronic lung condition which the doctors are still investigating, a whole
] in the heart, she's partially blind and she has inflamed
was really scared and was really depressed. I blamed him and I blamed myself.
I was crying every day.
punched me while I was in hospital. My tooth went through my lip and now I have
two (2) scars on my upper lip.
accepted the above statement as evidence of an alleged offence and accordingly
included compensation for this incident in the award
I made on 28 May 2019. On
29 June 2021 "H" lodged an application in relation to "G", who was
born on 14 August 2015, claiming compensation
for injuries sustained by "G" on
22 June 2015. In support of the application on behalf of "G", "H" provided
a statement similar
to her statement provided in application CIC 1356/2018.
attended the incident on 22 June 2015 and compiled Incident Report (IR)
number 220615 2035 15309 documenting reports of damage
done to "H's"
premises. Consistent with the statement subsequently made by "H" in support of
her application for compensation in
application CIC 1356/2018 it is
recorded police facilitated "H's" transfer to Crisis Care. There is no record
in the IR of "H" suffering
injury and the running sheet attached to the incident
report refers to property damage only.
support of this application on behalf of "G", her solicitors provided a report
from Paediatric Neurologist, Michael Harbord dated
6 May 2021.
Dr Harbord had access to the notes from King Edward Memorial Hospital
(KEMH) in relation to "H" and the birthing of
"G". Dr Harbord noted that
on 4 June 2015 - that is, more than two weeks prior to the incident - at
15 weeks gestation an antenatal
scan was performed for "H" showing partial
chorioamnionic separation with heterogeneous echotexture in the retro-amnionic
along the anterior uterine wall. An ultrasound was taken at
17 weeks gestation showing a subchorionic haematoma measuring
x 24 mm, which was still evident when a scan was
performed at 22 weeks gestation measuring
62 x 56 10 mm. Dr Harbord noted the assault
occurred on 22 June 2015 at 18 weeks gestation. He noted "H" was
reviewed at KEMH on 8 July 2015 at 20 weeks gestation
and at that time
it was expected the delivery for "G" would be 23 November 2015. The notes
recorded there was no PV (per vaginum)
bleeding; that is, bleeding of the
genital tract. "H" was reviewed again on 7 August 2015 at 24 weeks
gestation as a result of premature
rupture of membranes at about 7.30 am.
She was admitted to KEMH for ongoing management but later in the day it was
observed there
was meconium staining (indicating possible foetal distress). She
was reviewed by an obstetric registrar at 4.00 pm who noted the
staining. An ultrasound was performed which showed normal amniotic fluid volume
with no adverse foetal features seen.
An ultrasound was repeated on
13 August at 25 weeks gestation, noting there was no amniotic fluid
volume indicative of a persistent
fluid leak following the rupture of membranes.
The placenta was situated at the posterior uterine wall clear of the cervix. No
foetal features were seen, and the umbilical artery was normal. On
14 August 2015 there were concerns about ongoing PV loss with
intermittence
uterine tightenings [
], and "H" was transferred to the labour ward for
Syntocinon augmentation of delivery, that is, an induced birth. "G" was
subsequently
delivered by normal vaginal delivery. On examination post-delivery
the placenta was found to have three vessels in the umbilical
cord and showed no
abnormality. There was evidence of acute chorioamnionitis, affecting the
extra-placental membranes. There was
also high grade chronic villitis. The
hospital pathologist concluded there was a patch of high grade chronic villitis
choriomanioitis and features of ischaemia. On delivery "H" was
intubated and various tests were performed.
Subsequently
it was established "G" was born with retinopathy of prematurity affecting both
eyes requiring laser therapy. She has
chronic lung disease secondary to
prematurity, problems with aspiration of food and requires antibiotic treatment
during winter to
prevent development of pneumonia. "G" currently requires the
assistance of a speech therapist and dietitian and may require assistance
physiotherapy or occupational therapy. She is due to start school in 2022. She
has problems with gross motor co-ordination
in conjunction with chronic
respiratory disease and poor exercise tolerance.
applicant's solicitors requested an opinion from Dr Harbord as to whether
"Gs" premature birth could be attributed to the incident
on 22 June 2015
and the apparent damage to "H's" placenta at that time. In answer to that
question Dr Harbord opined:
issue is best answered by an expert obstetrician. However, I note that the
antenatal ultrasounds did show partial chorioamnionic
separation, with
heterogeneous echotexture in the retro-amnionic region along the anterior
uterine wall, and subsequent ultrasounds
showed a subchiorionic haematoma. It
may be that the abnormalities with the chorioamnionic separation and the
subchorionic haematoma
made the membranes more likely to rupture, particularly
following the episode of abdominal trauma.
my opinion the placental abnormalities with high grade chronic villitis, and
features of ischaemia were likely to have contributed
to the intrauterine growth
retardation, as her birthweight of 580gm was less than the
percentile. However the normal arterial cord gas
at delivery indicates that there was no significant hypoxia in the hours prior
to delivery.
my opinion the premature delivery occurred because of the premature rupture of
membranes, and the development of acute chorioamnionitis.
As discussed above
that the subchorionic haematoma and the separation of the
chorioamnionic and amnionic membranes with heterogeneous echotexture, made
membranes more likely to rupture, particularly following abdominal trauma
If there had not been a premature rupture of membranes at 24 weeks
gestation, with subsequent development of acute chorioamnionitis,
premature delivery would not have occurred. [My emphasis]
will return to consideration of the medical evidence below. This application on
behalf of "G" is made pursuant to section 17 of
the Act as there were no
charges laid against "I". I was satisfied when "H" made her application for
compensation in relation to
the incident on 22 June 2015 she had suffered
injury as a consequence of the commission of an offence and made an award in her
for that incident. In this application I note at the time of the
incident "G" was not been born and the primary question for consideration
this application is whether I have jurisdiction to make an award in favour of
"G" as an unborn child at the time of the alleged
offence. The threshold
requirement for an award of compensation under the Act is the applicant must
establish there has been either
a "proved" or "alleged" offence as a consequence
of which the applicant suffers injury. There are two issues for consideration
which overlap. First, can an unborn child be a victim for the purposes of the
Act? Second and related to the first issue, is whether
there are any offences
under Western Australian law which impose criminal responsibility for harm done
to an unborn child or foetus
and, if not, can an application proceed in the
absence of such an offence? The solicitors for applicant rely heavily upon the
that "H" suffered injury as a consequence of an offence and was awarded
compensation for that incident and therefore there is sufficient
nexus between
"H" and "G" to establish an entitlement.
order to be eligible for compensation "G" must establish she is a victim as
defined by under section 3 of the Act, that is, a
suffers injury or who dies as a consequence of the commission of a crime. The
threshold requirement is the applicant must be
time of the incident the subject of this application. There is no definition of
in the Act which is unsurprising given the discussion
is defined in
Interpretation Act 1984
(WA) to include a
public body, company, or association or body of persons, corporate or
unincorporate, but there is no reference
made to a natural person as this is
self-evidently included. The
Criminal Code Act
Compilation Act 1913
(the Code) does not define
simpliciter but at section 1 of the Code the term
person and owner
includes corporations consistent with the
Interpretation Act
, (see also the
discussion in
Mansell v The Queen
[2004] WASCA 111)
whereas the
person employed in the Public Service
used in the Code is
clearly a reference to natural persons only. The reference to a
in the Act is clearly limited to a natural person as the
context of the Act is to pay compensation to that person as a victim for
physical and/or mental and nervous shock as well as other personal losses. It
follows the issue is whether the applicant is a
being a victim for the purposes of the Act? The Code is of some assistance in
this regard as section 269, provides as
a child becomes a human being
A child becomes a person capable of being killed when it has completely
proceeded in a living state from the body of its mother,
whether it has breathed
or not, and whether it has an independent circulation or not, and whether the
navel-string is severed or
The Code in effect enacts the
'born alive rule' which dates back the 17
explained in
[2005] NSWCCA 178
[2005] 63 NSWLR 278
and the cases cited
therein. (See also the useful commentary in Savell K (2006) 'The Legal
Significance of Birth'
29 (2) UNSWLJ 23).
The rule was subject to criticism by
Chief Justice Spiegleman, for the plurality, in
it was based on anachronistic and antiquated factors, namely the primitive state
of medical knowledge and high risks of
childbirth at the time the rule was
formulated. That said, the rule remains a part of the law in Western Australia
and other jurisdictions.
Fore example in
Barrett v Coroner’s Court
of South Australia
[2010] SASCFC 70
the born alive rule was applied in
the context of a coronial inquest considering the ‘reportable death’
or a new-born
R v Lippiatt
(Unreported, District
Court of Queensland, Hoath J, 24 May 1996) in a case not unlike this matter, the
accused was charged for having
caused the stillbirth of an unborn child by
kicking a pregnant woman in the abdomen. Because the child was not born alive,
was no unlawful killing of a person and therefore he was charged and
convicted of the unlawful procurement of a miscarriage and assault.
section of the Code for consideration is section 290.
Section 290
of the Code provides:
birth of live child
Any person who, when a woman is about to be delivered of a child, prevents the
child from being born alive by any act or omission
of such a nature that, if the
child had been born alive and had then died, he would be deemed to have
unlawfully killed the child,
is guilty of a crime, and is liable to imprisonment
Consideration
was given to this section in
Martin v The Queen (No 2)
(1996) 86 A
Crim Rep 133, 138 where Murray J, referring to a when a
woman is about to
be delivered of a child
it mean at or about the time of birth? If so, why is it so limited, or is it a
case that a woman is regarded as being about
to be delivered of a child at any
time while she is pregnant and carrying a live fetus? ... Noting therefore the
uncertainties in
the proper interpretation of s 290, which may be left for
another day, it is sufficient for present purposes to conclude that there
nothing in the wording of that section which would necessarily require it to be
applied to conduct of the accused person which
is closely connected in time with
the birth of a dead child.
ordinary meaning of the words 'about to be delivered of a child' in
section 290 suggest the section is limited to situations
where birth is
imminent. Though it has been asserted the section may apply before birth to a
'viable' foetus, which is capable of
being born alive. (See
R v Bayliss and Cullen
(1986) 9 Qld Lawyer Reps 8
36–7 (McGuire DCJ). See also
R ν Woolnough
[1976] NZCA 51
[1977] 2 NZLR 508
, 516 (Richmond P), in relation to the
Crimes Act 1961
(NZ) s 182 which applies to a person who causes the death 'of any child
that has not become a human being', unless the death is caused
'before or during
the birth' of the child by means employed in good faith for the preservation of
the mother's life. In
Preston v Parker
[2010] QDC 264
[239], Irwin
DCJ , after a review of authorities relevant to the
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld), which contains similar provisions to the Code, concluded that a foetus is
for the purpose of his consideration of various
defences under the
Criminal Code 1899
is defined in the Code in section 1 as any boy or girl under the age of
18 years and in the absence of a positive evidence as to
age, any boy or
girl apparently under the age of 18 years. Thus, the definition of child
is measured for the purposes of the Western
Australian criminal law from birth
not from conception.
Lee & Hutton
[2013] Fam CA 745
per Watts J giving judgement in
the Family Court provided a useful summary of the status of an unborn child at
In tort law it is clear that an unborn child may possess rights. The unborn
child is deemed to be a “person” where the
right is for his or her
benefit, so that if he or she survives birth, he or she is entitled to recover
compensation for damage caused
by a breach of duty by a defendant,
notwithstanding that the child was unborn at the time the breach occurred
Watt v Rama
[1972] VicRp 40
[1972] VR 353[10]).
In succession law, a child en ventre sa mère (in the mother's womb) has a
contingent interest dependent upon birth. Even a
frozen embryo can be taken to
be an existing person. In
Re the estate of the late
(1996) 5 Tas R 365
, a couple who wished to have children entered into an
in-vitro fertilisation program. One child was born. It was the intention
the couple to have another child. Two other embryos that were produced were
frozen. The father died intestate. It was held
that "a child, being the
product of his father's semen and mother's ovum, implanted into the mother's
womb subsequent to the death
of his father is, upon birth, entitled to a right
of inheritance afforded by law".
In trust law, the interests of an unborn child can be protected. In
v Candoora No. 19 Pty Ltd
[1999] VSC 524
, the trustee would have been able
to amend the trust deed in a way that would exclude the unborn child from having
rights in the
trust once born. The plaintiff was allowed to commence proceedings
on behalf of his unborn child. The court granted an interlocutory
injunction to
protect contingent rights of an unborn child who, if born, would have rights
under the family trust.
As can be seen those areas of the law where a legal fiction exists to treat a
en ventre sa mère
as a living child, the fiction does not
operate unless it is invoked to provide a benefit to the child once born.
Notwithstanding Lindenmayer J's reasoning in
, it would have been
possible to have considered making a declaration that proper arrangements in all
the circumstances had been made
for the care, welfare and development of the
child in anticipation of that child being born. Such an interpretation would
consistent with the notation that a declaration could be made for the
benefit of the child once born.
It may also have been possible in the abortion cases to argue that there was a
the Act for granting an
injunction for the protection of the child,[11] because the ability to be born
was a benefit to the foetus.
The difficulty with any such argument is the law in
the abortion cases has developed in a different way to the way the law has
in tort, succession and trust law.
As I have already mentioned, Lindenmayer J in In the marriage of F and F
observed that by way of obiter Gibbs CJ in
Attorney-General (QLD) (Ex rel
[1940] ArgusLawRp 50
(1983) 46 ALR 275
(a case in which an
injunction was sought from a State court to prevent an abortion) said:
The second argument is that an unborn child is to be regarded as a person whose
existence can be protected by the courts. As at present
advised, I would agree
with the judgment of Sir George Baker P in
Paton v BPAS Trustees
at 279, that a foetus has no right of its own until it is born and has a
separate existence from its mother.
Consistent with this view, in criminal and coronial law, the "born alive"
rule holds that "for a foetus to achieve legal personhood,
the infant must have
been born alive".[12] The "born alive" rule provides that a newborn baby is a
person within the law when it
is fully extruded from its mother
(whether or
not the umbilical cord has been cut or the placenta is attached) and living by
virtue of the functioning of its own organs
with or without medical stimulus or
assistance (see
[2005] NSWCCA 178)
[My Emphasis]
at 22 June 2015 "G" had not
completely proceeded in a living state from
the body of her mother
and did not do so until 14 August 2015. By
letter dated 29 June 2021, "H's" solicitors submitted in this
3.4 There is currently no other law in Western Australia or Australia as a whole
that can clearly define whether an unborn child
of a gestation greater than 20
weeks is considered a natural person and taking into account the
Amendment (Zoe's Law) Bill 2019
in New South Wales we propose that the
Applicant be considered a natural person at the time of the
applicant's solicitors also noted that Western Australian abortion laws allow
for an abortion prior to 20 weeks gestation asserting
it is therefore
unlawful to obtain an abortion after 20 weeks as the unborn child is
"generally considered closer to a natural person
than an embryo". No authority
is provided for this assertion. The submission suggests because "G" was born at
more than 20 weeks
gestation I should find "G" to be "closer to a natural
person" anytime thereafter and therefore find she was a
and therefore a victim under the Act at the time of the incident. The
applicant's solicitors provide no case authority for this proposition
no reference to Western Australian law. This approach is flawed for a number of
reasons noted below but in addition it
must be the date of offence or incident
is of significance rather than the date of birth as suggested given that an
award of compensation
is premised on the date of an offence having regard to
section 31 of the Act in particular. As noted above to the extent the Code
assists in this regard the submission is contrary to the law discussed in
relation to section 269 above.
applicant's solicitor's refer to New South Wales law under the
Amendment (Grievous Bodily Harm) Act 2005
(NSW) which extended the
definition of grievous bodily harm under the
Crimes Act 1900
include, "the destruction (other than in the course of a medical procedure) of
the foetus of a pregnant woman, whether or
not the woman suffers any other
harm." That amendment recognises the loss of a foetus as an injury to the
pregnant woman broadening
the definition of the legal status of the foetus
itself. This allows for an indictment charging grievous bodily harm to be
against an offender who causes harm or destruction to a foetus, though
the complainant would be the mother and not the unborn child.
Recent amendments
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Loss of
Foetus) Act 2021
go further and create an offence of grievous bodily harm to
a foetus but have not yet received royal assent. The provision of a New
Wales statute are of little assistance in deciding this issue.
amendments to the
Restraining Orders and Related
Legislation Amendment (Family Violence) Act 2016
(WA) and the consequent amendments to section 1(4A) of the Code broaden the
scope of any reference to doing bodily harm to a
harm done to their unborn child though these amendments do not recognise the
unborn child as a separate human being, and
therefore the principle that until
the child is born, the unborn child is biologically part of the mother remains
on foot. (See Finlay,
L (2015) "Foetal Homicide Law Reform in Western
Australia" 40(1) University of Western Australia Law Review 463, for background
this legislation.)
for section 290 of the Code noted above, I am unable to find any provision
in the Code which creates an offence in relation
to an unborn child such that a
charge could be laid referencing the unborn child. Section 1(4A) of the
Code specifies a reference
to causing or doing bodily harm and grievous bodily
harm to the mother includes harm to the unborn child therefore constituting harm
to the mother.
answer the first question posed above I find the meaning of
under the Act refers to a natural person and does not include an unborn
child. The applicant was not a person for the purposes of
the Act because she
not completely proceeded in a living state from the body of her
at that time of the alleged offence and therefore cannot meet the
threshold requirement of the Act. As to the second question I
conclude that
save for section 290 of the Code, which does not apply in this case, there
is no provision in the Code, or other relevant
Western Australian legislation,
which provides an offence could be committed against "G" as an unborn child
separate from her mother.
Because I have concluded "G" was not a person it is
not necessary for me to decide to whether the applicant could succeed in such
circumstances.
is also a question of causation. The applicant asserts, on behalf of "G", the
incident caused "G" to be prematurely born and
a consequence "G" suffered
injury, namely the conditions and impairments referred to above. As to
causation, and leaving aside that
Dr Harbord had some doubts about his own
expertise to proffer an opinion, I note the High Court in
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
That some medical witness should go into the box and say only that in his
opinion something is more probable than not does not conclude
the case. A
qualified medical practitioner may, as an expert, express his opinion as to the
nature and cause, or probable cause,
of an ailment. But it is for the jury to
weigh and determine the probabilities. In doing so they may be assisted by the
evidence. But they are not simply to transfer their task to the
witnesses. They must ask themselves "Are we on the whole of the
satisfied on a balance of probabilities of the fact?". In this case his Honour
in his summing-up instructed the jury that
this was their task; and no ground is
shown for impugning their conclusion. (at p645)
reflected upon the opinion of Dr Harbord, I do not think I can put this
evidence any higher than there was a
possibility
that subchorionic
haematoma and the separation of the chorioamnionic and amnionic membranes with
heterogeneous echotexture which
occurred prior to the incident, caused the
membranes to rupture, giving rise to the premature birth of "G" and thereby
causing injury
to "G". As the applicant bears the burden of establishing on
balance of probabilities the incident caused the injuries to "G", the
provided would not have been enough for the claim to succeed.
Accordingly,
I determine I have no jurisdiction to make an award in relation to this
applicant and therefore the application is refused
on that ground, but I would
also find that the application fails because the applicant has not established
"G" suffered injury as
a consequence of the alleged offence. I do not have to
decide the question whether an application could succeed where there is no
offence specific to an unborn child.
to section 64(3)(c) of the Act I prohibit publication of any particular of these
reasons that is likely to lead members
of the public to identify "G", "H" or
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
R Guthrie, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
23 FEBRUARY 2022
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (238 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter