URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CARTER -v- SOUTH METROPOLITAN HEALTH SERVICE [2025] WADC 74 (20 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
CARTER -v- SOUTH METROPOLITAN HEALTH SERVICE
[2025] WADC
JEYAMOHAN DCJ
7 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
20 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 3358 of 2023
SIMON MATTHEW CARTER
SOUTH METROPOLITAN HEALTH SERVICE
Appeal from registrar's decision - Appeal to
remove case form Inactive Cases List - Application to set aside dismissal for
prosecution - Whether exceptional circumstances warrant setting aside
Legislation:
District Court Rules 2005
(WA) r 38, r
44, r 44D, r 44E, r 44F, r 44G
Rules of Supreme Court 1971
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Hall & Wilcox (Perth)
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
F S Kotai Pty Ltd, C J Broun Pty Ltd, Elizabeth Berkley Wysocki and
Carol Elizabeth Mcgrath t/as Glen Forrest Medical Centre
[2020] WADC
Belendaine Pty Ltd v Primary Consulting Services Pty Ltd
[2014] WADC
Cyclis Group Pty Ltd as trustee for The Garside Health Property Trust v
Kabway Pty Ltd
[2019] WADC 41
Gibbs v Royalblue Securities Pty Ltd
Guillaume v City of Stirling
[2020] WADC 41
Hazart Pty Ltd v
(1993) 11 WAR 26
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics Pty Ltd
[2018] WADC
Ogbonna v Programmed Integrated Workforce Ltd [No 2]
[2022] WASCA
Rowe v Stoltze
[2013] WASCA 92
(2013) 45 WAR 116
Sovereign Grange Pty Ltd v
A V Truck Services Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2017] WASCA 142
Stewart v Hames
[2019] WASCA 127
Introduction
appellant plaintiff, Simon Matthew Carter, brought proceedings against the
respondent defendant, the South Metropolitan Health
Service (SMHS), by
amended writ of summons filed on 23 August 2023 for damages and costs
incurred as a result of alleged medical
negligence.
11 September 2023, SMHS filed a memorandum of appearance.
11 September 2024, the Principal Registrar issued a notice pursuant to
District Court Rules 2005
(WA) (DCR) r 44D(1)(a) placing the
case on the Inactive Cases List as no document had been filed in the case
for the preceding 12
chamber summons filed on 9 March 2025 (dated 10 March 2025),
Mr Carter filed an application to remove the case from the
Cases List.
11 March 2025, the Principal Registrar issued a notice that the case
had been dismissed on 11 March 2025 pursuant to DCR r 44G
as the case
had been on the Inactive Cases List for six continuous.
chamber summons filed on 28 March 2025, Mr Carter brought an
application to set aside the decision to dismiss the proceedings
pursuant to DCR
r 44G(5) (Set Aside Application).
order of the learned deputy registrar made 25 June 2025, following the
hearing of the Set Aside Application, the application was
dismissed with
Mr Carter ordered to pay the costs of SMHS (Decision).
notice of appeal dated 25 June 2025, Mr Carter, appeals against the
the reasons which set out below, the appeal should be dismissed and the
application to set aside the dismissal of the case is
Procedural background
writ of summons filed 5 July 2023, Mr Carter commenced
District Court action no CIV 3358 of 2023 against the
'Medico Legal Team
Fiona Stanley Fremantle Hospital Group' for payment of
damages and costs incurred as a result of medical negligence of 'employees
Fiona Stanley Fremantle Hospitals Group' with the 'period of medical
negligence' said to be 'from Tuesday, 18 October 2022 to
the current date'
and 'ongoing'.
order of the court made on 9 August 2023, following an application of
Mr Carter by chamber summons filed 18 July 2023, Mr Carter
an amended writ of summons on 23 August 2023 naming SMHS as the defendant.
The amended writ of summons claims as against SMHS
the following:
of damages of $250,000, in addition to the costs of making this claim, including
any legal fees, fees to gather evidence,
loss of rental incomes, costs to
re-enrol in the two university courses of Notre Dame University affected by
SMHS's medical negligence
claim is for damages and costs incurred as a result of medical negligence of
employees of Fiona Stanley Fremantle Hospitals Group
period of medical negligence is from Tuesday, 18 October 2022 to the
current date and is ongoing.
claim is also to recover medical expenses paid for psychology and psychiatric
health services as a result of medical negligence
that has caused harm to
Mr Carter. The claim will include ongoing costs to pay for treatments
required as a result of medical negligence
by SMHS's employees.
claim is also seeking a written apology by SMHS's, correction of falsified
medical records, to Mr Carter and other affected parties
affected by the
medical negligence.
11 September 2023, SMHS filed a memorandum of appearance.
11 September 2024, the Principal Registrar issued the
Inactive Case Notice. The case was placed on the Inactive Cases List
the date of that notice pursuant to DCR r 44D(1)(a).
chamber summons filed on 9 March 2025 (dated 10 March 2025),
Mr Carter filed an application to remove the case from the
Cases List. The application was supported by the affidavit of
Simon Carter sworn 9 March 2025 (First Carter Affidavit) and
(relevantly) to the following:
on 12 September 2024, Mr Carter received communications from SMHS's
lawyers that the matter had been placed on the Inactive Cases
List and that
to remove the matter requires a chamber summons and affidavit.
Mr Carter intended to pursue civil action against SMHS in this court.
the delay in progressing this action is due to SMHS allegedly refusing to
provide information to Mr Carter under a Freedom of
Information (FOI)
request that has been escalated to the FOI Commissioner for external
the FOI Commissioner had provided the parties with her preliminary views on
the matter.
Mr Carter requests the case to be removed from the Inactive Cases List
to allow the FOI Commissioner to conclude her review.
Mr Carter intends to provide a statement of claim to SMHS in the next
6 - 9 months at the latest and is 'fully invested' in brining
against SMHS.
11 March 2025, the Principal Registrar issued a notice that the case
had been dismissed on 11 March 2025 pursuant to DCR r 44G
as the case
had been on the Inactive Cases List for six continuous months.
letter dated 14 March 2025, Mr Carter wrote to the
Principal Registrar informing her of the chamber summons filed 9 March
seeking to remove the case from the Inactive Cases List and seeking a
reversal of the dismissal and for the case to be made active.
21 March 2025, the Principal Registrar made orders granting
Mr Carter leave to amend the application to remove the case from the
Inactive Cases List and that that chamber summons stand as an application
under DCR r 44G(4) to set aside the dismissal of the action
for want of
prosecution. By letter dated 24 March 2025, further to the orders made in
respect of the application, the Principal
Registrar wrote to Mr Carter
relevantly setting out the following:
any application to an action from the Inactive Cases List must be both made and
determined, with orders removing the action from
the list, before the expiration
of the six-month period provided for under r 44G of DCR.
is not enough that the application is filed; if no order has been made by the
time that period expires, the dismissal of the action
occurs by operation of DCR
any application therefore needs to be made in sufficient time for the court to
deal with it.
DCR r 44G(4) provides that, if a case is dismissed under subrule (1),
a party may apply to the court for, and the court may make,
any order needed as
a consequence of the dismissal.
under DCR r 44G(5), the court may, in exceptional circumstances and on such
terms as it thinks just, set aside the dismissal
of a case under
subrule (1).
in the circumstances, Mr Carter is required to apply to have the dismissal
concluding, the Principal Registrar expressly drew Mr Carter's
attention to the requirement under DCR r 44G(5) and for Mr Carter
satisfy the court that exceptional circumstances exist.
to the orders made on 21 March 2025, by chamber summons filed on
28 March 2025, Mr Carter amended the application to remove
from the Inactive Cases List to the Set Aside Application. The
application was supported by the affidavit of Simon Carter
28 March 2025 (Second Carter Affidavit). Mr Carter in the
Second Carter Affidavit, relevantly deposes to the following:
on 10 March 2025, Mr Carter was informed by the court that 'they would
get in front of a registrar to review' the application
to remove the case
from the Inactive Cases List before the 11 March 2025 dismissal
court registry staff had 'accidentally' failed to give that application to a
registrar and had created an administrative.
was under the impression that he had until 11 March 2025 to remove the case
from the Inactive Cases List.
is self-represented and could not have known how much time the court needed
prior to 11 March 2025 for the court to have
enough time to consider the
application to remove the case from the Inactive Cases List and allocate a
hearing date.
Since November
2022, Mr Carter has been attempting to access an unredacted copy of his
medical record to accurately complete a statement
of claim in describing the
facts of his case that includes medical negligence, defamation, assault and
battery and unlawful arrest
and detainment.
is Mr Carter's opinion that the release of FOI request made by
Mr Carter has been delayed by SMHS.
is awaiting the outcome of an external review of the FOI request.
has in the interim provided SMHS with a draft statement of claim which contains
inaccuracies which will need to be remediated
once he has access to the
requested medical record(s) the subject of the FOI request.
his poor education and understanding of the legal processes, Mr Carter
failed to understand that he could have subpoenaed his
medical records through
the court prior to filing a writ.
relies on the affidavit of Alison Yeong Hornsby sworn 24 April 2025
(Hornsby Affidavit) in opposition to the Set Aside Application.
Ms Hornsby in her affidavit, deposes to the following:
on 21 May 2024, Ms Hornsby drafted and caused to be sent, a letter to
Mr Carter seeking a timeframe for filing and service of
his statement of
claim and informing him that his action would be placed on the
Inactive Cases List if a statement of claim was not
10 September 2024. Annexed to the Hornsby Affidavit is a copy of that
letter marked 'AYH-1'.
on 2 August 2024, Ms Hornsby drafted and caused to be sent, a letter
to Mr Carter informing him, amongst other things, that his
action would be
placed on the Inactive Cases List if a statement of claim was not filed by
10 September 2024. Annexed to the Hornsby
Affidavit and marked
'AYH-2' is a true copy of that letter.
on 12 September 2024, Ms Hornsby drafted and caused to be sent, a
letter to Mr Carter enclosing the court Inactive Case Notice
11 September 2024 and informing him, amongst other things, that the case
would be automatically dismissed on 11 March 2025
for want of prosecution
if the case remained on the Inactive Cases List for six continuous months.
Annexed to the Hornsby Affidavit
and marked 'AYH-3' is a true copy of that
on 31 January 2025, Ms Hornsby drafted and caused to be sent, a letter
to Mr Carter informing him, amongst other things, that
the case remained on
the Inactive Cases List and would be automatically dismissed on
11 March 2025 for want of prosecution. Annexed
Hornsby Affidavit and marked 'AYH-4' is a true copy of that letter.
opposes the application on the basis that Mr Carter was forewarned of the
consequences of the action remaining on the Inactive
Cases List and had
ample time to file an application to remove the action from the
Inactive Cases List before it was dismissed on
order of the court made on 28 April 2025, the Set Aside Application
was listed to be heard at a special appointment on 25 June
2025 with the
orders made in respect of the filing and service of any affidavit material and
submissions by both parties in relation
to the application.
order of the learned Deputy Registrar made 25 June 2025, following the
hearing of the application, the Set Aside Application was
dismissed with
Mr Carter ordered to pay the costs of the defendant.
notice of appeal dated 25 June 2025, Mr Carter, appeals against the
Decision. The notice of appeal contains a single 'ground',
namely 'Decision to
dismiss my order to set aside the dismissal of CIV 3358'.
notice of appeal was supported by the affidavit of Simon Carter sworn
4 August 2025 (Third Carter Affidavit) that deposes to
background to Mr Carter's claim against SMHS.
Mr Carter's
basis of claim against SMHS.
Mr Carter is self-represented and is not familiar with legal processes as a
qualified legal practitioner or employees of the
court would be.
Mr Carter had informed the court that he had not yet secured rental
accommodation in Wollongong, New South Wales and to direct
all his court
communications to his email.
Mr Carter understood, based on court orders, that he had until
11 March 2025 to take action and request his case be removed from
Inactive Cases List.
Mr Carter had engaged with multiple phone calls with court registry staff
to identify all the forms he was required to fill out
to successfully complete
his application.
Mr Carter was unaware that the court had duplicated his customer profile so
that there were two accounts under his name.
whilst Mr Carter could access other court proceedings under his name,
CIV 3358 of 2023 was not accessible to Mr Carter through
the eCourts
Mr Carter did submit the correct forms to the court on Sunday, 9 March
2025 requesting that the case be removed from the Inactive
Cases List.
he believed, with nothing from the court suggesting otherwise, that he could
file his application prior to 11 March 2025 and
that his request would be
automatically approved by the courts, in providing him more time to progress his
legal case.
the court were already aware before the dismissal that Mr Carter was
experiencing problems accessing his unredacted medical file
from SMHS and that
Mr Carter had attempted previously to request the court to support a
subpoena on SMHS to produce an unredacted
copy of the medical file but was not
assisted by the court.
Mr Carter had since been attempting to access his unredacted medical file
from SMHS including under FOI in addition to making
direct requests of
on 10 March 2025, Mr Carter spoke with a court registry staff member
and explained the urgency of his application filed 9 March
2025 to remove
the case from the Inactive Cases List and was told that 'he will make sure
the application is seen by a registrar
today who can then make a determination
on it today, don't worry I will mark this as urgent' and that he was otherwise
there was nothing more he could do and was informed that the court
were experiencing a five day backlog in processing applications.
Mr Carter also sent SMHS a copy of the application.
appeal proceeded to hearing on 7 October 2025. Mr Carter was
self-represented and appeared via audio link at his request, which
the court was
able to accommodate.
was represented by counsel at the hearing of the
Case management principles
case management principles in
div 3 of the DCR includes the
following relevant rules:
44A. Cases inactive for 12 months deemed
If no document is filed in a case for
12 months by any party to the case, the case is taken to be inactive unless the
Court orders
44D. Parties to be notified of case being on Inactive Cases List and to
advise clients
(1) When a case is taken to be inactive under
, or an order is
rule 44B(4)
, or an order made under
rule 44C(1)
takes effect, the
Principal Registrar must -
(a) put the case on
the Inactive Cases List; and
(b) give all parties to the case written notice that the case is on the
Inactive Cases List and of the effect of
(2) If under subrule (1) a practitioner for a party is notified, the
practitioner must, as soon as practicable, notify the party
(a) the fact that the case is on the
Inactive Cases List and why; and
(b) the effect of
44F. Removing cases from Inactive Cases List
(1) If a Form 1 (Entry for Trial), or a consent order finalising the case, is
filed in a case on the Inactive Cases List, the case
is taken to have been
taken off the list.
(2) Any party to a case on the Inactive Cases List may apply to the Court
for an order that the case be taken off the Inactive Cases
(3) The Court may order a case be taken off the Inactive Cases List if
satisfied the case will be conducted in a timely way or for
any other good
(4) An order that a case be taken off the Inactive Cases List may include
any conditions necessary to ensure the case is conducted
in a timely way.
44G. Certain Inactive Cases taken to have been dismissed
(1) A case that is on the Inactive Cases List for 6 continuous months is
taken to have been dismissed for want of prosecution.
(2) If a case is dismissed under subrule (1), the Principal Registrar must
give all parties to the case written notice of the fact.
(3) If under subrule (2) a practitioner for a party is notified,
the practitioner must, as soon as practicable, send a copy of the
(4) If a case is dismissed under subrule (1), any party to it may apply to the
Court for, and the Court may make, any order needed
as a consequence of the
(5) The Court may, in exceptional circumstances and on such terms as it thinks
just, set aside the dismissal of a case under subrule
(6) For the purposes of subrule (5) it does not matter that the case was
dismissed before the commencement of that
Appeal jurisdiction - registrar appeals
party who is dissatisfied with a decision of a registrar may appeal to a
The appeal is
to be by way of a new hearing of the matter that was before the
appeal is a hearing de novo:
Hazart Pty Ltd v
The judge hearing the appeal is to treat the application as if it was before the
court for the first time, save that the party appealing
has the right as well as
the obligation to open the
appellant is not required to demonstrate error to succeed on the
am therefore to treat the application which led to the making of the orders the
subject of the appeal as though it had not been
previously determined. It is
not necessary for Mr Carter to establish an appealable error on the part of
the registrar.
had regard to the procedural history of the matter, I was mindful that
I made the order on 9 August 2023 granting Mr Carter
leave to file the
amended writ of summons in my then role as a registrar of this court. Whilst
the orders made were unrelated to
matters the subject of this appeal, as a
matter of prudence, I advised the parties of this in writing on 6 October
2025 in circumstances
where I was presiding on the appeal. Prior to the
hearing of the appeal, both parties confirmed that they had no objection to
presiding over the appeal notwithstanding the orders made on 9 August
Leave to adduce additional evidence on appeal
programming the appeal for hearing, the following orders were made by the
Registrar on 12 August 2025:
respondent file and serve any further affidavit by 9 September 2025.
appeal be listed for hearing before a Judge on 7 October 2025 at
11.00 am for a half day hearing.
appellant file and serve his written submissions by 23 September 2025.
respondent file and serve its written submissions by 30 September
costs of today be reserved to the appeal.
to the making of the orders, Mr Carter filed the following affidavits:
of Simon Carter sworn 12 August 2025 (Fourth Carter
Affidavit).
of Simon Carter sworn 25 September 2025 (Fifth Carter
Affidavit).
of David Carter sworn 6 August 2025 (David Carter
Affidavit).
in the Fourth Carter Affidavit deposes to the following:
Mr Carter was allegedly detained against his will in his home on
18 October 2022.
due to continued harassment by Mr Carter's neighbours and the absence of
assistance from the Fremantle Council and the Fremantle
matters escalated such that Mr Carter obtained an interim violence
restraining order against a neighbour.
whilst at Fremantle Hospital, Mr Carter was detained in a room against
his will and guarded by a Western Australia police officer
and subject to
medical and psychiatric examination.
following his release on or about late October 2022, Mr Carter was
Mr Carter's brother purportedly received a phone call from a nurse from the
Alma Street Mental Health Unit on 3 November 2022
and that the call
was in respect of a further appointment which Mr Carter says was fabricated
as he never agreed to attend the same.
in the Fifth Carter Affidavit deposes to the following matters in
the reason for the late provision of this affidavit was due to alleged delays on
the part of SMHS in providing the requested
medical documents.
on a review of the documents, Mr Carter claims (amongst other things) that
he was misdiagnosed and was administered force medication
on a number of
he continued to be administered medication contrary to medical orders given on
20 October 2022, which Mr David Carter can
Mr David Carter
in his affidavit deposes to matters relating to the circumstances of
Mr Carter's claim and includes matters Mr David
Carter says he
observed. The David Carter Affidavit seeks to depose to matters of fact of
evidence that relate to the substantive
claim Mr Carter seeks to advance
against SMHS.
addition to these affidavits, Mr Carter relies on the Third Carter
Affidavit in support of this appeal.
Mr Carter's
submissions is that he was not aware that leave was required prior to filing the
additional affidavits. Mr Carter submits
that the affidavits are necessary
demonstrate the delays on the part of SMHS.
evidence from medical records supportive of Mr Carter's claims.
order for the court to be in a position to properly consider the merits of the
objects to the Third, Fourth and Fifth Carter Affidavits and the
David Carter Affidavit evidence being admitted on the basis
has not been granted.
Third Carter Affidavit seeks to deal with the merits of MrCarter's claim
and is irrelevant to the appeal and does not otherwise
relate to the question of
whether there were exceptional circumstances such as to warrant setting aside
the dismissal of the proceedings.
Fourth Carter Affidavit seeks to deal with the merits of Mr Carter's
claim and is irrelevant to the appeal and is otherwise is
not fresh evidence.
There is therefore no legitimate reason why Mr Carter could not have
adduced the evidence in the primary application.
Fifth Carter Affidavit seeks to deal with the merits of Mr Carter's
claim and is irrelevant to the appeal and further does not
relate to whether
there were exceptional circumstances such as to warrant setting aside the
dismissal of the proceedings. Further,
the affidavit was provided to SMHS at a
very late stage prior to the hearing of the appeal.
David Carter Affidavit does not go to the issues regarding 'exceptional
circumstances' relevant to DCR r 44G(5) and has been provided
late stage prior to the hearing of the appeal.
Disposition
appeal to a judge of this court from the decision of a registrar is by way of a
new hearing.
appeal is by way of a new hearing of the matter that came before the registrar,
the parties are not confined to the evidence
presented to the registrar, and the
court should ordinarily allow the parties to rely on additional evidence,
subject to a discretion
heard from both parties, further to the parties' respective written positions
communicated to the court on 3 and 6 October,
and noting that:
seeks to rely on the Third Carter Affidavit, the Fourth Carter
Affidavit, the Fifth Carter Affidavit and the David Carter
to establish the exceptional circumstances said to warrant setting aside the
SMHS additional affidavit evidence, SMHS does not assert prejudice including in
respect of the late provision of the David
Carter Affidavit and says that
its position, having reviewed, the content of the affidavits, is unchanged;
procedural prejudice is asserted by SMHS as a result of the inclusion of the
additional evidence; and
additional time is sought by SMHS to adduce further evidence in response, leave
to adduce the additional evidence was
The issue on the appeal
issues that arise for determination are as follows:
the case properly dismissed for want of prosecution?
exceptional circumstances exist justifying the setting aside of the dismissal of
the case pursuant to r 44G(5)?
Was the case properly dismissed for want of prosecution?
relies on his oral submissions made at the hearing of the appeal and his outline
of submissions dated 25 September 2025
and the matters deposed to in his
various affidavits and the David Carter Affidavit and his outline of
submissions. Mr Carter deposes
to the matters said to arise subsequent to
the filing of his chamber summons application on 9 March 2025 (dated
10 March 2025) to
remove the matter from the Inactive Cases List, a
detailed summary of which is set out above.
position, as it appears in the outline of submissions and the
Hornsby Affidavit and counsel's submissions. As set out in
Hornsby Affidavit, SMHS corresponded in writing with Mr Carter on
several occasions after the case had been placed on the Inactive
informing Mr Carter that he would need to take steps to remove the case
from the list. SMHS submits that Mr Carter was
forewarned of the
consequences of the action remaining on the Inactive Cases list and had
ample time to file an application to remove
the action from the
Inactive Cases list before it was dismissed on 11 March
Disposition
document was filed on the case since SMHS filed a memorandum of appearance on
11 September 2023. As a result, on 11 September
Principal Registrar issued the Inactive Cases Notice and the case was
placed on the Inactive Cases List from the date of
that notice. It is
irrelevant to the operation of DCR r 44A how it came about that no document
was filed within the 12-month period.
It is enough that no document was
issuing the Inactive Case Notice on 11 September 2024, Mr Carter was
given notice in writing by the Principal Registrar that the
case had been
put on the Inactive Cases List and of the effect of DCR r 44E and
Inactive Case Notice relevantly provided as follows:
Pursuant to r 44D(2), as soon as practicable after receiving this notice,
a practitioner must notify the party they represent of
the fact that the
case is on the Inactive Cases List and the effect of r 44E.
Pursuant to r 44G(1), a case that is on the Inactive Cases List for
6 continuous months is taken to have been dismissed for want
of prosecution.
my review of the materials, it is clear that Mr Carter was aware that the
case had been placed on the Inactive Cases List on 11
September 2024.
Mr Carter, in the First Carter Affidavit, deposes that on
12 September 2024 he received communications from SMHS's
advising him that the case had been placed on the Inactive Cases List and
that to remove the matter requires a chamber
summons and
solicitors, in that letter, expressly informed Mr Carter as
We enclose a notice from the District Court of Western Australia advising that
your action has been placed on the Inactive Cases
An application can be made to the District Court to have the action removed from
the Inactive Cases List: see
rule 44F(2)
District Court Rules 2005
For such an application, you will need a Chamber Summons and Affidavit in
support. There are civil procedure template forms on the
District Court website
which may assist you in preparing an application. Applicants in possession of
eligible concession cards can
apply for a waiver or a reduction of the Chamber
Summons filing fee.
As per the notice, if the action remains on the Inactive Cases List for
6 continuous months
it will be automatically dismissed by the District
Court on 11 March 2025
for want of prosecution.
letter dated 31 January 2025, SMHS's solicitors again wrote to
Mr Carter and informed him, amongst other things, that the case
remained on
the Inactive Cases List and would be automatically dismissed on
11 March 2025 for want of
prosecution.
SMHS's solicitors, in that letter, expressly informed Mr Carter as
We refer to our previous correspondence dated 12 September 2024 enclosing a
notice from the District Court of Western Australia dated
11 September
We note that your action remains on the Inactive Cases List. As per the
Court notice, your action
will be automatically dismissed by
the District Court on 11 March 2025
for want of prosecution.
We understand that an application has been made for external review with the
Information Commissioner. Please note that you will
still need to apply to the
District Court to have the action removed from the Inactive Cases List (see
rule 44F(2)
District Court Rules 2005
(WA)), notwithstanding that the external
review may not yet be finalised.
Procedurally, to make such an application, you will need to file a Chamber
Summons and Affidavit in support. There are civil procedure
template forms on
the District Court website. Applicants in possession of eligible concession
cards can apply for a waiver or a
reduction of the Chamber Summons filing
Lastly, we take this opportunity to suggest that you seek your own independent
legal advice on the content of our letter, and your
claim generally. You can
practising in medical negligence.
is clear that Mr Carter had clear notice of the fact that the case had been
placed on the Inactive Cases List from both the Principal
and subsequently SMHS's solicitors and that the case would be
automatically dismissed
on 11 March 2025 if an application was
not made to remove the case from the Inactive Cases List before then.
SMHS's solicitors even
took the additional step of prompting Mr Carter of
this consequence by letter dated 31 January 2025 and informing him of what an
application to remove the case from the Inactive Cases List would
Rowe v Stoltze
, the Court of Appeal in considering the operation
of DCR r 44G(1) observed
... it is not correct to say, as the appellants do, that the action was
dismissed by administrative action. The deemed dismissal
of the action came
r 44G(2) requires the Principal
Registrar to give the parties written
notice of the dismissal of an action, that administrative action plays no role
in the dismissal
itself; it is merely notice, after the fact, that the
action has been dismissed.
Nor can it be said that in some way the operation of r 44G(1) derogates
from the exercise of the jurisdiction of the court under
District Court Act. The operation of r 44G(1) does not affect
the exercise of the jurisdiction of the court under s 8
District Court Act. It involves no determination of the substantive rights
of a party or the making of any judgment or order
of the court. It simply
brings to an end, by a deemed dismissal, proceedings which the parties, having
been put on notice under
r 44D(1), have not kept alive.
Gibbs v Royalblue Securities Pty
Honour said:
The decision of
Rowe v Stoltze
... makes it clear that an action
is taken to have been dismissed under r 44G(1) DCR simply because it had
been on the Inactive Cases
list for six continuous months, regardless of
how this had come about.
short, no order of the court is necessary to give effect to the deemed
dismissal. The dismissal occurs by operation of law and
involves no
determination of the substantive rights of the parties or the making of any
judgment or order of the court. It simply
brings to an end, by deemed
dismissal, proceedings which the parties, having been put on notice under
r 44D(1) have not kept alive.
the question of this timing, Mr Carter submits that the application was
the case being dismissed and in circumstances where he 'was
under the impression that he had until 11 March 2025 to remove the case
from the Inactive Cases List' and that as someone who is
self-represented, he could not have known how much time the court needed
to 11 March 2025 for the court to have enough time to consider the
application and allocate a hearing
Mr Carter further points to a number of other factors he placed reliance on
to advance his submission that he had understood that
in filing the chamber
summons application on Sunday, 9 March, the court would be in a position to
address the application prior to
the case being automatically dismissed on
matters included, amongst other things, Mr Carter having engaged with
multiple phone calls with the court registry, being
purportedly informed that
there was a serious backlog in processing and administrative 'complications' to
do with Mr Carter having
duplicated his customer profile so that there were
two accounts under his name. At the crux of Mr Carter's submissions on
is that he filed the application by chamber summons to remove the matter
from the Inactive Cases List prior to the date on which
the case was to be
automatically dismissed and that he otherwise placed reliance on discussions had
with court registry staff about
the application being in effect 'fast tracked'
to be brought to the attention of a registrar of the court.
is a clear distinction between the applying for orders on the one hand and
obtaining orders on the other. It was not intended
that time would stop running
simply by the filing of an application. An order to remove a case from the
Inactive Cases List must
be obtained within the six month period; it is not
sufficient that an application to remove the case from the Inactive Cases
is made within the six month
in DCR r 44G(4) does not extend to allowing the court to extend the time
periods stipulated in r44A or
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
does not apply to allow the court to extend the time in DCR r 44G(1) and
the incidental or implied powers of the District Court
cannot be used to
extend the time period in DCR
was observed in
Cyclis Group Pty Ltd as trustee for The Garside
Health Property Trust v Kabway Pty
Accordingly, any argument that an application to remove the case from the
Inactive Cases List has the effect of somehow suspending
the running of
time for the purposes of r 44G(1) or that the problem created by bringing
an application within time but not having
it determined until after time could
somehow be administratively corrected, or that an order could somehow be given
retrospective
effect is unfortunately mistaken and not in accordance with the
court of appeal decision in
Rowe v Stoltze
is for the plaintiff to seek an abridgment of time for an application to be
my view, Mr Carter had ample opportunity to take steps to file a chamber
summons application to remove the case from the Inactive
Cases List prior
to the case being dismissed on 11 March 2025. Despite this, Mr Carter
only chose to file his application on 9 March
2025, which was a Sunday, and
in effect, one day prior to the dismissal taking effect. Further, no allowance
was made by Mr Carter
in any event for service of the chamber summons on
SMHS who not only had a right to be heard and on the application, but to be
a reasonable time in which to prepare their response if any in opposition
to the application. The application may be unsuccessful,
and an order never
to the surrounding matters Mr Carter asks this court to have regard to in
respect of circumstances leading up to the dismissal,
including reliance placed
by Mr Carter on conversations purportedly had with court registry staff,
having had regard to these matters,
they do not and cannot defeat the automatic
deemed dismissal of the case by virtue of DCR r 44G(1).
ground of appeal has not been established.
Are there exceptional circumstances that warrant an exercise of the court's
discretion under DCR r 44G(5) to set aside the dismissal
of the action and,
if so, on what terms?
relies on his written outline of submissions dated 25 September 2025, the
matters deposed to in each of his various affidavits
including the Third, Fourth
and Fifth Carter Affidavits and the David Carter Affidavit, and the
oral submissions put to the court
at the hearing of the appeal on 7 October
2025. Mr Carter's position can be summarised as follows:
the Set Aside Application was filed two days prior to the automatic
dismissal date.
Mr Carter was diligently monitoring the file and acting as soon as
practicable in a manner consistent with the principles in
Sovereign Grange
Pty Ltd v A V Truck Services Pty Ltd
the dismissal had occurred in circumstances where Mr Carter had already
filed an application to remove the matter from the Inactive
the court acted on duplicate and inaccurate records which deprived
Mr Carter of procedural fairness.
Mr Carter has a serious and arguable cause of action in negligence, assault
and battery, false imprisonment and defamation such
that he has a meritorious
case which warrants determination on its merits rather than being defeated by
procedural dismissal.
the delay in the progress of the matter was allegedly caused by the defendant's
refusal and failure to provide records 'as soon
as practicable' contrary to the
Mental Health Act 2014
that the delay in the progress of the matter was caused by delays beyond
Mr Carter's control including in respect of requests
made to the
FOI Commissioner.
these matters demonstrate prompt action and diligence on the part of
Mr Carter in all of the circumstances.
Mr Carter was denied procedural fairness.
the dismissal would cause substantial prejudice to Mr Carter as he would be
deprived of pursuing his claim.
submits that the burden lies on Mr Carter to establish that exceptional
circumstances exist. SMHS submits that in circumstances
is nothing unusual, special or atypical in the circumstances leading to the
was the Mr Carter's delay in filing the application to remove the case from
the Inactive Cases List that led to the dismissal and
it was simply left to
the last minute.
Mr Carter's
failure to respect the court processes and case management rules is a relevant
consideration per
Rowe v Stolze
is no causal connection between the FOI external review process and the
dismissal of the plaintiff's case.
Self-representation
is not, of itself, extraordinary.
exceptional circumstances exist in this case and Mr Carter's application
should be dismissed.
Disposition
r 44G(5) provides that the court may, in exceptional circumstances and on
such terms as it thinks just, set aside the dismissal
of a case under
subrule (1).
general principles in determining whether there are exceptional circumstances
were outlined by the Court of Appeal in
Sovereign Grange
in upholding the primary court's decision,
and summarised as
follows by Principal Registrar Melville in
ATS v F S Kotai
circumstances to be 'exceptional' under r 44G(5) they must be out of the
ordinary, unusual, special or uncommon. They do not
need to be unique
or unprecedented or very rare however they will not be exceptional if they are
regularly, or routinely, or normally
encountered.
fact that the Inactive Cases List was introduced to further case management
must be borne in mind. The wider interest of other
litigants wanting to have
cases heard and the public interest in the proper and efficient use of scarce
public resources of the court
must be taken into account.
exceptional circumstances must be causally related to the dismissal of the
action and it must be established that the circumstances
which have led to the
dismissal of the action are exceptional.
is no particular circumstance that can be defined as exceptional. 'Exceptional
circumstances' may relate to a single exceptional
matter or to a combination of
exceptional facts or a combination of ordinary facts that when taken together in
combination may reasonably
be regarded as amounting to exceptional
circumstances. Each case must be determined on its own facts.
Rule 44G(5)
is not remedial. It should be interpreted as giving the court a broad power to
relieve against injustice.
Inattention
or inadvertence by a solicitor may in some cases be considered an exceptional
circumstance. However, r 44G(5) must be
considered in the context of case
management. Consistent with the principles of case management in r 38 and
r 44A of the Rules,
the onus is on the party (not the party's solicitors)
to enter the action for trial and to file documents. For this reason, case
management directions and interlocutory orders are made against the party not
against the party's lawyer.
inadvertence or inattention by a solicitor would ordinarily not constitute an
exceptional circumstance that would absolve a plaintiff
from any personal
responsibility to pursue the action.
to be considered in the exercise of the discretion
(a) whether there has been any delay in bringing
the application to set aside the dismissal and the reason for that delay;
(b) the merits of the plaintiff's case (there being no point in reinstating a
case that has no merit);
(c) the prejudice to the plaintiff if the dismissal of the action is not set
aside (including the expiry of any relevant limitation
period); and
[d] the prejudice to the defendant if the dismissal of the action is set
(footnotes omitted)
reference to 'exceptional circumstances' regulates the manner in which the
discretion is to be exercised. It is not to be interpreted
as a two-step
process whereby the existence of exceptional circumstances is a condition
precedent to the existence of a
discretion.
decision in
Sovereign Grange
clear that the DCR r 44G(5) poses a single question for the court in the
context of an application to set aside a dismissal
- whether exceptional
circumstances warrant the setting aside of the
burden lies on Mr Carter as the applicant/plaintiff to establish the
exceptional circumstances.
relevantly note as follows.
that on my review of the materials, the court record shows little progress from
the time of the filing of the SMHS's memorandum
of appearance on
11 September 2023 and the matter being placed on the Inactive Cases
List on 11 September 2024. Mr Carter's affidavit
evidence speaks to
delays said to be caused by SMHS and third party delays in obtaining requested
documents. This in itself does
not show anything out of the ordinary, and does
not demonstrate why steps could not have been taken to otherwise progress the
procedurally. Further, Mr Carter in the Second Carter
Affidavit deposes to the fact that a draft statement of claim has been provided
to SMHS. Whilst noting that this occurred after the dismissal, this does
however show that steps could have been taken by Mr Carter
prior to the
dismissal to progress the proceedings.
the fact that Mr Carter is self-represented is not in itself
extraordinary.
Mr Carter himself has otherwise clearly demonstrated that he is able to
engage with the court process as and when required, including
by way of filing
documents, adducing evidence and appearing at hearings, including in the context
of this appeal. Further, Mr Carter
had clear notice from the court
that the case had been placed on the Inactive Cases List and that he would
need to take steps to
remove the case from that list. Similar notice and
explanation was provided to Mr Carter by SMHS as demonstrated by the
deposed to in the Hornsby Affidavit.
a further relevant factor is the merits of Mr Carter's case. As to this,
the basis of the claim is limited to the matters
set out in the amended writ of
summons Mr Carter filed an amended writ of summons filed on 23 August
2023. As already noted, Mr
Carter claim is for damages as a result of
SMHS's alleged medical negligence in 2022 and ongoing.
any assessment of the strength of the Mr Carter's claim is limited to the
amended writ of summons, it cannot be said that
the claim has no merit.
However, the claim is broad, contains a myriad of allegations not set out in any
meaningful form. The claim
also includes matters that would sit outside a claim
for damages such as the request for a written apology by SMHS, correction of
allegedly falsified medical records, to Mr Carter and other affected
parties affected by the medical negligence, who are themselves
not party to the
proceedings the subject of the dismissal. It follows that at this stage, it is
difficult to make a proper assessment
of the merits of the claim given the
documents and information available are essentially limited to Mr Carter's
amended writ of summons.
that there might be some merit to Mr Carter's claim, and that a plaintiff
will suffer prejudice if the dismissal is not
set aside, those factors either
alone or in combination with any other factors identified by Mr Carter do
not amount to exceptional
circumstances warranting the setting aside of the
dismissal of the case. In any event, the DCR do not demand that the court set
aside a dismissal of an action which may have merit where the plaintiff has been
given, but failed to take advantage of, a reasonable
opportunity to prosecute
note for completeness that the dismissal of an action under
DCR r 44G(1) does not in itself bar a fresh action for the same
No question of
res judicata
issue estoppel
arises as there has been no determination on the merits. Nor will the fact
that the action was dismissed under DCR r 44G(1) necessarily
mean that any
fresh action will constitute an abuse of process; that will depend upon the
circumstances.
to the extent Mr Carter asserts that he was denied procedural fairness,
nothing is meaningfully advanced in support of this
and in any event on my
review of the matter, such an assertion is unsupported. The rules of procedural
fairness only require that
each party be provided with a reasonable opportunity
to be heard, something which is to be judged not solely by reference to the
interests of the parties but also having regard to the wider interest of other
litigants waiting to have cases heard and the public
interest in the proper and
efficient use of the scarce public resources of the
all of the circumstances, on a careful consideration of the facts of the pleaded
case, and having had regard to the well-established
principles set out in
Sovereign Grange [No 2]
, the materials and evidence relied on
by Mr Carter do not show anything out of the ordinary such that it could be
said to constitute
'exceptional circumstances' within the meaning of DCR
ground of appeal has not been established.
circumstances where no order was obtained removing the matter from the
Inactive Cases List prior to the deemed dismissal having
occurred on
11 March 2025, the action was properly dismissed pursuant to DCR
r 44G(1). Accordingly, in order for this action to
be able to proceed, it
will be necessary for Mr Carter to successfully obtain an order in this
appeal setting aside the dismissal
on the grounds of exceptional circumstances
as provided for in DCR r 44G(5).
the reasons which I have set out above, Mr Carter has failed to prove that
exceptional circumstances exist justifying the setting
aside of the dismissal of
Consequently,
the appeal should be dismissed.
to adduce additional evidence on appeal is allowed.
appeal is dismissed.
application to set aside the dismissal of the case is dismissed.
will hear the parties as to costs
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
21 OCTOBER 2025
Hazart Pty Ltd v Rademaker
(1993) 11 WAR 26
(Malcolm CJ)
Stewart v Hames
[2019] WASCA 127
(29) - (30) (Malcolm CJ);
Belendaine Pty
Ltd v Primary Consulting Services Pty Ltd
[2014] WADC 74
[14] (Stevenson
DCJ) as endorsed in
Ogbonna v Programmed Integrated Workforce Ltd [No 2]
[2022] WASCA 79
[2013] WASCA 92
(2013) 45 WAR
Carter Affidavit, par 2. Also see Hornsby Affidavit, par 6; Annexure
Hornsby Affidavit; Annexure
Hornsby Affidavit, par 7; Annexure
Hornsby Affidavit, Annexure
Rowe v Stolze
Gibbs v Royalblue Securities Pty Ltd
[2017] WADC 80
Carter Affidavit, par
example Second Carter Affidavit, pars 1(a) and 1(b); Third Carter Affidavit,
pars 5, 6, 7 and
Cyclis Group Pty Ltd as trustee for The Garside Health Property Trust v
Kabway Pty Ltd
[2019] WADC 41
Cyclis Group v
Rowe v Stolze
Rowe v Stolze
[22] - [26] and [28] -
Cyclis Group v Kabway
Ogbonna v CTI Logistics Pty Ltd
[2018] WADC
Sovereign Grange Pty Ltd v A V Truck Services Pty Ltd [No
[2017] WASCA 142
Sovereign Grange [No
Sovereign Grange [No 2]
Guillaume v City of
[2020] WADC 41
ATS v F S Kotai Pty Ltd, C J Broun Pty Ltd, Elizabeth Berkley
Wysocki and Carol Elizabeth Mcgrath t/as Glen Forrest Medical Centre
[2020] WADC 115
Sovereign Grange [No 2]
Sovereign Grange [No 2]
Sovereign Grange
Rowe v Stolze
Sovereign Grange [No 2]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (420 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter