URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Norris and The Owners of 185 Peninsula Road - Strata Plan 5141 [2004] WASTR 46 (7 September 2004)
STRATA TITLES
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
7 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000053
STRATA PLAN
KATHRYN ANN
THE OWNERS OF 185 PENINSULA ROAD – STRATA PLAN
Catchwords:
Real property
– Strata titles – common property – repair and replacement of
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also
1 The cost of repair of
2 The Applicant is Kathryn Ann Norris as the proprietor of Lot 10 on Strata
Plan 5141 ("the Strata Plan").
Strata Plan and
relevant Act
3 The Strata Plan was registered on 4 July 1977 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
4 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles Act
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
5 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
6 The parcel is a 10-lot single-storey brick and tile residential development,
situated at and known as 185 Peninsula Road, Maylands.
7 The Strata Plan records that the address for services of notice on the Strata
Company as C/- Torrens Real Estate, PO Box 515,
Morley WA 6062, although the
correspondence on the file indicates that Torrens Real Estate no longer has any
involvement with the
Strata Company.
8 If there is a new address for service of notices on the Strata Company, the
Registrar of Titles should be notified as soon as
possible and the amended
address recorded on the Strata
9 As no changes of by-laws are recorded on the Strata Plan, the by-laws of the
Strata Company which were, originally, the "standard"
by-laws in the Schedule to
the 1966 Act, are now, pursuant to s 42(2) and the transitional provisions
in Sch 3, the "standard"
in Sch 1 and
Unit entitlements
10 The unit entitlements of all lots are
Order sought
11 The Applicant has sought an Order in the following
“That the resolution claimed to have been passed at the special meeting of
the Helen Court Strata Company (Strata Plan 5141)
held on 4 October 2003 stating
'to keep it equitable the final cost of ceiling repair to Unit 9 (re fixing and
painting) to be set
at the current nett present value of ceiling repairs to all
units Invoice date 24/09/03. All Units are to be levied at that price
ceiling repairs. Those Units that have repaired their own, are given a credit to
the same value. This results in a zero cost
to owners who have done their own'
be set aside and that Helen Court Strata Company be ordered to repair and
reinstate the ceiling
and insulation of Unit 10 and that the Helen Court Strata
Company meet all associated costs of the repair and reinstatement of the
and insulation. The work is to be completed within 30 days of the decision of
the referee.”
Applicant's
submissions
12 The Applicant advises that no prior notice or agenda item was circulated
indicating that a special levy would be discussed at
the Strata Company's 4
October 2003 meeting.
13 Her understanding was that a special levy had to be passed by way of a
resolution without dissent and that, through a proxy and
through subsequent
written notice, she has recorded her dissent.
14 The Applicant states
"By levying my unit for the full cost of repairs and not levying other units who
claim to have done their repairs, regardless of
the date those repairs were
carried out, I am paying for repairs that were carried out to other units before
I was an owner. By not
verifying and quality controlling the repairs, the units
claiming to have done ceiling repairs may still need work done later. The
special levy does not appear to solve the problem for any future repair.
Owners who carried out their own repairs were mistaken. It is their
responsibility to ascertain their rights and the Strata Company's
responsibility
to maintain common property. The special levy applied retrospectively is not a
fair way of redressing their mistake
in that it penalises me for their
15 She advises that when she purchased her Lot 10 in January 2000, she did not
have a building inspection made, on the basis that
the Strata Company was
responsible for the structure.
16 She claims that while some lots only needed to have ceilings reattached to
the joists, the ceiling of Lot 10 needed to be replaced
"It appears from the written quote and discussions with the tradesmen that the
cost of repairing my unit will be in excess of the
special levy of $1 500. This
seems to be discriminatory since the ceiling is common property and everyone
should contribute equally.
The levy was refunded to owners who said they had done ceiling repairs but
without receipts there is no evidence that refunds were
given against proven
expenditure.
The Strata Company should meet the cost of replacing the insulation since its
removal was part of consequential damage of having
to replace ceiling and is not
claimable on insurance ..."
17 The Applicant has provided a copy of a quote from All States Gyprock
relating to the works requested by the Applicant. The works
cover the supply of
a "skip" bin, plastic for protection, the removal of ceilings and cornices to
kitchen, lounge, dining room, master
bedroom, office and laundry, the removal of
rubbish, the supply and installation of new gyprock and cornices, and the supply
installation of insulation and other items, for a total estimated cost of
The 2003 AGM
18 The meeting referred to by the Applicant was not a “special
meeting”, but appears to have been the Strata Company’s
2003 Annual
General Meeting (“the 2003 AGM”). The meeting was called for and
commenced on 14 September 2003 and, by a
vote of the meeting, was adjourned
until 4 October 2003, to complete the business of the
Responses to application
19 The proprietors of 5 lots have opposed the application. No proprietors have
supported it.
20 Some of those opposing the application have referred to works carried out by
them within and adjacent to their lots without an
awareness that the Strata
Company could be liable to meet some or all of those costs but that, in any
event, a considerable amount
of works has been, and continue to be, carried out
by some lot proprietors, for the benefit of all. Examples given are the cleaning
of gutters, the laying of paths, pruning, repairs to retaining walls and
reticulation installations.
21 The proprietor of Lot 8 advises that the Applicant, without making any
enquiries as to the nature or standard of the existing
ceilings and without
reference to the Strata Company, installed very heavy insulation materials into
the ceiling cavity above Lot
10 and that about two years later the ceilings were
obviously affected by the weight of that insulation. He states
"The lounge/dining/kitchen ceiling area was severely bellied by the weight. It
had to be slowly jacked up to approximately level
22 The ceilings are, apparently, still propped up.
23 Another proprietor opposing the application has stated that, even though the
notice calling the 2003 AGM referred only
"Any other business deemed necessary",
without specifically referring to ceiling repairs, the proxy document signed by
the Applicant, and used by her proxy at the meeting,
specifically referred to
ceiling repairs.
24 The same proprietor contends that the decision on the repair cost does not
require a resolution without dissent and that in
any event, the Applicant was in
arrears with her levies at the time of the meeting.
25 I have been provided with a copy of a report dated 13 May 2004 from P &
Dmac Constructions Pty Ltd, Wall and Ceiling contractors,
following on an
inspection of ceilings in Lots 2, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10.
26 In relation to Lot 10, the report
"This is original ceiling and has blow-in insulation. Min living area is too far
gone to be repaired and will have to be pulled down
and replaced. This is
urgent. Bedrooms 1 and 2 are both off joists 50 – 75mm but if work is
carried out promptly they will
be salvageable. Laundry ceiling shows signs of
damp and an extractor fan needs to be installed. Cornice around manhole needs
repairing".
27 That report summarises these points as
"This ceiling needs attention A.S.A.P. It is quite dangerous. The blow in
insulation would need to be removed for repairs to occur.
There have been repairs to several units and all but unit 10 is OK for now.
My estimate of $3 500 - $4 000 would cover removal of insulation and ceiling to
living area (of Lot 10), replace old ceiling with
10mm gyprock and 75mm cornice,
repair sagging ceilings to bedroom 1 and 2 and repair laundry ceiling after fan
has been installed..."
28 In accordance with the definition of "lot" in ss 3(1) and (2), each lot
within the scheme is a cubic space only, having as its
boundaries the upper
surface of the floors, the inner
surfaces of the perimeter walls and the under
surfaces of the ceilings of the
part of the building in which it is
29 Everything else, including the floors, perimeter walls, ceilings, the roof
cavity above the ceilings, the roofs, and all external
areas and the air space
above the buildings and the external areas, are common
The Strata Company's
obligations
30 Section 35(1)(c) imposes an obligation on the Strata Company
"(b) control and manage the common property for the benefit of
all the proprietors;
(c) keep in good and serviceable repair, properly maintain and, where
necessary, renew and replace —
(i) the common property, including the fittings, fixtures and lifts used in
connection with the common property; and
(ii) any personal property vested in the strata company,
and to do so whether damage or deterioration arises from fair wear and tear,
inherent defect or any other cause".
31 Section 36(1) makes it obligatory for the Strata Company to establish and
maintain an administrative fund
"... that is sufficient in the opinion of the company for the control and
management of the common property, for the payment of any
premiums of insurance
and the discharge of any other obligation of the strata company".
32 Section 36(1b) and (c) require the Strata Company to determine from time to
time the amounts to be raised for those purposes
and to raise those amounts by
levying contributions on the lot proprietors in proportion to the unit
entitlements of their respective
33 Section 36(2) gives the Strata Company the option to establish a second fund
as a reserve fund
"... for the purpose of accumulating funds to meet contingent expenses, other
than those of a routine nature, and other major expenses
of the strata company
likely to arise in the
Considerations
34 Despite the Applicant's belief to the contrary, only an ordinary resolution
is required in relation to determining budgets and
deciding on the contributions
to be levied on lot proprietors.
35 I believe that there has been a reserve fund for some time.
36 If, as the Applicant appears to concede, the Applicant owed money to the
Strata Company at the time of the 2003 AGM, then neither
she nor any proxy
appointed by her was entitled to vote or to be counted in the quorum for the
meeting. Section 3D and Sch 1, by-law
14(6) would have allowed her or her proxy
to be included in a quorum for and to vote on a resolution without dissent or in
where a unanimous resolution was necessary, but neither of those types
of resolution were under consideration at the time of the
37 In relation to the ceilings of Lot 10, talking into account the age of the
buildings, and taking into account the report made
by P & Dmac Constructions
Pty Ltd on the condition of the ceilings in six of the lots, it appears to me
that the Strata Company
is aware of and has a responsibility to repair, and
where necessary, replace any ceilings that have deteriorated.
38 Even if on a mistaken view, in respect of the liability to meet the costs
involved, or, with knowledge of the Strata Company's
obligations, but on a
voluntary basis, some lot proprietors have carried out repair and replacement
works on common property items
at their own cost, rather than impose the cost on
the Strata Company. While I agree with the Applicant that any amounts that might
be proposed to be credited to those proprietors for those works may be very
difficult to determine accurately, perhaps an attempt
could be made to seek a
mutually satisfactory result.
39 However, the Applicant's use of the ceiling space for the installation of
insulating material without the prior approval of the
Strata Company, whether by
way of a licence or an exclusive use by-law (see s 42(8)) was an
unauthorised use of common property
although the ceilings have been
installed for many years, it appears to be a reasonable assumption that the
weight of the insulation
has contributed to or accelerated the need for repair
or replacement of the ceilings of Lot 10. This view is supported by the
Applicant’s
statement that in some lots the ceilings could be restored by
simply re-attaching them to the joists above
40 On the basis of the P & Dmac Constructions Pty Ltd's report, the Strata
Company must, in relation to the Applicant's Lot
10, meet the cost of repairs to
the ceiling of bedrooms 1 and 2, the laundry (including the cornice around the
manhole) and the replacement
of the ceiling of the "living area".
41 However, I consider that the Strata Company should not be responsible for
the payment of any repair costs arising from the installation
of insulation in
the ceiling above Lot 10 unless it was installed by her, or a predecessor in
title to her lot 10, with the prior
approval of the Strata Company. If the
ceilings are replaced, the Applicant would not be entitled to install new
insulation without
the Strata Company's approval. While the Orders that I
propose to make will involve the Strata Company in some expense, perhaps
necessitating
the urgent raising of a special levy from all proprietors
(including the Applicant), all members of the Strata Company could be
risk of a substantial damages claim should a person be injured as the result of
a ceiling collapse.
42 As the reports provided to me indicate that steam damage is likely to recur
in the laundry area, I recommend to the Strata Company
that it meet the cost of
installing the recommended ceiling fan in order to minimise steam damage to any
new laundry ceiling.
43 On the basis that s 81(2a) allows me to express an order in terms other
than sought, so long as my order does not differ
in substance
from the order
sought, my Order is that
“If the insulation in the ceiling on lot 10 on Strata Plan 5141 was
installed without the prior written consent of ‘The
Owners of 185
Peninsula Rd Maylands – Strata Plan 5141’ ("the Strata Company"),the
Strata Company must, by 20 September
(a) request P & Dmac Constructions Pty
Ltd(“Dmac”) of 33 Lilacdale Road Innaloo to revise its report and
cost estimate
of 30 May 2004, by separating the cost of any necessary removal of
the insulation from the ceiling cavity above the said Lot 10 from
the cost of
replacing the ceiling above the living area and the laundry in the said Lot 10
and re-fixing the existing ceilings above
bedrooms 1 and 2 of the said Lot 10;
(b) within 14 days of receipt of the said revised cost estimates and upon the
delivery by the proprietor of the said Lot 10 to the
Strata Company of a written
undertaking by that proprietor to pay to Dmac the costs involved in the said
removal of the insulation,
whichever later occurs, instruct Dmac , at the cost
of the Strata Company in respect of the balance of the said works, to carry out
the works specified in that company's report of 30 May 2004 as soon as
but, if the said insulation was installed with the prior written consent of
the Strata Company without the proprietor of the said
Lot 10 undertaking to
meet the cost of the removal thereof, the Strata Company must, by 20 September
2004, instruct Dmac to carry
out the works the subject of the said estimate of
30 May 2004, at the Strata Company’s cost, as soon as possible.
DATED 7 SEPTEMBER 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter