URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/471.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CDL -v- SEVEN WEST MEDIA [No 2] [2025] WASC 471 (6 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- SEVEN WEST MEDIA [No 2]
[2025] WASC 471
- 23 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 1055 of 2023
AUSTRALIAN NEWSPAPERS
- Where newspaper published report on result of appeal against sentence for
child sexual abuse - Whether use of term 'paedophile'
defamatory in relation to
person convicted for child sexual abuse - Whether newspaper article gave rise to
certain imputations arising
from use of the words 'lollipop man', 'child
pornography' and 'sexual abuse' - Use made of prior criminal conviction in
proceedings - Defences of justification, contextual truth,
substantial truth and fair reporting of proceedings of public concern
Seven West Media was a publisher of the article
Legislation:
Plaintiff's
Representation:
First Defendant
Ms R Young SC & Mr P C
Ms R Young SC & Mr P C
Solicitors:
First Defendant
Steedman Stagg
Steedman Stagg
referred to in decision:
judgment was delivered extemporaneously on 23 October 2025 and has been edited
from the transcript).
Introduction
matter is an action in defamation commenced by writ of summons filed on
20 January 2023 against Seven West Media and West Australian
Newspapers by
the plaintiff. There are suppression orders in respect of the identity of the
people involved in the subject matter
of the proceedings, and I shall therefore
refer to the plaintiff as the plaintiff rather than by name, and names of others
anonymised. The plaintiff claims damages for defamation in respect of an
article published on page 44 of The West Australian newspaper
5 March 2022 (
Article bore the headline 'Child abuser loses sentence appeal'. It was
accompanied by a photograph of the plaintiff, and it contained
the following
A paedophile lollipop man, who was jailed for more than a decade for his sexual
abuse of several young girls, has had his appeal
against that jail term thrown
out by WA's highest court. The plaintiff, whose picture is on the right, filmed
the abuse, some of
which went on for years, but he refused to accept the verdict
of a jury which, in 2019, found him guilty of eight charges of persistent
abuse of a child and producing child pornography. He was also found to have
hoarded more than 26,000 independent videos and
photographs depicting children
as young as one. The plaintiff was a traffic warden at a Western Suburbs primary
school for 14 years
before his arrest. After his detention, he continued to
claim nothing sexual was shown in any of the videos. In an appeal, which
himself, the plaintiff said that the judge accepted hearsay evidence, used
opinion evidence that was not factual and ignored
professional opinion. The
Supreme Court dismissed the appeal and said 'the appellant poses a risk of
further offending'.
turn to the uncontroversial background to the matter, which is set out in both
of the Court of Appeal decisions concerning this
CDL v The State of Western
[2022] WASCA 18
) [8] - [26] and
CDL v The State of Western
[2022] WASCA 145
) [25] - [38]. I refer particularly to the Sentence Appeal decision
plaintiff was born in 1958. At all relevant times, he was employed as a traffic
warden at a primary school in a suburb of Perth,
assisting people outside the
school to cross the road.
Ms F had a son, K. The plaintiff and Ms F separated in
1999 and were
subsequently divorced. Ms F then remarried in July 2005.
her second husband, Ms F gave birth to triplets E, C and Z. Some years
later, in about 2013, in the course of his association
with the primary school,
the plaintiff met Ms XH. Ms XH had two daughters, M, born in 2001, and
B, born in April 2012. The plaintiff
maintained contact with his former
wife, Ms F. By reason of the ongoing relationship that the plaintiff had
with Ms F and her family,
and Ms XH and her family, the plaintiff had
considerable interaction with, and assisted with the care of, Ms F's
triplets, E, C,
and Z, and Ms XH's daughters, M and B.
April 2016, the plaintiff was arrested and charged with a number of offences.
Ultimately, nine charges were preferred against
the plaintiff. The plaintiff
stood trial in the District Court for those nine charges between 8 and
16 April 2019.
offending in respect of count 1 related to conduct between October 2011 and
April 2013, and related to the plaintiff persistently
engaging in sexual
conduct with E, one of the triplets born in 2005.
offending in respect of count 2 was also said to have occurred between
October 2011 and April 2013. The victim was another of
the triplets,
C. The charge was also one of persistently engaging in sexual conduct with a
child under the age of 16.
third charge, count 3, was also a charge of persistently engaging in sexual
conduct against a child under the age of 16. That
offending took place between
April 2013 and April 2016. The victim in respect of that offending was
B, the second daughter of Ms
XH, who was born in 2012.
fourth, fifth and sixth charges, that is, counts 4, 5 and 6, related to
video footage taken by the plaintiff, recording the offences
in counts 1, 2
and 3. Having filmed the sexual conduct, those videos amounted to child
exploitation material.
seventh charge, count 7, was a further charge of production of child
exploitation material in relation to the child, Z, who was
the third of the
triplets born to Ms F. That charge related to conduct said to have occurred
between 8 December 2011 and 7 December
2012. I shall put that count to
one side because ultimately the plaintiff was acquitted of that charge.
eighth charge, count 8, related to the production of child exploitation
material between 2 December 2012 and 13 December 2013.
That related to
Ms XH's older daughter, M, who was aged between 11 or 12 at the time of the
ninth charge, count 9, was in relation to the offence of possession of
child exploitation material. The transcript of the District
Court trial, which
was in evidence in this hearing, established that it was an agreed fact at the
District Court trial that charge
9 related to in excess of
26,000 images and videos.
large majority of these materials were category 1 images, that is, images of the
least offensive type of child exploitation material.
However, there were items
across all five categories, including a significant number in categories 4
and 5, which are the most serious
forms of child exploitation
The details of the indecent dealings are set out to some extent in the Sentence
Appeal decision, particularly at [15] in relation
to E, [20] in relation to C
and [23] in relation to B.
more detailed evidence in relation to the child exploitation material the
subject of count 9 is set out at [26] of the Sentence
Appeal decision. It
is not necessary to repeat the details set out plainly in the Court of Appeal
decisions. It suffices to say that
the conduct was extremely serious. The
plaintiff pleaded not guilty (except to count 9, for which a guilty plea
had been entered).
The plaintiff gave evidence at his trial. On 16 April
2019, the jury returned verdicts of guilty to all charges other than an
in respect of count 7.
was media coverage of the charges, including of the convictions. That media
coverage named the plaintiff. It should be observed
that the media coverage of
the charges and convictions is
subject of this defamation proceeding.
January 2025, I delivered a decision in relation to the admissibility of
proposed evidence in these proceedings:
CDL v Seven West
[2025] WASC 53
Admissibility
). In that decision, I also dealt with the significance to these
proceedings of the criminal convictions, and the findings made by
the sentencing
judge. The sentencing took place on 2 August 2019. The plaintiff was
sentenced to a total effective sentence of 12
years and six months'
imprisonment.
I pointed out in the Admissibility Decision, it is to be appreciated that the
defence - or at least a significant part of the
defence - advanced by the
plaintiff in the criminal proceedings was the contention that his conduct in
respect of the victims was
not sexually motivated but was undertaken in order to
administer medical assistance or hygienic processes to the children. The
of the District Court trial, as I observed in the earlier decision,
makes plain that the issue of whether the plaintiff's conduct
was sexual or for
medical or hygienic purposes was the very issue left to the jury. The jury
rejected the plaintiff's version of
events, and findings were made by the trial
judge on sentencing that the plaintiff's conduct was sexually motivated.
plaintiff appealed both his conviction and his sentence. The sentence appeal was
heard first on 15 October 2021, and the conviction
appeal was heard on
29 November 2021. Similarly, the Court of Appeal's decision in respect of
the appeal against sentence was delivered
first on 18 February 2022. That
is the Sentence Appeal decision. The decision of the Court of Appeal in respect
of the conviction
was delivered on 4 November 2022 and that is the
Conviction Appeal decision.
appeals failed. Indeed, both appeals failed at the first hurdle of the
application to extend time. The article in The West Australian,
the subject of
the plaintiff's action in this proceeding, which appeared on 5 March 2022,
followed the publication of the Court of
Appeal's 18 February 2022 decision
in respect of sentencing.
The plaintiff's claim
turn then to the content of the article the subject of the plaintiff's claim.
The plaintiff pleads various imputations said to
arise from the Article, which
the plaintiff contends are defamatory.
principles applicable to determining whether pleaded imputations are established
are well settled. They are set out in a number
of cases, including recently and
very usefully in the decision of
Lazos v West Australian
Newspapers Ltd [No 2]
[2024] WASC 238
- [42]. The overriding
consideration is to determine what the words would convey to an ordinary person
who is not given to strained
or scandalous
interpretations.
The court looks to the natural and ordinary meaning that the words would convey
to the reasonable and hypothetical person. The court
looks at the publication as
a whole, rather than isolated analysis of words or phrases.
have again set out the content of the Article below, this time with those
aspects of the Article which are the subject of the plaintiff's
claim emphasised
in bold and underlined text:
lollipop man
, who was jailed for more than a decade for his sexual abuse
of several young girls, has had his appeal against
term thrown out by WA's highest court. The plaintiff, whose picture is on the
right, filmed the abuse, some of which went on
but he refused to
accept the verdict of a jury which, in 2019, found him guilty of eight charges
of persistent sexual abuse of a child
producing child
pornography
. He was also found to have hoarded more than 26,000
independent videos and photographs depicting children as young as one. The
was a traffic warden at a Western Suburbs primary school for 14 years
before his arrest. After his detention, he continued to claim
nothing sexual was
shown in any of the videos. In an appeal, which he ran himself, the plaintiff
said that the judge accepted hearsay
evidence, used opinion evidence that was
not factual and ignored professional opinion.
The Supreme Court
dismissed the appeal and said "the appellant poses a risk of further
(Emphases added)
defendants' opening submissions usefully set out a
which provided a detailed summary of each imputation which the plaintiff
contended arose from the differing parts of the Article,
the precise part of the
Article relied upon for that imputation, and the defendants' position in respect
of each of the alleged
imputations.
In addition, the plaintiff supplemented those imputations with some further
complaints in his evidence and oral submissions.
The evidence at trial
I turn to the imputations, I will outline the evidence given at trial. The
plaintiff called Ms F. The object of Ms F's evidence
that the court
permitted to be led by the plaintiff related to any evidence Ms F might be
able to give in respect of the damage to
the plaintiff's reputation. In the
event, Ms F was unable to give any such evidence.
plaintiff also called his own biological son whom he had with Ms F, that
is, K. The object of calling K was similarly to lead
evidence in respect of any
damage to the plaintiff's reputation. Again, K was unable to give any evidence
that could assist the court.
plaintiff also called Mr Timothy Clarke. Mr Clarke was a journalist
with The West Australian, who was the author of the Article.
Mr Clarke gave
his evidence in a straightforward manner. His evidence was directed to a number
of issues, but most relevantly for
these proceedings, Mr Clarke explained
the manner in which the Article was written.
particular, Mr Clarke explained that he alone wrote the Article, and
although the content of the headline was a matter for sub‑editors,
content itself was his alone. Mr Clarke also gave evidence in relation to
his own employment. He explained that he was employed
only by West Australian
Newspapers and not by Seven West Media. Mr Clarke also gave evidence
relating to the processes and procedures
of publishing an article written by a
journalist within The West Australian and the two forms of publication in print
and online.
Mr Clarke's evidence was candid and straightforward, and I
accept his evidence.
plaintiff also called Mr Andrew Sturcke. Mr Sturcke was a person known
to the plaintiff before he began his term of imprisonment.
It emerged from
Mr Sturcke's evidence that on one occasion he visited the plaintiff in
prison. However, following that, it appears
Mr Sturcke declined to have any
further contact with the plaintiff. The object of seeking evidence from
Mr Sturcke, again was in
respect of evidence he may be able to give about
the impact of the Article on the plaintiff's reputation.
was asked about his understanding or observation of the impact of the Article on
the plaintiff's reputation. Mr Sturcke's
evidence was that he did not
consider that the Article had any impact on the plaintiff's reputation. In
short, he considered that
the plaintiff's reputation was already impaired, and
he was not aware of it having been any further impaired by the publication of
the Article the subject of the proceedings.
plaintiff then gave evidence himself. I observe that the object and content of
the plaintiff's evidence and submissions appeared
in large measure to be
directed to wishing to persuade the court that the conduct the subject of his
convictions was undertaken out
of concern for health and hygiene, and was not
I explained in the Admissibility
on the basis of the authorities in this court, I consider that the findings of
the District Court, including the findings of the
sentencing judge which were
upheld by the Court of Appeal, establish those matters for the purposes of these
proceedings and generally.
I proceed therefore on the basis that for the
purposes of these defamation proceedings, the convictions and the findings in
of those convictions, are incontrovertible.
Imputations
turn then to the imputations arising from the Article contended for by the
plaintiff, and I shall deal with each one in turn. I
do so by reference to the
numbering in the defendants'
to the first imputation, the plaintiff contends that by reason of the word
'paedophile', or perhaps the expression 'paedophile
lollipop man', the Article
conveys the imputation that the plaintiff has a primary or exclusive sexual
attraction to prepubescent
children. Alternatively, the plaintiff contends that
the expression conveys the imputation that the defendants know or are qualified
to assess the plaintiff's sexual attraction to children.
my view, the reasonable reader would simply understand the Article to mean that
the plaintiff was a paedophile, that is, an adult
who had engaged in sexual
activities with a child or children. The Article does not convey any meaning
or exclusive sexual attraction, or any meaning as
to the defendants' knowledge or qualifications in respect of the plaintiff's
proclivities.
turn then to the second asserted imputation, and that relates to the phrase
'lollipop man'.
plaintiff submitted that the use of the word 'lollipop man' conveys the meaning
that the plaintiff induced or procured children
through the lure of lollies to
sexually abuse them. In my view, the phrase 'lollipop man' does not convey the
meaning contended for
by the plaintiff. Rather, the phrase 'lollipop man'
conveys its ordinary meaning, that is, a person who assists children to cross
the road, ordinarily outside a school. That meaning is reinforced by the fact
that the Article itself describes the plaintiff as
a traffic warden.
notion of a lollipop man comes from the fact that the crossing guards
historically held colourful signs in a shape or form similar
to that of a
lollipop, hence the name lollipop man became a colloquial and popular term. The
plaintiff contended that only people
of a particular generation are familiar
with or use that term, and that currently the term necessarily has a sexual
connotation,
particularly when combined with the word 'paedophile'. I do not
accept that. There was no evidence that the ordinary use of the word
man' has ceased, or its understanding has ceased.
accept there is, no doubt, some level of emphasis in the Article combining the
terms 'paedophile' and 'lollipop man'. That is because
such a combination is
certain to spur acute community concern that a person who has been convicted of
child sex offences may have
had contact with children as part of their routine
employment. I suspect that is the reason that the newspaper used the phrase 'a
paedophile lollipop man'. However as a matter of meaning, all it means is that a
traffic warden assisting children was convicted
of child sex offences.
alternative meanings which I have found in respect of the first and second
alleged imputations were pleaded by the defendant
as the alternative and correct
meanings to be distilled from the Article.
third asserted imputation relates to the word 'that' in the first sentence, and
in particular, that the plaintiff 'had his appeal
jail term thrown out' (emphasis
added). The plaintiff submitted that the word 'that' conveyed the meaning that
the plaintiff had
served other jail terms, and was therefore a repeat
do not agree that that is how the ordinary hypothetical reasonable person would
read that sentence. Rather, I agree with the defendant
that the Article simply
coveys that the plaintiff had received a term of imprisonment for the
convictions the subject of the Article.
I do not accept that it implies or
conveys the existence of any other term of imprisonment.
fourth imputation pleaded relates to the words in the Article that the plaintiff
had 'refused to accept the verdict of a jury'.
The plaintiff alleged that those
words carried the meaning that the plaintiff had contended that the verdict of
the jury was unsafe
or unsatisfactory.
my view, the ordinary reader is unlikely to distil such a rather technical
meaning from the words 'he refused to accept the verdict
of a jury'. Rather, the
ordinary reader would simply understand that to mean that the plaintiff was
contesting his conviction, and
thereby the jury's finding that he was guilty.
The notion of a verdict being unsafe or unsatisfactory is a meaning that is
only to be distilled by a lawyer, and even a lawyer is unlikely to draw
that inference unless they have particular experience with
appellate criminal
law in some way.
next imputation alleged relates to the words in the
[H]e refused to accept the verdict of a jury
which in 2019
found him guilty of eight charges of persistent sexual abuse of a child
and producing child pornography.
(Emphasis added)
imputation said to arise from those words is that the defendants' publication
was true and accurate in that the plaintiff's conviction
was that he was guilty
of eight charges of persistent sexual abuse of a child. The conviction, however,
did not relate to eight charges
of persistent sexual abuse of a child, since one
of the eight charges in respect of which the plaintiff was found guilty related
to possession of child exploitation material and four of the charges related to
producing child exploitation material.
with that imputation, I do not accept that that meaning is conveyed by the
Article, because the Article says clearly ' ...
eight charges of persistent
sexual abuse of a child
and producing child
pornography
' (emphasis added). However, by his evidence and submissions,
it appears that the matter that was the subject of the plaintiff's real
complaint was the use of the words 'persistent sexual abuse of a child' and the
use of the term 'child pornography'. The plaintiff's
contention was that this
conveyed the meaning that he was guilty of charges relating to persistent sexual
plaintiff's complaint was that he was found engaging in sexual
with a child. The plaintiff
complained that the term 'sexual abuse of a child' is far more serious and
damaging than engaging in
sexual conduct with a child. To the extent that the
plaintiff asserts an imputation that the Article conveyed a meaning that he had
engaged in persistent sexual abuse of a child, that meaning is conveyed plainly,
because that is what the words say.
next imputation, being the sixth, asserted by the plaintiff relates to the words
'producing child pornography'. The plaintiff
asserts that the meaning conveyed
by those words is that the Article is a true and accurate account of the
plaintiff's conviction
in that the videos show a child in a sexual context. In
my view, that is a somewhat technical and strained meaning of the words.
in my view, the words convey the meaning that they plainly bear, that is, that
the plaintiff was found guilty of charges
relating to producing child
pornography. The plaintiff also appeared to advance an argument that the term
'child pornography' conveyed
a more serious and damaging meaning than the term
'child exploitation material'. That was not included in the imputations in the
Statement of Claim, but I shall, in any event, return to that when I am dealing
with the defences.
seventh imputation was that the words '[t]he Supreme Court dismissed the appeal
and said the "appellant poses a risk of further
offending"', conveyed a meaning
that the Court of Appeal formed an autonomous and independent view that the
plaintiff was a risk
to the community or deferred to the trial judge. The
defendants denied that that imputation was conveyed and pleaded that the Article
conveyed that the Court of Appeal considered the plaintiff posed a risk of
reoffending.
am not persuaded that there is a substantive difference between the plaintiff's
imputation and the defendants' imputation. In any
event, on balance, I think the
Article does convey an imputation that the Court of Appeal had its own view,
that is, an autonomous
and independent view based on the materials that it
examined that the plaintiff was a risk to the community. In substance I consider
that that imputation was conveyed.
eighth imputation is that the Article is an accurate and fair report of the
Court of Appeal's finding. That imputation is accepted
defendants.
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act
) sets out the defence
of justification as
25. Defence of justification
It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant proves
that the defamatory imputations carried by the matter
of which the plaintiff
complains are substantially true.
defendants rely substantially on the defence of justification in respect of the
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth imputations.
need not deal with the first, second and third imputations because I have found
that the meanings contended for by the plaintiff
were not conveyed by the
Article. That is, I do not consider that the Article conveyed that the plaintiff
had a primary or exclusive
sexual attraction to prepubescent children or that
the defendants either knew or were qualified to make that assessment, nor do I
accept that the term 'lollipop man' conveyed the meaning that the plaintiff
induced or procured children through the lure of lollies
to sexually abuse them.
Nor do I accept that the Article conveyed by the use of the word 'that' that the
plaintiff is or had served
other jail terms and is therefore a repeat
the alternative imputation pleaded by the defendants was that the Article
conveyed that the plaintiff was a paedophile,
being an adult who had engaged in
sexual activities with a child. That imputation is plainly defamatory, but it is
plainly true.
I have explained, the convictions are conclusive evidence of the subject of
those convictions, including the findings in relation
to the nature of the
plaintiff's behaviour towards the children. The authority for that, as I
discussed in the Admissibility Decision,
Mickelberg v The Director
of Perth Mint
[1985] WASC 175
[1986] WAR 365.
The detail provided both in the sentencing
remarks and in the Court of Appeal's decisions establish plainly that describing
the plaintiff
as a paedophile is substantially or indeed entirely true.
Therefore, in respect of that alternative pleaded imputation, the defence
justification is made out.
respect of the second imputation, the defendants plead that the alternative
imputation is that the plaintiff was a school traffic
warden or a person who
assisted children crossing the road. That imputation of itself, in my view, is
not defamatory to begin with.
But in any event, it is substantially true as the
facts demonstrate that the plaintiff was for a period of some 14 years a
warden assisting children crossing the road.
turn then to the third imputation. As I have noted, I do not accept the
plaintiff's imputation. The alternative imputation pleaded
by the defendants was
that the Article conveyed that the plaintiff had received a jail term for the
convictions the subject of the
Article. That imputation is both on its face
defamatory, but also plainly true. Therefore, the justification defence is made
in respect of the third imputation.
plaintiff's fourth imputation, which I do not accept, was that the words
'refused to accept the verdict of a jury' imputed that
the plaintiff had alleged
the jury's verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory. The Conviction Appeal decision
at [114](c) records that
the plaintiff did assert or appear to assert that the
verdicts of guilty were, having regard to the evidence, unreasonable or unable
to be supported.
alternative imputation pleaded by the defendants, that is, that the Article
conveyed that the plaintiff contested the jury's
finding that he was guilty is
plainly true, and meets the defence of justification set out in
Defamation Act
turn then to the fifth imputation. Dealing first with the eight charges, I have
found that that imputation is not made out because,
as I have noted above, the
ordinary reader would understand the phrase 'eight charges of persistent sexual
abuse' to mean 'eight
charges of persistent sexual abuse
and producing child pornography
(emphasis added). That is what the Article says, and that is what an ordinary
reader would understand it to mean. That plain meaning
conveyed by the Article
is true, and therefore meets the justification defence because the plaintiff was
indeed convicted of eight
charges of sexual offences relating to children.
turn to the plaintiff's complaint that emerged in the course of the trial
relating to the use of the word 'abuse', and as I have
noted above, the
plaintiff contends that the Article is defamatory because it conveys by use of
the term 'sexual abuse' a much more
serious matter than it would have conveyed
by the use of the term 'sexual conduct'.
is to be recalled that the Article is a report on the Court of Appeal's decision
in response to the plaintiff's appeal against
his sentence. It is plain from the
outset of the Article that the Sentence Appeal decision is the subject of the
content. In that
regard, it is noteworthy that the notion of abuse, and indeed
the term 'abuse', was used in the sentencing remarks which were set
out in full
by the Court of Appeal in the Sentence Appeal decision. At [32](4) the Court of
Appeal notes that the appellant (the
plaintiff) repeatedly quoted the trial
judge's sentencing remarks as including the finding that '[t]he [plaintiff]
repeatedly used
the opportunity to look after the children to sexually abuse
them'. In addition, at [74] of that decision, the Court of Appeal observed
'[t]he [plaintiff] took advantage of the relationships that he had with their
mothers to sexually abuse the victims.'
insofar as the Article used the word 'abuse', in my view, that does not in any
way impugn the accuracy of the Article
or undermine the availability of the
justification defence. The use of the term 'abuse' by the Court of Appeal and by
the sentencing
judge is entirely unsurprising. That is for a reason that ought
to be apparent to any decent person. That is because any sexual conduct,
or activity with a child, is of itself abusive. The plaintiff ultimately
appeared to accept that in oral submissions, although
he gave evidence that
demonstrated a perhaps not surprising but nevertheless worrying lack of insight
into that notion. In submissions,
the plaintiff did appear to accept that that
was so, but then denied that his activity was sexually motivated.
as I have said, the trial judge's findings are incontrovertible and therefore,
as I have already explained, I proceed on the
basis that the findings of the
trial judge are unimpugned. It follows that the conduct was sexual, and as there
was sexual conduct
and sexual activity with a child, it was of itself
necessarily abusive. Therefore, the Article's use of the word 'abuse' was true
and the justification defence is made out.
turn then to the imputation regarding child pornography. As I have noted, I do
not accept the imputation pleaded by the plaintiff.
defendants pleaded an alternative imputation, that the plaintiff was found
guilty of charges of producing child pornography.
The defendants say that that
alternative, that correct imputation, is substantially true. As I have noted,
the plaintiff appeared
to contend that the use of the term 'pornography'
conveyed an imputation that was far more serious than the correct terminology
is 'child exploitation material'.
do not accept that submission. It does not appear to me that the term 'child
pornography' is in some way more serious than 'child
exploitation material'.
Indeed, it might be said that the term 'child exploitation material' is a better
description of what this
sort of conduct is. It is exploitative of children. The
term reflects the evil in the conduct, perhaps more so than the term
'pornography'.
I therefore do not accept the submission that, somehow, the
imputation arising from the word 'pornography' is more damaging or more
defendants accept that there was an inaccuracy in the Article in this respect,
in that the Article referred to eight charges
of 'persistent sexual abuse of a
child and producing child pornography', whereas one of the eight charges of
which the plaintiff
was convicted was a count of possession of child
exploitation
In my view, that inaccuracy did not undermine the substantial truth of the
Article as a whole, and therefore, I find that in respect
of that imputation as
well, that is, the sixth imputation, the defence of justification is made
that respect, I also refer to the volume and the seriousness of the items the
subject of the charge, which included tens of thousands
of images and videos. A
relatively small percentage, but nevertheless a significant number of those
items was material in categories
four and five (which are the most serious form
of material).
in my view, the term 'producing child pornography' used in the Article might
nevertheless lend itself to an understanding
or a circumstance which is
serious than the reality of the
plaintiff's conviction for the possession of over 26,000 items, including a
significant number at
the most serious end of that scale.
then to the seventh imputation, I accept the plaintiff's imputation that the
Court of Appeal formed an autonomous independent
view. I also accept that the
Article is open to the alternative imputation pleaded by the defendants that the
court considered the
plaintiff posed a risk of further offending. The reason
that I accept both imputations is because I am not persuaded there really
material difference between them.
any event, in my view, the imputation is substantially true. The Court of Appeal
considered that the plaintiff was at risk of
reoffending. Reoffending is a risk
to the community, and therefore the Court of Appeal did form its own view that
the plaintiff was
a risk to the community.
last imputation is accepted by the defendants.
turn then to the defence of contextual truth which is contained in
Defamation Act
, which provides:
26. Defence of contextual truth
It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant proves
(a) the matter carried, in addition to the defamatory imputations of which the
plaintiff complains, one or more other imputations
(contextual imputations) that
are substantially true; and
(b) the defamatory imputations do not further harm the reputation of the
plaintiff because of the substantial truth of the contextual
imputations.
defence arises where the alternative imputations asserted by a defendant did not
further harm the reputation of the plaintiff
because of the substantial truth of
those alternative imputations. That is sometimes put as the contextual
imputations or alternative
imputations 'swamping' the effect on the plaintiff's
reputation. I will put to one side whether the word 'swamping' is an accurate
reflection of the statutory defence.
my view, in any event, the statutory test in
Defamation Act
is met, because to the extent that there are defamatory imputations, they do not
further harm the reputation of the plaintiff because
of the substantial truth of
the contextual imputations pleaded by the defendants. Therefore, I would uphold
the defence under
, in respect of the alternative imputations pleaded
by the defendants.
turn then to the further defence of the defendants under
Defamation Act
, which is the defence of the publication of public documents.
That section provides:
Defence for publication of public documents
(1) It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant
proves that the matter was contained in —
(a) a public document or a fair copy of a public document; or
(b) a fair summary of, or a fair extract from, a public
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), if a report or other document
under the law of a country would be a public document except
non‑compliance with a provision of that law about –
(a) the formal requirements for the content or layout of the report or
document; or
(b) the time within which the report or document is prepared, or presented,
submitted, tabled or laid to or before a person or
the report or document is a public document
despite that non‑compliance.
(3) A defence established under subsection (1) is defeated if, and only
if, the plaintiff proves that the defamatory matter was
not published honestly
for the information of the public or the advancement of education.
defence requires that the defamatory matter be contained in an article. That
element is plainly met. The second element is that
the matter reported on, that
is the Sentencing Appeal decision, is a public document. That element is plainly
met. The third element,
which is ordinarily the most controversial one, is
whether the Article is a fair summary or extract from the public document.
article would not be fair if it included extraneous material and commentary
beyond an accurate reporting of the public document
to which it refers. In
v Fairfax Digital Australia & New Zealand Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC
, from [100], Rothman J explained that in order for the summary to be
fair, it does not need to be perfect. Errors may occur. The
question is whether,
on the whole, it conveys a fair summary.
defendants accept that there is a minor inaccuracy in the Article because it
refers to, as I have already noted, persistent sexual
abuse and producing child
pornography without reference to the conviction for possession of child
pornography (child exploitation
my view, however, that error does not deprive the Article of the character of a
fair summary. That is particularly so when regard
is had to the severity and
seriousness of the child exploitation material, the subject of the conviction.
defendants also advanced a defence under
Defamation Act
which is a defence of fair reporting of proceedings of public concern. That
section provides:
Defences of fair report of proceedings of public concern
(1) It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant
proves that the matter was, or was contained in, a
fair report of any
proceedings of public concern.
(2) It is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant
proves that —
(a) the matter was, or was contained in, an earlier published report of
proceedings of public concern;
(b) the matter was, or was contained in, a fair copy of, a fair summary of, or
a fair extract from, the earlier published report;
(c) the defendant had no knowledge that would reasonably make the defendant
aware that the earlier published report was not
my view, and substantially for the reasons I have already given, the defence
is established.
note in passing that there is an element of that defence that the defendants had
no knowledge that would make it reasonably clear
that the Court of Appeal's
sentencing decision was not fair. There is no reason to suggest that the Court
of Appeal's sentencing
decision was not fair. It was never the subject of
appeal, and no evidence or submission has been advanced to indicate that it was
completeness, Mr Clarke was asked in cross-examination whether he was aware
of anything that would indicate to him that the Court
of Appeal's sentencing
decision was unfair. Somewhat unsurprisingly, he said he was not aware of
anything of that nature.
follows that to the extent that I have accepted any imputations arising from the
Article, either those asserted by the plaintiff
or those accepted, either
primarily or in the alternative contextually by the defendants, those
imputations are either not defamatory
or the defendants have established a
complete defence in respect of each of those imputations.
completeness, I would add that even if there was any aspect of the Article that
had been shown to be defamatory, in my view,
that would not warrant any award of
damages, given that the primary, if not the overwhelming, cause of any damage to
the plaintiff's
reputation were the convictions and the findings against him,
and possibly prior media reporting.
Was Seven West Media a publisher?
final issue I need to determine is the question of whether Seven West Media is a
publisher of the Article. The principles as
to what constitutes a publisher are
reasonably well settled. They are set out in the case of
Mundine v Brown
[2010] NSWSC 468
to which counsel for the defendants drew my
and in the reasons of Mitchell JA in
Wright v de Kauwe
[2024] WASCA 51
that respect, Mr Clarke's evidence was relevant. He explained that there
was no involvement whatsoever of Seven West Media in
the publication of the
Article. There was no admissible evidence before me that Seven West Media had
any involvement in the publication.
plaintiff referred to a schedule to his submissions, or what appeared to have
come from a schedule to his submissions, which
made reference to Seven West
Mr Clarke accepted that that document suggested that there may have been a
different article published by Seven West Media with substantially
content. The difficulty, however, is that there was no evidence of the
provenance of that document. Mr Clarke could not
explain where it came from
or be confident as to what it meant. In any event, even if Seven West Media did
publish a substantially
similar article, that is not an article sued upon in
these proceedings.
completeness, I should make mention of the fact that the plaintiff was perhaps
understandably led into considering that Seven
West Media might have been a
he first complained about the matter, he appears to have written to the
Independent Media Council. He received a response from
the chairman of the
Independent Media Council addressed to the plaintiff in prison, which
Seven West Media (SWM) is the publisher of The West Australian newspaper and of
the article the subject of your complaint.
letter is curiously undated and unsigned. But on its face, it contains a
statement which, with respect, is unhelpful. In the
context of media law, a good
deal of which is defamation law, the notion of a publisher has a particular
legal meaning. If such a
letter was sent, and I simply do not know if it was and
when it was, it is regrettable that the plaintiff received a written document
from the Independent Media Council in those terms.
that as it may, the letter from the Independent Media Council, even if it was
sent, is in truth irrelevant to the question of
whether, at law, Seven West
Media was a publisher. There is no evidence before me that Seven West Media was
a publisher, and therefore
I conclude that the contention that it was a
publisher must fail.
plaintiff also raised the issue of malice. Malice is relevant because if malice
is proven then that will impact upon the availability
of certain defences. There
was no substantial evidence of any malice on the part of the defendants, and
therefore although malice
was not actually pleaded, to the extent that it was
suggested or advanced, it is rejected.
these reasons, the plaintiff's claim must be
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Solomon
6 NOVEMBER 2025
Clarke T, 'Child abuser loses sentence appeal', The West Australian (5 March
2022), 44. This article has been reproduced with amendment
to anonymise the
Exhibit A.13, 209 -
Lazos v West Australian
Newspapers Ltd [No 2]
The defendants' table is annexed to this judgment at Annexure
Defendants' Opening Submissions (1 October 2025), 10 - 12.
Admissibility Decision [46] -
Defendants' Opening Submissions (1 October 2025), 10 - 12.
Defendants' Opening Submissions (1 October 2025) [55].
ts 333 - 337 (23 October
Plaintiff's written outline of opening submissions (29 August 2025), sch
Exhibit A.51.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (9.41 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter