URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/475.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PROSPA ADVANCE PTY LTD -v- ATHANASIOU [2025] WASC 475 (10 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
ADVANCE PTY LTD -v- ATHANASIOU
[2025] WASC 475
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 2188 of 2025
ADVANCE PTY LTD
property - Caveats - Application to extend operation of caveats pursuant to
of Land Act 1893
(WA) - Whether plaintiff
has established a serious issue to be tried as to caveatable interest - Balance
of convenience - Turns on
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
Transfer of Land
Application
Representation:
Mr B J Tomasi
First Defendant
Solicitors:
Bridges Lawyers
First Defendant
Trinix Lawyers
Trinix Lawyers
referred to in decision:
judgment was delivered extemporaneously and has been edited from the transcript
to correct matters of grammar and formatting,
and to add headings and full
citations).
Introduction
way of the Originating Summons filed on 17 October 2025, the plaintiff,
Advance Pty Ltd, applies for
orders extending the operation of the following two caveats pursuant to
Transfer of Land Act
(1) caveat P724190: over Mary Athanasiou's interest only in Lot 34 on
Strata Plan 50808, being the whole of the land described in
Certificate of
Title Volume 2741 Folio 33 commonly known as [Redacted],
155 Adelaide Terrace, East Perth WA 6004
East Perth Property
(2) caveat P724191: over Lot 2 on Strata Plan 70819, being the whole of the land
described in Certificate of Title Volume 2864 Folio
138 commonly known as
[Redacted] Hemsey Street, Balga WA 6061 (
first defendant, Mary Athanasiou, is the sole registered proprietor of the
Balga Property. Ms Athanasiou is a joint tenant of
the East Perth Property,
together with the second defendant, her husband Christos Athanasiou. Both
appear by counsel and oppose the
extension of the caveats.
caveats were lodged by Prospa on 27 September 2023 to protect its claimed
interests in the properties as chargee under a loan
agreement and guarantee
which Prospa says was signed by Mary Athanasiou as guarantor on
18 August 2022.
third defendant, the Registrar of Titles, has indicated by way of letter that he
does not intend to participate in the application
and will abide by the orders
of the court, save as to costs.
matter came before me on 27 October 2025 on an urgent and
inter parte
is no dispute from Mr and Mrs Athanasiou that Prospa has a caveatable
interest in the two properties. Rather, Mr and Mrs Athanasiou
submit that
the balance of convenience does not favour the extension of the
relies on the affidavit of Gerard Bryant sworn 17 October 2025 and the
affidavit of Katie Griffiths, sworn 24 October 2025.
Prospa has also filed
an undertaking as to damages in the usual form and counsel for Prospa was
instructed to offer, on behalf of
his client, a further undertaking
On the basis that there will not be surplus funds available to meet its debts at
the settlement of the sale of each of East Perth
Property and the Balga
Property, Prospa undertakes to remove the two caveats at
settlement.
and Mrs Athanasiou rely on the affidavit of Mrs Athanasiou sworn
24 October 2025 and the affidavit of Mitchell Collins sworn
October 2025.
Factual background
light of the acceptance by Mr and Mrs Athanasiou that Prospa has a
caveatable interest in the properties, it is only necessary
to provide a brief
summary of the facts underpinning Prospa's claim.
short, Prospa's interest arises as a chargee of a charge pursuant to a loan
agreement entered into on 18 August 2022, between
Prospa and a company
Essential Facility Management Pty Ltd, Mrs Athanasiou and Ms Afroditi
copy of the Agreement is attached to Mr Bryant's affidavit. In accordance
with the Agreement, Prospa agreed to loan Essential Facility
Management the sum
of $257,500, and Essential Facility Management was to repay the loan amount by
making 104 weekly payments.
Agreement also contains a guarantee and indemnity (cl 12.2 and
cl 12.3), whereby Mrs Athanasiou and Ms Tasou guaranteed to
the performance of the obligations of Essential Facility Management under
the Agreement and indemnified Prospa against any loss it
may suffer under the
Agreement and any default by Essential Facility Management in the performance of
its obligations under the Agreement.
for present purposes, the Agreement also contains the following
(1) Clause 2.2 which provides that if the amount loaned to and paid to Essential
Facility Management was over $150,000.00, or an
Event of Default occurs under
the Agreement, then Mrs Athanasiou (as a Transaction Party) will grant
security over the 'Secured Property'
to secure the amount owing by Essential
Facility Management under the Agreement.
(2) Clause 2.3 which provides that in the circumstances where cl 2.2
applies, Mrs Athanasiou (as a Transaction Party) charges the
Property in favour of Prospa and consents to any registration in connection with
the Secured Property, including the registration
property is defined broadly so as to include all real property of
Mrs Athanasiou, and an event of default includes non‑payment
instalment, which goes unremedied for five business days following notification
of the default. Prospa then dispersed the funds
under the Agreement, and
Essential Facility Management initially paid the weekly instalments between
26 August 2022 and 23 June 2023,
but then ceased. Demands were issued
by Prospa to Essential Facility Management, Mrs Athanasiou and
Ms Tasou, but the amounts demanded
were not paid.
a consequence, on 27 September 2023, Prospa lodged the two caveats. Both of
the caveats are absolute caveats and the interest
claimed is as a chargee in
accordance with a charge as contained in the Agreement.
affidavit evidence before me also refers to some proceedings in the District
Court. It is not necessary to go into detail about
those, however, it is
sufficient to observe that, on 24 January 2025, default judgment was
entered in the District Court against
- relevantly, for today's purposes -
Mrs Athanasiou.
District Court proceedings remain ongoing in relation to two other defendants.
were issued by Landgate on 2 October 2025, and 3 October 2025 to
Prospa, stating that the caveats will lapse at midnight
on 28 October 2025
in relation to the East Perth property, and 29 October 2025 in relation to
the Balga property, unless extended
by order of this court.
her affidavit, Mrs Athanasiou deposes that she entered into a contract for
a sale of the Balga property on 14 August 2025, in
the amount of $651,000,
following an advertising campaign by her real estate agent. A copy of the
contract is attached to her affidavit.
Mrs Athanasiou deposes that she did
not know the purchaser prior to entering into the contract. Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that she is
informed by her solicitors that settlement of the Balga
property is due to take place on 7 November 2025. Mrs Athanasiou has
attached a variation of the contract which evidences this settlement date.
relation to the East Perth property, Mrs Athanasiou deposes that she
entered into a contract for the sale of this property on
4 September 2025,
in the amount of $690,000, following an advertising campaign by her real estate
agent. A copy of the contract is
attached to Mrs Athanasiou's affidavit.
Mrs Athanasiou deposes that she did not know the purchaser prior to
entering into the contract.
Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that she is informed by her solicitors that settlement of the East Perth
property was due to take place on
20 October 2025 but has been delayed.
Mrs Athanasiou deposes this is because of Prospa's refusal to withdraw the
caveat. That is
not accepted by Prospa. Mrs Athanasiou has also attached a
variation of the contract which evidences this settlement date.
evidence before the court indicates that that settlement date is now proposed to
take place tomorrow, on 28 October 2025. Mrs
Athanasiou has also
attached correspondence concerning the settlement of the East Perth property,
which indicates that the purchaser
has indicated that they may issue a default
notice in relation to the contract, and also that, as at 20 October 2025,
the purchaser
is ready, willing and able to complete the contract, and that
penalty interest will be deducted from the purchase price at a daily
$168.90 from 20 October 2025.
Mrs Athanasiou
also deposes as to the amount of equity in the properties. Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that both properties have a first
ranking mortgage registered by the
Commonwealth Bank
of Australia on
11 February 2022. This can be seen from the respective certificates of
title. Further, in addition to Prospa's caveats,
each property also has a caveat
registered by Community and Corporate Lifesavers Pty Ltd on 14 May 2024 -
that is, registered after
Prospa's caveat.
Mrs Athanasiou
has attached correspondence from the solicitors for the Commonwealth Bank which
states that as at 6 October 2025,
the amount owing by Mr and
Mrs Athanasiou to the Commonwealth Bank is $1,447,193.91.
mortgage is stated to be secured as against all properties. Further, the
correspondence states that the Commonwealth Bank would
only agree to provide
discharges of the mortgages at settlement for the properties where full net
proceeds are received to the extent
of the amount owing.
Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that she intended to sell the Balga Property and the East Perth Property
to pay off her outstanding debts.
Mrs Athanasiou
also deposes that she is informed by her solicitors and verily believes that the
proceeds from the sale of the Balga
Property after the deduction of the real
estate agent's commission and settlement costs will be in the amount of
approximately $620,000.
For the East Perth Property, it will be in the amount of
approximately $660,000. In those circumstances, Mrs Athanasiou deposes that
in circumstances where the Commonwealth Bank intends to collect full sale
proceeds, there will be no surplus funds remaining which
Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that she is also the owner of two other properties, over which Prospa
has registered caveats. The certificates
of title for these properties are
attached to her affidavit, and also Ms Griffiths' affidavit.
of the properties is located in North Perth, and Mrs Athanasiou has a
21/100 interest in that property. No mortgage is registered
against this
property. Both Prospa and Community & Corporate Lifesavers Pty Ltd have
registered caveats against Mrs Athanasiou's
interest only.
other property is located in Mirrabooka. Mrs Athanasiou is the sole
registered proprietor. There is a first ranking mortgage
registered by the
Commonwealth Bank on 11 February 2022, as well as caveats lodged by Prospa
and Community & Corporate Lifesavers
Mrs Athanasiou
deposes that she and her husband will suffer considerable prejudice if the
settlements of the Balga Property and the
East Perth Property cannot proceed, in
the form of penalty interest or damages and additional amounts to be paid to the
Commonwealth
Collins deposes that lapsing notices were issued by Landgate to Community &
Corporate Lifesavers Pty Ltd in relation to each
of its two caveats, and they
were due to lapse at midnight on 23 October 2025 (East Perth Property) and
24 October 2025 (Balga Property).
Neither party is aware of any ex parte
extension orders being granted, however it does appear that a search by Prospa
of the title
today, still shows each of these caveats on the titles. Whether
that is due to an administrative matter, or some other reason, is
Legal principles
Extension of caveat
s 137 of the TLA, a person claiming any estate or interest in land under the
operation of the TLA may lodge a caveat with the
Registrar. The purpose of a
caveat against dealings is to operate as an injunction to the Registrar to
prevent registration of dealings
forbidden by the caveat until notice is given
to the caveator so that he or she has an opportunity to oppose such
registration.
138C (2) of the TLA provides for the Supreme Court's powers when a caveator
applies to the Supreme Court for an order extending
the operation of a caveat.
The terms of s 138C of the TLA are as
(1) A caveator who is served with a notice under section 138B(1) may apply to
the Supreme Court, in accordance with rules of the
court, for an order extending
the operation of the caveat.
(2) On the hearing of an application under subsection (1), the Supreme Court -
(a) if satisfied that the caveator's claim has or may have substance -
(i) may make an order extending the operation of the caveat for such period as
is specified in the order; or
(ii) may make an order extending the operation of the caveat until the further
order of the court; or
(iii) may make
other orders as it thinks fit
concerning the caveat or the land in respect of which the caveat was lodged;
that the caveator's claim has
or may have substance, shall dismiss the application; and
such ancillary orders in relation to
the application as it thinks fit.
(3) An interim order under this section may be
unless the court orders otherwise.
shall ensure that the Registrar
is served with a copy of each order made by the court on an application under
subsection (1).
The principles
applicable to an application to extend a caveat are well established and were
summarised in
Bride v Registrar
and have been applied in numerous decisions of this court. There is no need to
restate these principles in full here.
Essentially,
there are two questions for
determination:
, has the caveator
demonstrated that their claim has or may have substance or, as it is sometimes
put, has the caveator established
that there is a serious question to be tried
in respect of the estate or interest in the land claimed?
, does the balance of
convenience favour the extension of the operation of the caveat?
two questions are interrelated. The court must balance the injustice that might
be suffered by the proprietor if the caveat were
to remain against the injustice
that might be suffered by the caveator if the caveat is
Whether the plaintiff's claim to an interest in the
land has or may have substance
is no dispute that a charge over land is an estate or interest in land within
the meaning of s 137 of the TLA which is capable
of protection by way of
caveat, and there is no dispute by Mr and Mrs Athanasiou that Prospa has a
caveatable interest in relation
properties.
Balance of convenience
case concerns the balance of convenience.
submits that there is no dispute that the caveats should be removed to enable
the settlements to take place, but the question
is one of timing. Prospa also
submits that there is no dispute that there is a first ranking mortgage to the
bank which will need
to be paid before any funds could flow to it. Prospa
accepts that if settlement of the East Perth Property occurs tomorrow, and the
settlement of the Balga Property occurs on 7 November 2025, and there is
nothing intervening, that there will not be any surplus
funds after the bank is
Prospa submits, the question is one of timing.
submits that the defendants had not previously provided clear and timely
information as to the proposed settlement dates and
the amounts owing to the
Bank. Prospa relies on the various correspondence exchanges attached to the
affidavits that were read. Prospa
submits that the lapsing notices were not
required, and it was prepared to attend settlement of the properties and if the
was that there were no surplus funds, then it would remove the caveats
at settlement.
if there were surplus funds, then it would be able to protect its interest by
not removing the caveat unless and until appropriate
arrangements were made in
that regard. Prospa submits that if the caveats lapse, and settlement does not
occur on the dates identified,
then it will be left with no protection of its
underlying interest.
defendants submit that this is simple case of the balance of convenience
favouring the lapsing of the caveats. The defendants
submit that the evidence
demonstrates that there will be no surplus funds in relation to the properties
and therefore no utility
in extending the caveats. Further, Prospa has caveats
over two other properties owned by Mrs Athanasiou which protect its
interest. The defendants submit that this case is similar to the facts
underpinning the decision of this court in
Bizcap AU Pty Ltd v
defendants also submit that they are not aware of whether it is possible for the
caveats to be removed at the settlement in the
manner proposed by Prospa,
including using the PEXA system, or whether there would be a delay on Landgate's
part in processing any
such removal, and whether settlement would be held up in
this regard, including whether the bank would proceed in those circumstances.
for Prospa indicated that he was instructed that it was possible to proceed in
the manner proposed.
was no evidence before me of whether this is possible.
weighed the various factors, I am satisfied that the balance of convenience does
not favour an extension of both caveats for
the following reasons.
the strength of Prospa's case is a relevant factor. In this case, there
is no dispute that Prospa has a caveatable interest and so
I consider Prospa's
case to be strong.
submits that in circumstances where a plaintiff has demonstrated that their case
has or may have substance, then ordinarily
interlocutory removal of a caveat
will be unusual. Prospa relies on the decision of
Custom Credit Corporation
Limited v Ravi Nominees Pty
where Owen J (Malcolm CJ and Walsh J agreeing) held that:
The purpose of the caveat is to restrain the registered proprietor from dealing
with the land in a way which will defeat or derogate
from the incidents
attaching to that proprietary interest until the respective rights of the
parties have been honoured (if there
is agreement) or determined (if there is
disagreement). In many cases, removal of the caveat will have the effect of
destroying for
all practical purposes, the benefit of the proprietary
it is also relevant to have regard to the decision of
Navarac Pty Ltd v
Moondancer Holdings Pty
where Pullin JA (with whom Miller and Newnes JA agreed) drew a
distinction between a situation where the caveator claims a fee simple
leasehold interest and the situation where a caveator claims a security
interest. Pullin JA held that where the interest claimed
by the caveator is
a security interest, or an interest in competition with another claimant against
the registered proprietor, the
position is not necessarily the same as set out
Custom Credit
and the balance of convenience issues may prove to be
See also the approach adopted in
Bizcap AU Pty Ltd v
Pezzano Enterprises Pty
in the present case, my view is that the interests relevant to the balance of
convenience should be weighed carefully
rather than approaching the matter from
an assumption that the removal of the caveats would be unusual.
Mr and Mrs Athanasiou have provided evidence of prejudice in the
event that the caveats are extended.
Mrs Athanasiou
has entered into contracts for the sale of the two properties and has deposed as
to the settlement dates. If the caveats
remain in place, then the settlement of
these contracts may be delayed or prevented. The evidence before the court in
relation to
the East Perth Property indicates that the settlement date has
passed, penalty interest is accruing. The settlement date for the
Balga Property
is only short time in the future, being 7 November 2025.
there is evidence before me that there is little utility in extending the
caveats. In relation to each property, there is a first
ranking mortgage and the
amounts owing to the bank will need to be paid from the settlement proceeds. The
evidence is that after
this is done, there will be no surplus from the sale to
be paid to Prospa.
submits that it has never intended to prevent settlement of the properties, and
if, at settlement, there is no surplus funds
available for Prospa, then it will
remove the caveats, and has given an undertaking to this effect through counsel
Propsa submits that should not occur until settlement when the precise details
of the surplus funds are confirmed and Prospa
is therefore able to protect its
the evidence before the court in the form of the letter from the bank's
solicitors is that the amount owing as at 6 October
2025 exceeds the
combined sale prices for the properties by around $100,000. This is before the
estimated settlement costs are deducted
from the purchase prices. Therefore,
this is not a case where there is likely to be any surplus funds.
real risk would then seem to be the risk that settlement does not proceed on one
or both of the properties on the proposed dates,
and Prospa is left without a
caveat protecting its interests.
all the circumstances, absent any evidence that settlement will not take place,
I consider the risk of prejudice to Prospa in
this regard to be uncertain. I
also consider the risk can be managed by the making of an order granting Prospa
leave pursuant to
s 138D of the TLA to lodge a caveat in identical terms
(save for one matter which I will return to) if settlement does not occur
five business days of 28 October 2025 for the East Perth Property and
7 November 2025 for the Balga Property.
Prospa has caveats registered over two other properties owned by
Mrs Athanasiou. I do not have any information before me as to the
those properties, or the amounts owing on the Mirrabooka property. However, it
is not a case that Prospa has no other security
in relation to the amounts
I do not have any evidence before me as to whether settlement can proceed in the
manner proposed by Prospa.
reaching my conclusion, I have not overlooked the fact that Prospa has provided
an undertaking as to damages in the usual form
and has offered the further
undertaking through counsel this morning. However, I do not consider this
factor, in light of the other
factors I have referred to, is sufficient to shift
the balance of convenience.
those reasons, I will not extend the operation of the
delivering my oral reasons I heard from counsel as to the appropriate orders and
as to costs. I then made the following
to Order 18 Rule 6(2)(b) of the
Rules of the
Supreme Court 1971
, the plaintiff has leave to join Registrar of Titles
as the third defendant.
plaintiff has leave to amend the originating summons in the form of the minute
of amended originating summons attached to the
plaintiff's minute of proposed
orders dated 24 October 2025.
plaintiff's originating summons dated 17 October 2025 be dismissed.
plaintiff has leave, pursuant to
Transfer of Land Act 1893
to lodge fresh caveats in the same terms as:
(a) caveat P724190, being the caveat against the title of Lot 34 on Strata
Plan 50808, being the whole of the land described in Certificate
of Title Volume
2741 Folio 33 commonly known as [redacted] (East Perth Property) if settlement
does not occur within five business
days of 28 October 2025; and
(b) caveat P724191, being the caveat against title of Lot 2 on Strata Plan
70819, being the whole of the land described in Certificate
of Title Volume 2864
Folio 138 commonly known as [redacted] (Balga Property) if settlement does not
occur within five business days
of 7 November
for deleting the word 'absolute' and substituting the words 'unless subject to
the claim of caveator' for each caveat.
be liberty to apply.
be no orders as to costs.
Post script
hearing from both parties, I adjourned the proceedings
to consider my decision,
before returning to court and delivering my oral reasons.
I had delivered by oral reasons for my decision, but prior to pronouncing my
orders, counsel for Prospa indicated that he had
sought instructions during the
adjournment and was instructed that it was possible for the caveats to be
removed at settlement under
the PEXA system. Counsel for Mr and
Mrs Athanasiou indicated that he remained unaware of whether that was
indicated to counsel that I remained of the view as expressed in my oral
reasons, and observed that there was no evidence before
me as to whether removal
of the caveats at settlement was possible, and noted that this was not a matter
which was agreed between
the parties.
also refused Prospa's application to adjourn to file further evidence on this
issue, owing to imminent settlement dates and in
light of the various other
matters relevant to the balance of
convenience.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
10 NOVEMBER 2025
Leros Pty Ltd v Terara Pty
[1992] HCA 22
(1992) 174 CLR 407
Bashford v Bashford
[2008] WASC 138
[42] - [50].
Bride v The Registrar of
[2015] WASC 11
Bizcap AU Pty Ltd v
[2024] WASC
Custom Credit Corporation
Limited v Ravi Nominees Pty Ltd
(1992) 8 WAR 42
Navarac Pty Ltd v
Moondancer Holdings Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 95
(2009) 40 WAR
Navarac Pty Ltd v
Moondancer Holdings Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 95
(2009) 40 WAR 150
Bizcap AU Pty Ltd v Sharma
[2024] WASC
Pezzano Enterprises Pty
[2023] WASC 168.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter