URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/155.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Justin Simmonds -v- Electricity Networks Corporation t/a Western Power [2025] WAIRC 155; (12 March 2025)
AGAINST A DECISION OF THE WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY TRIBUNAL IN MATTER NUMBER WHST
8/2023 GIVEN ON 27 AUGUST 2024
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R COSENTINO
COMMISSIONER T B WALKINGTON
COMMISSIONER T KUCERA
FRIDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
WEDNESDAY, 12 MARCH 2025
JUSTIN SIMMONDS
ELECTRICITY NETWORKS CORPORATION
T/A WESTERN POWER
ON APPEAL FROM:
WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY TRIBUNAL
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
[2024] WAIRC 00782
WHST 8 of 2023
Industrial Law WA – Whether to
allow an appeal out of time – Where the Appellant's Notice of Appeal does
not set out
concise grounds of appeal alleging an error of law or error of fact
– Whether appeal has any prospects of success – Justice
require that the time to appeal be extended – Application to appeal out of
time dismissed - Appeal dismissed
Legislation
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Industrial Relations Commission Regulations 2005
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Mr J Simmonds (in person)
Ms H Millar (of counsel)
Solicitors:
Not applicable
Corrs Chambers Westgarth
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Arpad Security Agency Pty Ltd v The Federated Miscellaneous Workers’
Union of Australia, Hospital, Service and Miscellaneous
Adrian Doyle v Roman Catholic Bishop of Bunbury
[2022] WAIRC 00799
(2022) 102 WAIG 1533
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
Cousins v YMCA of Perth
[2001] WASCA 374
(2001) 82 WAIG 5
Esther Investments Pty Ltd v Markalinga Pty Ltd
[1989] WASC 174
(1989) 2 WAR 196
Jackamarra v Krakouer
[1998] HCA 27
(1998) 195 CLR 516
Justin Simmonds v Electricity Networks Corporation t/a Western Power
[2024] WAIRC 00782
(2024) 104 WAIG 1968
Reasons for Decision
Appellant, Justin Simmonds, was employed by the Respondent, Electricity Networks
Corporation trading as
Western Power
, as a Safety Operations Business
Partner. On 27 April 2023, Western Power dismissed Mr Simmonds from
his employment following investigations
into both allegations against Mr
Simmonds and Mr Simmonds’ work related grievances.
Simmonds applied to the Work, Health and Safety
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
alleging that he was the subject of discriminatory conduct for reasons
prohibited by s 106 of the WHS Act. In essence, his claim
was that when Western
(a) placed him on a performance plan; and
(b) dismissed him from his employment
it took discriminatory action against him for the reason, or reasons that
included, that he had raised an issue or concern about work
health and safety.
Simmonds’ claims were heard by the Tribunal over a four-day hearing.
27 August 2024, the Tribunal dismissed Mr Simmonds’ application and
published reasons for that decision:
Justin Simmonds v Electricity
Networks Corporation t/a Western Power
[2024] WAIRC 00782
Ultimately,
the Tribunal found that Western Power had discharged the onus on it of proving
that a prohibited reason was not a substantial
reason for the conduct Mr
Simmonds was aggrieved by. Commissioner Emmanuel set out the evidence on this
issue in her Reasons from
[75] to [103] concluding at
Accordingly, I find that although Western Power took
discriminatory action (as defined by s 105 of the WHS Act) against
Mr Simmonds
when it dismissed him, Western Power did so for a reason other
than a prohibited reason. Western Power has proved on the balance
probabilities that the prohibited reason in s 106(h) of the WHS Act
was not the reason, or a substantial reason, for the warning,
cl 29 of the WHS Act, the appeal provisions of
Relations Act 1979
) apply to the Tribunal. And
so, by s 49(2) of the IR Act, a party may appeal from a decision of the Tribunal
to the Full Bench of
the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
Section 49(3) of the IR Act prescribes that an appeal under the section must
instituted within 21 days of the date of the decision against which the appeal
is brought.
Simmonds did not appeal within the specified time in s 49(3). He lodged his
Notice of Appeal on 20 September 2024. His appeal was
three days out of
proceedings were listed for hearing on 7 February 2025. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Full Bench declined to grant Mr
Simmonds leave to file his appeal
out of time and dismissed the appeal indicating that we would publish our
reasons for decision
in due course.
are our reasons for those orders.
Full Bench has power to extend time to institute an appeal under s 49 of the IR
Act: s 27(1)(n). The purpose of having this discretion
is to do justice
between the parties:
Kathleen Gallo v The
Honourable Justice Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
64 ALJR 458
). Mr Simmonds must show that strict compliance with the time
prescribed by the IR Act would work an injustice on him
Adrian Doyle v Roman Catholic Bishop of
[2022] WAIRC 00799
(2022) 102 WAIG 1533
) the Full Bench described four major but not exhaustive
factors which are considered in the exercise of the discretion, citing
Esther Investments Pty Ltd v Markalinga Pty
[1989] WASC 174
(1989) 2 WAR 196:
length of the delay;
(b) the reasons for the delay;
(c) the prospects of success of the appeal; and
(d) the extent of any prejudice to the respondent.
Arpad Security Agency Pty Ltd v The Federated
Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of Australia, Hospital, Service and
Miscellaneous
(1989) 69 WAIG 1287
, Mr Simmonds needs to make
out his case for the Full Bench to exercise its discretion to extend time in his
Mr Simmonds instituted his appeal, the Full Bench convened a directions hearing.
The directions hearing was conducted on 25
November 2024. At that time, the
Full Bench informed Mr Simmonds that an appeal under s 49 is not a chance to run
his case at first
instance all over again. We explained that an appeal is by way
of rehearing, meaning that the appellant needs to show that the first
decision maker made an error of law or an error of fact or both. We explained
that r 102(2) of the
Industrial Relations Commission
Regulations
(WA) dictates that the Notice of Appeal must
clearly and concisely set out the grounds of appeal and what alternative
decision the
appellant seeks. Regulation 102(3) requires the Notice of Appeal to
specify the particulars relied on to demonstrate that the decision
the evidence and the specific reason why a decision is alleged to be wrong in
noted that Mr Simmonds’ Notice of Appeal did not do what the Regulations
required. We alerted him to the fact that we could
not find within the extensive
Notice of Appeal, which ran to 33 pages, anything that resembled grounds of
appeal in the sense of
alleging an error of law or error of fact in the
decision. Rather, the many pages looked like a report of everything that had
in the proceedings leading up to the decision and an attempt to have
another go at persuading the Full Bench that the claim at first
instance ought
to be upheld. While the Notice of Appeal made it very clear that Mr Simmonds
disagreed with the outcome and would
have preferred a different result, it did
not appear to advance any arguable contention that the Tribunal’s factual
upon which the ultimate decision turned, were not open on the
also explained to Mr Simmonds that one of the factors we would need to consider
in deciding whether to grant an extension of time
to appeal is whether the
appeal was arguable. We told him that it would not be appropriate to grant
permission to appeal unless an
arguable case of appealable error is
demonstrated. We noted that in its current form, Mr Simmonds’ Notice of
Appeal would fail
to show there is an arguable appeal because it did not
identify grounds for appealing. We told Mr Simmonds that if the matter was
proceed to hearing on the existing Notice of Appeal it was extremely likely that
he would not be granted an extension of time
simply because his Notice of Appeal
did not disclose any grounds of appeal.
the conclusion of the directions hearing, we made orders for Mr Simmonds to file
any application to amend his Notice of Appeal
by 16 December 2024.
these warnings, Mr Simmonds did not apply to amend his grounds of appeal. At the
time of the hearing, his Notice of Appeal
remained in the form of a narrative
submissions which
went to secondary findings of fact asserted to be erroneous,
without an attempt to explain how those matters infected the primary
findings of
fact on which the Tribunal’s decision turned.
the hearing of the appeal, Mr Simmonds nevertheless pressed his application for
an extension of time to appeal. He referred to
the fact that he had set out
reasons for the late filing of his Notice of Appeal in the notice itself. He
submitted that a three-day
delay is insignificant in the scheme of things, and
he should not be shut out from the appeal process for being three days late,
especially in circumstances where no steps were taken by the Full Bench to
progress his application for an extension of time to appeal
until two months
after it was filed.
to whether the Notice of Appeal identified grounds of appeal, Mr Simmonds said
that under the ‘chess club test’ his
Notice of Appeal would be
considered to contain enough information to show that he had ‘plenty of
grounds’ of appeal.
The ‘chess club test’ was, Mr Simmonds
explained, a phrase he had made up to refer to people ‘with intellectual
capabilities’ as contrasted with ‘morons’ at a pub (FBA ts 3).
emphasised to Mr Simmonds that he would need to demonstrate to us that his
Notice of Appeal contained proper grounds of appeal
before we could consider
granting leave to file the appeal out of time. He variously indicated that he
should have just ‘won
the whole thing’ (FBA ts 3), that his appeal
grounds were throughout the Notice of Appeal, that the ultimate decision was a
complete error of judgment and that he disagreed with the whole of the decision
at first instance. He described his ‘biggest
ground’ (FBA ts 3) as
being that WorkSafe WA cannot afford for the appeal to be denied. He
submitted that everything he had
written in his Notice of Appeal shows error and
that his appeal goes to the whole of the WHS Act and its objects. His
submissions
amounted to no more than assertions that the Tribunal should have
made a different decision without identifying why findings made
Eventually,
after a brief adjournment, Mr Simmonds told us that he considered his Notice of
Appeal identified at least the following
grounds of appeal:
the Tribunal erred by excluding from evidence a recording he sought to rely on:
Notice of Appeal paragraph 56.
(2) That the Tribunal applied the wrong case law or failed to apply case law
that he had referred to the Tribunal: Notice of Appeal
paragraph 59.
(3) That the Tribunal denied him a fair process by failing to make reasonable
adjustments for him often enough: Notice of Appeal paragraph
(4) Mr Simmonds referred to paragraphs 12 and 13.1 of his Notice of Appeal.
As we understand his submissions, he relies on these paragraphs
as being to the
effect that the Tribunal had not properly understood or applied the objects of
the WHS Act.
(5) Mr Simmonds referred to paragraphs 16 and 17 of his Notice of Appeal
which raise concerns or issues about how his public interest
disclosures as an
employee were handled.
proceeded to consider Mr Simmonds’ application for an extension of time
for appealing on the basis that these five grounds
are his grounds of
Does the Proposed Appeal have any Prospects of
time for appealing cannot be extended unless the proposed appeal has some
prospects of success:
Cousins v YMCA of
[2001] WASCA 374
(2001) 82 WAIG 5.
The Full Bench need not go
into elaborate detail on the merits but should assess the merits in a rough and
Jackamarra v Krakouer
[1998] HCA 27
(1998) 195 CLR
of Mr Simmonds’ grounds have any prospects of success.
first ground derived from paragraphs 56 to 58 of the Notice of Appeal relates to
the refusal to admit recordings into evidence.
The Commissioner explained her
reasons for refusing to admit the evidence on relevance grounds at [52] –
[57] and [59] of the
the hearing Mr Simmonds sought to tender five audio recordings. Eventually he
only pressed for two, being recordings of:
performance discussion meeting on 16 March 2023 (see [23] above) (
), which Mr Simmonds said shows that Ms Nesci lacks experience and
knowledge, and defers to Mr Prideaux;
Simmonds’ discussion with Mr Robert Mitchell (Human Resources Business
Partner) on around 17 March 2023 (
Recording 2
), which he said shows Mr
Mitchell considered that:
Silvester and Ms Nesci did not handle the disciplinary process well;
PIP had flaws; and
Power’s process of handling grievances would be different to what actually
happened in Mr Simmonds’ case.
Essentially
Mr Simmonds argued that Western Power had a toxic culture and the reason he made
Recordings 1 and 2 was to protect himself
against injustice. He said he had paid
‘an audio person’ to ‘clean up’ the recordings.
undergone an unspecified ‘cleaning up’ process casts doubt on the
integrity of Recordings 1 and 2. But even if
that were not the case, I decided
that Recordings 1 and 2 would not be admitted in to evidence.
Tribunal is not bound by any rules of evidence but may inform itself on any
matter in such a way as it thinks just:
Relations Act 1979
) by virtue of cl 29(1) of Schedule 1
of the WHS Act.
Fundamentally,
I did not consider that Recordings 1 and 2 were relevant or necessary. Ms Nesci,
Mr Armstrong and Mr Mitchell were
not the relevant decision-makers in relation
to the alleged discriminatory conduct. Recordings 1 and 2 did not go to the
of whether the decision-makers had impermissible reasons in their mind
when they engaged in the discriminatory conduct. In any event,
Mr Simmonds was
able to fairly prosecute his claim without reliance on the recordings. He was
able to cross-examine the relevant
decision-makers and Ms Nesci. Mr
Mitchell’s view about the matters set out at [52b] above is not
the recordings appeared to have been made contrary to the
Surveillance
Devices Act 1998
(WA). The regime under that Act expressly prohibits covert
recordings of private conversations except in limited circumstances. Mr
made Recordings 1 and 2 without the knowledge or consent of those he recorded. I
was not persuaded that the recordings were
reasonably necessary for the
protection of Mr Simmonds’ lawful interests.
the circumstances of this matter, I concluded that the Tribunal could fairly
hear and determine application WHST 8 of 2023 without
listening to the covert
recordings. I considered Recordings 1 and 2 were not relevant and that, at a
minimum, it would not be just
or necessary to admit them into evidence. In my
view, to allow reliance on Recordings 1 and 2 would also be contrary to the
obligation to act in accordance with s 26(1)(a) of the IR Act.
For these reasons I ordered that Recordings 1 and 2 would not be admitted
Simmonds disagrees with the decision but has not set out why the decision
involves any error. The Commissioner was plainly correct.
The recordings did not
involve the relevant decision makers. Mr Simmonds did not contend that those
involved in the recordings were
relevant decision makers.
second ground in paragraph 59 of Mr Simmonds’ Notice of Appeal is that the
Tribunal had regard to case law, which the respondent
referred to, and that case
law concerned adverse action cases under the
Fair Work Act 2009
). Again, the Notice of Appeal does not say why in doing so any
error of law occurred.
discriminatory conduct provisions of the WHS Act have not previously been tested
or applied authoritatively. That is, there is
no case law which was binding on
the Tribunal. There was nothing improper in the Tribunal having regard to case
law concerning the
adverse action provisions of the FWA. The FWA’s adverse
action provisions are closely aligned with the WHS Act’s discriminatory
conduct provisions, with similar structure and language. The Commissioner
referred to that case law as being helpful and persuasive.
The Commissioner did
not proceed on the basis that she was bound by those decisions.
any event, the outcome of Mr Simmonds’ application turned on findings of
fact about the reasons for Western Power’s
conduct, not the application of
any legal principle.
second ground has no merit.
third ground alleges that Mr Simmonds was denied procedural fairness because the
Tribunal failed to make appropriate accommodations
or adjustments for him often
enough. Paragraph 45 of his Notice of Appeal says:
start of the hearing the Applicant advised the Tribunal that he has depression
and ADHD, making it difficult to explain things
and keep track of his thoughts,
and requested he be allowed to present his case with limited
interruptions.
45.1. The Applicant felt that he could not
present his case fairly during the hearing because he kept being told it was
irrelevant.
45.2. The Applicant believed that it was not only relevant considering the
case law suggesting so, but it was essential in proving
understand Mr Simmonds is alleging that he was denied procedural fairness by
being cut off at times and prevented from making his
submissions.
the proceedings at first instance, Mr Simmonds provided the Tribunal with
written submissions which exceeded 60 pages in length.
During the course of the
hearing, he made oral closing submissions after an adjournment which was for the
purpose of allowing Mr
Simmonds to gather his thoughts before making his closing
submissions (ts 265).
Simmonds’ oral closing submissions are recorded in 14 pages of transcript
(ts 266-280), compared with 8 pages of Western
Power’s oral closing
submissions (ts 257-265). He gave 40 minutes of oral submissions with few minor
interruptions from the
Commissioner. On the few occasions the Commissioner
spoke, it was to clarify things like the paragraph of a case which Mr Simmonds
was referring to (ts 268), a section of the WHS Act or a page number he was
referencing (ts 273).
point of relevance (ts 274). At this point, Mr
Simmonds estimated he had a
further ten minutes of submissions to make (ts 275). The Commissioner
informed Mr Simmonds:
So the point made [by counsel] is correct. It
isn't really relevant. And I have given you a lot of leeway. I’m mindful
you're unrepresented. I'm mindful of what you've said about how stressful
you've found it. There's been a range of reasons why you've
considerable leeway.
I understand the point you're making. You probably don't need to labour that
Simmonds apparently took this on board and moved on to a different topic of the
disciplinary process (ts 275).
objections were taken by Western Power’s counsel, when Mr Simmonds
referred to a matter that was not in the evidence and
matters not put to
witnesses (ts 277). Mr Simmonds then attempted to give evidence from the
bar table of a further matter that was
not in evidence when the Commissioner
quite properly stopped him (ts 278). The Commissioner also prevented Mr
Simmonds from dealing
with matters that did not form part of his amended claim
before the Tribunal (ts 279).
Simmonds continued his oral submissions after these points were dealt with,
concluding his submissions with the words ‘And
that’s all I’ve
got to say’ (ts 280). The Commissioner asked Mr Simmonds ‘Is that
the end of your submission?’
(ts 280), giving him an opportunity to add
anything that he might have felt he had not covered. He did not take that
opportunity.
critical issue in Mr Simmonds’ application at first instance was what was
the relevant decision maker’s reasons for
taking discriminatory action. Mr
Simmonds was provided the opportunity to cross-examine the relevant decision
maker. He declined
to do so. His choice was made after the Tribunal had
explained to him the consequences of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67.
should be apparent from this overview of the conduct of the hearing that there
is just no merit to Mr Simmonds’ complaints
of being denied procedural
fairness. There is no requirement of procedural fairness that a litigant be
entitled to speak without
interruption from the presiding judicial officer. It
is entirely proper for the Tribunal to take steps to ensure that the proceedings
are conducted fairly and efficiently. The Tribunal afforded great leniency to Mr
Simmonds. The hearing was procedurally fair.
Simmonds’ fourth ground relying on paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Notice of
Appeal essentially amounts to a general grievance
that the outcome of the case
at first instance did not accord with the objects of the WHS Act. Paragraphs 12
and 13 are as follows:
work health and safety incident is a work health and safety
12.1 An incident investigation is ultimately to
prevent recurrence.
12.1.1 The Respondent’s Incident Management Procedure states:
“This procedure defines the processes for incident reporting,
investigation, action development and communication to prevent
recurrence...”
12.2 An incident investigation report is an investigation process necessary
to successfully complete any incident investigation to
adequate quality.
12.2.1 The Respondent’s
Incident Management Procedure
an Area Manager to
“support investigation processes necessary to
complete any incident investigation to successful completion and adequate
12.3 Sharing a draft incident report with another duty holder is required by
Law and the Respondent’s
Safety, Health And Environment Management
12.4 The Respondent’s
Safety, Health and Environment Management
System Framework
“So far as is reasonably practicable,
consultation takes place
with Workers
who are, or
are likely to be directly affected by a matter
relating to work health or safety
12.5 The sharing of the draft
Incident Investigation Report
Applicant to the Area Manager, on his request, allowed the Area Manager to
provide feedback, seek clarification and implement
controls, stating in emails
to the Applicant:
Added some notes
draft incident
investigation report
, if you could
“Just a heads up,
I’ve put in some preliminary actions from
reading the report
unaware that the teams weren’t consistent
or knowledgeable
on the use of the temp discon tags
so we’ve done
an audit of packages across East, implemented a new scanning procedure and doing
a knowledge piece with the teams.
Hopefully limits exposure to similar incidents
in the future.
12.6 The sharing of the draft
Incident Investigation Report
Applicant to the Area Manager contributed to resolving the work health and
safety issue by reducing the risk of harm to workers
and members of the public
by introducing or reinforcing control measures.
12.7 The incident could have resulted in multiple fatalities.
12.8 The sharing of the draft
Incident Investigation Report
Applicant to the Area Manager could have prevented multiple fatalities.
the facts, the Applicant was involved in resolving a work health and safety
issue satisfying the requirements of
section 106(i)
A finding otherwise, set in precedence, would
be detrimental to the Object of the
(original emphasis)
[62] – [64] of the Reasons, the Tribunal considered the question of
whether Mr Simmonds had raised an issue or concern about
work, health and
safety. The Tribunal concluded that Mr Simmonds had raised an issue or concern
he sent an email to Western Powers’
Chief Executive Officer on 23 February 2023. The Tribunal made no finding as to
he had raised an issue or concern about work health and safety when
sending the draft Incident Investigation Report (referred to
in the Reasons as
the Wundowie Report) to the area manager because it was not part of Mr Simmonds
amended application and therefore
not part of his case: [64].
paragraphs 12 and 13 to amount to grounds of appeal Mr Simmonds needs to show
that the question of whether he had raised an issue
or concern about work health
and safety by sharing the draft Incident Investigation Report was properly
before the Tribunal. That
is, he must show that the Tribunal was required to
determine whether to make the finding he now seeks, as part of his application
at first instance. He has not done so. Accordingly, these paragraphs do not
amount to grounds of appeal and cannot support any finding
fifth of Mr Simmonds’ grounds is based on paragraphs 16-17 of the Notice
of Appeal which say:
persons with duties and/or obligations the Applicant proposed to take action to
seek compliance by included;
16.1. The Respondent’s
Head of SEQT
Three members
of the Respondent’s
Executive Leadership
16.3 The Respondent’s
Head of Operational Maintenance
Applicant included the
Issues Email
Public Interest Disclosure
) he made to the Respondent’s
Senior Forensic Advisory
t to address the issues and concerns within the email, and
allegations that he was being subject to discriminatory conduct for prohibited
reasons contrary to
Section 112(4)
17.1 The Applicant did not receive any update on his
during his employment with the Respondent.
17.2 The Respondent’s same
Senior Forensic Advisory Specialist
was appointed to investigate the Applicant for breach of confidentiality two
weeks after he raised his PID, which resulted in his
termination.
(original emphasis)
is nothing in the Reasons that relates to the matters set out at paragraphs 16
and 17 of the Notice of Appeal. These paragraphs
do not disclose any arguable
appeal ground that can be considered or determined by the Full Bench. The
matters raised by paragraphs
16 and 17 are of no legal significance. As grounds
of appeal, they are without merit.
are unable to find anything else in the Notice of Appeal which would constitute
grounds of appeal with prospects of success.
Accordingly,
we are not satisfied that the appeal has prospects of success. Absent a prospect
of success, justice does not require
that the time to appeal be extended. The
fact that the appeal has no prospects of success is fatal to Mr Simmonds’
an extension of time.
is therefore strictly unnecessary for us to consider the other potentially
relevant factors. We have done so only because Mr Simmonds
and Western Power
made submissions about them.
Length of the Delay
delay is not lengthy. Three days is a relatively short period of delay. This
factor alone would not prevent an extension of time
Reasons for delay
the Notice of Appeal, Mr Simmonds says his delay is explained by the fact that
he was ‘on sick leave to manage my mental
health since August 20,
2024.’ He refers to being able to provide evidence of appointments with
Resilia on three dates. It
is not clear who or what Resilia is. Mr Simmonds did
not provide any other evidence to explain why his mental health prevented him
from filing a Notice of Appeal within time or what the change was in his mental
health that might explain why he lodged his appeal
on the date he did. The
explanation of the reasons for the delay do not weigh in favour of an extension
of time being granted.
Prejudice to Respondent
respondent does not rely on any particular prejudice to it arising out of the
delay in opposing the grant of an extension of time
to appeal. It concedes that
any prejudice is minimal.
is also a neutral factor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter