URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/81.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LHRE GROUP PTY LTD -v- COMPLETE HIRE & SALES PTY LTD [2025] WADC 81 (12 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
LHRE GROUP PTY LTD -v- COMPLETE HIRE & SALES PTY LTD
[2025] WADC 81
WALLACE DCJ
25, 26 & 27 JUNE 2025 WITH SUPPLEMENTARY WRITTEN
SUBMISSIONS FILED ON 14 JULY 2025
DELIVERED :
12 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 169 of 2024
LHRE GROUP PTY LTD
COMPLETE HIRE & SALES PTY LTD
Building and Construction Industry (Security
of Payment) Act 2021
(WA) - Whether contract can be inferred from objective
circumstances - Whether
Jones v Dunkel
inferences can be drawn -
Post-contractual silence as admission - Whether ostensible or apparent authority
can be relied upon positively
by principal - Whether debt was assigned
Legislation:
Building and Construction Industry (Security
of Payment) Act 2021
Civil Judgments Enforcement Act 2004
Construction Contracts Act 2004
Property Law Act
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
Plaintiff successful
Representation:
Mr L N Firios
Mr M R Collins
Solicitors:
Squire Patton Boggs
Hotchkin Hanly
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v J Hutchinson Pty Ltd
Australian Energy Ltd v Lennard Oil NL
[1986] 2 Qd R 216
B Seppelt & Sons Ltd v Commissioner for Main Roads (1975) 1 BPR 9147
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
[2001] NSWCA 61
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Cargill Australia Ltd v Viterra Malt Pty Ltd (No 28)
[2022] VSC 13
Chamberlain v The Queen
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
DM Drainage & Constructions Pty Ltd v Karara Mining Ltd [No 6]
Fabre v Arenales
(1992) 27 NSWLR 437
Glass v Pioneer Rubber Works of Australia Ltd
[1906] ArgusLawRp 120
[1906] VLR 754
Harry S Bagg's Liquidation Warehouse Pty Ltd v Whittaker
(1982) 44 NSWLR
Haynes v McNeil
[1906] WALawRp 51
(1906) 8 WALR 186
Hightime Investments Pty Ltd v Adamus Resources Ltd
[2012] WASC 295
Hughes v NM Superannuation Pty Ltd
(1993) 29 NSWLR 653
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Junker v Hepburn
[2010] NSWSC 88
La Mela v Franklexis Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 83
LHRE Group Pty Ltd v Complete Hire & Sales Pty Ltd
[2024] WADC 61
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Lysaght Bros & Co Ltd v Falk
[1905] HCA 7
(1905) 2 CLR 421
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liq) (Receivers and Managers Appointed) v Mining
Standards International Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 82
Nominal Defendant v Owens
(1978) 22 ALR 128
OSB Group Pty Ltd v Complete Hire & Sales Pty Ltd
[2024] WASC 310
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
[2004] HCA 35
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shade Systems Pty Ltd
Quickway Constructions Pty Ltd v Electrical Energy Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA
Re Swan Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2016] NSWSC 1724
Reynell v Lewis
[1846] EngR 1141
(1846) 15 M & W 517
(1846) 153 ER
Sino Iron Pty Ltd v Mineralogy Pty Ltd
[2014] WASC 406
Subdivisions Ltd v Payne
[1934] SAStRp 48
[1934] SASR 214
Tomko v Palasty
[2007] NSWCA 258
Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v Longmuir
[1997] 1 VR 125
Westgem Investments Pty Ltd in its own right as Trustee for Hossean Pourzand
and Jenny Maria Pourzand atf the Helen Trust v Commonwealth
Bank of Australia
[2019] WASC 310
Winks v WH Heck & Sons Pty Ltd
[1986] 1 Qd R 226
Table of Contents
Introduction
plaintiff, LHRE Group Pty Ltd (LHRE) is a company engaged in the business of
labour hire for discrete works on construction
Mr Kevin O'Shea is the sole director of LHRE and responsible for its
operations.
also the sole director of OSB Group Pty Ltd (OSB Group), which is a
company that performs contract works on mining
Mr Kevin O'Shea runs both businesses together with his brother
Mr Michael O'Shea, who is the general manager of those
confusion, and intending no disrespect in doing so, I will refer to
Mr Kevin O'Shea and Mr Michael O'Shea by their first
defendant, Complete Hire & Sales Pty Ltd (Complete) carries on the business
of providing building services to a variety of
clients, including to some of its
related entities.
Mr Emanuel Dillon is the sole director of
the sole director of Spinifex Holdings (WA) Pty Ltd (Spinifex Holdings), which
operates the Spinifex Hotel and associated
facilities in Derby, Western
January - May 2023, the Spinifex Hotel provided, pursuant to a written
agreement with the Department of Communities, accommodation
for residents of
Fitzroy Crossing and surrounding areas who had become displaced due to
recent floods. During that period, various
internal and external areas of the
hotel were damaged. As a result, repair works were required to be
Separately,
in or about May 2023, Complete was retained by Crushing Services International
Pty Ltd to design, supply, transport,
install and commission a 200-person
accommodation camp at Onslow (the Onslow Project). The appointed project
manager for both the
Onslow Project and the rectification works for the Spinifex
Hotel was Mr Ian
early May 2023, Mr Massey contacted Michael by telephone querying whether
OSB Group would be interested in pricing the construction
of the 200-person
camp for the Onslow Project.
12 May 2023, a meeting was held at Complete's offices which was both an
introductory meeting and one in which OSB Group's interest
in the Onslow
Project was discussed. In attendance at the meeting was Mr Dillon and
Mr Massey of Complete and Kevin and Michael
on behalf of
There is a dispute between the parties as to whether LHRE was mentioned at that
meeting. It is also in contention as to whether
the remedial works required at
the Spinifex Hotel were discussed.
17 May 2023, Mr Dillon telephoned Michael to discuss the provision of
labour to undertake remedial works at the Spinifex
conversation was followed up by Kevin with Mr Dillon by email the following
day, in which he queried when the labour would be
required and what tools would
need to accompany them to
number of the details of the project were negotiated through email exchanges,
including the identity of the prospective labourers
and their rates as well as
the requirement that a one-off mobilisation and demobilisation cost be
in contention that all of the emails sent to Complete during this period by
Michael and/or Kevin were sent from their
OSB Group email accounts and
contained their OSB Group email signature.
29 May 2023, Kevin sent Complete a copy of LHRE's credit application form
together with a document setting out LHRE client standard
conditions.
Despite being followed up a number of times, the credit application form was
never completed or executed by the defendant.
1 June 2023, the labour arrived at the Spinifex Hotel in Derby and
undertook both rectification and refurbishment works, concluding
labourers worked under the direction of Complete and day worksheets were
prepared which identified the daily works performed
which was signed in
acknowledgment by
issues were raised in relation to the quality of the work
4 July 2023, Mr Jamal Uddin emailed a tax invoice to Complete dated
3 July 2023 in respect of the labour hire at the Spinifex
Hotel claiming
$81,934.64 (inclusive of GST) and attaching the supporting day
worksheets.
Mr Uddin used his OSB Group email address and signature. However, the
attached tax invoice was on LHRE letterhead. The payment
advice on the invoice
identified the payor as LHRE. The attached day worksheets indicated, by way of
a box which was ticked, that
the company who performed the works was
OSB Group. Each handwritten day worksheet provided to Complete was
accompanied by a corresponding
responded to the email the same day noting that the invoice was one day old and
requiring the following matters be addressed:
(a) the hours and
names per person to be included on the invoice;
(b) the invoice to stipulate that the remedial works to the Spinifex Hotel
was to rooms 1 - 34;
(c) the terms to be stated on the invoice;
(d) to ensure that no travel was charged for and if there were claims for
material for it to be identified; and
(e) identifying that the payor may need to be changed to the Spinifex Hotel
which would be further clarified by Complete
invoice was re-sent to Complete several times for various reasons. Whilst
Complete continued to request that the above matters
be addressed in the
invoice, at no stage did the communications raise concerns regarding the invoice
being issued by LHRE as opposed
The invoice remains unpaid.
2 October 2023, LHRE issued a formal statutory payment claim pursuant to
Building and Construction Industry (Security of Payment) Act 2021
(WA) (SOP Act) in the amount of $81,934.64 (including
did not provide a payment schedule in response to the payment claim within
15 business days, or at all. If the statutory
scheme applies, it follows,
by operation of
and s 26 of the SOP Act, that the amount claimed
became due for payment on 6 November 2023, being 25 business days
after the payment
claim was made. Complete did not pay the claimed amount by
6 November 2023, or at all.
The plaintiff's pleaded case and the position of the defendant
plaintiff filed a writ of summons and statement of claim with the court on
15 November 2024. It sought leave to amend its claim
on the first day of
trial pursuant to O 21 r 5 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court
(WA) (RSC). The amendments sought related primarily to pleading that
the plaintiff and the defendant entered into an agreement
or arrangement.
The granting of leave by the court was unopposed by the defendant.
note that the court may allow the amendment of a pleading on such terms as to
costs or otherwise as may be just and in such manner
as the court may direct:
RSC O 21 r 5. The determination of whether to allow an
amendment involves the exercise of the court's discretion
in the interests of
no presumption that parties are entitled to amend pleadings upon an application
for leave to
relevant factors in determining whether to grant leave in the circumstances of
this application include the following:
(a) granting the application
had no adverse consequences of delay;
(b) there appeared to be no prejudice to the defendant in granting leave to
amend in circumstances where the amendments proposed did
not alter the
substantive issues requiring determination;
(c) the proposed amendments had no consequential flow on effect in relation
to the evidence which would be heard during trial;
(d) the proposed amendments did not necessitate any consequential amendments
to the defence nor necessitate the defendant requiring
to produce or seek
further discovery or necessitate additional witnesses to be called to give
evidence at trial; and
(e) the amendments were necessary for the plaintiff to properly articulate
its claim in the particular statutory context in which
the claim had been
brought and relied upon the same pleaded particulars.
above matters reflect the principles which apply when the court determines an
application seeking leave to amend pleadings which
is made late in the
proceeding, as is the case
Upon a proper consideration of the matters identified above, it is
appropriate that leave be granted to the plaintiff to rely upon
the amended
statement of claim provided to the court dated 26 June 2025. I note that it
conducted its case consistently with that
pleading at trial.
plaintiff claims that on or about 1 June 2023, LHRE and Complete entered
into an agreement or arrangement under which LHRE undertook
to carry out works
for Complete, at the Spinifex Hotel. The plaintiff claims that the contract was
partly oral, partly in writing,
and partly by conduct and was formed by the
following acts:
(a) oral request made by Mr Dillon to Michael
on 17 May 2023 requesting the provision of labour for maintenance work to
be performed
at the Spinifex Hotel;
(b) in writing, by email, from Kevin on 18 May 2023 to Mr Dillon
identifying the available labour;
(c) orally, by telephone, on 26 May 2023 between Complete's project
manager, Mr Ian Massey, instructing Kevin to mobilise two carpenters,
labourers, and a plumber to the site and confirming separately by way of email
dated 26 May 2023 from Mr Massey to Complete's
operations manager,
Ms Gemma Lees;
(d) in writing, by email, from Kevin on 29 May 2023 to Mr Massey
enclosing labour hire terms and conditions; and
(e) by conduct, through the engagement by Complete of the labour supplied by
LHRE commencing on 1 June 2023.
relevant terms of the agreement or arrangement pleaded by the plaintiff which
were negotiated on 26 May 2023 did not appear to
be in contention at trial.
Nor was it in contention at trial that any agreement or arrangement entered into
to supply the labour
to perform remedial works would constitute the carrying out
of 'construction work' and the supply of 'related goods and services'
by and for the purposes of the SOP Act.
plaintiff claims pursuant to s 22 and s 23 of the SOP Act that it was
entitled to and issued a payment claim seeking a progress
payment for $81,934.64
(including GST). The plaintiff claims that the claim was due and payable 25
days after it was made, namely
6 November 2023, pursuant to
s 20(1)(b) of the SOP Act and that the defendant became liable to pay that
amount due to its failure
to serve a payment schedule.
plaintiff claims that in all the circumstances it is entitled to judgment in its
favour pursuant to s 27(3)(a) of the SOP Act.
The plaintiff also
claims pursuant to s 21(b) of the SOP Act, interest payable on the
amount of the claim at the rate prescribed
Civil Judgments
Enforcement Act 2004
(WA) and costs.
then to the position of the defendant as pleaded in its defence filed with the
court on 15 August 2024. That pleading, in
essence, identifies the
following position of the defendant:
(a) it denies that it entered
into an agreement or an arrangement with the plaintiff to supply labour in order
to perform remedial
works at the Spinifex Hotel;
(b) says further that between 12 and 26 May 2023, Michael and Kevin,
acting for and on behalf of OSB Group, communicated with the
(i) meeting held at the defendant's offices between Mr Dillon and
Mr Massey, acting for and on behalf of the defendant and Michael
and on behalf of OSB Group on 12 May 2023;
(ii) telephone conversation between Mr Dillon, acting for and on behalf
of the defendant and Michael, acting for and on behalf of
OSB Group on a
date between 12 and 18 May 2023;
(iii) email from Michael, acting for and on behalf of OSB Group to
Mr Dillon, acting for and on behalf of the defendant dated 18 May
(iv) telephone conversation between Mr Dillon, acting for and on behalf
of the defendant and Kevin, acting for and on behalf of OSB
Group on a date
between 18 and 26 May 2023; and
(v) email from Kevin, acting for and on behalf of OSB Group to
Mr Massey, acting for and on behalf of Complete dated 26 May 2023;
(c) the defendant therefore denies the plaintiff's entitlement to a payment
claim pursuant to the SOP Act;
(d) in the alternative, the defendant pleads that if the parties entered into
the contract as pleaded by the plaintiff, then by no
later than 2 October
2023 the plaintiff assigned its right, title and interest in and under that
contract to Scottish Pacific (BFS)
Pty Ltd, including its right, title and
interest in any payments the defendant was required to make pursuant to the
following particulars:
(i) the assignment is to be inferred from the written statements to the
effect contained in invoices issued to the defendant; and
(ii) the emails attaching the invoices constitute notice to the defendant of
the assignment pursuant to
Property Law Act 1969
(e) as such the defendant pleads that it was not obliged to provide a payment
schedule to the plaintiff nor was it obliged to pay
the claim because the
relevant statutory requirements are not met and therefore the plaintiff is not
entitled to any relief.
30 May 2024, the Principal Registrar heard an application by the plaintiff
seeking summary judgment. The application was dismissed,
and a costs order was
made in favour of the
Issues for determination
appears uncontroversial that an agreement or arrangement was entered into as a
result of which labour was supplied to undertake
building works, primarily of a
remedial nature, at the Spinifex Hotel during 1 - 18 June
crucial issue for determination in this trial is the
Complete contracted for the supply of that labour, namely, whether the
contracting entity was the plaintiff or OSB Group.
That issue will be
determined by the court either applying the straightforward analysis of contract
formation based on offer and
acceptance or the alternative more complex and
involved analysis of inferring a contract from all the objective circumstances.
plaintiff bears the onus of proof to the civil
order for the plaintiff to discharge the burden of proof and persuade the court
on a balance of probabilities, feeling an actual
persuasion, they must show that
there is more than conflicting inferences of equal degrees of probability, so
that the finding made
by the court is not a mere matter of
conjecture.
circumstances are proved in which it is reasonable to find a balance of
probabilities in favour of the conclusion sought by the
plaintiff then, although
the conclusion may fall short of certainty, it is not to be regarded as mere
conjecture or
the court is unable to find that an agreement existed, then the court needs to
consider whether an arrangement existed, having
regard to the broad definition
of 'construction contract' in s 5 of the SOP Act. That consideration
nevertheless requires the court
to determine who are the parties to any such
arrangement and therefore has significant overlap in relation to the primary
the court determines that an agreement or arrangement was entered into by the
plaintiff and the defendant, then it needs to consider
whether LHRE assigned its
right, title and interest in and under the contract or arrangement to Scottish
Pacific (BFS) Pty Ltd (ScotPac),
including its right, title and interest in any
payments the defendant was required to make pursuant to that contract or
arrangement.
Overview of the witnesses at trial
addition to the documentary evidence tendered by the parties, the plaintiff
called two witnesses, Kevin O'Shea and Michael O'Shea
defendant called evidence from one witness,
Emanuel Dillon.
Kevin O'Shea
mentioned previously, Kevin is the sole director of both LHRE and OSB Group
which he runs together with his brother Michael.
Whilst Kevin first crossed
paths with Mr Dillon in or about 2020 when their companies were engaged on
a project for the Pindan Group,
he did not know Mr Dillon
gave evidence that his first substantive involvement with the defendant was
attending at its offices with Michael on 12 May
2023 to meet with
Mr Dillon and Mr Massey. The meeting had been arranged to discuss the
involvement of OSB Group in the construction
of a 200-person mining camp
for Complete's Onslow Project. It was also an introductory meeting.
stated that he explained to Mr Dillon and to Mr Massey that he and his
brother had two 'divisions', and he explained what each
did. He recalled
specifically discussing the significant financial losses incurred on the Pindan
project for both LHRE, and
It was suggested to Kevin during cross-examination that there was no
discussion at that meeting about LHRE which was a proposition
denied by him.
Kevin went further, stating:
We specifically made a point of it because it [LHRE] was owed 3 million,
and OSB [Group] was only owed a million.
did not recall talking about the Spinifex Hotel job at this initial meeting.
His recollection, prompted by the email he sent
to Mr Dillon on 18 May
2023, was that the matter was first raised by Mr Dillon in a telephone
conversation with Michael on 17 May
gave evidence that Mr Dillon asked Michael whether labour could be provided
for various remedial works at the Spinifex Hotel
that discussion, Kevin emailed Mr Dillon to confirm the timing of the job,
and the required
responded to Kevin by email on 24 May 2023 confirming the timing of the
works and identifying that the labour simply required
hand tools specific to
their particular
confirmed in his evidence that all of the emails exchanged with Mr Dillon
were sent on OSB Group email addresses with automated
signatures.
conceded that he was unable to say that he informed Mr Dillon at any point
in time that LHRE would be undertaking the job for
the Spinifex
26 May 2023, Kevin received a telephone call from Mr Massey
instructing him to mobilise two carpenters, two labourers, and a plumber
site to perform the remedial works at the Spinifex Hotel. This prompted Kevin
to email Mr Massey, copying in Mr Dillon, to
confirm the labour rates,
mobilisation costs, and identifying available
Mr Massey responded four minutes later confirming with Complete's
operations manager, Ms Gemma Lees, when the labour would be mobilised
Ms Lees then arranged the flights for the labour to travel from Perth to
29 May 2023, Kevin emailed Mr Massey and Ms Lees, copied to
Mr Dillon, an LHRE credit application form and LHRE labour hire client
terms and conditions. The content of the email was as
Please see attached for the labour supply outline [sic] below can you have this
fill [sic] out and sent back thanks.
gave evidence that the usual practice of LHRE was to provide its credit terms to
those it contracts
document provides the terms and conditions for the labour hire that govern the
credit that is
stated that ordinarily LHRE would not proceed without the credit application
form being signed and returned but on occasion
they have proceeded in the
absence of the documentation being
agreed in cross-examination that the credit application form did not attach a
scope of works, nor did it refer to the price
to perform the work, noting that
it was 'just a credit
application'.
rejected the proposition that the document did not identify the entity who would
perform the work. He stated that it identified
LHRE as the entity providing the
service/performing the
responded by email on 30 May 2023 informing Kevin that he had forwarded the
document to the relevant parties and would
credit application form (absent the terms and conditions) was emailed to
Complete again on 19 and 24 July 2023 with a request
for the form to
be completed, signed, and returned as soon as possible given that the 'LHRE
Group client needs to pay to the ScotPac
account instead of our LHRE
gave evidence that if the credit application had been completed and submitted,
and finance approved, it would have enabled
LHRE to assign the invoice for the
Spinifex Hotel job to ScotPac. Given that Complete did not submit the credit
application form,
LHRE did not obtain any finance from ScotPac and the
invoice was not provided to
at least 8 June 2023, Kevin had asked Mr Dillon for a purchase order
for the labour
stated in his evidence that the purchase order would have clarified the entity
that they were to invoice. That is, it would
have identified whether they were
to invoice completehire@sales or Spinifex and would have included the relevant
job description.
Complete never provided a purchase
gave evidence that on 1 June 2023, labour was supplied to Complete which
was on site until 18 June
stated that the company which hired the labourers who were mobilised was LHRE
and the company who paid those labourers was
was cross-examined regarding the day worksheets completed on site which had the
OSB Group box ticked when identifying the company
performing the works. On
that premise it was put to Kevin that those documents recorded that
OSB Group performed the work, not the
plaintiff, which was a proposition he
accepted that the day worksheets were prepared by Mr Jamie McPherson
but stated that he did not know who had ticked the boxes.
He rejected the
proposition that at the relevant time Mr McPherson was employed by
OSB Group, asserting that for the Spinifex Hotel
job he was an LHRE
stated that the day worksheets are used to record the work performed and that
the boxes on the forms are not an indication as
to which entity has performed
the work. Kevin gave evidence that it is the invoice which is issued which
identifies the relevant
entity. Kevin stated that there are often many mistakes
on day worksheets which are completed by labourers and not by someone with
authority to bind the company. Kevin stated that that is why an invoice is
attached to the day worksheet which is the formal invoicing
relation to the personnel employed on the Spinifex Hotel job, Kevin gave
evidence that all employees across OSB Group and LHRE
are casually employed
and depending what project they are working on, will dictate what company has
retained them. Kevin gave evidence
that the four labourers mobilised at the
Spinifex Hotel at the time were hired by LHRE and once the job was completed,
available to be rehired by OSB Group across other
gave evidence that LHRE invoiced for the work performed on the Spinifex Hotel on
3 July 2023 which was emailed to Complete
a number of emails were exchanged between LHRE and Complete in relation to the
invoice between 4 July and 2 October
cross-examined as to why the invoice was not changed to accommodate the matters
requested by Mr Dillon. Kevin provided
the following
We can't alter an invoice. If they've got signed sheets that are signed by his
own party and our party, that is the evidence that
you give for an invoice. You
can't just go altering invoices to suit someone. It's got to be what's on
- that's what you're billing
for ... we can't just go along and write whatever
we want. If we give an invoice with all the sheets, that is the back up
It's the same across every contract job that we do. You send
evidence which are invoice [sic]. Otherwise you'd have hundreds of
gave evidence that the invoice was automatically generated with a statement
noting that amounts payable had been transferred
to ScotPac which was an error
in this case because Complete did not submit the credit application
If the form
had been signed, it would have been provided to ScotPac to follow their own
internal processes and if approved, an account
would have been opened with them
gave evidence that if the procedures set out by ScotPac are not followed, then
the debt cannot be assigned and LHRE has to
pursue the debt
themselves.
Therefore the invoice being issued with the proforma statement on it was an
error as the debt had not been
gave evidence that for the purpose of this proceeding he contacted ScotPac and
obtained correspondence confirming that they
did not have any hold over the
claim in respect of the
gave evidence as to a meeting he attended together with Mr Dillon on
26 July 2023 at Complete's office. Samantha Rodgers,
Contract Administrator, was also in
attendance.
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the Onslow Project which was not
going well. There was also a brief discussion about
the Spinifex Hotel job.
Kevin gave evidence that Mr Dillon had a printed copy of LHRE's terms and
conditions and invoice on the
table in front of him and he said words to the
effect that:
(a) there were no issues with money and the invoice
would be paid; and
(b) he wanted LHRE to reword the invoice so that he could make a claim from
the Government Relief Fund for damage to rural businesses
from the bad weather
that occurred earlier that year.
gave evidence that Mr Dillon did not raise any concerns about LHRE being
the invoicing party.
the meeting, Ms Rodgers sent an email stating that the invoice was not in
Complete's system and asking for it to be resent,
which was duly
Mr Dillon also forwarded his email of 4 July 2023 asking Kevin to
address his 'fair and reasonable request dated 4
was put to Kevin in cross-examination that he handed Mr Dillon a copy of
the credit terms at the meeting which was a proposition
he rejected.
was also put to Kevin in cross-examination that Mr Dillon informed him
during the meeting that he was not signing any credit contract
with LHRE because
his contract was with OSB Group, which again was rejected by
gave evidence that at the conclusion of the meeting he asked Mr Dillon when
they would be paid in respect to the Spinifex Hotel,
and he responded 'Yep.
No. We'll get that paid for
will say more about my assessment of the witnesses in due course, however, I
note at this stage that Kevin impressed as a witness
of truth, who at times made
reasonable concessions and whose evidence was predominantly consistent with the
objective contemporaneous
Michael O'Shea
gave evidence that he is the general manager of both LHRE and OSB Group
which he runs together with his brother, Kevin.
He described LHRE as a labour
and plant hire business and OSB Group as a contractor who performs
construction projects focussing
on the mining
gave evidence of the first meeting he attended together with Kevin on
12 May 2023 with Mr Dillon and Mr Massey at Complete's
Michael stated that they each spoke about previous projects and contacts within
the industry.
had a specific recollection of discussing the
We hit it off because of the Koodaideri contract, he - he was on that as well
with Pindan. We lost 4 million. 3 million was to
LHRE. Another million was to
OSB, and we talked about Kenneth Baker.
gave evidence that he recalled informing Mr Dillon and Mr Massey that
LHRE was their labour hire company. It was put to
Michael that he was
speculating about what was discussed which he refuted. Michael gave evidence
'... it's not a guess, because
we talked about the Pindan matter. We talked
was put to Michael during cross-examination that Mr Dillon's evidence was
that at no stage during the meeting was LHRE mentioned.
I know, and that is remarkable how he can say that,
because it also points to the fact that his project manager - we left that
and then were sending emails and he asked for his wife for a job on the
, so nobody knew about LHRE. You would have had to
have been in that meeting to have known about LHRE. ... in that meeting it was
asked as well, 'What does OSB Group stand for? What does LHRE Group stand
gave evidence that after the meeting Mr Massey asked if there was a
position for his wife with LHRE and they ultimately offered
employment.
agreed that nothing was said at the initial meeting in respect to LHRE being the
contracting party for the works at the Spinifex
Hotel. Michael said that was
because he was unaware of the project until Mr Dillon telephoned him to
discuss it a few days
that discussion Mr Dillon informed him that he needed labour to mobilise to
the Spinifex Hotel and asked if they would provide
that labour. Michael
informed his brother who then contacted
gave evidence in relation to the use of OSB Group email address noting that
they worked for numerous clients and sometimes
sent emails from OSB Group
and sometimes from
gave evidence that the labourers who were mobilised on site and who performed
the works at the Spinifex Hotel were paid by
LHRE and were LHRE employees.
Following completion of the works some of the men would have been re-assigned to
was cross-examined in relation to the day worksheets completed by
Mr McPherson and the fact that most of them had the box
of OSB Group
ticked in relation to the company selected as performing the works. Michael
gave evidence that it was not the job of
labourers on site to inform as to the
entity they were working for given that that matter had already been agreed
between the parties
and in this instance, it was
stated that it was probably Mr McPherson who prepared the day worksheets,
and he accepted that he was an OSB Group
gave evidence regarding the invoice which was issued to Complete and whether the
payment claim had been assigned. He stated
that the wording on the invoice was
standardised LHRE invoicing as 9 times out of 10, clients complete the
credit application form,
and the invoice is assigned to
gave evidence that ScotPac required a completed credit application form and
performed a risk assessment before providing
LHRE finance for a job. Complete
did not fill out the application form and therefore was not set up with ScotPac
for the Spinifex
recalled Mr Dillon requesting that the invoice be edited and stating that
he would then pay it within 24 hours. He also
recalled Mr Dillon
suggesting that the invoice may need to be directed to the Spinifex Hotel.
Michael also gave evidence that Mr
Dillon asked for a credit to be provided
which was given to
said that Mr Dillon referred LHRE to Ms Lees in relation to changes
that may need to be made to the invoice. Ms Lees was
emailed but never
responded. The invoice was therefore not
I will shortly make findings in relation to my assessment of the credibility and
reliability of Michael. At this stage I
note that, in brief, Michael presented
as a credible witness doing his best to recollect matters that took place some
two years earlier.
At times it was clear that he was confused by particular
lines of questioning but nevertheless appeared to be doing his best to
questions openly and transparently.
also note that both Kevin and Michael were cross-examined as to whether they had
discussed their evidence with one another. Concessions
were made that they had
discussed the case in a general sense insofar as LHRE was owed money by
Complete, but both denied collaborating
with one another in order to advance the
plaintiff's case.
Emanuel Dillon
gave evidence on behalf of the defendant as the sole director of Complete.
Mr Dillon described Complete as being in the
business of providing building
services for a variety of different clients, including some of its related
gave evidence that one of Complete's related entities to which it provides
building services is Spinifex Holdings which
operates the Spinifex Hotel in
Derby. Mr Dillon is the sole director and shareholder of that
described the Spinifex Hotel as a hotel with approximately 126 rooms, a
restaurant, a sports bar, a bar, a TAB, a conference
room and bottle
gave evidence that from about January 2023 until in or about May 2023, the hotel
provided accommodation for residents of
Fitzroy Crossing and surrounding areas
who had become displaced due to recent
accommodation was supplied pursuant to an agreement with the Department of
Communities which provided for Spinifex Holdings to
be paid for the provision of
the accommodation. At some stage all the hotel rooms were occupied by the
the relevant period, Mr Dillon gave evidence that various internal and
external areas of the hotel were damaged by the residents
including the whole
perimeter fencing being destroyed and pushed over; graffitiing of the carpark
and paving; windows of the hotel
rooms being smashed and doors jarred open;
televisions in the hotel rooms being destroyed; carpet being defecated and
urinated on;
walls of the hotel room being spat on; offensive language
graffitied on walls internal and external of the hotel; cigarette butt
hotel room carpets and walls and fire damage inside the hotel
a result, Mr Dillon gave evidence that in or about May 2023 he decided
to arrange for repair works to be performed to the Spinifex
Hotel by Complete
subcontractors.
gave evidence that he also took the opportunity to undertake some refurbishment
stated that all subcontractors involved in the rectification and refurbishment
works were paid except for the invoice the
subject of this
proceeding.
gave evidence that he intended to seek reimbursement for some of the Spinifex
Hotel rectification work from the Department
Communities.
stated that the corporate entity claiming reimbursement was Spinifex Holdings,
not Complete.
gave evidence that whilst he proceeded to seek reimbursement from the Department
of Communities, no costs were reimbursed.
He provided documents to the
Department of Communities in order to substantiate the claim, however,
Mr Dillon denied that those
materials included documentation
referrable to the work performed by the labourers mobilised to site by Kevin.
Mr Dillon gave evidence
that those works were mentioned, but they were
not able to provide any information to support the
gave evidence regarding his meeting with Kevin and Michael on 12 May 2023.
He was initially cross-examined as to what
appeared to be inconsistencies across
affidavits sworn by him in relation to the details of this initial meeting,
including when
it took place and who attended. In this regard, Mr Dillon
was questioned as to his affidavit of 14 March 2024 filed in unrelated
Supreme Court proceedings initiated by OSB Group against Complete (the
Supreme Court
proceeding).
That affidavit identifies that the meeting took place a few days following
18 May 2023 and omits to mention the presence of
Mr Dillon's first affidavit filed in this proceeding, he also attested to
the initial meeting being attended only by
Mr Dillon first mentioned Kevin's presence at the meeting in his
11 June 2025
Mr Dillon experienced difficulties in explaining why he omitted to mention
in his earlier affidavits Kevin's attendance at the
was put to Mr Dillon that his recollection of the meeting was not very
good, which was a proposition he
accepted that the 12 May 2023 meeting was an introductory one during which
Michael and Kevin explained who they were and
evidence that they told him about OSB Group but denied that LHRE was
Mr Dillon gave evidence that the focus of the meeting was the Onslow
Project. However, he asserted that the rectification works
required at the
Spinifex Hotel also came
accepted that he spoke with Michael on 17 May 2023 regarding the works
required at the Spinifex Hotel which was followed
up by email from Kevin on
Mr Dillon's
evidence was consistent with that of Kevin and Michael that labourers were
arranged to mobilise at the Spinifex Hotel
site on 1 June 2023 and
demobilised from site on or about 18 June
was taken through the relevant email correspondence exchanged between the
parties in relation to the personnel who would
be mobilised on-site, the costs
associated with the personnel, including a one-off mobilisation cost and
also gave evidence as to the provision of the LHRE credit application and terms
and conditions which were first provided
by email on 29 May 2023.
Mr Dillon accepted that the documents had the LHRE logo on them. However,
Mr Dillon denied seeing the
documents at the time. Mr Dillon was
cross-examined as to the fact that the documents were forwarded to him again by
Mr Massey on
content of the email
stipulated:
Sent from Kevin OSB. LHRE is their labour hire division.
accepted that the documents were brought to his attention, although asserted
that there was only one document (namely that
the two documents comprised
was cross-examined as to why he did not mention receiving the 30 May 2023 email
in any of his affidavits and he
Cos - Sam Rodgers is the contracts administrator, and she administrates the
contracts for me.
was cross-examined as to the fact that his attention appeared to be drawn to
LHRE by Mr Massey on 30 May 2023 to which
I can see the words LHRE. I can see it says it's a labour hire division.
conceded that the documents were sent to him again by Kevin via email on
8 June 2023 and that he responded the following
Mr Dillon accepted that he received the email attaching the relevant
conceded that Kevin emailed him again on 13 June 2023 following up the
previous provision of 'an account opening form for
the labour supply for the
Derby hotel' and asking for it to be sent
Mr Dillon was uncertain as to whether the email was again drawing his
attention to the LHRE material previously provided to him.
gave evidence regarding an email he sent to Michael on 3 July 2023
informing him that Mineral Resources had raised a concern
and asking for
information on OSB Group, in particular urgently requesting the provision
of a capability
Mr Dillon was taken to Michael's response which listed works undertaken by
OSB Group and which also provided information on LHRE
in respect to labour
hire and plant hire
capabilities.
was put to Mr Dillon in cross-examination that based on the 3 July
2023 email his attention was again being drawn to LHRE which
was a proposition
he rejected.
Mr Dillon accepted that he copied and pasted the information and provided
gave evidence regarding the invoice he received on 4 July 2023 dated
accepted that the invoice clearly depicted the LHRE
Mr Dillon denied looking at the invoice when he received
Nevertheless he accepted that he responded the same day requesting a number of
amendments be made to
contents of Mr Dillon's email is as
Mate the invoice is one day old.
Wish you mobilised as quick.
We need the hours and names per person on the invoice please.
I need the invoice to say remedial works to the Spinifex Hotel Derby WA hotel
State the terms on the invoice.
Work with Gemma if you can.
F you do that next 24 hours it will be paid in the next run which is Friday the
14th but I need it done and approved by tomorrow
night (please).
Ensure no travel charged for and if you are claiming material we can see what
that is also.
Gemma may want it invoiced to spinifex hotel also but she can tell
was cross-examined as to how he was able to identify that the invoice provided
was one day old or to seek changes to it
in circumstances where he asserted that
he did not review it. Mr Dillon experienced significant difficulties in
answering the questions
put to him. In relation to how he was able to
ascertain, without reviewing the invoice, that it was a day old, Mr Dillon
Because it's 4 July - it's - the day - I assumed it was - I never opened it. If
- if I got something today, it's a day old.
Counsel: Mr Dillon, we just looked at the invoice together.
It was dated 3 July?---Yeah, which would make it two days
Counsel: Is that a serious answer, Mr Dillon?---Definitely.
Yeah. I mean, if I was born today, and died today,
how old was I?
was put to Mr Dillon that he was aware the invoice did not provide the
hours and names because he had seen it and therefore understood
the generic
references to the day sheets, which again was a proposition which he
following exchange then took
Counsel: Well, Mr Dillon, how did you know the invoice didn't have the
hours and the names of the persons, if you didn't open it?---I
didn't know it
did or didn't. I don't say it didn't. I just - I'm trying to help
them get paid.
accepted that he requested that the invoice specify that the remedial works were
performed to hotel rooms 1 - 34 so that
the cost could be claimed from
the Department of
Communities.
was put to Mr Dillon that the day worksheets clearly identified that the
work undertaken was
limited to rooms 1 - 34 which he
conceded. He asserted that he was not aware of that at the time because he did
not review the
However, Mr Dillon accepted that some of the works undertaken on the
Spinifex Hotel included refurbishment to the bottle shop and
the kitchen
therefore conceded that he was aware that the labourers were performing works
beyond rectification to rooms 1 - 34 irrespective
of seeing the
was put to Mr Dillon whether he was therefore asking for the invoices to be
fraudulently manipulated, which was a proposition
conceded that he also raised the possibility of the invoice being directed to
the Spinifex Hotel rather than to Complete.
He stated that was because if
materials were being claimed it would be more appropriate to invoice the hotel.
He conceded in cross-examination
that he was not concerned whether the invoice
was directed to Complete or to Spinifex
was cross-examined as to why his email did not raise any concerns that LHRE was
the invoicing party. Mr Dillon, perhaps
in the most credible part of
his evidence, stated that he was not
conceded that the invoice was followed up the same day when an accounts email
address was requested from Complete. However,
he refused to provide one,
explaining that his previous email needed to be actioned, after which payment
'easy enough'.
Mr Dillon conceded that again in that email correspondence he made no
mention of LHRE being the incorrect invoicing entity. Mr Dillon
that the invoice was sent again to Complete on 17 July
gave evidence regarding the meeting which then took place on 26 July 2023.
He agreed that his 14 March 2024 affidavit
filed in the Supreme Court
proceeding correctly attested to the fact that the meeting took place on
26 July 2023 at Complete's offices
at which Kevin, Mr Dillon and
was therefore cross-examined as to why two weeks later when he came to swear his
first affidavit in these proceedings he attested
to the meeting taking place
on or about 27 July 2023
. Mr Dillon stated that he could not
remember precisely when it took
during this part of his evidence Mr Dillon appeared to experience
difficulty in explaining the inconsistency.
asserted that the District Court affidavit was provided for the purposes of the
plaintiff's application for summary judgment
and therefore he did not go into as
much detail as perhaps he should have. It was pointed out to Mr Dillon by
counsel for the plaintiff
that in fact both of the affidavits had been prepared
for summary judgment applications, simply in two different
Mr Dillon asserted that at the time of swearing his affidavit in these
proceedings he could no longer recall the date of the meeting
whereas two weeks
earlier when he swore his affidavit in the Supreme Court proceeding he was able
to recall the precise
pointed out to Mr Dillon by counsel for the plaintiff that his Supreme
Court affidavit was sworn earlier in time and thus
he was questioned as to how
he could be certain two weeks earlier and then uncertain two weeks later.
Mr Dillon maintained that
he could not recall the precise date when he
executed his affidavit in these
proceedings.
Mr Dillon conceded that his Outlook calendar which recorded the
meeting as taking place on 26 July 2023 was available to him and
proceeding.
conceded that shortly after the meeting concluded, Ms Rodgers emailed Kevin
identifying that she had spoken to the 'key
players' in relation to the
invoice however it was not in their system and requested that it be resent,
following which the invoice
was provided
Mr Dillon agreed that he also responded on the same date, forwarding his
previous email dated 4 July
Mr Dillon was cross-examined as to the absence in his email of any
concerns in respect to LHRE despite his affidavit evidence that
26 July 2023 meeting he informed Kevin that he would not sign the credit
application, that the contract for the Spinifex
Hotel works was with
OSB Group, that Complete did not have LHRE on its systems, and that he
did not even know who LHRE was and therefore
he would only be dealing with
initially maintained his position that he was not requesting changes to the
invoice because he did not know that changes
were required but rather was simply
identifying that it needed to be made in a certain way so that it could be paid
promptly. Following
an exchange with the court Mr Dillon conceded that he
would have 'probably' seen the invoice in or about 17 or 18 July 2023 and
had in fact seen it by 26 July
circumstances it was put to Mr Dillon that despite that knowledge he
nevertheless said nothing in relation to LHRE needing
to be changed to
OSB Group. His response
Well, I made it clear what I'm after.
following exchange then took
Counsel: Exactly. You did make it clear it's the matters raised in your
4 July email, none of which concerns LHRE, Mr Dillon?---Cos
didn't exist.
conceded that he then emailed Ms Rodgers on 26 July 2023, directing
her attention to his email of
It was put to Mr Dillon in cross-examination, given that his
email was written in capital letters, that he was frustrated at the
time that he
wrote it. He accepted that potentially he was. Mr Dillon conceded that he
was frustrated because the changes he had
requested be made to the invoice on
4 July 2023 had still not been made. Mr Dillon accepted that the
emails were sent after the
meeting which took place earlier in the
conceded that during the meeting of 26 July 2023 the Spinifex Hotel job was
mentioned and Kevin asked if they were going
to get paid. However he denied
that he had a copy of the invoice on the table at the
Mr Dillon gave evidence that at the meeting he told Kevin that he did not
care who LHRE was, because they had contracted with OSB
Group and if the
invoice was amended to the correct entity then it would get
put to Mr Dillon that contrary to his evidence, all the email
correspondence exchanged immediately after the meeting made
no reference to an
issue with the invoice being issued by LHRE to which Mr Dillon
We didn't have a problem
conceded that on 27 July 2023 Ms Kaitlyn Cox, the accounts
payable officer for Complete, emailed Kevin requesting the corresponding
day worksheets related to the invoice be provided so that she could action
the approval process promptly and finalise a payment
Mr Dillon was questioned as to why the email did not refer to any issue in
respect to LHRE being the incorrect invoicing party.
No. She wouldn't know.
conceded that in response to Ms Cox's email, the invoice, together with the
day worksheets was re-sent to Complete on 27
accepted that on 13 September 2023, an internal email was sent from
Ms Rodgers to Ms Cox entitled 'LHRE Group invoice'
seeking the
'lowdown on LHRE Group invoice for works completed on the Derby hotel', because
Kevin wanted to know when the invoice
was going to be
Mr Dillon accepted that on the same day Ms Rodgers emailed Kevin
requesting a credit of $1,046.04 excluding GST
If you can please apply that credit to the invoice, I can run it past Emanuel
again for his final sign-off.
stated that he was not asking for the credit, rather that Ms Rodgers was
doing so. Mr Dillon accepted that the credit
was then provided to Complete
as requested.
was put to Mr Dillon during cross-examination that throughout the emails
exchanged between the parties not once was an issue raised
in respect to LHRE
not being the correct invoicing party to which Mr Dillon stated that he
made his position clear at the meeting
was also taken through a series of text messages exchanged between himself and
Kevin in November 2023 in respect of which
no issue was raised regarding LHRE
being the invoicing
Mr Dillon agreed that the text messages referenced discussions about the
timesheets yet stated nothing in relation to concerns regarding
LHRE being the
was put to Mr Dillon in cross-examination that one of the reasons why he
resisted paying the invoice was because he had a broader
dispute with
OSB Group and did not want to pay any money to the O'Shea brothers, which
was a proposition he
Credibility, assessments and findings on disputed facts
note the following as relevant considerations in relation to my assessment of
the reliability and credibility of the witnesses:
(a) When witnesses
give inconsistent accounts of discussions and meetings which took place some
years earlier in time, their veracity
is often tested by reference to the
objective facts proved independently of the testimony given, in particular by
reference to the
contemporaneous documentary evidence, the motives of the
witnesses, and the overall
probabilities.
(b) When there is inconsistent evidence before the court as to oral
discussions which took place some period of time before the trial,
need only be reasonably satisfied of the salient features of the alleged
conversation, that it is more probable than not
that words of that substance or
effect were spoken. The precise words spoken need not be
(c) When the court is invited to make a finding that a witness has
deliberately lied in their evidence, given the potential serious
consequences
which may flow from allegations of perjury, 'reasonable satisfaction' of such a
matter should not be reached by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect
inferences. The civil standard of proof remains the same, but the seriousness
of the issue
affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
(d) Proof of matters on the balance of probabilities does not require the
court to reach a threshold of satisfaction to a degree of
will suffice if the objective circumstances give rise to a more probable
inference in favour of the position the plaintiff
(e) The evidence must be considered as a whole, rather than in a piece-meal
or selective
court must consider the weight which is to be given to the united force of all
the circumstances put together in determining
whether they raise a more probable
inference in favour of what is
mentioned earlier in these reasons, I found both Kevin and Michael to be
credible witnesses, doing their best to provide the court
with their honest
recollection. In large part their evidence was also corroborated by the
contemporaneous documentary trail.
same could not be said in relation to Mr Dillon and the evidence he
provided in this proceeding. In short, Mr Dillon was an
unimpressive
witness and most of his evidence could not be confidently relied upon by the
court unless corroborated by contemporaneous
documents. I will explain the
basis of this assessment as I address some of the contentious areas of
is the question as to whether LHRE was a topic of discussion at the initial
meeting which took place between the parties on
12 May 2023.
Mr Dillon adamantly gave evidence that LHRE was never mentioned at that
meeting. Kevin and Michael both gave evidence
that not only was LHRE mentioned,
but that they also discussed the nature of its work and the fact that it had
lost a considerable
sum of money on a Pindan project.
my view, the evidence of Kevin and Michael was both credible and reliable in
relation to this matter. It was also entirely plausible.
witnesses accepted that the 12 May 2023 meeting was an introductory one
given at that early stage the parties were relatively
unfamiliar with one
another. It follows, as a matter of common sense, that in such a context Kevin
and Michael would want to appraise
Complete as to the capabilities of both of
their corporate entities. In addition, both Kevin and Michael had very
specific recollections
of discussing the significant losses incurred,
particularly by LHRE, on a Pindan project, which one of
Mr Dillon's corporate entities
was also involved in. Michael could recall
the name of that project, being the Koodaideri contract. The specificity
of that recollection
served the purpose of grounding it for both witnesses.
Again, it is highly plausible that in such an introductory
meeting, the parties
would seek to find common ground between them to
establish rapport.
Kevin and Michael's evidence was not identical on who mentioned what detail at
the meeting, that is hardly surprising when
witnesses are attempting to
recollect precise words which were spoken some years earlier in respect of which
no record exists. The
court would be more concerned if their evidence
was perfectly complimentary, like a well-fitted glove, which might indicate
collaboration,
contamination or corruption of the evidence.
Their imperfect recollections reflected the integrity of the evidence and
its veracity.
addition, Michael specifically recalled Mr Massey contacting him after the
meeting to explore whether there was a position available
at LHRE for his wife,
which subsequently resulted in her being offered employment by that entity.
Indeed, Michael's demeanour in
giving that evidence was somewhat incredulous
that Mr Dillon could deny any knowledge of LHRE whilst his project manager
knew of the entity but pursued employment for his wife with it. Again,
I find that that specific recollection grounds the evidence
of Michael that LHRE
was indeed raised at that meeting. If it had not been, then the discussion that
followed with Mr Massey simply
could not have taken place. Michael's
evidence in this regard did not appear to be challenged and whilst it was not
contained in
his affidavit evidence, it appeared to me that it arose organically
(as evidence is prone to do at times) through the spontaneity
cross-examination process. Michael was not questioned as to the absence of that
detail in his affidavit and nor were the
LHRE employment records in respect of
Mr Massey's wife called for. I accept Michael's evidence as both credible
and reliable.
Mr Dillon's
evidence in respect to this initial meeting in my view lacked credibility,
reliability and plausibility. In relation
to reliability, Mr Dillon had
significant difficulties over a relatively short period of time in recollecting
the date of the meeting
or who in fact attended it. Also, despite accepting
that it was an introductory meeting, he refused to accept what logically flowed
from that premise, namely, that the O'Shea brothers would want to
explain the capabilities across their corporate entities.
Mr Dillon gave evidence that it was at this initial meeting that the works
required at the Spinifex Hotel was first raised,
I reject that evidence as
lacking in credibility and reliability. Firstly, Mr Dillon accepted that
the primary purpose of the meeting
was to discuss the Onslow Project. Secondly,
the contemporaneous documentary evidence indicates that the Spinifex Hotel
rectification
works was first raised in a telephone conversation between
Mr Dillon and Michael on 17 May 2023. In my view, if the matter had
fact been raised at the 12 May 2023 meeting, email correspondence
following that meeting would most likely exist evidencing its progression.
such earlier correspondence exists. The first email correspondence created in
relation to the matter is dated 18 May 2023 because,
as that correspondence
indicates, the matter was first raised the previous day by Mr Dillon by
Mr Dillon also gave evidence that at the meeting there was a document
on the table with the words 'OSB' and 'Capability Statement'
which he flicked
Neither Kevin nor Michael were cross-examined as to that matter and I note that
their affidavits (which were sworn and filed earlier
in time to Mr Dillon's
affidavit which attests to this matter) are silent on it.
reject Mr Dillon's evidence in relation to that matter as lacking in both
credibility and reliability. Mr Dillon experienced great
difficulty in
explaining the absence of this evidence in both affidavits he had prepared and
filed in the Supreme Court proceeding,
which addressed what took place at the
12 May 2023 meeting, and its absence in his initial affidavit prepared and
filed in this
proceeding.
The absence of the evidence in the Supreme Court proceeding in particular raises
serious doubts as to its reliability when one considers
the fact that in those
proceedings Mr Dillon alleges that he was misled by that very document in
order to contract with OSB Group
for the Onslow Project. The crucial
nature of that evidence to the issues in contention in that proceeding is
therefore self-evident
and was conceded as such by Mr Dillon during his
evidence in this
proceeding.
Yet in the Supreme Court proceeding Mr Dillon attested to the fact that he
received the document
on or around 3 July 2023
, entirely consistent with
the documentary evidence before this
Namely, that Mr Dillon urgently requested Michael to provide an
OSB Group capability statement on 3 July 2023 which was then
immediately
provided to
in the email exchange between Mr Dillon and Michael on 3 July 2023
indicates that the very same document had been provided
to Complete only a few
weeks earlier. That is because, in my view, it had not been.
therefore find that, as at 12 May 2023, Mr Dillon, and therefore
Complete, was not only aware of the existence of LHRE, but was
also aware that
it was involved in the supply of labour hire.
I turn to the matter of the provision of the credit application and labour hire
terms and conditions which were emailed
to Complete on a number of
gave evidence that at no time prior to the labour hire mobilising on site in
Derby did he review those documents. I reject
that evidence. I find,
by way of inference, that by at least 30 May 2023 Mr Dillon had
reviewed those documents and therefore was
aware that they were documents of
LHRE. This inference is open to being drawn because those documents were
provided to Mr Dillon
by Kevin on 29 May
by Mr Massey by email on 30 May
no plausible explanation in the circumstances as to why Mr Dillon would not
have reviewed the documents given that they
had been provided to him with a
request for them to be completed and returned. He chose not to do so, as is the
case in relation
to the request to provide a purchase order. Nevertheless, in
my view he was aware of them.
appeared very clear during the testimony given by Mr Dillon that no matter
the strength of the documentary evidence to which his
attention was directed, he
refused to accept that he had read a document, at least prior to mid-late July
2023, that mentioned LHRE.
Indeed there were multiple occasions between
29 May 2023 and 17 July 2023 when documents were emailed to
Mr Dillon which referenced
LHRE and he denied reading each and every one of
them, in circumstances where at times he was responding to the very
contents of
those documents (in relation to the tax invoice issued in the name
of LHRE) and in circumstances where he passed information about
LHRE onto his
own client.
Such evidence in all of the factual circumstances is simply incredulous.
therefore reject the evidence of Mr Dillon in which he denied reading a
document which contained a reference to LHRE.
in this vein, is the issue as to whether Mr Dillon viewed the LHRE tax
invoice dated 3 July 2023 when it was first emailed
to him on 4 July
2023. In my view he undoubtedly did so despite his vehement assertions
otherwise. It is inconceivable that Mr
Dillon did not read the email yet
was able to correctly identify the following in relation to
(a) that it was provided one day late, namely the invoice was
dated 3 July 2023, and it was provided the following day on 4 July
(b) that the invoice did not provide the hours or the names of the personnel
who were supplied;
(c) that the invoice did not state that it was in relation to remedial works
in respect to the Spinifex Hotel in Derby, Western Australia,
in relation
to rooms 1 - 34;
(d) that it did not state the terms on the invoice beyond requiring payment
to be made within 30 days;
(e) that it was not invoiced to the Spinifex Hotel; and
(f) that it was not clear on the face of it whether travel had been charged
for and whether there was any claim in respect to
Mr Dillon's
evidence that he merely correctly speculated that those matters may not be
addressed in the invoice borders on the absurd.
He knew that they were not
addressed in the invoice
he had reviewed the invoice. Indeed,
the invoice was significant to Mr Dillon because he intended to claim
reimbursement of the
costs from the Department of Communities. He therefore
understood that the information he sought would likely be required for any
claim. I find that Mr Dillon read the invoice every single time it
was provided to him as well illustrated by his responses
which repeatedly
requested that changes be made to it consistent with his 4 July 2023 email.
therefore follows that I reject Mr Dillon's evidence that he did not raise
concerns in relation to LHRE being the invoicing party
because he had not
reviewed the invoice until sometime in mid-late July 2023. That evidence is
false. On his own evidence Mr Dillon
stated that he was not concerned that
it had been issued by
I accept that evidence; it is clear that he was not concerned because if he
had a concern, he certainly had plentiful opportunities
to raise the matter and
did not do so.
I turn to what was discussed at the 26 July 2023 meeting. Again, I
find the evidence of Kevin to be both credible and reliable and
also entirely
consistent with the contemporaneous communications which exist in documentary
form exchanged between the parties following
that meeting. Mr Dillon's
evidence continued to be unimpressive. He appeared to be evasive in relation to
the date of the meeting
in his affidavit evidence filed with this court, in
contrast to the affidavit he filed in the Supreme Court proceeding. This is
despite the fact that his own Outlook calendar entry for the meeting was part of
the trial bundle of documents exhibited in this
is at this meeting for the first time that Mr Dillon stated that he raised
a concern with Kevin that he would not be dealing with
LHRE. Kevin rejected
that that statement was ever made during the meeting, and I accept his evidence
in that regard. The meeting
had been arranged to discuss issues in relation to
the Onslow Project. At the conclusion of the meeting Kevin asked
Mr Dillon when
they were going to get paid for the Spinifex Hotel works.
It is entirely plausible that he would raise that concern at this opportunity
given that the invoice remained outstanding.
the meeting a number of email communications were exchanged between the parties
including a request by Complete for the
invoice to be provided again because it
was not on their system. Nowhere in any of that correspondence was the issue
raised that
LHRE was not the appropriate invoicing
absence of its mention, despite Mr Dillon's evidence as to its significance
to him at that point in time, speaks volumes. Its
complete omission in the
contemporaneous documentary evidence is because, consistent with Kevin's
evidence at trial, it was not mentioned
by Mr Dillon during that meeting or
at any stage before or thereafter. If it were as crucial an issue to
Mr Dillon as he gave evidence
of, it would have been documented.
Certainly, other issues were the subject of email communication by
Mr Dillon. The identity of
LHRE as the invoicing party was not.
despite Mr Dillon's denials of this fact, I positively find that his
refusal to pay the invoice was because, at least initially,
Kevin had not
made the required changes to it, which would have facilitated his claim for
reimbursement from the Department of Communities.
That is the only logical and
rational inference that flows from all the evidence before the court when
considered in its totality.
The request for those changes was repeatedly made
by Mr Dillon and Kevin was unable to make certain of those changes, in
the day worksheets which evidenced what works were performed.
In essence, the work that was performed was the work that was
Jones v Dunkel
parties each made submissions inviting the court to draw an inference that the
failure to call a witness was because of a fear
that the evidence would not
assist them:
The plaintiff made this submission in light of the defendant's failure to call
Mr Massey to give evidence as to the nature of the
discussion which took
place at the 12 May 2023 meeting. The defendant also made the submission
in relation to Mr Massey, given that
he left the defendant's employment to
take a position with the plaintiff shortly after completion of the Spinifex
Hotel works. The
defendant also invited the court to draw the same adverse
inference against the plaintiff for its failure to call Mr McPherson to
address the question of his employment at the relevant time and his completion
of the day worksheets.
am grateful to his Honour Vaughan J for his helpful discussion of the
application of the rule in
Jones v Dunkel
Drainage & Constructions Pty Ltd v Karara Mining Ltd [No
The rule in
Jones v Dunkel
is accepted to be an application of the
maxim that evidence is to be weighed according to the proof which it was within
of one side to have produced and in the power of the other to have
contradicted.
There are, however, well established limits to what may be established by a
Jones v Dunkel
inference. In particular:
Jones v Dunkel
permit an adverse inference that the uncalled evidence would have been
positively damaging to the party. As was said by
Menzies J in
, the absence of the witness cannot be used to make up any
deficiency of evidence.
Jones v Dunkel
does not prevent favourable
inferences being drawn in favour of the party if other evidence justifies the
matters of fact alleged in the defence are otherwise established by the
evidence, the failure to call the uncalled witness does
not detract from such a
(footnotes omitted)
would add to the above that the court ought to be cautious in drawing a
Jones v Dunkel
inference where there is a competing inference
available that the reason the witness was not called is because they had no
relationship with the fact or facts in
firstly the submission made by the defendant in respect of the failure of the
plaintiff to call Mr McPherson as a witness
at trial. In my view no
inference is capable of being drawn in relation to that
decision. Any evidence of Mr McPherson's subjective understanding of the
entity which had engaged him at the relevant time (in an evidentiary context
where employees had a level of transference between
the plaintiff and
OSB Group) had no relevance to the issue as to which entity had legally
contracted with the defendant. His absence
as a witness therefore is
unsurprising.
turn to consider the failure of the parties to call Mr Massey as a witness
at trial to give evidence as to whether the plaintiff
was mentioned at the
12 May 2023 meeting. It was not in contention that at the time of the
meeting Mr Massey was employed by the
defendant and was the project manager
for the Spinifex Hotel works. It is also not in contention that Mr Massey
left the employment
of the defendant shortly after the works were completed and
commenced employment with OSB Group. At the time of the trial, he was
longer in that position of
employment.
my view it is open to the court to find that there was some animosity between
Mr Massey and Mr Dillon at the time of his departure
employment with the defendant such that the decision not to call him may have
been based on that consideration as opposed
necessarily to a fear that his
evidence would not assist the
relation to the plaintiff's decision not to call Mr Massey,
I similarly find that it does not allow the court to draw a
inference against that party. It is unclear on what terms
Mr Massey left the employment of the plaintiff. In addition,
in circumstances
where no notes exist of the meeting on 12 May 2023,
it was open to the plaintiff (and indeed the defendant) to consider that
would be unable to shed any light on the details of the
discussion some two years later.
Michael gave evidence that at some point following the meeting Mr Massey
asked whether there was a position available for
his wife with the plaintiff, it
appears that that evidence was given organically and relatively spontaneously
through the course
of cross-examination as opposed to a matter which had been
recollected prior to trial (and which therefore may have factored into
consideration to call Mr Massey at
lastly, whilst the evidence of what was said regarding the plaintiff at the
12 May 2023 meeting has relevance in this trial,
it could not be
said to be determinative of the crucial issue as to identifying the relevant
parties to the agreement.
all the circumstances, in my view no
Jones v Dunkel
should be drawn by the court in the failure of either party to call
Mr Massey as a witness at trial.
Statutory scheme
has been noted above, the plaintiff's claim arises in a statutory context of the
SOP Act which replaced the
Construction Contracts Act 2004
The SOP Act applies to construction contracts formed on or after
express object of the SOP Act is 'to provide an effective and fair process
for securing payments to persons who undertake to
carry out construction work in
the construction industry': s 3(1). That object is achieved primarily by
the creation of a statutory
entitlement to progress payments in favour of
persons undertaking construction work, facilitated by an expedited process for
resolution of those
'Construction
contract' is given a broad definition and includes 'a contract, agreement
or other arrangement under which one party
undertakes to carry out construction
work, or to supply related goods and services, for another party': s 5.
Relevantly in this
case, 'construction work' is defined to include 'the
alteration, repair, restoration, maintenance, ... of any building, structure
SOP Act creates a statutory right to progress payments in favour of persons who
have undertaken to carry out construction work
pursuant to a construction
right to payment therefore is a statutory right separate to any contractual
claim at common law or otherwise. The mechanism
by which a person asserts the
statutory claim is by issuing a 'payment claim' to the person who 'is or may be
liable to make the
progress payment': s 22(1). Section 20 identifies
the due date for payment being 25 business days after the payment claim.
is payable on unpaid amounts from that due
respondent to a payment claim is afforded the opportunity of responding by
providing a 'payment schedule' to the claimant within
15 business days:
s 25(1)(b). If the respondent does not propose to make any payment, the
payment schedule must indicate that position
identifying the reason why:
s 25(2)(d), s 25(3)(a) and s 25(3)(b).
If the respondent does not provide a payment schedule as prescribed,
they become liable to pay the claimed amount by the due date as if the claim
were admitted in full: s 26. If the respondent does
not pay the debt by
the due date, then the complainant is able to enforce the statutory debt
summarily in recovery proceedings before
a competent
purpose of these provisions was recently considered by his Honour
Musikanth J in the Supreme Court
proceeding:
(1) The evident purpose of the procedure contemplated by s 25 of the Act is
to encourage a respondent to engage with a payment claim.
(2) With the benefit of a payment schedule, the claimant will quickly know
whether its claim is accepted or contested (and if contested,
reason why).
(3) The payment schedule serves the important function of informing the claimant
of the metes and bounds of the dispute so that the
respondent can make an
informed choice as to how to proceed.
(4) If the [claimed or scheduled amount owed] is not paid by the due date, the
Act creates a
statutory debt
in favour of the claimant which may be
recovered in proceedings before a competent court.
(5) In short, the approach reflects a 'clear parliamentary intention of "speak
up or pay up"'.
(footnotes omitted)
statutory scheme is ordinarily used in circumstances where the construction
contract remains on foot and progress payments need
to be met in order to ensure
construction works can continue unimpeded. As such it is an interim payment
which does not affect the
party's final rights and entitlements at general
statutory scheme aimed at ensuring that money in relatively large construction
projects keeps flowing and works do not come
an unusual approach to an alleged failure to pay an amount due and owing in
circumstances where there are no ongoing works
to be performed (and therefore
the payment claim was not a true progress claim) nevertheless it is not in
dispute between the parties
that the statutory scheme of the SOP Act
applies. The sole question being whether the plaintiff is in fact the relevant
the construction contract.
is also not in dispute between the parties that given that the defendant did not
provide the plaintiff with a payment schedule
as required by s 25, if the
court finds that the plaintiff was a party to the relevant construction
contract, the defendant became
liable to pay the payment claim on
Did LHRE contract with Complete?
Plaintiff's position
plaintiff's primary case is that, when adopting the analytical mode of offer and
acceptance, a contract was formed between the
parties on or about 1 June
2023. In this regard the plaintiff asserts the following:
emails exchanged between 18 May and 26 May 2023 evidences the scope of
works to be carried out as opposed to evincing an objective
intention by the
parties to be bound immediately and comprehensively;
(b) once the scope of works had been identified, the plaintiff was then in a
position to make its offer by proffering its terms and
conditions of supply on
29 May 2023 which the plaintiff submits was an offer in the most classical
(c) the plaintiff notes that an offeror may prescribe a method of acceptance,
which in this case was the acceptance by the defendant
of the labour onsite
constituting its agreement to the plaintiff's stipulated terms and
conditions;
(d) once the labour mobilised onsite on 1 June 2023 the plaintiff
submits the defendant accepted its terms and conditions and the
formally accepted.
plaintiff submitted to the court that contrary to the defendant's position at
trial, the terms and conditions provided to the
defendant are not those in
respect of the provision of credit. Rather, they are standalone terms of labour
supply covering matters
pertinent to such contractual arrangements such as
invoicing and supply arrangements, expenses, applicable law, occupational health
and safety, medical costs, warranties as to the qualifications of the labourers
supplied, insurance, timesheets and so forth. The
plaintiff contends that the
terms are freestanding and operate whether or not there is also an agreement in
place for the supply
alternative approach relied upon by the plaintiff is for the court to undertake
the more involved analysis of inferring a contract
from all of the objective
circumstances in lieu of identifying a specific offer and acceptance. In this
regard the plaintiff invites
the court's attention to the
(a) the various communications of LHRE material provided
to Complete;
(b) the evidence before the court that LHRE supplied and paid for the labour
(c) the conduct of Mr Dillon on behalf of the defendant in treating
uncontroversial the presence of LHRE as the invoicing party at
all times and
thus as the legally contracted party.
relation to the defendant's contention that the court ought to find that the
parties agreed to the essential terms of the contract
on 26 May 2023, which
constituted an offer made by OSB Group that was accepted by Complete, the
plaintiff submits that this an erroneous
approach for the following reasons:
the defendant pleading that Mr Massey acted on behalf of Complete, it
adduced no evidence at trial of his actual authority.
The plaintiff submits
that the evidence before the court in fact demonstrates to the contrary, namely
that Mr Massey lacked authority.
For example, in his email of 13 May
2023, he forwarded LHRE's terms and conditions 'to the relevant parties',
Additionally, Mr Dillon described in his evidence Mr Massey as a
mere employee
who was employed by Complete for a period of only eight
approach invited by the defendant is atomistic in nature which has been subject
of criticism by the Court of
as the defendant sought to rely on the booking of flights for the labour as
evidence of a contract, the plaintiff notes that
this was not
as the defendant relied on the day worksheets, this is a further illustration of
selective identification of material contrary
to the established principles of
contract formation. In any event the plaintiff submits to the court that
little can be drawn from
the ticking of OSB Group boxes because there was
no evidence before the court as to who ticked the box, the employees
ostensible authority to bind the company, and ultimately the day
worksheets were reproduced without any box ticked prior to their
provision to
the defendant. The plaintiff submits therefore that the ticking of the box on
the day worksheets cannot be determinative
of the legal contracting
consideration of the totality of the evidence enables the court to consider
admissions against interest given the course of conduct
of Mr Dillon in
failing to ever take issue with LHRE being the relevant invoicing party and
therefore the relevant contracting party.
The plaintiff submits that
Mr Dillon's conduct, and therefore the conduct of the defendant,
is consistent only with the position
that it was contracting with the
the plaintiff submits that if the court is unable to find the formal formation
of a contract, an alternative way of proceeding
is for the court to characterise
the very same conduct identified by the plaintiff as giving rise to an
arrangement. The plaintiff
submits that this involves giving a different legal
characterisation to the same set of material facts.
plaintiff accepts that if the court finds that a contract was formed, then there
is no need for it to consider whether an arrangement
Defendant's position
defendant submits to the court that an examination of the relevant documents
reveals an objective intention between Complete
and OSB Group to enter into
a construction contract for the works at the Spinifex Hotel given the
(a) the pre-contractual written communications, and the
written communications by which the contract was formed, were all sent and
received on behalf of OSB Group. As such, the defendant submits that
a reasonable person would have understood that it was OSB Group
offering to perform construction work for Complete and who ultimately undertook
to carry out that work;
(b) there is no written communication or other form of documentary evidence
capable of establishing that Complete's directing mind
and will (being
Mr Dillon) knew about the existence of LHRE until after the essential terms
of the construction contract were agreed
with OSB Group
(which occurred on 26 May 2023); and
(c) conduct occurring contemporaneously with OSB Group's performance of
the work unequivocally supports the conclusion that it was
that entity, and not
LHRE, that contracted with Complete.
relation to the latter point the defendant invites the court to have regard to
the following documents which it says enables the
court to make a finding or
draw an inference that it was OSB Group who performed the works at the
Spinifex Hotel:
(a) the day worksheets in respect of which the box
of OSB Group was ticked, being documents completed by Mr McPherson,
who was also
described as an employee of OSB Group in contemporaneous
correspondence;
(b) Mr Swain's site report of 6 June 2023 which referred to the
work being performed by employees of
(c) the failure of Kevin and Michael at any time to correct references in
email correspondence that the labour supplied to the Spinifex
employees of OSB Group.
defendant submits to the court that insofar as the plaintiff relies on the terms
and conditions emailed to Mr Massey on 29 May
2023 as constituting an
offer or forming part of the contract for the provision of labour to the
Spinifex Hotel:
(a) any reliance on that document is ill-founded and
misplaced in circumstances where Complete did not ask for credit, and nor did
execute the credit application;
(b) the terms and conditions form part of a 4-page document, with pages 1 and
2 being the credit application and pages 3 and 4 appearing
to be the terms and
conditions regulating the provision of any credit;
(c) it is not in contention that Complete never sought credit, was never
provided any credit, nor was party to any terms and conditions
in respect to any
provision of credit;
(d) in any event the credit application must be executed by the relevant
party in order to acknowledge that they have read and understood
the attached
terms and conditions thus expressly acknowledging not only that the four pages
constitute one collective document, but
secondly the document takes no effect
unless the certification statement is completed as stipulated;
(e) on its plain reading the credit application regulates the provision of
credit to the successful credit applicant and stands separately
and aside from
the contract for the supply of labour which clearly proceeded in the absence of
any application for credit being sought
or granted;
(f) the credit application was not a separate document to the terms and
conditions as evidenced by the fact that the documents are
numbered sequentially
and given that the terms and conditions were never provided to the defendant in
the absence of the credit
application;
(g) whilst the defendant accepts that an offeror can prescribe a mode of
acceptance, in this case there was no evidence of a prescribed
acceptance in relation to the 4-page document given that neither party conducted
themselves in a manner which evidenced that
they were bound by it.
For example, the defendant notes that LHRE did not provide a schedule of
rates as required by cl 3.1, invoices
were not issued weekly as required by
cl 4.1 and the invoice which was issued was not required to be paid within
14 days (cl 4.2).
relation to the plaintiff's contention that the court ought to find that
Mr Dillon's silence in relation to LHRE being the invoicing
party, should
be taken as an admission against interest, the defendant submits that there is
no proper basis on which the court could
make that adverse finding. The
defendant submits that the court ought to accept the evidence of Mr Dillon
that he did not raise
an objection because at all times he held the subjective
belief that Complete had contracted with OSB Group, which the defendant
submits is entirely consistent with Mr Dillon's emails to Mr Swain and
Michael on 6 June 2023 which referred to the labour supplied
as being that
of OSB Group. The defendant submits that during the relevant period
of time Mr Dillon did not even know that the plaintiff,
as a separate
corporate entity, existed. In this regard the defendant notes that there was no
unequivocal communication ever made
by the plaintiff to the defendant that it
was contracting with LHRE. Indeed, all of the contemporaneous communications,
on the defendant's
case, reflected otherwise.
relation to the plaintiff's alternative argument, namely that an arrangement was
entered into between the parties, the defendant
repeats its position as set out
above. Namely, an arrangement still requires a consensus or meeting of the
minds between the two
this regard the defendant submits that the consensus or meeting of the minds was
between Complete and OSB Group.
Consideration
traditional approach to the question as to whether parties have reached
agreement is to enquire whether there has been both offer
acceptance.
That approach requires a clear outward manifestation of an offer made by one
party (the offeror) of a willingness to be bound on
certain terms which is then
accompanied by an unequivocal assent to that offer communicated by the other
party to the negotiation
(the offeree). The parties' intentions to be
bound is objectively determined, with the court considering the interpretation
a reasonable person would place upon the parties' words and actions,
rather than the subjective intention espoused by the parties
themselves.
has been recognised however that at times the approach as to whether a binding
agreement has been concluded is difficult to analyse
in terms of offer and
acceptance and indeed such an approach may, in the context of the
particular factual circumstances, be
unrealistic.
A binding agreement can therefore be found without identifying,
in the traditional sense, an offer and acceptance. That approach
involves an analysis of inferring a contract from an objective consideration of
all the relevant facts and circumstances which are
found to exist including
(a) examining what the parties said and did in the context in
which those statements and actions occurred;
(b) an objective discernment of the import and meaning of relevant
contemporaneous documents;
(c) having regard to the surrounding relevant circumstances
as found to be
by the parties; and
(d) the genesis, purpose and object of the relevant
transaction.
question is whether, in all the circumstances, can an agreement between the
plaintiff and defendant be inferred? Has a mutual
assent been given
by the defendant to an offer
made by the plaintiff
? That involves a
consideration as to what a reasonable person in the position of the plaintiff
and a reasonable person in the position
of the defendant would think as to
whether a concluded bargain had been reached
between those two
the context of this case, it is important to also consider what part, if any,
the role of silence as post-contractual conduct
has to play in the determination
of the crucial question. In that regard I note the following relevant
principles:
(a) post-contractual conduct is admissible on the
question of whether a contract was
(b) subsequent communications may legitimately be used against a party as an
admission by conduct of the existence or non-existence,
as the case may be, of a
subsisting contract, where an issue concerns whether a particular person was a
party to the
(c) subsequent communications may be taken into account (including silence in
response to a propounded contractual position) as a
factor in determining
whether prior dealings between the parties gave rise to a binding
(d) the post-contractual conduct cannot permissibly be used in order to
interpret the terms of a contract but rather is confined to
the question as to
what was the real contract between the parties and what were their beliefs as to
the effect of the written
(e) it is only in cases where the post-contractual evidence is clear that
inferences, such as the existence of a contract, will be
Nevertheless, there is nothing in principle which prevents proof of a contract
by admissions as long as the admission is
made with sufficient clarity and
deliberation.
evidence of post-contractual conduct is admissible in this case regarding the
question of whether a binding contract was entered
into between the plaintiff
and the defendant. It is certainly not capable of being conclusive of that
matter because ultimately
the construction of a contract is always an objective
determination for the court. Nevertheless, it is a matter that the court may
have regard to in making that objective determination.
this case, in my view, the traditional approach of offer and acceptance is not
capable of identifying whether a contract existed,
whether it be between the
plaintiff and the defendant, or whether it be between OSB Group and the
defendant. This is because, on
the basis of all the facts and circumstances of
this case, the negotiation of the contract proceeded both organically,
informally,
and relatively quickly over a matter of days in respect of which the
parties appeared to struggle to ensure formal matters were properly
If that were not the case, the dispute simply would not have arisen.
is necessary for the court to determine who the contracting parties are because
of the actions, or inactions of the parties -
the plaintiff's failure to
expressly communicate that it was the offeror, and the defendant's failure to
query or at the very least
to clarify that matter. The latter matter is
pertinent in circumstances where the court has made a finding that the defendant
appraised as at 12 May 2023, that the O'Shea brothers had two
businesses through which they operated.
turn then to undertake an objective assessment of what was conveyed by the
parties by their words and actions in the relevant surrounding
circumstances as
known by them and when considering the genesis, purpose and object of the
transaction.
I note that much has been said by the defendant in these proceedings of an
assumption purportedly made by it that it was
contracting with OSB Group
because it received a number of emails using that entity's email address and
signature footer. In my
view, the emphasis and reliance on that matter is
misplaced. I say this when one considers, objectively, the totality of the
before the court as to the parties' words, conduct, and knowledge which
relevantly includes the following:
(a) Mr Dillon, the
controlling mind and will of the defendant, knew as of 12 May 2023
that the O'Shea brothers operated through two
business entities, OSB Group
which undertook primarily large mining contracts and LHRE which was its labour
supply division;
(b) on 17 May 2023, Mr Dillon, acting as Complete, enquired of
Michael labour supply services for rectification works at the Spinifex
This conversation took place five days after Mr Dillon attended a meeting
during which he was informed that LHRE provided
that very type of service;
(c) whilst the defendant certainly received emails in respect of the Spinifex
Hotel works on the email address of OSB Group, I note
(i) simultaneously during the relevant period, the defendant was also
negotiating with OSB Group in relation to the Onslow Project.
defendant was therefore in communications with both Kevin and Michael utilising
the OSB Group email addresses for that separate
but simultaneously
negotiated arrangement;
(ii) the defendant knew that both OSB Group and LHRE were companies of
the O'Shea brothers;
(iii) the unchallenged evidence before the court is that both OSB Group
and LHRE operated from the same office premises and shared
administrative personnel and indeed utilised the same casual labour workforce
across their projects. That is, there was
fluidity across the organisational
structures and operations of those entities as one might expect when both are
operated by two
(iv) it ought to be uncontroversial for the court to recognise that in the
current technological world in which individuals operate,
and the speed within
which they do so, that often the email address from which one chooses to
communicate is simply a matter of convenience
rather than the conveyance of a
level of formality. This is particularly so when individuals have
access to multiple email addresses.
In the context of this case the O'Shea
brothers were already communicating with Mr Dillon using their
OSB Group email. As a matter
of convenience, it seems logical that they
would continue to do so despite extending into communications in relation to a
my view, therefore, at the time that the 26 May 2023 email was sent by
Kevin to Complete, the identity of which corporate entity
the O'Shea brothers
were utilising for the labour supply had not been formally identified albeit the
plaintiff subjectively intended
to be the offeror. In my view, an objective
analysis of all the relevant facts and circumstances by 26 May 2023
evidence that that
matter remained ambiguous. For that reason, despite details
of the relevant personnel being offered and the rates at which they
charged being communicated (and purportedly accepted by Mr Massey) it was
not possible for that correspondence to constitute
an offer capable of
acceptance.
further issue arises, if the court is wrong in its finding, as to the authority
of Mr Massey as an employee of Complete to bind
it in any contract whether
it be with OSB Group or with LHRE. Despite the defendant pleading that
Mr Massey was acting for and on
behalf of Complete in his communications on
26 May 2023, no evidence was led by the defendant to establish that matter
fact of his employment.
party claiming that apparent or ostensible authority exists in a particular case
bears the onus of
defendant submitted to the court that the matter of authority was not in issue
in the pleadings and therefore no onus of proof
not accept that submission. The matter of agency has been pleaded by the
defendant. Given that the defendant alleges, by
way of defence, that a contract
was entered into by its agent, the defendant bears the onus of proof that the
agent had the authority
scope of apparent authority is determined by asking what the principal has
represented to the third
authority of an agent may be apparent, where it results from such a
manifestation made by the principal to the third
apparent or ostensible authority to exist, a representation therefore must be
made by the principal (Complete) through words
or conduct, expressly or
impliedly, or by acquiescence as to the agent's authority to act on
the behalf of the principal in relation
to which the third party has
if the court were to take the evidence at its highest in favour of the defendant
and infer that ostensible authority existed
on the basis of an implied
representation made by Mr Dillon on behalf of Complete by acquiescing to
Mr Massey's agreeance to terms,
that is not capable of establishing
authority to the extent of Mr Massey determining
Complete would
contract with. Indeed, as I mentioned that matter had not been specifically
addressed by the parties at the time
of the relevant communications.
further hurdle in relation to this matter is that ostensible authority operates
, that is, by preventing the principal (Complete) from
that the agent had the authority to legally bind the principal in
the relevant
in my view in any event the defendant cannot rely upon it in the manner pleaded.
follows therefore that no contract was entered into on 26 May 2023 and
indeed the issue of the identity of the relevant contracting
party (as offeror)
in my view remained a live one.
may strike as somewhat unusual that terms were being agreed, and indeed were
starting to be acted upon, in the absence of an agreement
as to which entity was
going to perform the requisite services the subject of those terms. However, in
my view that matter is not
so striking in a case where the identity of the
contracting party was limited to a choice of two, both with the same sole
and controlling mind, and both operated by the same two individuals in
circumstances where there was a clear level of ambivalence
by the other
negotiating party as to that very
such circumstances the clear materiality and significance of Kevin's email to
Mr Massey and Ms Lees, copied to Mr Dillon, on 29
2023 becomes
email attaches the only formal documents provided to Complete prior to it
accepting the supply of labour the subject of negotiation.
identifies LHRE and is split into two separate documents entitled 'LHRE credit
application form' and 'LHRE labour hire
client terms and conditions' as is
evident in the attachment line of the email.
is not disputed in the proceeding that the credit application form was never
completed by Complete and therefore it never sought
a supply of credit and nor
was one provided. What is in dispute is whether the terms and conditions
provided together with the credit
application form were standalone terms of
labour supply which were being put forward to Complete for its acceptance.
my view the LHRE standard terms and conditions document was indeed a standalone
document despite it being numbered sequentially
with the credit application form
for the following reasons:
(a) a standalone document can
nevertheless be attached to various documents, relevantly here, to a credit
application form, without
it forming part of that document. Many such
examples exist such as appendices to research or conference papers, schedules to
annexures to legal documents and so on.
In such circumstances the appendices or annexures are clearly capable
of standing alone
despite being numbered consecutively together with the
document to which they relate;
(b) on each occasion that the documents were provided to Complete the LHRE
standard terms and conditions document was attached separately
to the credit
form application and entitled 'LHRE labour hire client terms and conditions'.
It was only when the contract had been
performed that the LHRE credit
application form was sent to Complete absent the attachment of the LHRE terms
and conditions, for
obvious reasons given that the labour to which the terms and
conditions purportedly related had by that stage been
(c) the LHRE terms and conditions document makes only a passing reference to
the provision of credit (in cl 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.10 and
4.12 which are
applicable only
credit has been provided) and does not include any of
the standard terms and conditions one would ordinarily expect to exist in
to credit applications;
(d) rather, the LHRE terms and conditions document set out the very matters
one would expect would be standard terms and conditions
applicable to a contract
for the supply of labour such as:
(i) the requirement for LHRE to provide a schedule of rates applicable to the
relevant labour provided (cl 3.1);
(ii) if the labour hire's original duties as specified are changed, before
they undertake that further work, notification needs to
be provided to LHRE of
the change so that it can verify whether the person is trained, competent and
qualified to perform the new
duties (cl 3.3);
(iii) providing the minimum period of hire of any given day of 4 hours
(iv) stipulating the period of notice to terminate the labour supply
(v) providing that where an offer of permanent employment is made to the
labour supplied, the requirement that a current permanent
placement fee is paid
to LHRE (cl 4.6);
(vi) the requirement that the client will provide a safe work environment to
the labour supplied and other provisions relevant to
occupational health and
safety obligations (cl 5);
(vii) requiring the client to be responsible for reimbursing LHRE for any and
all medical costs associated with the initial placement
of any labour supply and
any ongoing medical costs associated with the placement (cl 6);
(viii) identifying LHRE obligations including in relation to warrantees in
respect to the labour supply (cl 7);
(ix) provisions identifying the client's obligations including in relation to
industrial relations, inductions, the maintenance of
liability insurance
and related matters (cl 8); and
(x) the requirement that the client or the client's representative sign the
labour supply timesheets to confirm the hours to be paid
are correct and the
normal time and extraordinary time allocations are also correct (cl 9).
Importantly cl 9.3 identifies that LHRE
will invoice based on the
timesheets;
(e) whilst the communications in relation to the documents exchanged between
the parties were certainly unsophisticated in nature,
in my view it was clear
when the documents were provided to Complete that they related to the supply of
labour the subject of previous
communications exchanged between them on
Irrespective
therefore of Complete applying for credit or not, the LHRE standard terms
and conditions were clearly capable of operating
independently of any such
financial arrangement. They canvassed all the matters that one would
ordinarily expect to be applicable
to a labour supply contractual arrangement
none of which have any applicability as standard terms and conditions to an
application
seeking credit.
my view the LHRE standard terms and conditions document served two
(a) it communicated in unequivocal terms to Complete,
in circumstances where there had been some ambiguity, that LHRE was
the offeror
as opposed to OSB Group. Now whilst the formal corporate
name of the plaintiff was not identified at that stage (by the omission
Ltd'), that has little materiality to the court's finding. This is because it
appears that the parties approached such matters
with relative informality,
perhaps more so on the part of Complete, which appeared to either refuse or
certainly failed to provide
even a purchase order when requested to do so which
would have identified
formal legal corporate
(b) on one analysis, certainly the one proffered by the plaintiff,
the provision of the LHRE standard terms and conditions document
the mode of acceptance of the offer by Complete by way of cl 16.4 which
your acceptance of subsequent employment of referred candidates from LHRE
will constitute your agreement to these Standard Terms and
Conditions.
formal nature of the documents certainly did not appear to be lost on
Mr Massey who had, up until that stage, perhaps been heavily
involved in
communicating with Kevin in relation to details such as the type of labour
required and the timing of their arrival.
This is self-evident by the
fact that Mr Massey informed Kevin that he forwarded the documents to the
relevant parties and would
follow up, which he did the following day when he
forwarded the email to Mr Dillon and
Ms Rodgers.
Mr Dillon conceded in his evidence that he was the relevant
the request for Complete to provide a purchase order, Mr Dillon, and
therefore Complete, remained silent in relation to
the request to complete the
credit application form and in relation to the standard terms and conditions of
LHRE. At this stage
the relevance of the documents to the Spinifex
Hotel works ought to have been clear given that the subject line of the email
to the Derby Hotel.
my finding that Mr Dillon read the relevant documents at least by
30 May 2023, he was armed with the knowledge of cl 16.4 before
accepting the labour which mobilised onsite on 1 June 2023. Self-evidently
the LHRE standard terms and conditions document did not
require execution by
Complete. Indeed, other than the credit application form, no document in
respect to the terms applicable to
the arrangement by which labour would be
supplied was subject to any requirement of formal execution. Therefore, the
that requirement in relation to the standard terms and conditions is
unsurprising. It is also unsurprising that such a document
would be attached to
a credit application which would ultimately be considered by a financial
institution, in this case ScotPac.
It is a matter of logic and common sense
that a financial institution would wish to have the assurance of the provision
of relevant
standard terms and conditions applicable to a contract (and a signed
acknowledgment to be bound by those terms and conditions) before
considering an
application for the provision of credit in relation to that contract. Financial
institutions do not operate in a
void when considering whether to provide credit
facilities. The evidence of both Kevin and Michael in this regard was therefore
in my view credible and indeed
a proper interpretation of the LHRE standard terms and conditions document is
that it did form part of the negotiations
between the parties, and more
materially, identified to Complete in a formal manner, who the offeror was in
relation to the supply
of labour to it.
the parties performed consistently with every term or condition stipulated in
the document does not in my view detract from
the court reaching this
conclusion. This was a very short contract period of some 18 days. Whilst
a number of the provisions in
the LHRE standard terms and conditions documents
were clearly applicable and appeared to be complied with, others were not which
can be explained by the confined nature of the contractual arrangement. Indeed,
the clauses which appear not to have been complied
with which were raised by the
defendant in this proceeding are those in relation to the issuing of invoices on
a weekly basis and
the requirement that the invoices be paid within
However, given that the contract was of an 18-day duration this is somewhat
unsurprising.
is not in dispute that the labour supplied to Complete mobilised onsite on
1 June 2023 and remained until 18 June 2023. Complete
the supply of labour and the individuals supplied worked under the supervision
and at the direction of Complete.
now turn to consider the post-contractual conduct that the parties have invited
the court to have regard to.
turn first to consider the conduct of Mr Dillon which the plaintiff submits
is a course of conduct constituting an admission against
interest made on behalf
of Complete, namely an admission that the plaintiff was not only the correct
invoicing party but therefore
was also the correct contracting party.
the case law demonstrates, post-contractual conduct, including a course of
conduct by silence, can constitute an admission against
interest which comprises
separate and additional evidence which can be relied upon to establish that a
contract existed, and in particular
that a contract existed between certain
not every occasion of silence is sufficiently material to amount to an admission
and therefore the court must carefully consider
the nature and circumstances in
which the conduct arises.
my view the post-contractual conduct of Mr Dillon is material in all the
relevant circumstances of this case. That is, his continuing
course of conduct
of silence over many months during which there were ongoing communications as to
why the invoice issued to Complete
had not been paid stands in complete and
utter stark contrast to the defendant's asserted position, namely that
Mr Dillon refused
to pay the invoice because it had been issued by the
incorrect party. Such a position simply flies in the face of
Mr Dillon's silence
in relation to that matter. Indeed, Exhibit 1
evidences 14 separate communications with Mr Dillon in relation to the
invoice issued
by the plaintiff, in addition to it being raised at the
26 July 2023 meeting, and yet not one single communication exists in which
Mr Dillon identified that he had an objection or concern that it was the
plaintiff who was issuing the invoice as opposed to
The documentary evidence before the court demonstrates that the 3 July 2023
LHRE invoice was provided to Mr Dillon seven
no occasion did Mr Dillon identify that the plaintiff was not the correct
invoicing party and/or that the defendant would
not pay the invoice for that
further matters are relevant to Mr Dillon's post-contractual conduct in
this regard. Firstly, it is not the case that Mr Dillon
did not engage at
all in relation to the form and contents of the invoice. That s, it
is not the case that Mr Dillon did not scrutinise
the invoice or carefully
consider it in order to request that changes be made to it. Indeed,
Mr Dillon requested numerous changes
be made to the invoice before the
defendant would be willing to pay it. He communicated a number of times to the
effect that if
those changes were made (none of which required the
invoicing party to change) then payment would be made 'easy
my view it would have been abundantly obvious to Mr Dillon each and every
time he reviewed the invoice that it was issued by the
plaintiff. The document
could not be more unambiguous in that regard. Not only did Mr Dillon
engage with the invoice by requesting
numerous changes be made to it, the
defendant also requested and in fact received a credit in relation to it (with
the relevant correspondence
exchanged between the parties in relation to that
matter being titled 'LHRE Group
credit that was provided to the defendant was in fact provided by the
what further flies in the face of Mr Dillon's silence in relation to this
matter, is the fact that the very issue of the
defendant being provided formal
documents of a financial nature from the incorrect contracting party was raised
during the same relevant
period of time in respect to the Onslow
correspondence is unequivocal. Namely, an LHRE credit application was provided
to Complete for completion and it refused to
do so on the basis that the
contract in relation to the Onslow Project was with OSB Group
(in this regard the email chain clearly
evidences Kevin referring to a
credit application being signed 'for the P200
an objection was raised with him he immediately responded, 'I agree to the P200
all works will be [invoiced] by OSB Group
hope this clears this
was no such response by way of objection or concern in relation to the numerous
times that the LHRE credit application was
provided to the defendant in the
context of the Spinifex Hotel project and nor was any such issue ever raised
during the multitude
of times that the plaintiff issued an invoice to defendant
in respect to that project. Indeed, when Kevin allayed Complete's concerns
relation to the credit application which they had construed as being sought in
relation to the Onslow Project, by clarifying that
it was simply being requested
in relation to the 'Derby Hotel' (given that the invoice 'was raised by
LHRE Group')
further issue was raised by the defendant. That is, the clarification that it
was only sought in relation to the contract with
the plaintiff appeared to
resolve their concern. If it had not, then that was the very
opportunity in which the defendant could
have asserted that its position was
both contracts
were with OSB Group, not just the Onslow
Project. It did not do so, again, in my view because there was no
dispute in relation to
that matter.
the reliance by the defendant on this documentary evidence to suggest that it is
a contemporaneous record in which Mr Dillon
raised concerns with Kevin in
the 26 July 2023 meeting that Complete was not contracting with the
plaintiff in relation to the Spinifex
Hotel works, is in my view an artificial
contortion of what appears to be clear on the face of those communications.
Indeed, I note
that whilst Mr Dillon annexed the 27 July 2023 email to
his affidavit of 27 March 2024 asserting that it related to the Spinifex
Hotel, he failed to annex the immediate response sent by Kevin some five minutes
later clarifying that the credit application was
not being sought for the
Onslow Project
(that being the clear
defendant invited the court's attention to an email of 4 August 2023 sent
by Ms Rodgers to Mr Uddin which was copied to Kevin
email was in response to a request for a LHRE credit application to be completed
in respect of the 'NWCH Project'. Ms Rodgers
asserts in her email that the
defendant engaged OSB Group to undertake works on Spinifex Hotel and at the
NWCH Project. I note that
there is nothing in the email chain which
suggests that the request to complete the credit application form related to the
the subject of this proceeding (in fact the email chain refers to the
'p200 camp'). It is therefore unclear why Ms Rodgers mentioned
the Spinifex Hotel in her email.
Rodgers was not called as a witness at trial and no witness who gave evidence at
trial (including Kevin and Michael) was questioned
in relation to the
relevance or meaning of that correspondence. In any event Ms Rodgers was an
employee of the defendant at the
time with no authority to bind it.
Mr Dillon gave evidence that she was not the contract administrator in
relation to the works
undertaken at the Spinifex
was not a party to the correspondence. In the circumstances that
correspondence does not assist the court, particularly when
later correspondence
was exchanged with Ms Rodgers in relation to the Spinifex Hotel works
entitled 'LHRE Group Invoice' which does
in fact include Mr Dillon as
a recipient and no objection is
I note the failure of Mr Dillon to raise objection to the plaintiff as the
claimant when the statutory claim was served on
the defendant, which
provided yet another opportunity to raise objection, and indeed one in which the
defendant had a statutory obligation
to do so: s 25(3)(a) of the SOP. Yet again
the defendant chose silence. Mr Dillon's evidence on this matter was
unpersuasive, namely
that he did not respond because Complete had not contracted
he stated that he understood the serious nature of the claim and the requirement
for Complete to
do not accept Mr Dillon's explanation in his evidence, to the effect, that
there was no need to object to LHRE being the invoicing
party because to his
knowledge 'LHRE did not
aware of its existence on 12 May 2023 and thereafter was provided documents
evidencing its existence on numerous occasions.
His silence cannot be explained
based on ignorance in all of the circumstances.
post-contractual conduct of Mr Dillon is significant because it goes to the
very heart of the issue in contention between the
parties and Mr Dillon is
the sole director and shareholder of the defendant. He is its
controlling mind and will. In my view, his
silence in all the circumstances and
the multitude of occasions during which his silence extended, is an admission
made with sufficient
clarity and deliberation that the defendant was in a
contract with the plaintiff.
I leave the issue of post-contractual conduct, I need to address relevant
matters raised by the defendant.
much weight has been placed by the defendant in these proceedings on the day
worksheets which were completed each day during
the undertaking of the
rectification works at the Spinifex Hotel. It is not in contention that the day
worksheets have two boxes
which can be ticked onsite to indicate whether the
company performing the works was the plaintiff or OSB Group. The majority
the boxes in relation to this matter were ticked in respect to OSB Group
or no selection was made. It is also not in contention
that the day worksheets
were completed by Mr McPherson, one of the labour hire personnel involved
in those works. Each day worksheet
was also approved by a Complete employee and
my view those documents have little if any relevance in the court's objective
determination as to which party contracted with
Complete. I say this for the
following reasons:
(a) there was no direct evidence before the court
as to who had in fact ticked the OSB Group box on the relevant day
worksheets;
(b) even if the court were to draw an inference that the person who did so
was Mr McPherson, the evidence before the court was that
he was a mere
employee used across both corporate entities, namely both the plaintiff and
OSB Group, who had no authority to bind
either company;
(c) therefore, if the court were to draw such an inference the evidence at
its highest would support the court finding that Mr McPherson
subjective view at the time that he was employed by OSB Group. His
subjective view in that regard is of course irrelevant
to the objective
determination which needs to be undertaken by this court;
(d) each of the day worksheets were reproduced in typed form and those
documents did not replicate the selection of OSB Group as the
company who
performed the works;
(e) all of those documents collectively, the handwritten day worksheet
records and the typed versions, were attached to a formal tax
invoice clearly
issued by the plaintiff; and
(f) the evidence before the court, which was both credible and reliable, was
that the practice of ticking the box by an employee onsite
was not determinative
of which corporate entity performed the work. The evidence was also that the
Spinifex Hotel project employees,
including Mr McPherson,
were employed by the plaintiff at the time and paid by the
handwritten day worksheets therefore provide little assistance to the
the defendant also appears to submit that the court ought to take into account
as relevant post-contractual conduct Kevin's
failure to correct references in
communications that refer to the labour supplied to the Spinifex Hotel as being
employees of OSB
Group. I assume that the defendant is inviting the court
to find that the conduct is an admission against interest which supports
position that at all times the defendant was in fact contracting with
the defendant did not make the submission with such clarity, the court struggles
to otherwise identify the relevance of its
written submissions in relation to
this matter. In this regard the defendant invited the court to consider the
following evidence:
(a) Kevin's failure, when taken to the site
report prepared by Mr Swain dated 6 June
'why OSB [Group] was performing the works and not LHRE, nor why Jamie
[McPherson] was representing OSB [Group] and not
(b) Kevin's evidence that he did not see any cause to correct information in
an email from Mr Dillon to Michael on 6 June 2023 (which
appeared on a
chain of emails to which Kevin became a recipient on 8 June 2023) in which
Mr Dillon referred to Mr McPherson 'of
regard the defendant submitted that Kevin did not see the need to correct the
record because Mr McPherson was an OSB Group
employee and was at the
time working for that entity which is a finding that the court ought to
I said, it appears that the defendant is inviting the court to consider the
post-contractual conduct of Kevin in order to find
that it constitutes an
admission against interest which supports a finding that the plaintiff was not
the contracting party in relation
to the Spinifex Hotel works.
are a number of difficulties in reconciling the submission made on behalf of the
defendant. From an evidentiary perspective,
(a) the site report prepared by Mr Swain was emailed
to Mr Dillon and Mr Massey and subsequently forwarded to other
personnel of the
was never provided to the plaintiff and certainly not to Kevin. It is unclear
therefore the basis on which Kevin was able to
explain why Mr Swain was
referring to Mr McPherson as an OSB Group employee, or indeed the
relevance in that regard of Mr Swain's
subjective belief; and
(b) the email sent by Mr Dillon to Michael on 6 June 2023 which
similarly refers to Mr McPherson as an OSB Group employee was not
correspondence directed to
Whilst the communication was forwarded to Kevin the following day, the
email of that date did not refer to Mr McPherson as an employee
OSB Group and indeed when Kevin responded to Mr Dillon on 8 June
2023 he also did not refer to Mr McPherson as an employee of
OSB Group. Kevin's evidence was that he did not read the email chain
at the time, and I found that evidence
effectively, the defendant invites the court to find that an admission against
interest has been made by the plaintiff
due to Kevin's failure (as its sole
director) to correct information in an email forwarded onto him on one occasion
that referred
to one of the labour supply personnel as being an employee of
OSB Group rather than the plaintiff.
defendant appears to submit that the failure of Kevin not to correct the record
(the one statement in the one email) is an admission
by the plaintiff that
Mr McPherson was an employee of OSB Group at the relevant time working
for that entity.
my view, the evidence is simply incapable of enabling the court to make such a
finding. This is when one has regard to the following:
evidence of Kevin as to fluidity of the use of casual labour between the
plaintiff and OSB Group and the context in which
the communication arose,
namely the use of Mr McPherson (and possibly other of the labourers) after
the completion of the works at
the Spinifex Hotel to be redirected and retained
by OSB Group on the Onslow Project;
(b) the communication did not arise in material circumstances of significant
legal import in which one would have a reasonable anticipation
or expectation
that a correction would be made;
(c) in any event such a correction in all the circumstances would perhaps
have led to confusion on the part of Mr Dillon given that
later Mr McPherson may well have been retained by OSB Group, given the
casual, project driven nature of the employees used
across both corporate
(d) Kevin's recollection is that he did not read the full email chain when he
received the email from Michael; and
(e) silence in such circumstances does not constitute a clear, unequivocal
and deliberate admission that not only was the labour provided
to the Spinifex
Hotel employed at the relevant time by OSB Group, but that that entity was
the contracting party with the defendant
in relation to those works.
my view the evidence is not sufficiently clear to be used for the purpose for
which the defendant wishes to use it and does not
enable the court to infer from
that conduct that a contract therefore existed between OSB Group and the
the above factual analysis, I therefore return to the question before the court,
namely whether in all the objective circumstances
of the case, can an agreement
be inferred that was entered into by the plaintiff and the defendant in relation
to works undertaken
at the Spinifex Hotel? That is, what would a reasonable
person in the position of the plaintiff and a reasonable person in the position
of the defendant think as to who the relevant contracting parties were?
upon the court's objective consideration of all the relevant facts and
circumstances, in my view an inference can be drawn
and I find that a
contract was entered into by the plaintiff and the defendant particularly when
one has regard to:
(a) the knowledge of the defendant of the
plaintiff and the nature of its business following which within five days the
sought services of that very nature;
(b) the fact that the only formal documents provided to the defendant,
including contractual standard terms and conditions, were documents
plaintiff and the defendant, after receiving those documents, accepted the
labour supplied to it;
(c) the evidence that the labour supplied to the defendant was supplied and
paid for by the plaintiff; and
(d) the course of conduct of Mr Dillon referred to at
[213] - [222] being an admission against interest from which the court
an inference that the plaintiff was the correct invoicing and contracting
party at all material times.
my view in all of those circumstances a reasonable person would consider that
the plaintiff and the defendant had entered into
the relevant contract by 1 June
2023. Further, one must bear in mind that this was a contract formulated within
a matter of days
and performed within 18 days. It was fast moving,
relatively informal and negotiated in an unsophisticated manner. Despite those
matters it is the court's view that when the relevant supply personnel mobilised
onsite there was mutual assent to all essential
terms of the agreement by the
plaintiff and by the defendant.
that the court has found that an agreement was reached between the parties,
which therefore does constitute a construction
contract for the purposes of the
SOP Act, it is unnecessary for the court to consider whether an arrangement
court therefore turns to consider the second issue arising to be determined on
the pleadings.
Whether the plaintiff assigned the debt owing to ScotPac
defendant has pleaded in the alternative that by no later than 2 October
2023, the plaintiff assigned its right, title and interest
in and under the
construction contract to ScotPac, including its right, title and interest in any
payments the defendant was required
to make to it. The defendant asserts
that the assignment is to be inferred from written statements to the effect
pleaded, contained
in the invoices issued to Complete. The defendant submits
that the invoices constitute notice to the defendant of the assignment
Property Law Act
plaintiff's position is that the invoice issued to the defendant was
automatically generated and contained a mere error in the
reference to requiring
payment to be made to
plaintiff submits that this position is supported by the letter the plaintiff
obtained from ScotPac dated 25 October 2024 stating
that it does not hold
any claim over the invoice on the grounds that the credit application process
was not executed by the
plaintiff notes that the defendant required discovery in relation to the matter
which yielded no evidence of any assignment
and no subpoenas were issued to
ScotPac. As a result, the plaintiff submits to the court that the
defendant has failed to satisfy
its evidentiary burden of
Consideration
my view there is no persuasive evidence before the court of any assignment of
the debt from the plaintiff to ScotPac. An automated
generic invoice in the
absence of any other evidence is simply an insufficient basis on which the
defendant could satisfy its burden
gave evidence as to the error that arose in relation to the generation of the
invoice which was credible and
Kevin also gave evidence as did Michael regarding the process that needed
to be followed in order for the assignment of a debt to
ScotPac which the
defendant refused to engage
indeed the actions of the defendant that resulted in the inability of the
plaintiff to assign the debt and avoid involvement
in protracted and costly
legal proceedings. I find that in fact there was no assignment of the debt to
defendant seeks to rely on
Quickway Constructions Pty Ltd v Electrical
which the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered whether a statement in an
invoice in similar terms meant that the purported
claimant was in fact the
claimant under the SOP Act. Gleeson and Leeming JJA held that if a payment
claim unequivocally states that
it has been assigned to a third party and
requires payment to be made to that third party, the purported claimant is not a
for the purposes of the
authority does not assist the defendant in the factual context of the case
before this court. That is because in
the claimant
conceded that the relevant debt in question had been the subject of a valid
legal assignment with effect from the service
of the tax invoice, and that
before that notice was received, there had been a valid assignment of the debt
in that case ScotPac had sent repeated letters to the respondent pursuing
payment of the assigned
addition in
the very document which was contended to be a
payment claim asserted that the plaintiff was no longer a
facts of this case are materially different. It is not conceded by the
plaintiff that there has been an assignment to ScotPac.
The payment claim
made pursuant to the SOP Act does not assert that to be the position.
Further, ScotPac has not taken action of
any kind seeking payment of the
purportedly assigned debt to it. In any event, the statement in the plaintiff's
invoice cannot be
said to 'unequivocally' state that it has been assigned to a
third party as was the case in
(the invoice in that case
stated that it had 'been assigned to Scottish Pacific (BFS) Pty
invoice in the proceedings before me simply states 'All amounts payable under
contracts to which this invoice relates, have
transferred
Scottish Pacific (BFS)
In addition, there was no documentary evidence before the court in
produced by ScotPac denying any legal hold over the
payment claim as is the case
all the circumstances the defendant has failed to persuade the court, on the
balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff assigned
its debt to
therefore follows that as the parties entered into a construction contract as
defined in the SOP Act, that statutory scheme applies.
is not in dispute that the plaintiff served a payment claim on the defendant on
2 October 2023 in the amount of $81,934.64 (including
is also not in dispute that the defendant did not respond by way of providing
the plaintiff with a payment schedule (or at all).
The defendant is
therefore liable to pay the claim as if it were admitted in full: s 26 of
the SOP Act.
became due on 6 November 2023: s 20(1)(b) of the SOP Act. Interest is
payable on the claim at a rate of 6% per annum: s
21(b) of the SOP Act and
Civil Judgments Enforcement Act
plaintiff also seeks a costs order in its favour. In my view, costs ought to
follow the event. The basis on which the order
for costs ought to be made can
either be agreed by the parties or be the subject of submissions.
will therefore hear from the parties as to the form of the final orders.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
Associate to Judge Wallace
12 NOVEMBER 2025
Affidavit of
Kevin Patrick O'Shea sworn 14 February 2024 (
First O'Shea
First O'Shea
Affidavit, pars 1 and
First O'Shea
Affidavit, par 5.
First O'Shea Affidavit, par 6; Affidavit of Michael Anthony O'Shea sworn
28 May 2025 (
M O'Shea Affidavit
Affidavit of
Emanuel Richard Brian Dillon sworn 27 March 2024 (
Second Dillon
Affidavit, par 1.
Second Dillon Affidavit, par
Second Dillon
Affidavit, pars 6 and
Second Dillon
Affidavit, pars 8 and
of Kevin Patrick O'Shea sworn 27 May 2025
O'Shea Affidavit
), pars 7 and 8; M O'Shea
Affidavit, pars 6 and
Affidavit, par 8; First O'Shea Affidavit, par 7; Second Dillon Affidavit, par
15; Amended Trial Bundle document (ATB)
First O'Shea Affidavit, pars 10 - 12; ATB 5, 10 -
First O'Shea Affidavit, pars 15 - 16; Second Dillon Affidavit, pars 25
Dillon Affidavit, par 25; First O'Shea Affidavit, par
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 13 and
ATB 26, 27, 34 - 38, 43, 57, 59
Westgem Investments Pty Ltd in its own right as Trustee for Hossean
Pourzand and Jenny Maria Pourzand atf the Helen Trust v Commonwealth
Australia Ltd [No 5]
[2019] WASC 310
[96] (Tottle
Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
[111] (Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel & Bell
principles identified in
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University
were considered by Edelman J in
Sino Iron Pty
Ltd v Mineralogy Pty Ltd
[2014] WASC 406
LHRE Group Pty Ltd v Complete Hire & Sales Pty Ltd
[2024] WADC
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Nominal Defendant v Owens
(1978) 22 ALR 128
Nominal Defendant v Owens
referring to the judgment in
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR
O'Shea Affidavit, par
O'Shea Affidavit, par 10;
First O'Shea Affidavit, par
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 11 and 12;
First O'Shea Affidavit, par 13;
Third O'Shea Affidavit, pars
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 15 and
First O'Shea Affidavit, par 18;
First O'Shea Affidavit, par 18; ATB 24 - 27, 34, 35, 37, 42
O'Shea Affidavit, par 30; ATB 46; ts
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 15 and
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 17 - 20;
Third O'Shea Affidavit, par 21;
ts 232 - 233.
O'Shea Affidavit, pars 4 and
Affidavit, par
Affidavit, pars 11 and
ts 151 (Kevin O'Shea); ts 241 (Michael
Second Dillon Affidavit, pars 1 and
Dillon Affidavit, par
Dillon Affidavit, par 6; ts
Dillon Affidavit, par 6; ts
Dillon Affidavit, par 7; ts
of Emanuel Richard Brian Dillon sworn 11 June 2025
Third Dillon Affidavit
ts 296 - 297.
298; Affidavit of Emanuel Richard Brian Dillon sworn 14 March 2024 (
Dillon Affidavit
First Dillon Affidavit, pars 11 - 13; ts
Second Dillon Affidavit, par
Dillon Affidavit, pars 5 and
Dillon Affidavit, pars 25 and
316 - 317; ATB 55 and
First Dillon Affidavit (MFI
and 330; Second Dillon Affidavit, par
ts 332; Second Dillon Affidavit, par
Re Swan Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2016] NSWSC 1724
DM Drainage & Constructions Pty Ltd v Karara Mining Ltd [No 6]
[2021] WASC 410
DM Drainage
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(361) - (363) (Dixon
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(360) (Dixon
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v Longmuir
[1997] 1 VR 125
Chamberlain v The Queen
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
[13] - [16].
Third Dillon Affidavit, pars 9 and
22; ts 302.
Third Dillon Affidavit, par 40; ATB
ATB 15, 16, 17, 22 - 27; ts 314, 319 - 322, 333 and
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
DM Drainage
Fabre v Arenales
(1992) 27 NSWLR 437
OSB Group Pty Ltd v Complete Hire & Sales Pty Ltd
[2024] WASC
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shade Systems Pty Ltd
[2018] HCA 4
[40] in which the coram of the High Court quoted the New South
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 12 November
2022, 6542: 'cash flow is the lifeblood of the construction
ATB 15, page 79
ts 151, 171, 229 and
ATB 16 and 17.
Dillon Affidavit, par
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in liq) (Receivers and Managers Appointed) v Mining
Standards International Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 82
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v J Hutchinson Pty
[2025] HCA 10
[19] - [20].
La Mela v Franklexis Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 83
[84]; See generally
Furmston M and Tolhurst G,
Contract Formation:
ed, 2016), 2 - 5.
Haynes v McNeil
[1906] WALawRp 51
(1906) 8 WALR 186
Glass v Pioneer Rubber
Works of Australia Ltd
[1906] ArgusLawRp 120
[1906] VLR 754
Mirabela Nickel
Subdivisions Ltd v Payne
[1934] SAStRp 48
[1934] SASR 214
Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
[2001] NSWCA 61
[71] - [79];
[2001] NSWCA 61
53 NSWLR 153
Mirabela Nickel
Tomko v Palasty
[2007] NSWCA 258
Hughes v NM Superannuation Pty Ltd
(1993) 29 NSWLR 653
referring to
B Seppelt & Sons Ltd v Commissioner for Main
(1975) 1 BPR 9147, 9149 and
9154 - 9156.
Winks v WH Heck & Sons Pty Ltd
[1986] 1 Qd R 226
Australian Energy Ltd v Lennard Oil NL
[1986] 2 Qd R 216
Mirabela Nickel
ts 249 and 266 (Michael); ts 157 and 188 - 190
Hightime Investments Pty Ltd v Adamus Resources Ltd
[2012] WASC
[142] (Edelman J) referring to
Reynell v Lewis
[1846] EngR 1141
15 M & W 517
, 526 - 527;
[1846] EngR 1141
(1846) 153 ER 954
, 958 (Pollock
Defendant's closing submissions, 14 July 2025, par
Lysaght Bros & Co Ltd v Falk
[1905] HCA 7
(1905) 2 CLR 421
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
[2004] HCA 35
Junker v Hepburn
[2010] NSWSC 88
(Hammerschlag J).
Cargill Australia Ltd v Viterra Malt Pty Ltd (No 28)
[2022] VSC 13
(Elliott J).
Harry S Bagg's Liquidation Warehouse Pty Ltd v Whittaker
(Powell J).
ATB 15 being an email from Kevin dated 29 May 2023 in which he
informed Mr Massey (copied to Mr Dillon) 'Please see attached for
labour supply outline[d] below
27; ts 210 and 216 (Kevin); ts 263
(Kevin); ts 260
ATB 23 - 27, 34, 37, 38, 42, 43, 52 - 54 and
24, 27, 34, 37, 38 and
26, 35, 37, 53 and
(Kevin); ts 244
Dillon Affidavit, par 39 and Annexure 'ERD-10'; ATB
185, 196 and
Defendant's closing submissions, 14 July 2025, par
27; Defendant's closing submissions, 14 July 2025, par
Affidavit of Kevin O'Shea sworn 16 April 2024
Second O'Shea Affidavit
), par 16; ts 244 and
Second O'Shea Affidavit, pars 13 - 16; Third O'Shea Affidavit, pars 26 - 29;
M O'Shea Affidavit, par 12; ts 220 - 221 (Kevin); ts
Quickway Constructions Pty Ltd v Electrical Energy Pty Ltd
[42] - [44].
ATB 23, page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (738 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter