URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GEOFFREY BROWN and NOLA TODOROVICH and ROBERT DOUGLAS (Decision 0.18065, O.18065/2) [2011] WABDT 74 (23 September 2011)
BUILDING DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
MR J CRIDDLE (DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON)
ON WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
ORDERS ISSUED:
23 SEPTEMBER 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
20 SEPTEMBER 2011
COMPLAINT NO.:
0.18065, O.18065/2
GEOFFREY BROWN and
NOLA TODOROVICH COMPLAINANTS
ROBERT DOUGLAS
CATCHWORDS:
Abatement of S12A Claim on death of Builder
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
HAYNES ROBINSON
Respondent:
GREAT SOUTHERN LEGAL
CASES REFERRED TO
IN DECISION:
Woolworths Ltd v Crotty
NSW Tafe v Finis
2 NSW LR 385
Bham v Medical Board of WA
(2007) WASC 90
Minister for Justice & Customs
[2001] FCA 1769
REASONS FOR DECISION
dispute between the Owners and the Builder arises out of agreements entered into
between the parties for building works to be
undertaken at the Owners’
premises at 245 Grey Street West, Mt Melville Albany.
claim was made by the Builder for monies outstanding under the contract for
building works or alternatively under a quantum merit.
Counterclaims were made
by the Owners in the Magistrates Court proceedings.
December 2007 a Complaint was issued by the Owners in the Building Disputes
Building Disputes Tribunal Complaint was the subject of a hearing before me on
May 2008 when a determination was made that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction was limited to workmanship issues as contractual
were beyond the monetary jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Orders were made including an assessment by the Builders’ Registration
Board Inspector which was undertaken by Inspector
Smith who provided an
assessment on the 1
October 2008.
workmanship issues were raised in Complaint 18065/2 which in a Directions
Hearing on the 29
April 2009 was consolidated with Complaint 18065.
A further inspection of workmanship items was undertaken with directions being
in relation to the hearing of the Complaints.
consolidated Complaints were listed for hearing on the 6
September 2010.
August 2010 the Tribunal was advised by the Solicitors for
the Builder that the Builder died on the 5
August 2010, that the
Executor of the Builder’s estate was his wife Mrs V E Douglas who
at that stage in Perth receiving radiation treatment for a serious illness
and who was not in a position to provide instructions on
the substantive issues
to be dealt with at the hearing.
Tribunal vacated the hearing dates with a direction that the parties were to
provide the Tribunal with written submissions on
the issue of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to further determine the Complaint in view of the
death of the Builder.
Owners’ Solicitors have provided the following submissions contending that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to proceed with
the Complaints and requesting that
the deceased Builder’s personal representative be substituted as a
Respondent in the proceedings.
THE CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS
1. The complaint the subject of
these proceedings, pursuant to s.17 Home Building
Contracts Act
, alleges a
breach of a home building work contract.
breach of the contract provides the Complainant a cause of action against the
Respondent.
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
on the death of the
Respondent the cause of action identified by the complaint shall survive against
the Respondent’s estate.
Registration Act
makes no provision for the procedure in the event of
the death of the Respondent in these proceedings and in the circumstances it
would be appropriate for the Tribunal to follow the procedure established
pursuant to Order 18 Rule 7(2) of the Supreme Court Rules,
ie to substitute the
personal representative of the Respondent as the Respondent in the proceedings
and to then carry on the proceedings.”
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
Respondent’s Solicitors have advised they have no instructions from the
deceased’s personal representative in relation
to the matter and are not
in a position to make submissions on the issue of the Tribunal’s
Tribunal notes in relation to the Owners’ submissions is that the
consolidated Complaints related to the Owners’ entitlement
to remedies
under Section 12 A of the Builders
Registration Act
and not pursuant to
Section 17 of the Home Building
Contracts Act
Tribunal has previously determined that its jurisdiction is limited to
workmanship issues and not contractual issues given the value
of the contract
exceeded the monetary jurisdiction of the Tribunal when the Complaints were
instituted.
THE POSITION AT COMMON LAW
common law rule was that a personal action died with the person, whether the
Plaintiff or Defendant. That rule appeared to be
modified to allow for a
personal representative to sue for all debts due to the deceased and for all
covenants and all contracts
which the deceased breached in his lifetime. See
Latham J. in Woolworths Ltd v Crotty
[1942] HCA 35
STATUTORY AMENDMENTS TO COMMON LAW RULE
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
abolished the common law
rule and provides
that on the death of any person all causes
of action subsisting against or vested in him shall survive against, or as the
be, for the benefit of his estate.
18 Rule 7(1) of the Rules of the Supreme Court provides that where a party to an
action dies but the cause of action survives,
the action does not abate by
reason of the death. Order 18 Rule 7(2) of the Rules provides
“where at any stage of the proceedings in any cause
or matter the interest or liability of any party assigned or transmitted
devolves upon some other person, the Court may, if it thinks it necessary in
order to ensure that all matters in dispute in
the cause or matter may be
effectively and completely determined and adjudicated upon, order that other
person to be made a party
to the cause or matter and the proceedings to be
carried as if he had been substituted for the first mentioned
statutory right provided to an aggrieved person under Section 12A of the
Registration Act
is not a cause of action within the meaning of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
and accordingly that
provision has no application in the present case.
THE STATUTORY CONTEXT
question of whether a statutory right (as distinct from a “
survive death depends on the intent of the legislature. See
Mahoney J in NSW Tafe v Fines 3 NSW LR 385 at 388, BHAM v Medical
Western Australia
[2007] WASC 90
(2007) WA SC90
at paragraphs 24 and 25 and Kalejs v Minister
for Justice and Customs
[2001] FCA 1769
paragraph 21.
12A of the Builders
Registration Act
provides a statutory right to relief in the
form of an Order directed to a person who has carried out building work to
(a) remedy the faulty or unsatisfactory
building work within such time as is specified in the Order; or
(b) pay to the owner of the building such costs of remedying the
building work that is faulty or unsatisfactory as the Disputes
considers reasonable in which case any costs so ordered by the Disputes Tribunal
constitute a debt to the Owner and are
recoverable by him in a Court of
competent jurisdiction.”
12A (1b) provides that the provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (1a) apply to and
in relation to building work carried out by
any person, whether a builder or
not, and whether registered under the Act or not.
question for determination is whether the statutory right given to a Complainant
under Section 12A of the Builders
Registration Act
survives the death of
the person who carried out the building work
benefit of the person for whom the building work was carried out.
Section itself does not purport to extend the liability of “
who carried out the building work”
to encompass his or her personal
representative in the event of death.
Statutory right granted to the owner of the building to receive payment under
Section 12A(1)(b) or the person for whom building
work has been carried out
under Section 12A(1a) is not an absolute right being subject to the issue of a
Complaint within the limitation
period in Section 12A(1aa) and subject to the issue of a preliminary notice
under Section 12A(3) of the Act.
12A(6) provides that “
Nothing in the section has the effect of
limiting, restricting or otherwise affecting any right or remedy a person would
had the Section not been enacted but in hearing and determining any
matter in which a builder or other person against whom or which
an order has
been made under this Section and a person for whom building work has been
carried out are parties, a Court may have
regard to any Order made by the
Disputes Tribunal under this Section.
INTERACTION BETWEEN THE HOME BUILDING
CONTRACTS ACT
AND THE BUILDERS
REGISTRATION ACT
3 (1)(b) of the Builders Registration Board Act provides that
Section 12A and 12B apply throughout the State to building work
that is homebuilding work as defined in the
Section 3(1).
which relevantly provides
(a) constructing or reconstructing a dwelling including an existing dwelling
and/or strata titled dwelling;
(b) placing
a dwelling on land;
(c) altering, improving or repairing a dwelling, including a strata titled
dwelling; or
(d) constructing or carrying out any associated work in connection with
(i) any work
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b); or
existing dwelling, including a strata-titled
17(1)(a)(i)
shifts the focus of faulty
and unsatisfactory building work from the contractual arena to the practical
remedial arena by providing
that contractual relief is not available under the
when an Order may be made under
Section 12A
Builders Registration Act 1939
has set up a mandatory insurance scheme which
obliges a builder under a residential building work contract to insure that
or that person’s successors in title against inter alia the risk of
being unable to take advantage of an entitlement to, or
to enforce or recover
under, a remedy under
Section 12A
Builders Registration Act 1939
reason of the insolvency or death of the builder.
is my view that the legislature in setting up the insurance provisions of the
granting a right to claim under this statutory
policy by reason of the death of the builder, assumes that rights and
entitlements
under Section 12A abate on the death of the builder.
that were not the case it would be open to an insurer to deny a claim under the
statutory policy unless and until a claimant under
Section 12A
Registration Act
have exhausted potential remedies against the personal
representative of the builder.
regard to the focus of
Section 12A
being the undertaking of remedial work by the
person who originally performed the work and given the insurance provisions
which provide
an alternate monetary remedy where the death of the builder
results in an aggrieved person being “unable to take advantage
of an entitlement to or to enforce or recover, a remedy under
I can discern no legislative intention for the statutory right
to be maintained against the estate of a deceased builder. I consider
insurance scheme set up by the
confirms the
legislative intent that a claim under
Section 12A
Registration Act
abates with the death of the builder.
found that a claim under Section 12A of the Builders Registration Board Act
abates on the death of the builder the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to
substitute the personal representative of the builder to enable the complaints
to proceed.
will accordingly be an Order that the Complaints be dismissed for want of
J R CRIDDLE
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (498 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (94.3 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter