URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/480.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LYNN -v- GOODLINE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD [2025] WASC 480 (13 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- GOODLINE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
[2025] WASC 480
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 2212 of 2025
ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
property - Caveats - Application to extend operation of caveat pursuant to
Transfer of Land Act
(WA) - Whether plaintiff has
established a serious issue to be tried as to caveatable interest - Balance of
convenience - Turns on
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
of Land Act 1893
caveat lapsed
Representation:
No appearance
Solicitors:
No appearance
referred to in decision(s):
judgment was delivered extemporaneously and has been edited from the transcript
to correct matters of grammar and formatting,
and to add headings and full
citations).
Introduction
plaintiff, Ms Ela
, has filed
an originating summons, seeking an extension of a caveat numbered Q383296, over
a property in Fairway Circle in Connolly,
pursuant to
Transfer of Land Act 1893
). The caveat expires at midnight
tonight, 24 October 2025, so the matter has been heard on an urgent
basis by me after usual court
has appeared by video‑link, and I have before me the
(a) the originating summons;
(b) the certificate of urgency;
(c) an outline of submissions;
(d) an amended statement of claim in the other Supreme Court matter
CIV 1553 of 2025
(e) an affidavit filed by Ms Lynn in CIV 1553 of 2025, which
Ms Lynn sought leave to rely on, and that leave was granted by
have a copy of the lease which is the subject of the claim for a proprietary
interest, and I also have a copy of a decision of
McGrath J in
Lynn v Goodline
Enterprises Pty Ltd
which deals with the same lease, which I will return
Factual background
broad terms, the factual background to this matter is that Ms Lynn entered
into a lease in relation to the property with
Goodline Enterprises
lease was entered into on 22 December 2023, or that was the commencement
date, and it was for a fixed‑term ending on 22
February 2025.
Ms Lynn moved in, it seems that a number of disputes arose - or matters of
disagreement arose between herself and Goodline
Enterprises regarding the
condition of the property, the number of people who were allowed to live on the
property, and the extent
to which Ms Lynn was able to use some of the rooms
in the property to rent out on a homestay‑type business.
way of background, the property is a five‑bedroom property, and
Ms Lynn alleges, in the information before me in her substantive
the Supreme Court (CIV 1553 of 2025), that the landlord has acted in a way
which was misleading and deceptive and has acted
in a negligent manner in terms
of several aspects of the maintenance of the property, and has engaged in
unconscionable conduct and
has overcharged, particularly post‑vacation of
the property, in terms of various invoices.
Ultimately,
what is clear from
Goodline Enterprises Pty Ltd [No 2]
, and Ms Lynn who confirmed
today, is that Goodline Enterprises, the respondent, issued a notice of
termination under the
Residential Tenancies
) in relation
to the lease. That termination has then gone through a series of appearances in
the Magistrates Court.
Magistrates Court having jurisdiction in relation to residential tenancy
agreements of this type made orders on 4 March 2025
and 27 May 2025
respectively, whereby the lease between Ms Lynn and Goodline Enterprises
was terminated pursuant to
of the RTA.
property seizure and delivery order was made by the Magistrates Court.
Ms Lynn outlines in her affidavit and she has confirmed
today that she was
evicted from the property. Her evidence is that she paid rent up until that
eviction date on 28 August 2025 but
is no longer living in the property and
is currently in temporary accommodation.
Legal principles
Extension of caveat
of the TLA, a person claiming any estate or interest in land under
the operation of the TLA may lodge a caveat with the Registrar
of Titles. The
purpose of a caveat against dealings is to operate as an injunction to the
Registrar to prevent registration of dealings
forbidden by the caveat until
notice is given to the caveator so that he or she has an opportunity to oppose
registration.
138C(2) of the TLA provides for the Supreme Court's powers when a caveator
applies to the Supreme Court for an order extending
the operation of a caveat.
The terms of s 138C of the TLA are as
(1) A caveator who is served with a notice under section 138B(1) may apply to
the Supreme Court, in accordance with rules of the
court, for an order extending
the operation of the caveat.
(2) On the hearing of an application under subsection (1), the Supreme
(a) if satisfied that the caveator's claim has or may have substance
(i) may make an order extending the operation of the caveat for such period as
is specified in the order; or
(ii) may make an order extending the operation of the caveat until the further
order of the court; or
(iii) may make such other orders as it thinks fit concerning the caveat or the
land in respect of which the caveat was
(b) if not satisfied that the caveator's claim has or may have substance, shall
dismiss the application; and
(c) may make such ancillary orders in relation to the application as it thinks
(3) An interim order under this section may be made ex parte unless the court
orders otherwise.
(4) The applicant shall ensure that the Registrar is served with a copy of each
order made by the court on an application under subsection
The principles
applicable to an application to extend a caveat are well settled and were
summarised in the decisions of
Bride v Registrar
and have been applied in numerous decisions in this court. There is no need to
restate these principles in full here.
Essentially,
there are two questions for
determination:
, has the caveator
demonstrated that their claim has or may have substance or, as it is sometimes
put, has the caveator established
that there is a serious question to be tried
in respect of the estate or interest in the land claimed?
, does the balance of
convenience favour the extension of the operation of the caveat?
two questions are interrelated. The court must balance the injustice that might
be suffered by the proprietor if the caveat were
to remain against the injustice
that might be suffered if the caveat is removed.
Question to be tried
firstly to whether there is a serious question to be tried in relation to the
estate or interest in land claimed. When I
was outlining the factual background,
I neglected to outline the details of the caveat, which I will do now.
caveat was lodged on 11 April 2025, and the estate or interest claimed is
as a lawful lessee in actual possession, pursuant to
a lease agreement entered
into on or about 22 December 2023. The caveat states that the caveator has
an equitable and possessory
interest in the subject land by virtue of that
lease, representations made by the registrar proprietor's agent regarding
tenancy and approval of home stay use and reliance there
the basis of the claimed estate or interest in land is as a lessee.
a starting point, a lessee under a lease will have a proprietary interest in
land. The question is whether that has been established
in this case, and I am
not satisfied that it is has for the following reasons.
whilst at the time the caveat was lodged, there was a lease currently on foot,
and Ms Lynn was in possession, that lease has now
been terminated by an
order in the Magistrates Court.
there has also been an order for a property seizure and delivery order.
Ms Lynn sought a review of those orders of the Magistrates Court under
Magistrates Court Act
(WA) in this court. That was
heard by McGrath J, and in his decision delivered on 6 August 2025,
his Honour dismissed that application
for review. There are no appeal rights
under the RTA, so a
application is the appropriate way to challenge
the decision of the Magistrates Court.
the factual position that I find myself in is that the lease has been terminated
and, additionally, Ms Lynn is not in
possession. In those circumstances, I
am not satisfied that Ms Lynn has established that her claim that she has a
proprietary interest
has or may have substance.
case is that the lease is, for want of a better description, 'still in play',
because Ms Lynn has commenced a substantive
action in this court which does
seek remedies and does concern the rights that she had under the lease and the
obligations of the
landlord under the lease.
wish to make it clear that my decision is solely concerned with extending the
caveat, and a decision not to extend the caveat does
not mean that Ms Lynn
cannot still sue on the lease for the various matters that she is raising in her
other Supreme Court matter
(CIV 1553 of 2025).
refusal to extend a caveat does not, in any way, prevent anyone from commencing
a legal action to vindicate their rights. It simply
means that there is no
caveat over the property.
a caveat operates as a type of injunction, it is a very particular type of
injunction that requires there to be a demonstration
of a proprietary interest
in land to found it, as opposed to other types of injunctions which do not
require that as a base foundation.
I note that in the material I have in
relation to her other Supreme Court matter (CIV 1553 of 2025), there are
other references to
seeking an injunction. That is appropriate to be done in the
course of that proceeding, not in the form of the caveat.
the above reasons, I am not satisfied that Ms Lynn has established that her
claimed interest in the land has or may have
Balance of convenience
to the balance of convenience, the two matters are interrelated, but one of the
first and key matters concerning the balance
of convenience is the strength of
the party's case. In this case, I have determined that I am not satisfied that
there is a case
for a proprietary interest in land. So that is a factor against
the extension of the caveat.
has also referred to the fact that if the caveat is not extended, then it may be
that the property can be dealt with, for
example, it might be rented to somebody
else. I accept that is a possible consequence of not extending the caveat, but,
indicated, nothing in my decision prevents Ms Lynn from still
bringing her other Supreme Court matter (CIV 1553 of 2025), and making
claims in relation to how the landlord has conducted themselves in relation to
when it comes to balancing the convenience, the position is that there is a weak
case and allowing the extension of the caveat
would prevent the landlord from
exercising their rights in relation to their property and nothing prevents
Ms Lynn's substantive
action from being commenced, subject to all the rules
of the court being complied with.
Conclusion and orders
in all the circumstances, I understand Ms Lynn feels aggrieved by what has
happened, and I am not in any way diminishing
that. However, when considering
the legal requirements that I am required to apply when considering a caveat
extension application
such as this, I am not satisfied that Ms Lynn has met
the criteria.
conclusion, I am not satisfied that it is appropriate for me to make an order
extending the operation of the caveat and I will
make the following
(1) The originating summons dated
24 October 2025 is dismissed.
(2) There be no orders as to costs.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
13 NOVEMBER 2025
Lynn v Goodline
Enterprises Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2025] WASC
Leros Pty Ltd v Terara Pty
[1992] HCA 22
(1992) 174 CLR 407
Bashford v Bashford
[2008] WASC 138
Bride v The Registrar of
[2015] WASC 11
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (173 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter