URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/118.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KACHANA PASTORAL CO PTY LTD and DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT [2025] WASAT 118 (27 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
BIOSECURITY AND AGRICULTURE MANAGEMENT ACT 2007
KACHANA PASTORAL CO PTY LTD and DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY
INDUSTRIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT [2025] WASAT 118
DR S WILLEY, SENIOR MEMBER
DR G MIDDLE, SESSIONAL MEMBER
5, 6, 7 NOVEMBER AND 11 DECEMBER 2024
DELIVERED :
27 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
DR 176 of 2021
KACHANA PASTORAL CO PTY LTD
DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Biosecurity - Declared pest - Duty to control -
Feral donkeys - Pest Control Notice - Environmental benefits of large feral
in rangelands
Legislation:
Agricultural Protection Board Act 1950
(WA) (repealed), s 5
Agriculture and Related Resources Protection Act
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management (Declared
Pests) Declaration (No 2) 2017
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management
(Declared Pests) Declaration 2013
Biosecurity and Agriculture
Management (Identification and Movement of Stock and Apiaries) Regulations 2013
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management Act 2007
s 31(1)(a)(i)
Biosecurity and
Agriculture Management Regulations 2013
(WA), reg 7, reg 7(1),
reg 7(2), reg 7(3), reg 27, reg 27(1), reg 27(4), reg
27(4)(a), reg 27(4)(b), reg 27(4)(c)
Explanatory Memorandum
Biosecurity and Agricultural Management Bill 2006
Interpretation Act
State Administrative Tribunal Act
Decision under review affirmed
Application for
review dismissed
Representation:
Mr K Henggeler
Mr C Mayne and Ms J Kasbergen
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's Office
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v North Sydney Council
[2007] NSWCA 164
; (2007) 155 LGERA 52
LS v Mental Health Review Board
[2013] WASCA 128
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Ord Irrigation Cooperative Ltd v Department of Water
[2018] WASCA 83
(2018) 232 LGERA 331
Puma Energy Australia and City of Cockburn
[2016] WASAT 36
(2016) 89 SR (WA) 1
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
donkeys are a declared pest in Western Australia.
that may be so, the directors of Kachana Pastoral Co Pty Ltd (
), which manages and operates the Kachana Station in the
Kimberley region (
), considers that large herbivores, such as
feral donkeys, deliver benefits such as bushfire control, better soils and
improved overall
environmental outcomes. For many years, the Applicant has
allowed, and intends to continue to allow, feral donkeys to remain on
rangelands on the Station.
9 August 2021, the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
), pursuant to its powers under the
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management Act 2007
issued on the Applicant a 'pest control notice' (
Control Notice
requiring it to cull (by shooting) feral donkeys on the Station. Initially, 72
donkeys were required to be culled. However, this
number has been revised
Applicant has applied to review the decision to issue the Control Notice
). It argues that the Control Notice is unnecessary because it is
sufficiently 'controlling' the donkeys on the
Summary outcome
the following reasons, we find that the correct and preferable decision is to
affirm the Control Notice and dismiss the Review.
we will explain, we are not satisfied that the control measures being
implemented by the Applicant are sufficient to contain the
number, distribution
and spread of feral donkeys on the Station in a manner that complies with the
requirements, and the purpose
and intent, of the
ultimate issue before us is whether we should affirm, vary or set aside the
Control Notice.
the parties agree that the feral donkeys on the Station need to be controlled,
the contest in this matter is essentially around
the effectiveness of the
Applicant's management approach.
the dispute, as between the parties is, in effect, directed to which of the
following constitutes the 'correct and preferable'
control measures currently being employed by the Applicant;
(b) the control measures set out in the Control Notice; or
(c) an alternative control measure that meets the objectives set out in the
BAM Act and the
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management Regulations 2013
BAM Regulations
Nature of the Tribunal's jurisdiction
proceeding arises in the Tribunal's review
Accordingly, our task is to hear the matter de novo and to make the correct and
preferable decision at the time of the decision
party bears any legal or practical
the Court of Appeal explained in
Health Review
reference to 'correct and preferable' recognises that, particularly in the
exercise of discretion, there may be more than one
correct decision available
and that, in such cases, the decision must be the preferable one.
are required to include in our reasons our findings on material questions of
reasons, where we state that we are satisfied as to the existence of a fact, we
mean that we are satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that the fact has
been proven.
Legislative framework
objects of the BAM Act include, relevantly, to 'provide effective biosecurity
and agriculture management in Western
Australia'.
Act is to provide the means to, relevantly, 'control the entry, establishment,
spread and impact of organisms that have
or may have an adverse effect on:
(i) other organisms; or
(ii) human beings; or
(iii) the environment or part of the environment; or
(iv) agricultural activities, fishing or pearling activities, or related
commercial activities, carried on, or intended to be carried
on, in the State or
part of the State[.]
the purposes of the BAM Act, 'biosecurity' is defined to
... protection from the adverse effect an organism has or may have
(a) another organism; or
(b) a human being; or
(c) the environment, or part of the environment; or
(d) agricultural activities, fishing or pearling activities, or related
commercial activities carried on, or intended to be carried
on, in the State or
part of the State[.]
to the commencement of the BAM Act (on 12 October 2007), feral donkeys were
regulated by way of declarations made by the Agricultural
pursuant to
powers under Pt IV of the
Agriculture and Related Resources Protection
The power to declare an organism as a 'pest'
the purposes of the BAM Act, a 'declared pest' is, relevantly, an organism for
which a declaration made under s 22(2) is in force.
3 of Pt 2 of the BAM Act deals with 'Biosecurity within Western Australia'.
Section 22(2) authorises the Minister to declare
an organism as a declared pest
in an area of the State if there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
organism has, or may
have, an adverse effect on either another organism, human
beings, the environment or agricultural activities, in the area.
to s 22(3), a declaration may assign the declared pest to a category designated
by the BAM Regulations.
7(1) of the BAM Regulations identifies various control categories to which a
declared pest may be assigned, for the reasons
stated therein. These control
categories are:
: if in the opinion of
the Minister introduction of the declared pest into an area or part of an area
for which it is declared should
be prevented;
—Eradication
: if in the opinion
of the Minister eradication of the declared pest from an area or part of an area
for which it is declared is feasible;
—Management
: if in the opinion
of the Minister eradication of the declared pest from an area or part of an area
for which it is declared is not
feasible but that it is necessary to -
(i) alleviate the harmful impact of the declared pest in the area; or
(ii) reduce the number or distribution of the declared pest in the area; or
(iii) prevent or contain the spread of the declared pest in the
to reg 7(2), the keeping categories for declared pests (aside from a
prohibited organism), for the purposes of s 22(3) of
the BAM Act, are as
Prohibited keeping
: if in the opinion of the Minister keeping the
declared pest in an area or part of an area for which it is declared should be
except under the authority of a permit to
(i) at a zoological park; or
(ii) at a scientific organisation approved by the Minister; or
(iii) for scientific, education or government operational purposes;
Restricted keeping
: if in the opinion of the Minister keeping the
declared pest in an area or part of an area for which it is declared should be
to keeping—
(i) under the
authority of a permit; or
(ii) in an approved quarantine facility in accordance with the terms and
conditions set out in the approval of the quarantine facility;
Exempt keeping
: if in the opinion of the Minister keeping the
declared pest in an area or part of an area for which it is declared should be
from any requirement under the Act in relation to
7(3) further provides that a declaration under s 22 of the BAM Act,
assigning a declared pest to a control category, must
specify the area, or any
part of an area, for which the declared pest is assigned to that
Feral donkeys are declared a pest
17 November 2017, the Minister
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management (Declared Pests) Declaration (No 2)
Declaration
), pursuant to s 22(2) of the BAM Act and reg 7 of
BAM Regulations.
Declaration, relevantly, is as
Full Organism Name
Control Category and Area Declared
Keeping category
Equus asinus (feral)
(Linnaues 1758)
C3 Whole of State
The duty to control declared pests
an organism is declared a pest, the effect of s 30(3) of the BAM Act is to
require an owner or occupier of land in an area for
which that organism is
declared a pest, or a person who is conducting an activity on the land, to
undertake the 'prescribed control
measures' to control the declared pest if it
is present on the land. The penalty for failing to comply is a $20,000 fine.
the purposes of s 30(3), 'control' is defined to
... in relation to a declared pest or other organism, includes eradicate,
destroy, prevent the presence or spread of, manage, examine
or test for, survey
for or monitor the presence or spread of, and treat[.]
to s 30(1), reg 27(1) sets out an extensive list of 'control measures [which]
are prescribed to control declared pests',
relevantly:
(c) capture and relocation;
(n) mustering;
(o) poisoning;
(p) removal;
(s) shooting;
(v) trapping;
duty imposed by s 30(3) is separate from, and applies separately to, a 'pest
control notice' that has been issued on a
27(4) of the BAM Regulations provides that, for a Category C3 declared pest
(such as feral donkeys), a person must take
such of the control measures
specified in reg 27(1) as are reasonable and necessary
(a) alleviate the harmful impact of the declared pest in the area for which it
is declared; or
(b) reduce the number or distribution of the declared pest in the area for which
it is declared;
(c) prevent or contain the spread of the declared pest in the area for which it
is declared.
23 of the BAM Act provides that, except as otherwise provided for in the
regulations or in a management plan, a person must
not, in an area for which an
organism is a declared pest, 'keep breed or cultivate', or 'release into the
environment', the declared
pest. The penalty is a fine of $50,000 or, in
the case of 'high impact
26 of the BAM Act sets out that a 'person who finds or suspects that, in an area
for which an organism is a declared pest,
there is the declared pest on or in a
place' must report the presence, or suspected presence, of the declared pest to
the Director
General or an inspector. The penalty is a $20,000 fine.
The power to issue a pest control notice
31(1) of the BAM Act allows an
'inspector'
give a pest control notice to, relevantly, the owner or occupier where a
declared pest is found on the
(i) be in writing;
(ii) identify where on the land the relevant declared pest has been
identified;
(b) may direct the person to whom it is given to, relevantly, take the
measures set out in the notice for the purpose of controlling
the declared
BAM Act does not otherwise direct an inspector as to matters that must be
considered in determining whether to issue a pest control
notice. Accordingly,
the discretion must be exercised having regard to the subject matter, scope and
purpose of the BAM
we have explained, a pest control notice is not subject to, or otherwise
restrained by, the extant duty to control declared pests
arising under s 30(3)
of the BAM Act.
The Large Feral Herbivore Strategy
donkeys are a Large Feral Herbivore
Western Australian Large Feral Herbivore Strategy 2020 -
LFH Strategy
), which was prepared by the DPIRD, provides that
invasive LFHs, including feral donkeys, need to be managed as an aspect of the
'sustainable
management of natural resources for the benefit of the pastoral
industry, the environment, human health and
LFH Strategy was prepared in the context of the Australian National Pest Animal
Strategy 2016 and supports both the Western Australian
Biosecurity Strategy
2016 - 2025 and the Invasive Species Plan for Western Australia 2015 -
purpose of the LFH Strategy is to provide guidance to stakeholders on a
strategic approach to the management of LFH in Western
Australia's
rangelands.
LFH Strategy notes that, in isolated cases and based on anecdotal evidence,
feral donkeys are seen by pastoralists as a valuable
tool for managing
vegetation to reduce the risk of fire in areas less accessible to domestic
LFH Strategy identifies a number of techniques that may be employed to manage
LFH including aerial culling which is regarded
as the most practical and
effective method control in Western Australia, given that most LFH populations
are located in remote areas
with inaccessible terrain. Other management options
include 'Judas programs' which are more apt when LFH are at lower densities
more difficult to locate. Judas programs involve the fitting of VHF collars to
donkeys, so they can be tracked to remove the
other donkeys in their social
Feral donkeys at the Station
(a) covers an area of 78,000 hectares and is in the East
Kimberley Region; and
(b) is managed by the Applicant pursuant to Pastoral Lease N49726L,
which comprises Lots 15, 66 and 706 on Deposited Plan 238230.
is not in contest that:
(a) feral donkeys have been on the Station
for many years;
(b) the feral donkeys are not branded in accordance with the
Biodiversity
and Agriculture Management (Identification and Movement of Stock and Aparies)
Regulations 2013
BAM (IMSA) Regulations
(c) the Applicant does not intend feral donkeys to be present throughout the
Station. Rather, it allows the feral donkeys to graze
area which is within the Stock Route Valley
(which the Applicant terms the 'Project Area');
(d) the Project Area is not fenced; and
(e) when feral donkeys stray south of the Project Area and will not be herded
back, the Applicant may take steps to cull them. The
area immediately
south of the Project Area is termed (by the Applicant as) the 'controlled
management zone'.
The Kimberley Rangelands Biosecurity Association and its feral donkey program
7 of the BAM Act deals with Administration. Division 5 of Pt 7 deals with
advisory groups and recognised biosecurity groups.
body established for a purpose which includes 'controlling declared pests in a
specified area' may be
recognised.
Minister may, by signed instrument, recognise a biosecurity
available for a recognised biosecurity group to carry out measures to control
declared pests.
Kimberley Rangelands Biosecurity Association
run an intensive control program for feral donkeys in the Kimberley region since
1978. The KRBA was recognised as a biosecurity
group by the Minister under the
BAM Act in April
was explained in the evidence of Mr Lindsay Strange, a Regional Biosecurity
Coordinator with the Respondent, funding is provided
to the KRBA for its LFH
program that targets wild donkeys and camels via its Judas program, which the
Respondent considers to be
an effective control measure.
evidence of Mr Richard Pasfield, the executive officer of the KRBA, also
discussed the administration of the LFH program. Mr
Pasfield explains that
the role of the KRBA is the control of declared plants and animals in the
Kimberley region on behalf of the
pastoral industry. While KRBA partners with
other groups in relation to weed control programs, it works exclusively with the
in relation to the LFH culling program.
history of donkey culling programs in the Kimberley stretches back almost 45
years. In Mr Pasfield's view, the goal of eradicating
viable populations of
donkeys in the Kimberley ranges has been 75% achieved. He has been involved in
aerial surveys of Kachana in
the administration of the LFH program and has also
met with Mr Chris Henggeler, a director at the Station, on a few occasions.
note here that the Henggeler family reside at, and manage, the Station. They
are also directors, and are the controlling mind,
of the Applicant. To avoid
confusion, these reasons will refer to members of the Henggeler family (Karl,
Chris and Robert) by their
first names. No disrespect is intended.
at the end of 2017, the KRBA's LFH program:
(a) had removed 580,000
feral donkeys; and
(b) cost more than $8,000,000, with funding provided by owners and the State
Government.
A: Discussions between the DPIRD, the KRBA and Kachana
October 2018, the Applicant, the Respondent and the KRBA developed a Memorandum
of Understanding (
) concerning the feral donkeys at the Station. Mr
Pasfield, representing the KRBA, took part in those discussions.
MoU specified the need for a donkey containment strategy to be developed.
However, its terms could not be agreed.
discussions regarding containment, replacement, removal or domestication of
feral donkeys at the Station did not result in
B: The Respondent visits Kachana
22 June 2021, the DPIRD carried out an aerial survey of the Station. Following
the survey, Chris was interviewed in relation
to the feral donkeys that had
been observed. The survey is explained further below.
after, on 13 July 2021, the Applicant was issued an infringement notice for
failing to control a declared
That infringement notice is separate from the Control Notice the subject of
the Review.
July 2021, the Respondent contacted the Applicant seeking their preferred option
for controlling the feral donkeys on the Station.
Options including
fencing or culling were canvassed. The Applicant did not respond to these
communications.
C: Aerial surveys of the Station
The initial survey
Respondent's case in this matter arises, primarily at least, from the results of
the three aerial surveys of the Station which
recorded the presence of feral
donkeys, as well as walking paths and dung. The donkeys were observed in
the Project Area, the controlled
management zone and in other locations on the
October 2018, Dr Magdalena Zabek, whose evidence we will come to, was advised
that there were about 100 donkeys within the Project
Area, although the precise
number was unknown. Dr Zabek was shown the controlled management zone during a
flight over the Station
with Chris. She observed several groups of donkeys.
Zabek designed, but did not attend, the first aerial survey of the Station in
survey was conducted from a helicopter flying along evenly distributed transects
across the Station. Three observers were in
the helicopter (including the
pilot). One observer sat next to the pilot, with one in the right hind seat.
The three observers
were in continuous communications to coordinate the
recording of the location and number of donkeys.
survey's aim was to count all visibly detectable feral donkeys on the Station.
The average flight speed was 50 km/h (range 40
to 60 km/h) at an average
height of (approximately) 200 feet (≈ 60 metres) above the ground. The
speed and height of the survey
took account of the terrain, vegetation and
climatic factors (including the position of the sun). The distance between
varied between 1 and 3 kms and the total survey length was 638 kms.
Transects were closer in the Project Area due to the denser
vegetation cover.
Outside of the Project Area, vegetation was sparser leading to better visibility
such that the transects could
be more spread. The data included the flight path
together with the spatial location of each donkey detected.
initial survey recorded 72 donkeys. Given the complexity of the terrain
(ridges, plateau and gorges), Dr Zabek regarded the
72 donkeys as being the
minimum population 'known-to-be-alive' at the Station. However, in her
view, more donkeys were likely to
be present. This was due to donkey dung and
walking paths observed in the north-west portion of the Station, near the
Salmond River
(and well outside the Project Area).
after this survey, on 9 August 2021, the Respondent issued the Control Notice
initially requiring the culling of 72 donkeys
'for the purpose of controlling
the declared pest'. The Control Notice outlined the requirements for both
aerial and ground shooting,
as well as instructions on where carcasses may be
biodegrade.
Applicant subsequently lodged the Review on 21 August 2021. The parties then
engaged in mediation and further discussions.
The second survey
Respondent surveyed the Station again in December 2022. Dr Zabek
participated in this survey as the fourth observer. The survey
methodology was
as per the first survey but included more intense surveying (closer transects)
south of the Project Area (the controlled
management zone) along the Stock Route
Valley as well as an area along the Chamberlain River Valley, immediately west
of the Station.
The total transect length of the survey was 658 kms.
donkeys were observed in the Project Area, with one donkey observed 7 kms south
in the controlled management zone. Again, Dr
Zabek regarded this to be the
minimum population 'known-to-be-alive' at the Station. The second survey
observed numerous old and
fresh paths in the north-west and central-north
moieties of the Station, but there was a question as to whether the tracks were
donkeys or cattle.
Kachana's aerial survey
the same day that the DPIRD conducted its second survey, Robert (Bobby), the
Station manager, conducted his own aerial survey,
limited to the southern
part of the Stock Route Valley, and the northern end of the Tablelands Station
(the station immediately south
of the Station).
his survey, Robert observed more than double the 35 donkeys that were
recorded by the Respondent. He explains this on the
basis that he has a better
understanding of the landform and terrain, as well as the movement of donkeys.
The third survey
DPIRD conducted a further aerial survey in October 2023. This survey was
more focused on the Project Area and the areas immediately
south and west (the
Stock Route and Chamberlain Valleys). The survey transects were closer (750
Zabek explains that the third survey was prompted by the culling data that had
recently been provided to the DPIRD by the Applicant.
That data was to the
effect that 98 donkeys had been culled between 2021 and 2023.
survey detected 117 donkeys within the Project Area and the Stock Route Valley.
As with the earlier surveys, Dr Zabek regards
the 117 observed donkeys to be the
minimum population 'known-to-be-alive' at the Station.
a result of this survey, on 15 April 2024, pursuant to an order allowing it to
reconsider its decision under s 31 of the SAT Act,
the Respondent issued a
revised Control Notice requiring the culling of 117 (as opposed to 72) donkeys.
Control Notice, as amended, provided that the 117 donkeys were required to be
culled as from 15 April 2024. The Applicants were
also required to provide a
monthly report to DPIRD setting out details of the culling undertaken in the
previous month including:
(a) the date of any cull; (b) GPS coordinates of
the culling; (c) the name of the person carrying out the culling; and (d)
the cull occurred by aerial or ground shooting (together, the
reporting measures
reason of s 31(3) of the SAT Act, the Control Notice issued on 24 April
2024 took effect as the decision the subject of the
The Respondent's case
Respondent's case is that the requirements set out in the Control Notice are
reasonable and necessary for the purposes of reg
27(4) of the BAM Regulations.
The removal of 117 donkeys will achieve a sustainable reduction in their number
and distribution and,
as a result, will reduce the risk of spreading.
Respondent submits that, in the circumstances of this case, the requirement to
cull 117 donkeys is, in practical terms, no more
than the duty to control
that the Applicant is already subject to, in any event, by reason of s 30(3) of
the BAM Act.
the additional reporting measures are also reasonable in the circumstances.
Furthermore,
the Respondent submits that compliance with the Control Notice would not place a
significant burden on the Applicant.
The Applicant's case
Applicant's case is that the feral donkeys at the Station are confined to the
Project Area or, if they are found in the controlled
management zone, they are
either herded back to the Project Area or culled. Donkeys are not permitted
elsewhere on the Station.
Applicant says that the movement of donkeys is effectively controlled by the
natural topography of the Stock Route Valley, including
the Durack Ranges, which
makes it difficult for donkeys to stray east or west out of the Project Area.
The homestead is located
at the northern end of the Project Area and the
controlled management zone (south of the Project Area) is patrolled via periodic
(quarterly) aerial surveys.
Applicant further submits that it is not necessary, nor cost effective, for the
donkeys to, in effect, be contained by fencing.
donkeys in the home range are safe and content and therefore are disinclined to
, as a matter of practicality, any fences would need to be
removed and replaced following each wet
Accordingly,
the Applicant's case, in broad terms, is that it is complying with the BAM Act
in that it is adequately controlling
the feral donkeys on the
Robert's evidence
our jurisdiction centres on making the correct and preferable decision on the
Control Notice, the Applicant's approach to the
management of donkeys does
inform what is, ultimately, a discretionary decision. Accordingly, it is
necessary to set out the Applicant's
approach to the management and control of
donkeys in some detail.
this regard, the Applicant's primary evidence was from Robert, a stockman and
licensed aircraft engineer. In addition, he is
also a qualified pilot for both
fixed wing aircraft as well as helicopters. He describes himself as
Kimberley 'born and bred', having
lived there for 31 years, including 19
years at the Station.
manages the Station, including the controlled management zone. He explains that
donkeys found in undesirable locations on
the Station, get removed (shot). When
required, Robert is responsible for culling donkeys.
of the central themes of Robert's evidence, and the Applicant's case, is that
the DPIRD, and the KRBA, are misguided in seeking
to eradicate feral donkeys
from the Kimberley, including the Station. Robert says eradicating any species
is impossible, citing
the cane toad as an example. He also observes that while
feral donkeys are a declared pest in Western Australia, they can, and do,
Western Australia via the unfenced border with the Northern Territory, which is
only 120 kms east of the Station. For this
reason, he says any quest to
eradicate donkeys in the Kimberley is inutile.
The KRBA has historically allowed donkeys at the Station
more than 30 years, there have been donkeys at the Station.
explains that, for many years, the KRBA and the Applicant worked together to
manage the donkeys. That is because when donkeys
strayed south out of Ndaba
Gorge (at the southern boundary of the home range) they would be shot by
government shooters. The KRBA
would then advise the Applicant of the number of
donkeys it had
Robert describes these arrangements, which ceased in 2017, as being
2017 neither the KRBA nor the DPIRD took issue with Kachana allowing donkeys to
remain in the Station's home range. While
Robert says DPIRD's change in
approach from 2017 was due to the Declaration, that is factually incorrect.
Donkeys have long been
declared as a pest in this
account of this background, Robert considers that the Respondent is now being
heavy handed in its dealings with the Applicant,
including in issuing the
Control Notice.
Donkeys bring environmental and other benefits
key aspect of the Applicant's case, and Robert's evidence, is that the DPIRD
should take its focus off the donkeys and instead
consider the success that the
Applicant has had in its land management practices at the Station. Robert was
asked why donkeys are
permitted to graze in the Project
Why are donkeys so important?
I like the donkeys because they will go into areas in our control
management zone where the cattle readily won't go. And I've got,
we're in the rangelands. We're not on great pastoral country. We're not on
nice flat ground where it's even going, and
you can drive around. We've got
hills. We've got - we've got gullies, and we've got ranges. And whether we
like it or not, about
– on average, we get about a metre of rainfall. And
with that much rain, we will grow grass. We will grow vegetation. Sorry,
necessarily grass, but we will grow vegetation. And in that landscape, I
have really only two broad options to manage vegetation,
and my options are
herbivores or fire. And I do a combination of, but in - and - and - and -
that - we also use the cattle for that.
And - and - and I think, later, that,
you know, from the environmental side, that will get spoken a bit too. But the
- the donkeys
in conjunction with the cattle - they're - they're different
grazers. They - they graze on different plants differently. They impact
environment differently. And if they're managed, their numbers and their
behaviours managed, they - they - and we - I believe
we have proven, and - and
we - you know, there's science out there, not just in Australia but all over,
that - that is verifying
that. And - and we've got a bit happening locally now,
which is great - to - to verify that. So yes, the donkeys are an integral
in our management strategy of the environment, and I don't - like I said, I
don't have a – you know, it's - it's - it's
- we're managing the impact
that they're having on - on the environment to the extent that they are doing a
- that they're doing
Applicant's position on the environmental benefits of allowing LFH to graze in
the rangelands is supported by both Mr Russell
Shaw and Mr Peter Curry, both of
whom gave evidence on a
Shaw, an experienced pastoral manager, explains that the 'excessive' number of
donkeys he observed in the 1970s have now largely
been removed, and while there
are some donkeys remaining, in his view, they are effectively managed. Mr Shaw
became aware of the
Applicant's philosophy regarding LFH in 2021 and has carried
out remote sensing to determine the condition of the rangelands at the
the Applicant, Mr Shaw considers that donkeys have benefitted land and stock
management practices in Northern Australia. He
considers that donkeys can also
be effective in managing wild dogs, which remain an issue in the Kimberley
rangelands.
the extent that donkeys may, on occasion, stray beyond the limits of the
Station, Mr Shaw considers they will remain within their
extended grazing range.
He considers the occasional straying of donkeys to be no different from managed
or feral cattle straying
across what are, in effect, non-existent pastoral
boundaries. Fencing of pastoral leases in the Kimberley is unrealistic due to
the extent and nature of the geography.
the evidence of Mr Curry, an experienced environment consultant, speaks to the
potential environmental and bushfire benefits
that may have resulted from the
presence of feral donkeys in the Project Area.
How the Applicant manages the donkeys at the Station
explained, until 2017, the KRBA was well-aware that there were donkeys present
on the Station.
2017, the Applicant has alone managed the donkeys at the Station, including,
where required, culling. The Applicant's management
program divides the Station
into three distinct areas:
(a) the Project Area (home range);
(b) the controlled management zone (the buffer area); and
(c) the remainder of the Station.
his evidence, Robert estimates that there are around 150 donkeys at the
considers that a donkey population of between 100 and 150 in the home range
appropriate.
in saying that, he does not regard the exact number of donkeys as being
important. He explained as
I have in my management never focused on an exact number of animals. I have a
rough idea of what's in the area, and, like I said,
I will adjust my - the
numbers based on the impact that I see the animal doing to the environment. I
don't really waste resources.
It - it benefits me very little to have an exact
number because in actual reality, it's impossible to get an exact number, so
never really focused on it. I would know fairly - relatively accurate what
numbers I would expect there, but I focus more so on
the risks that they pose to
the environment and to - to - and a negative impact - of the risk of negative
impacts more so than the
exact number. So I will look at amount of food that's
available, you know. Like I said, rainfall, lack of rainfall, fires. All
those things will sort of dictate - like I said, I will generally do my
reduction of numbers later in the season when food pressure
starts to come on -
starts to come on board or becomes - could become an issue. Obviously, I've got
animal welfare obligations there
as well, so I don't want a number that isn't -
that I - that, you know, that the country can't support.
control measures employed by the Applicant are explained as follows.
, donkeys are allowed to graze in the Project Area. Robert
explains that donkeys in the home range do not associate predation with
because they are left alone. If there is a need to shoot them, unless the
entire group is to be culled, the shooting takes
place away from other
donkeys in the home range are happy, safe and are left alone. As a result,
Robert says they will stay in the home range unless
impacted by other
influences.
Robert also says that, in practical terms, donkeys can only exit the Project
Area by traveling south. The northern boundary is
fenced close to the
encroach on the homestead, are
culled on the basis that 'they shouldn't be
natural ridges and terrain along the eastern and western boundaries of the
Project Area prevent the donkeys escaping east and
west through the rangelands.
Robert says he has never seen a donkey east of the Project Area and to the west
is the Durack Ranges.
He has never seen a donkey go over the Durack Ranges, nor
has he seen them travel through the gorges to the Chamberlain River Valley.
Robert has not seen donkeys use either Ndaba Gorge or Impi Gorge to access the
Chamberlain River
to the south are two buffer areas (termed buffer zone one and two) which,
together, comprise the controlled management
found within this zone may either be herded back north to the Project Area or
culled. During his patrols Robert might prompt
them to move north. The further
south he finds them, the more aggressive he is in his
However, if they keep moving south, they, put simply, 'don't come
evidence on the management of the buffer areas was as
I don't fence the southern area again because the cost and
maintenance of that fence would far outweigh and the effectivity of the
wouldn't come close, so what I - what I do is we have a buffer zone in there an
area where they can readily move into and graze
that I monitor and actively
discourage animals from being in there. As I said in the past, the donkey
shooters were doing that.
Now, I will do that. With more - further
south the animals are, the more aggressive I will be. I will generally shoot
- well, shoot the entire population, regardless of what they are -
mums, foals, you name it. Like, they're not - it's - it's - it
doesn't matter. If they're there and I don't want them there, they're
gone. Further to the northern edge of my buffer
zone, I might be a little bit
more selective. I might also go down there with a chopper and give them a bit
of a hard time and a
good scare and say, "Hey, fellows. This is not where you
want to be", and - and, you, I have in the past sometimes shot a few individuals
out of a family group and made sure the others were heading north at a great
rate of knots and then left them, so, by and large,
in their home range, the
donkeys know, "Hey, if I'm up here we would be left alone. If we go down here
we can get into trouble",
and if they keep going south, they get in serious
trouble. They don't come home. Like, it's - they're not telling their mates
down there.
In the project area, is that shared between donkeys and
Yes. Yes. There is cattle. I will sometimes put the cattle in an
out of that area - - -
Yes?---But there is - there is cattle throughout Kachana.
Yes. So I've - you know, sometimes when I muster the cattle out
of that area, the donkeys in there are that and - well, they're
that quiet, I
literally muster the cattle between donkeys, so if I'm even in my helicopter, on
foot, we just ignore the donkeys,
move the cattle out, move the cattle in. The
more quieter animals at home Dad calls them in and out of the area. Like. it's
- it's - they're not really an issue to me when I'm when - when I'm
mustering, just say.
surveys the controlled management zone by way of aerial patrols, which he
undertakes approximately each quarter (being once
every three months).
However, he is on the Station all the time and is, therefore, regularly
observing the Project Area and controlled
management zone. For example, he
might fly over the controlled management zone while undertaking other
duties, such as mustering
either on the Station or another pastoral lease (as he
is a helicopter mustering
observe what is happening.
conducting the quarterly patrols, he focuses on areas where he is expecting
donkeys to be, namely the Project Area and the controlled
so, he is looking for evidence of risks that the donkeys are posing in that
area, and to get a general understanding of
what is happening. He does not
focus on areas where he has not seen donkeys. Rather, he goes to the areas
where the donkeys are
terms of his observations, in his view, as explained above, the donkeys in the
As an example, he can
muster cattle through the donkeys in the
explains that, in general terms, donkeys found outside of the Project Area and
the controlled management zone will, in effect,
'dealt with'.
terms of its land management practices, Robert does consider that Kachana needed
to 'lift its game', in terms of formalising its
management of donkeys at the
why the Applicant now employs terms such as the 'Project Area' and the
'controlled management zone' and his quarterly observation
surveys are now
tracked and recorded, to allow these management practices to be independently
cross-examination, while he agreed he is not an expert in donkey behaviour or
says his evidence is based on his personal observations. For that reason, he
considers that he can comment specifically on
the behaviours of the donkeys on
The Applicant's case in the context of the reviewable decision
we have explained, the reviewable decision in this matter is the Respondent's
decision to issue the Control Notice.
heard this matter over four days, and listened to the evidence that Kachana has
assembled, which we have briefly canvassed
above, while the Applicant certainly
does challenge the decision to issue the Control Notice, that is but an aspect
of its much broader
campaign to persuade the DPIRD, and the KRBA, and now the
Tribunal, of what it regards as its success in utilising feral donkeys
aspect of its land management practices at the Station. That is to say, the
case put forward by Kachana is much wider than
the reviewable decision giving
rise to the Review.
this broader debate is not a matter for the Tribunal. The question of
whether the presence of LFH may deliver environmental
and other benefits to the
Kimberley rangelands sits well outside the scope of the reviewable decision.
Likewise, the negotiations
between the parties, and the MoU. The fact that the
parties have in the past discussed whether acceptable arrangements could be
agreed to allow donkeys to remain on the Station, is no longer relevant in the
context of the Control Notice and the associated Review.
this reason and leaving to one side Robert's evidence on how he patrols for
donkeys in the Project Area and the controlled management
zone, much of the
evidence relied upon by the Applicant is, we find, not directly relevant to the
is so because the DPIRD does not frame its case on the basis that donkeys are
causing environmental degradation at the Station.
Quite understandably, it
has simply not engaged with that aspect of the Applicant's case. Rather, its
case is simply that Kachana
has not sufficiently complied with its obligations
under the BAM Act (namely reg 27(4)(b)) to control the number or
distribution
of feral donkeys on the Station.
Accordingly,
however much we might consider that the land management practices being employed
by Kachana may warrant further consideration
and investigation, we have no
mandate to engage in, or meaningfully contribute, to that broader debate. It is
simply not our role.
reviewable decision before us begins, and ends, with the question of whether the
Control Notice should be affirmed, varied or
set aside. That question is to be
resolved by focusing on whether it can be said that the Applicant is effectively
controlling feral
donkeys for the purposes of the BAM Act. If we so find, the
Control Notice might well be regarded as superfluous.
is necessary that we expressly mark out the precise metes and bounds of the
Review because the Applicant's broader campaign is
premised, at least
implicitly, on an argument that we should not regard feral donkeys as being a
pest at the Station. That is also
an argument which we cannot engage with.
Declaration, the effect of which was to make feral donkeys a declared pest
across the State, was an executive decision made by
the Minister under the BAM
Act which cannot be reviewed in the Tribunal.
the relevant statutory regime for agricultural biosecurity in this State,
including the control of pests, does not recognise
the Station's boundaries.
While the Declaration does not operate to fetter our discretion, the simple
fact, and one which we cannot
ignore, is that feral donkeys are, and have long
been, a declared pest across the State. Furthermore, the State Government has
long-established
programs, the effect of which require donkeys to be controlled,
including by way of aerial culling.
Nevertheless,
while we have no mandate to engage in issues such as the environmental and other
benefits of allowing donkeys to graze
in the rangelands, we are not blind to the
fact that Kachana, supported by experts such as Dr Arian
and Mr Shaw, firmly believe that it is an emerging land stewardship concept that
ought not be dismissed and, indeed, has
potential for broader application.
it must be said, as we will come to, we can sympathise with the position the
Applicant finds itself in. It has long allowed
donkeys to graze in its home
range, which, while perhaps not ratified or approved in any formal sense, was at
least tacitly tolerated
by the relevant agencies. However, for reasons which it
seems the Applicant is still trying to understand, there has been a change
philosophy or approach taken by the KRBA and the DPIRD following its initial
aerial survey in 2021, that resulted in the issuing
of the Control Notice.
while we are required to proceed on the basis that feral donkeys are a declared
pest, we do understand why the Applicant places
the emphasis it does on seeking
to provide a rationale for allowing, and continuing to allow, donkeys to remain
in the Station's
The evidence of Dr Zabek
Zabek is a Senior Development Officer at the DPIRD dealing with Invasive Species
and Environmental Biosecurity. In her role,
she advises the State Government on
effective evidence-based management options for LFH in Western Australia.
Zabek's qualifications include a bachelor's degree in equine science as well as
a PhD in wild equid ecology from the University
of Queensland.
Respondent's case is largely framed around the opinions of Dr Zabek set out
in her witness
two reports dated 31 March
January 2024
prepared as part of the
gave oral evidence extending over three hearing days which, in effect:
(a) provides a
detailed explanation of the rationale for, and the undertaking of, the aerial
surveys (which are explained above at
[56] to [71]) conducted by the DPIRD;
(b) explains
the data that she has relied on to form an opinion on feral donkeys, including
their tracked locations; potential grazing
range, movement habits and other
natural tendencies; and, in doing so; and
(c) critiques
the effectiveness of the Applicant's management of donkeys at the Station.
Zabek visited Kachana in 2018 and interviewed Chris. At that time, Chris
advised that there were at least 100 donkeys on the
Station, but the exact
we have explained, Dr Zabek co-designed, but did not participate in, the first
aerial survey in December 2022 where 72 donkeys
were observed either within the
Project Area, or just beyond its eastern fringe. Dr Zabek notes that, during
that survey, donkey
dung was detected in the Salmond River area, approximately
10 kms north-west of the Project
Zabek participated in the second aerial survey in December 2022, where
34 donkeys were observed. One donkey was also observed
approximately 7 kms
south of the Project Area, within the controlled management
third aerial survey in October 2023 observed 117 donkeys, with many again
located at or beyond the eastern fringe of the Project
Area. Two donkeys were
south of the Project Area, one at its southern fringe and one approximately 4
Zabek has watched the DPIRD's 2021 interview with Chris. Having observed that
interview, it was apparent to Dr Zabek that Kachana
did not have in place any
kind of formal arrangements as to how it managed donkeys on the
the interview, Chris said that Kachana had culled:
(a) 25 male
donkeys (Jacks) in late 2018 (including 23 in December 2018) in the south
of the Project Area. However, Chris was unable
to confirm whether the culled
donkeys were from the home range such that the herd was spreading south, or
whether the donkeys had
strayed on to the Station; and
(b) four young Jacks in 2020 which were traversing the northern boundary of
the Project Area.
12 November 2021, Kachana informed the Respondent that it observed 25 donkeys
towards the southern boundary of the Station. Shortly
after, on 25 November
2021, Kachana then advised that it had culled 23 donkeys (again mostly
Zabek assumes that the 23 culled donkeys were from the herd of 25 reported on 12
November 2021. The exact location of the cull
was not provided but was said to
have occurred in the northern part of the Tablelands Station, immediately south
of the Station.
Kachana did not advise whether the culled donkeys were from its
we will explain further, Dr Zabek's overarching view is that the Applicant is
not effectively controlling the donkeys at the Station
to reduce their number or
distribution or to prevent or contain their spread.
view of the evidence is that the unfenced Project Area (which has an area
) is not sufficient to passively contain the
donkeys on the basis of Kachana's land management practices, including its
natural topography,
the northern fence near the homestead, salt
management of the southern buffer zones.
Kachana's removal of donkeys between 2018 and 2023
part of the Review, Kachana provided detailed information on the control
measures, namely culling, it had undertaken at the Station
between 2018 and June
2023. That information is set out in the table below.
Donkeys shot per year (n)
Male donkeys shot to the south of the Project Area. It was not established
whether the donkeys were from the home range or from elsewhere.
No donkeys removed.
Male donkeys removed while crossing the northern boundary of the Project
Original Control Notice issued on 9 August 2021
Male donkeys removed somewhere from the Stock Valley Route within the
northern part of the Tablelands Station. Whether the donkeys
were from the home
range or from elsewhere was not clear.
Location and sex of culled donkeys not provided.
Location and sex of culled donkeys not provided.
based on the Applicant's evidence, it has culled 125 donkeys (with 27 being
culled before the Control Notice and 98 after
it was issued in August 2021).
For this reason, the Applicant submits that, in effect, it has already complied
with the Control
Notice. However, from the evidence before us, at no time has
the Applicant sought to withdraw the Review on the basis that it had,
practical terms, complied with the Control Notice.
culling data provided by Kachana prompted the DPIRD to undertake the third, and
last, aerial survey which post-dated the latest
cull undertaken by the Applicant
(two donkeys in June 2023). As explained, the third survey was conducted
over a smaller area, with
more intense surveying, of the Stock Route and
Chamberlain River Valleys.
has been set out, during that third survey, a total of 117 donkeys were observed
both within the Project Area, but also in the
controlled management
Dr Zabek's analysis of the donkey population at the Station
Zabek's opinion is that, by reason of the number of donkeys observed during the
third survey in October 2023, and despite its
removal of some 125 donkeys,
Kachana did not taken steps effectively to reduce the number or distribution of
feral donkeys between
2018 and 2023.
Respondent is in no position to challenge Kachana's evidence as to its culling
activities between 2018 and 2023. Accordingly,
Dr Zabek has accepted
Kachana's data as a basis for her most recent report in
January 2024.
Kachana's evidence is that it has culled an average of 21 donkeys being
culled per year between 2018 and 2023.
estimate of there being 150 donkeys has also informed Dr Zabek's population
Zabek has assumed that there were 150 donkeys in 2018. It is to be recalled
that in 2018, when Dr Zabek met Chris, he was uncertain
donkeys that were on the Station but stated there was at least 100. In giving
evidence, Robert estimated there
were 150 donkeys.
is set out in Figure 2 below, an average removal rate of 21 donkeys per
year for 6 years would result in a 2023 donkey population
of between 102 and
324, depending on the growth rate. If a very conservative growth rate of 10%
was assumed, the population would
be 102 as at 2023. However, a 25% growth rate
would result in a 2023 population as high as
Zabek stresses that it is unknown whether the donkeys that were claimed to have
been culled by the Applicant were from its home
range or elsewhere. If the
donkeys were not from the Station, the donkey population would be 'considerably
Zabek also opines that the population growth rate of feral donkeys depends on a
range of variables, including survival rates,
the age of the first parturition,
and length of the breeding cycle. In the absence of population management (or
in the wake of a
significant reduction in population), lack of predation,
unlimited nutrition and low population densities, annual maximum feral donkey
population growth rates have been reported to reach between 20 to
Zabek references a study of the Victoria River District in Northern Australia
with low-density populations and in circumstances
where food availability was
not a limiting factor. In that study, the maximum finite rate of feral donkey
population increases was
between 23 to
Accordingly,
in the context of the Review, Dr Zabek considers an estimated population growth
rate of between 10 to 25% as appropriate.
the evidence that the Project Area is lush, Dr Zabek reasons that food
availability is unlikely to be a limiting factor. Furthermore,
the apparent
preferential removal of Jacks by Kachana (based on its reported cull events),
has likely led to a population imbalance,
biased towards Jennys. As more
females in a population give birth to more foals each year, Dr Zabek considers
that this has likely
increased the reproductive rate of the population, which,
in turn, has accelerated the annual population growth
the annual rate of population growth of feral donkeys at the Station is unknown,
what is known is that in October 2023, the
DPIRD observed 117 donkeys.
donkeys represent a considerably higher population than the more conservative
estimates in her analysis of growth scenarios (such
as 10%). In Dr Zabek's
opinion, based on the known factors (a tendency to cull Jacks and a lush
physical environment in the home
range), the population growth rate at the
Station 'could be as high as
That being the case, the donkey population at the Station would
exceed 230.
Accordingly,
based on an average of 21 culls per year, in the context of what was observed
during the third aerial survey, Dr Zabek
is not at all satisfied that the
Applicant's control measures have effectively reduced the number or distribution
of donkeys at the
Station. To the contrary, she considers that the donkey
population is likely to be increasing or, at best, being
maintained.
Zabek has also considered the efforts that will be required to reduce the number
or distribution and to prevent or contain the
spread of donkeys from Kachana
over the next 10 years. Starting from a premise that there were 159 donkeys on
the Station in
annual growth rate ranging between 15 to
Dr Zabek has
then calculated the donkey population based on three different cull
Scenario 1: removal of 21 donkeys per year, as per the Applicant's
Scenario 2: removal of 30 donkeys per year; and
Scenario 3: removal of 40 donkeys per year.
each scenario, four different population growth rate scenarios were considered
(10%, 15%, 20% and 25%).
, at a very conservative growth rate of
15% per annum, the removal of 21 donkeys each year would result in a 2033
population of 153;
meaning the existing population would be maintained.
However, if a growth rate of 20% is assumed, the donkey population would almost
double by 2033 (to
, assuming a conservative growth rate of
15% per annum, the removal of 30 donkeys each year would slowly reduce the
population such
that all donkeys would be removed by 2032. However, if a growth
rate of 20% is assumed, there would still be 50 donkeys at the Station
, removal of 40 donkeys per year would
considerably reduce the population, regardless of the assumed growth
Zabek also observes that there are other means by which the distribution of
donkeys could be managed at the Station. Such measures
may include any, or a
combination, of the following strategies:
(a) containing the donkeys
by fencing the Project Area so as to prevent the spread of donkeys away from the
(b) domesticating the donkeys in accordance with the
BAM (IMSA) Regulations. In doing so, all donkeys would need to be
allowing their visible distinction, namely by branding.
The Applicant would also need to demonstrate efforts to contain the donkeys
(i.e. fencing);
(c) complying with the Control Notice by removing a minimum of 117 donkeys,
which was the number 'known to be alive' as at the date
of the third aerial
survey (in October 2023). The removal of 117 donkeys would not eliminate the
donkey herd, but would considerably
(i) the current population;
(ii) population growth looking forward; and
(iii) the biosecurity risk of donkeys, and/or their offspring dispersing away
from the Station.
(d) removing 40 donkeys per annum for the next 5 years so as to gradually
(i) the number of donkeys on the Station;
(ii) the likely increase in the growth of the population; and
(iii) the biosecurity risk of donkeys, and/or their offspring dispersing away
from the Station.
The Project Area
Zabek is of the view that the Project Area (which has an area of
) is not of a sufficient such as to
voluntarily 'confine' donkeys. To explore this issue, Dr Zabek tracked the
movements of seven
feral donkey herds in the Kimberley. This GPS data was made
available via the KRBA feral donkey Judas program. The herds were tracked
an average period of 21 months (with a range of 2.6 to 40
average home range (that is, how far they moved) for these herds was 173.6
(with a range of 34.2 to 386.3
). Within four of the herds, some donkeys were
culled, and Dr Zabek considers that this may influence the behaviour of the
such as to increase the geographic size of their home range.
three of the herds she studied were unaffected by culling. Within these three
herds, the smallest recorded home range was
(being in excess of 30%) larger than the
Project Area.
Dr Zabek is therefore of the view that donkeys need more space to roam and
cannot be effectively contained within the
Project Area.
put to Dr Zabek that the controlled management zone, which is
included in any assessment of the area of the Station's 'home range'. That is
because, as per the Applicant's management
practices, donkeys can be present in
these buffer zones, so long as they return north to the Project Area; if they
head further south,
they are likely to be
Zabek's response to this line of questioning was that, for two reasons, it does
not change her view that the Project Area is too
small to naturally contain the
is that the Applicant's long­held view is that the donkeys are
intended to remain in the home range. The
is that the fact that
the donkeys are grazing further away from the Project Area means that they need
more roam, and moreover, provides
some evidence that the population may be
average size of donkey herds removed from the Kimberley by the KRBA between 1994
and 2017, was 7.18 donkeys. If a donkey population
within the Project Area of
150 is again assumed, Dr Zabek explains that the donkeys would form, in a social
context, up to 22 different
herds. Although feral donkeys are known to
share overlapping home ranges, Dr Zabek considers it highly unlikely that
all these herds
would voluntarily, and equally, share the Project Area.
, Dr Zabek explains that, in her
opinion, the Project Area is not of sufficient size to accommodate even one of
these donkey herd's
Accordingly,
Dr Zabek is of the view that in order to effectively control the donkeys within
the home range, they would need to be
restrained by a physical fence.
Zabek also examined data from a group of donkeys which were tracked along the
Chamberlain River (along the Stock Route Valley,
approximately 60 kms south-west
of the Station) (refer Figure 9 below). Again, this data was made available via
the KRBA's Judas
program. Analysis of the spatial data indicated that the group
had a home range that was ≈ 300 km
Zabek observed that the spatial data demonstrated that the group moved a
considerable distance along the Chamberlain River and
the Stock Route Valley,
which is the same valley in which the movement of donkeys was reported by the
Applicant in 2018 and 2021,
and in which the Project Area is
Zabek also tracked the movements, again via GPS data from the Judas program, of
eight groups of feral donkeys near the Station
between 1999 and 2016. That
data, shown in Figure 10 below, clearly shows that the donkeys move considerable
distances, far beyond
the geographic area of the Project Area. Dr Zabek
notes that groups did move out of the Project Area, notwithstanding
the Applicant's
land management practices which have been in place since
Habitat considerations
is set out in Table 1 and Figure 12 below, Dr Zabek also assessed the historical
habitat of feral donkeys on the Station. This
data was available, again, via
the KRBA's Judas program. She assessed the spatial locations of 232 donkeys
that were culled on the
Station, and a further 235 that were culled near the
Station, between 1999 and 2016. She has interpolated the locations of the
donkeys against known rangeland habitats found on the Station, based on
the Rangeland Land System Mapping (GIS
: Spatial representation of three main habitat types (H1,
H2, and H3) within and beyond Kachana Station; blue line - Kachana station
boundary, and red line - approximate location of the Project Area within habitat
H2. Figure was created by the author from land
and habitat data sourced from
short, there are three habitats (H
within the Station, with the Project Area (shown in red) being within Habitat
. Dr Zabek calculated habitat use based on the location of the
culled donkeys. In doing so, she referred to literature relating
resource selection by animals and the design, and analysis of, field studies
Dr Zabek's analysis of that data indicates that feral donkeys showed 'a
strong preference towards high carrying capacity habitat',
namely Habitat
, located west of the Chamberlain River, about 3 kms west of the
Project Area. Habitat H
was utilised 3.5 times more than
, and over five times more than Habitat H
Zabek opines that the proximity of the donkeys preferred habitat (Habitat
) may influence donkey movements, with the result that donkeys exit
the Project Area through the hills, or through either Ndaba or
Impi Gorges,
towards their preferred habitat. Because their preferred habitat extends beyond
the boundaries of the Station, the
effect may be that donkeys are exiting the
Station, spreading south and
, in which the Project Area is located, is neither preferred nor
avoided by donkeys. Accordingly, the data suggests that donkeys
if sufficient nutrition is available. However, because
this habitat extends beyond the Station's boundaries, Dr Zabek considers
unlikely that donkeys will voluntarily remain within the Project Area.
is evinced, she considers, by the locational data of the 235 donkeys that
were culled beyond the Station's boundaries which
suggests that donkeys were
utilising the H
habitat along the Stock Route Valley,
notwithstanding the Applicant's land management practices. Habitat
was generally avoided by
The natural behaviours of donkeys
Zabek further observes that the movement, and therefore the home range size, of
donkeys is influenced by 'numerous and complex
behaviours'.
availability of nutrition is not the sole factor. Examples of natural
behaviours include the dispersal of sub-adults from natal
groups; exploratory or
territorial behaviours of adult Jacks during breeding seasons; temporary
dispersal of adult Jennys to give
birth; the utilisation of hilltops to avoid
insects or to detect danger, or to seek shade or shelter during harsh
environmental
conditions.
Zabek explains that:
Seasonal resource distribution, habitat size, topography, different seasonal use
of habitats within the home range, or spacing of
individuals both within and
between groups all affect the distribution of female and male donkeys across the
landscape. ... In addition,
donkey groups generally remain cohesive over a
period of time, but they rarely form permanent
associations[.]
available evidence indicates to Dr Zabek that the availability of nutritious
habitat within the Project Area has not been sufficient
to contain the donkeys
and will not prevent their spread to other parts of the Station, and beyond its
boundaries.
her view, the Project Area is simply not large enough to contain donkeys and
that the Applicant's current approach is inadequate
given that, in her view, a
donkey could move out of the Project Area and through and beyond the controlled
management zone (which
is 12 kilometres in length) in a single
the case, the quarterly aerial patrols will not identify donkeys that have moved
away from the Station in the intervening
Genetic study of feral donkeys
Zabek has also led a study into the genetic connectivity of feral donkeys across
Western Australia, including the Kimberley.
Her study was referenced in her
initial report, but she was able to speak to the results at the final hearing.
Dr Zabek explains
that genetics 'don't lie' and they tell you how much 'genetic
material is shared amongst the
project allowed Dr Zabek to understand the 'kin lines' of donkeys between
mothers and daughters; mother to grandmother, siblings
sub-siblings'.
Zabek explained that 50% of all the analysed samples confirm that immediate
family members can be dispersed by as much as 50 kms.
Dr Zabek postulates
that data as against the size of the Project Area. She therefore queries
the Applicant's contention that the
donkeys within the Project Area do not
study indicated that the dispersal of donkeys can extend for over 300 kms. She
explains that:
What I'm learning from this study is that donkeys move much further than we give
them credit for. They are quite connected across
the entire Kimberley. They
share the same genes. They - they form one genetic population and you can only
form one big genetic
population if you move freely across the landscape. And
that is what those animals have been doing for
generations.
[the genetics study] is another piece of evidence for me to strongly believe
that animals in Kachana Station are not staying for
the entire life all the time
within a project area. If some animals will decide to stay, and I would agree
that some probably would,
because if you have females that are very strong with
nutritional needs, because they are either all the time pregnant or having
followed food that they have to feed, so they have a high nutritional needs, so
I wouldn't - probably it's likely that they will
probably stay within this good
habitat that is claimed by the applicant to be so good and nutritious, but
there's so many animals
that constitute the population and when I said about my
interest in population demography and age structure, that means that the
- pregnant females only constitute part of the population. There will be jacks,
which the male donkeys that will venture
further because they will be looking
for resources, for mates, for females. There will be all the offspring that
needs to go somewhere.
So there's so much more happening in a population of
those donkeys that we know or what we are told happens and this genetic study
was just additional piece of evidence to make me believe that they
Dr Zabek's assessment: Kachana's control measures are inadequate
Zabek explains that, even accepting the Applicant's evidence as to its culling
activities between 2018 and 2023, the control measures
being employed at the
Station, namely natural geography and topography, nutrition within the home
range, the provision of salt licks,
self-herding and low-stress mustering, are
not sufficient to contain feral donkeys within the Project Area and, moreover,
the boundaries of the Station. In her view, in order to adequately
contain the donkeys, a fence is
the Applicant is unwilling to adequately contain the donkeys, or domesticate
them, the only other effective measure to control
the population is to either
remove the 'known-to-be-alive' number of donkeys (which as at October 2023, was
117) or to remove a sufficient
number on an annual basis to progressively reduce
the size of the
population.
Zabek does not agree that the Applicant's primary management activity, being the
dedicated quarterly aerial patrols, is sufficient
to control either the number
or distribution of donkeys. In her view, the aerial patrols that are conducted
are not frequent enough
nor do they cover sufficient
Zabek is unsure whether it would be cost­effective to undertake more
frequent and broader patrols but is firmly of the view
that the Applicant's
current approach does not provide a satisfactory control response having regard
to how far donkeys move over
365 days in all
directions.
Consideration
Application of the statutory framework
we have set out, the applicable statutory scheme is directed to the management
of biosecurity issues within Western Australia.
application of that statutory scheme to feral donkeys arises by way of the
Declaration and has the result that, leaving to one
side the Control Notice, the
Applicant is not permitted to keep or cultivate feral donkeys and is required to
report their presence,
or suspected presence.
Furthermore,
by reason of s 30(3) of the BAM Act, the Applicant is under a duty to take
'prescribed control measures' to control
feral donkeys.
Declaration specifies that feral donkeys have been designated as Category C3
under reg 7(1) of the BAM Regulations across the
entire State. The Category C3
applies where the Minister is of the opinion that eradication of the declared
pest is not feasible,
but is necessary, to either alleviate the harmful impact
of, reduce the number or distribution of, or prevent or contain the spread
the declared pest.
we have set out at [28] above, reg 27(1) sets out a number of control measures
which are prescribed for the purposes of s 30(3)
of the BAM Act. In our
view, the prescribed control measures set out in reg 27(1) are to be read
as being exhaustive.
the language of Tobias JA in
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v North
reg 27(1) has an appearance of exhaustiveness as to the control measures that
may be employed in the context of a declared pest for
the purposes of s 30 of
the BAM Act. This is reinforced by reg 27(4), set out below, which
provides that only the control measures
specified in reg 27(1) are to be
deployed to control a declared pest.
Accordingly,
in our view, the statutory scheme does not recognise the Applicant's
arrangements, such as the maintenance of the Project
Area, and the
operation of the controlled management zone, as acceptable control measures for
feral donkeys.
Regulation 27(4) of the BAM
Regulations
reason of reg 27(4), in the context of the Category C pests, the Applicant 'must
take such of the control measures specified in
[reg 27(1)] as are reasonable and
necessary to':
(a) alleviate the harmful impact of the declared pest in the area for which it
is declared; or
(b) reduce the number or distribution of the declared pest in the area for which
it is declared; or
(c) prevent or contain the spread of the declared pest in the area for which it
is declared.
to the Applicant's
submissions,
our view, reg 27(4) is not to be construed as applying disjunctively,
notwithstanding the use of the word
the context of the applicable statutory scheme, we read the requirements in
sub regulation (4) as each requiring the taking of
reasonable and
necessary steps. There may be instances where all three sub regulations
are engaged. That is, in order to meet the
requirements of s 30(3) of the BAM
Act, it may be 'reasonable and necessary' to carry out control activities for
the purposes of
any or all of the circumstances identified in (a), (b) and/or
read reg 27(4) otherwise would be to ignore the intent and purpose of the
BAM Act which is, relevantly, to take reasonable and
necessary steps to control
declared pests.
this instance, the Respondent submits that sub-regulations (b) and (c) are
engaged in that reasonable and necessary control measures
are needed to both
'reduce the number or distribution or feral donkeys' and also to 'contain
[their] spread'. We accept the Respondent's
submissions on the construction of
reg 27(4) of the BAM Regulations.
The DPIRD is not pressing
for donkeys to be eradicated
Applicant submits, in effect, that the DPIRD is interpreting reg 27(4) to
require it to pursue eradication of what is (in effect,
following three reasons, we do not accept that submission
we note the decision before us arises from the Control Notice, and not the
overarching duty created by s 30(3) read together with
reg 7(1) and
reg 27 of the BAM Regulations. Accordingly, the Control Notice requires
specified actions to be undertaken. It does
not, by its terms, require the
Applicant to seek to, as it were, eradicate donkeys on the Station.
the duty to take the control actions identified in reg 27(1) so as to give
effect to reg 27(4), must be 'necessary and reasonable'.
The ordinary
meaning of the words 'necessary' and 'reasonable' in reg 27(1) are directed
to matters of context. That is, what control
actions are necessary and
reasonable will depend on the circumstances in question.
the evidence of Dr Zabek, which we accept, is that the cull required by the
Control Notice will not result in donkeys being eradicated
on the Station,
especially taking account of the effluxion of time since the last aerial survey
in October 2023.
Our key findings
find that Dr Zabek was an impressive witness. She is highly credentialed,
experienced and has the requisite expertise to offer
opinions and insights into
the behaviour of LFH in the Kimberley rangelands, including feral donkeys. Dr
Zabek amassed a wide range
of evidence from the KRBA, and elsewhere, that has
led to, and supports, her view that the Applicant is not adequately controlling
the donkeys at the Station in a manner which aligns with the intent of the BAM
also find Dr Zabek gave her evidence openly, candidly and most importantly,
impartially. We had every sense that her evidence
was directed to assisting the
Tribunal make the correct and preferable decision.
is not to say that we reject Robert's evidence as to the land management
practices that are being employed at the Station.
Robert struck us as a
forthright and honest witness who, we accept, has long had experience in dealing
with donkeys both at the Station
and in the Kimberley rangelands generally.
Nevertheless,
as we come to set out our findings, we proceed, as we must, on the basis that
feral donkeys are a declared pest under
the BAM Act. As we have also
explained, the Review is not an inquiry into whether allowing donkeys to graze
in the rangelands is
a land stewardship concept that may bring about a range of
environmental and other benefits. By reason of the Declaration, the Applicant
is under a duty to control donkeys. That duty applies regardless of the
Control Notice and the Review.
broad terms, we accept the evidence of Dr Zabek, which was not seriously or
meaningfully contradicted by the Applicant. Accordingly,
our detailed findings
are as follows:
Applicant is not reducing the number and distribution of feral donkeys. It has
not complied with its obligation to control
donkeys at the Station in a manner
which accords with the BAM Act and BAM Regulations. Maintaining a
population of up to, on Robert's
evidence, 150 feral donkeys, is, of itself,
hardly consistent with the underlying fact that they are a declared pest that
controlled and are not permitted to be
Leaving to one side the Control Notice, the Applicant is,
we find, plainly not taking reasonable and necessary control measures to
the number and distribution of feral donkeys as required by reg 27(4)(a) of
the BAM Regulations.
(2) Feral donkeys are at risk of spreading from the Station. The Applicant
is not effectively taking action to prevent or contain
the spread of donkeys for
the purposes of reg 27(4)(c) of the BAM Regulations. While we accept that
the Review has prompted it to
take steps to improve and formalise its management
approach to donkeys, for the reasons set out below, we do not consider these
arrangements
to be adequate:
satisfied, and we find, that the natural home range of donkeys extends well
beyond the geographical area available in the
Project Area. The data from
tracked donkeys referred to, and opined upon, by Dr Zabek demonstrates that
donkeys can travel long
distances and that a home range can be up to ≈
. The genetic study into feral donkeys headed by
Dr Zabek only reinforces this view. We agree with Dr Zabek that the genetic
supports a conclusion that only some of the donkeys will stay at the
Station for their lifetime. For a range of reasons, there will
be donkeys that
leave the Station.
tracked donkey herds studied by Dr Zabek, in herds where there was no culling,
the smallest recorded grazing range was
30% larger than the Project Area. While
the Station's home range may indeed be lush, such that many of the donkeys are
settled and
satisfied, it is not in contest that donkeys can and do move beyond
the Project Area. That is, of itself, evinced by the need for
the controlled
management zone;
(c) assuming, consistent with Robert's
evidence, that there are 150 donkeys at the Station, there would be up to
22 different social
groups present. Based on Dr Zabek's analysis, we
consider it unlikely that 22 different herds would voluntarily share the Project
Area on a permanent basis.
To the contrary, the Project Area would, we find, become a contested space
leading to the spread and distribution of some donkeys
away from the Project
Area. That is especially so given that the Applicant's culling is targeted
towards male Jacks meaning the
donkey population at the station is not gender
balanced, also likely leading to an increased rate of population growth given
population bias towards Jennys;
(d) the Project Area comprises habitat that is not preferred by donkeys. The
habitat analysis undertaken by Dr Zabek indicates the
Project Area comprises
habitat which is not favoured by donkeys. It is habitat that is
found across approximately one third of the Station. The location
donkeys culled between 1999 and 2016 confirms the presence of donkeys beyond the
Project Area, notwithstanding the Applicant's
land management practices;
(e) the targeted patrolling of the controlled management zone approximately
every 90 days is not sufficient given Dr Zabek's opinion,
accept, that donkeys could travel through and beyond the zone in a single day.
Nor are we satisfied that Robert's incidental
observations of the Station
and, in particular, the controlled management zone, at other times is sufficient
for us to be satisfied
that the Applicant is effectively controlling the risk of
donkeys exiting the home range.
To the contrary, we are very concerned that while Robert is doing his
absolute best to manage the distribution and spread of donkeys,
the quarterly
surveys are not frequent enough. In our view, donkeys are well capable of
leaving the Station between these patrols;
(f) the culling of 125 donkeys between 2018 and 2023 has not sufficiently
controlled the donkey population at the Station. That is
evident by reason
that, despite these controls, the third aerial survey undertaken by the
Respondent in October 2023 observed 117
donkeys. As explained by Dr Zabek,
this represents the minimum 'known to be alive population'. There would be
other donkeys that
were not able to be observed. Robert agreed that donkeys can
be difficult to spot from the
(g) the Applicant's culling of an average of 21 donkeys a year is not
aggressive enough to manage the donkey population in a manner
that complies with
the purpose and intent of the BAM Act. With an average of 21 donkeys being
removed per year, unless the growth
rate proves to be very conservative (15% or
less), the donkey population is likely to grow.
However, if there were 150 donkeys at the Station in 2018, the fact that
117 donkeys were observed in October 2023, almost 6 years
later, inclines us to find that the population growth rate has not been at the
more conservative end. If a growth rate of 20% is
assumed, the donkey
population will be growing in what is, as we have explained, a home range that
is smaller than the natural home
range of donkeys. In so finding, we accept
Dr Zabek's view that the growth rate for the donkey population at the
Station is, indeed,
likely to be as high
(3) In circumstances where we have found that the feral donkeys on the
Station are not reducing in number or distribution, and their
spread is not
being adequately controlled, the Control Notice is both a necessary and
reasonable response in the context of the applicable
statutory scheme
established by the BAM Act and the BAM Regulations.
Disposition
our view, taking account of our key findings above, the correct and preferable
decision as at the time of the decision on the
Review is to affirm the Control
we have explained, we accept the evidence of Dr Zabek and find that the measures
that are being undertaken at the Station are
not sufficient to effectively
control the number, distribution and spread of the feral donkey population that
has long existed at
the Station.
Accordingly,
the Control Notice is required to specifically dictate the number of donkeys
that must now be removed. It is necessary
and reasonable because the Applicant
has not, and is not, complying with its duty to control the number, distribution
of what is a declared pest under s 30(3) of the BAM Act.
we could, we are not minded to vary the decision under review so as to mandate
an annual cull over a number of years. We
are of the view that action needs to
be taken now to address this issue. Moreover, as Dr Zabek explained, requiring,
for example,
40 donkeys to be culled over 5 years results in more animals
needing to be
Like Dr Zabek, in order to be as humane as possible, we prefer to
minimise the culling by instead requiring compliance with the
Control Notice.
we can appreciate that the Applicant has long allowed donkeys to graze in the
rangelands in the Station's home range, and that
for an extended period, this
practice appears to have been tolerated by the KRBA and the DPIRD, the simple
fact is that feral donkeys
are a declared pest. While our decision as to
whether to affirm or otherwise the Control Notice is discretionary, we are
to put to one side the fact of the Declaration and the responsibilities
on landowners that flow from that.
it is not for us to justify or defend the Declaration, as is set out in the LFH
Strategy, it is plain that LFH are regarded
as a threat to inter alia the
economic output of the pastoral industry, given that LFH and cattle compete, as
it were, for the same
grazing areas. In saying that, we do acknowledge the
Applicant's evidence that feral donkeys graze in areas of the rangelands that
cattle cannot access. We will say a little more about this shortly.
should also note that that time has moved on. The last aerial survey of the
Station by the DPIRD occurred in October 2023 where
117 donkeys were
observed. Based on the evidence of Dr Zabek, unless control measures have been
employed by the Applicant in the
meantime, the donkey population is likely to
have grown further. The point being that compliance with the Control Notice was
intended to, and will not, eradicate donkeys from the Station.
is also apparent to us that, going forward, should the Applicant wish to keep
and retain feral donkeys, it must, as it were, persuade
the KRBA and the
Respondent that it can effectively manage and control the number or
distribution of the donkey population. As we
have found, the current informal
arrangements employed by the Applicant to date have not been sufficient in that
regard, a point
which Robert fairly noted to be the case.
whatever reason, the informal arrangements that led to the DPIRD and the KRBA,
in effect, tolerating the presence of donkeys
at the Station ceased long ago.
The Applicant has been aware of this for a number of years now. If the
Applicant is serious about
retaining donkeys, it must commit to a more rigorous
and transparent set of arrangements that provide a level of comfort to the KRBA
and the Respondent, who manage and safeguard the broader interests of the
pastoral industry, that the donkey population will not:
unchecked and uncontrolled; and
(b) disperse from their home range.
the background of this Review, it is clear that the Applicant has, at times,
buried its head in the sand in terms of appreciating
the fact that the
arrangements that had been tolerated for a period of time, could no longer be
allowed to continue unchecked and
that more aggressive control of the donkeys
was required.
July 2021, the KRBA/DPIRD tried to discuss possible arrangements with the
Applicant on this very question, but the Applicant simply
chose not to engage.
It is therefore unsurprising that a Control Notice was ultimately issued.
Final comments
we conclude, we wish to observe that it may well be worthwhile for the DPIRD and
the KRBA to consider closely, and perhaps
even partner with, the Applicant in
exploring what has been the effect of allowing donkeys to graze in the
rangelands.
the possible environmental benefits of LFH is not an aspect of the Review, as we
have stated, we are not blind to the opinions
that were offered which support
the Applicant's philosophy on LFH. And, it must be said, while the KRBA speaks
of its success in
its long-running program to cull LFH in the rangelands, it is
almost certainly the case that land management practices have moved
1978, when the donkey culling program in the Kimberley region commenced.
in saying that, we do observe that the evidence, including environmental
evidence, that was put forward by the Applicant
in this case contained much
anecdotal opinion, but little specific data. For example, given that
cattle and donkeys intermingle
in the rangelands, how can one be sure that the
lush environment within the home range is due to the presence of donkeys. While
we have seen that studies might be progressing in that regard, there appears to
be little available data at this time.
Nevertheless,
and notwithstanding the case put forward by the Applicant, the simple fact is,
plainly, not all pastoralists value
donkeys in the same way the Applicant does.
The Applicant has long chartered its own course in this regard but, as we have
is not doing enough to control the number, distribution and spread of
what is a declared pest from the Station.
find that the correct and preferable decision is to affirm the Control Notice
(including the reporting measures) and to dismiss
the Review. The parties
should confer and prepare orders in these terms.
should also be prepared which address the manner in which the Control Notice
will be carried out, by reference to the 'Revised
Measures Proposed by the
Respondent' which were filed on 15 November 2024 but adjusted to take
account of the date of the publication
of these reasons.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
DR S WILLEY, SENIOR MEMBER
27 OCTOBER 2025
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Irrigation Cooperative Ltd v Department of Water
[2018] WASCA 83
(2018) 232 LGERA 331
v Mental Health Review Board
[2013] WASCA 128
[92] (Murphy JA,
Newnes JA agreeing).
SAT Act, s 77.
BAM Act, s 3(1);
Explanatory Memorandum,
Biosecurity and Agricultural Management Bill 2006
(WA), page 1.
Agricultural Protection Board was established pursuant to s 5 of the
Agricultural Protection Board Act 1950
(WA) (repealed).
publication in the
Prior to the Declaration, the
Biosecurity and Agriculture Management
(Declared Pests) Declaration 2013
, published in the
on 7 May 2013 (No 74, page 1925) had the effect of making feral
donkeys a declared pest.
'high impact organism' is a prohibited organism that has been prescribed as a
high impact organism.
'inspector' is defined in the BAM Act, s 6 to be, relevantly, a person so
appointed pursuant to s 162 of the BAM
s 31(1)(a)(i).
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
context of the LFH Strategy, LFH includes: unowned donkeys, horses (Equus
caballus) and the hybrids as well as Arabian (dromedary)
camels (Camelus
dromedarius).
Respondent's Amended Bundle of Documents (Exhibit 1), page 79.
Exhibit 1, page 78.
Act, s 169(2).
Act s 170(1) and s
Act, s 169 provides that the Minister may recognise a biosecurity group. The
purposes of such biosecurity groups include controlling
declared pests.
Act, s 126 and s
SAT Act, s 31(3).
November 2024.
November 2024.
ts 258, 7 November
[22] above.
277, 7 November
7 November 2024.
ts 276 - 277,
7 November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
ts 259, 7 November
268, 7 November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
ts 268, 7 November
Wallach has published academic papers on the potential benefits of donkeys and
other LFH. However, she was ultimately not called
by the Applicant.
reports are found in Volume 4 of Exhibit
Exhibit 9, figure
Exhibit 10, figure
'salt lick' is either a natural or artificial deposit of salt and other minerals
that animals lick for essential nutrients. Salt
licks provide essential
minerals for herbivores as a source of sodium, calcium, phosphorus and trace
Exhibit 10.
Exhibit 10,
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page 6.
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page 7.
Exhibit 10,
section 4.1, page 7.
The estimated
population of 159 is based on what Dr Zabek regards as a conservative growth
rate of 15%; premised on there being 150
donkeys on the Station in 2018. See
also: ts 176, 6 November
explains that the annual growth rate of a population is not static, but will
fluctuate based on
environmental conditions, available
resources, the reproductive status of a population, sex ratio, survival rates
and control and
management actions: Exhibit 10, para 4.2, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.2, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.2, page
Exhibit 10,
section 4.2, pages 9 - 10.
Exhibit 9, section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
November 2024.
November 2024.
ts 238, 7 November 2024.
ts 238 - 239,
7 November 2024.
section 5.2, page 19.
section 5.2, page 20.
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
section 5.2, page
November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
November 2024.
Exhibit 10, section 6, page
10, section 6, page
240, 7 November
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v North Sydney Council
[2007] NSWCA 164
; (2007) 155 LGERA 52 [55(h)]; see also
Puma Energy Australia and City of Cockburn
[2016] WASAT 36
; (2016) 89 SR (WA) 1 [46].
Interpretation Act 1984
Interpretation Act 1984
ts 50, 5 November 2024.
282, 7 November
180, 6 November 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter