URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ISAAC GEOFFREY MATHER BY HIS NEXT FRIEND ELKE LUNN -v- INSURANCE COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WADC 78 (30 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
ISAAC GEOFFREY MATHER BY HIS NEXT FRIEND ELKE LUNN -v-
INSURANCE COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WADC 78
CURWOOD DCJ
17 - 18 FEBRUARY 2025; FURTHER WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS BY
DEFENDANT ON 28 FEBRUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
30 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 2181 of 2023
ISAAC GEOFFREY MATHER BY HIS NEXT FRIEND ELKE LUNN
First Plaintiff
JETHRO JAMES MATHER BY HIS NEXT FRIEND ELKE LUNN
Second Plaintiff
INSURANCE COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Mother of two young boys killed in motor vehicle
accident caused by negligent driving of her husband and the father of the boys -
Assessment of damages for loss of dependency and loss of services - Relevance of
services provided by father before death in undertaking
assessment of
Legislation:
Fatal Accidents Act 1959
Damages assessed
Representation:
First Plaintiff
Mr T Lampropoulos SC & Mr L E M Bayly
Second Plaintiff
Mr T Lampropoulos SC & Mr L E M Bayly
Mr G P Bourhill SC
Solicitors:
First Plaintiff
Second Plaintiff
Panetta McGrath Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Baker v Bolton (1808) 170 ER 1033
Biddulph v Lenegan (Unreported, WASC, Library No 990076, 19 February
De Sales v Ingrilli
[2002] HCA 52
(2002) 212 CLR 338
Nguyen v Nguyen
(1990) 169 CLR 245
NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation (formerly GIO) v Willis
(1995) 35 NSWLR
Ruby v Marsh
[1975] HCA 32
(1975) 132 CLR 642
Seymour v British Paints (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1967] Qd R 227
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Van Gervan v Fenton
(1992) 175 CLR 327
Wheat v Wisbey
[2013] NSWSC 537
Introduction and overview
1 November 2020 Sabine Mather was killed in a motor vehicle accident
near Capel. The accident was caused by the negligent driving
of her husband,
James Ryan Mather. She was 31. James also died in the crash. Sabine and James
were survived by their two young
sons, Jethro 7 and Isaac 5. At the date
of their deaths Sabine worked 30 hours per week as a permanent part-time
child care worker
and James worked as a boatswain.
the tragic event in which they became orphans, Jethro and Isaac have been cared
for and raised by their maternal grandparents
Elke and Steve Lunn.
and Isaac, by Elke who is their next friend, commenced these proceedings seeking
damages from the Insurance Commission of
Commission) under the
Fatal Accidents Act 1959
(WA) (which I sometimes
refer to as 'the Act'). The claim is for the pecuniary benefits and domestic
care and assistance that Sabine
would have provided them but for her death. As
I will set out in greater detail, the task in assessing damages is based on a
hypothetical
position, being the loss of the chance of obtaining a financial
benefit from the continuance of the life of the deceased who is the
the action. This requires a determination of the monetary value of the gains
that Jethro and Isaac would have obtained
from Sabine if she had not died on 1
November 2020.
Commission admits liability for James' negligence and admits that Jethro and
Isaac are entitled to maintain an action and recover
damages in respect of
Sabine's death for the purposes of
of the Act. The trial before
me therefore is concerned only with the assessment of damages for Jethro and
Isaac's claims for loss
of dependency and loss of services.
A threshold issue: The appropriate counterfactual to assess damages
threshold issue arises from the fact that James' negligence caused not only
Sabine's death but also his own death. This raises
an important question of
what is the appropriate counterfactual against which the boys' loss is to be
The Commission's position
Commission argued that the damages to be awarded could only compensate Jethro
and Isaac for domestic services and financial support
that Sabine would have
provided in the context of a two-parent household. With respect to domestic
services, the services that James
was providing at the date of death, and
would have continued to provide but for his death, cannot be attributed to
Sabine in a hypothetical
assessment and awarded to the plaintiffs.
Further, for the purposes of assessing Jethro and Isaac's claims for loss of
based upon Sabine's lost income, Sabine's level of personal
consumption should be calculated as a percentage of household income
two-parent household based upon James' and Sabine's total incomes at the date
Commission's position was that any other approach would result in Jethro and
Isaac receiving compensation not only for services
their mother would have
provided, but also for services their father would have provided. Further, it
would be wrong to award any
sum which compensates Jethro and Isaac for services
previously provided by their father, as this would provide compensation for the
loss of services provided by both parents. Rather, the
Fatal Accidents
only permits recovery of material benefits that Sabine would have
provided, and compensation cannot extend to benefits that James
Plaintiffs' position
and Isaac's position is that, but for her wrongful death, Sabine would have been
their sole parent providing all care and
financial support for them from
1 November 2020. Taking this approach, any care James provided before his
death (about which no
evidence was led), or would have provided but for his
death, is irrelevant to the assessment of damages.
Loss of dependency (pecuniary benefits)
parties agreed that the claim for loss of dependency should be calculated across
three separate periods:
From Sabine's death (1 November 2020) until 31 January 2021.
From 1 February 2021 (the commencement of the 2021 school year) until the date
of judgment. Periods 1 and 2 comprise the plaintiffs'
past loss of pecuniary
Future loss of pecuniary benefits from the date of judgment until the dates when
Jethro and Isaac would cease to be financially
dependent on Sabine.
parties agree that it is appropriate to use a blended rate for Period 2,
such blended rate taking account of pay rises Sabine
would have received
for her ongoing service, rising seniority and promotions she would have obtained
within the child care business
that she worked for, Bayswater Child Care
Association (BCCA). However, they disagree on what the appropriate blended rate
be. It is therefo3re necessary for me to reach conclusions about what
Sabine's likely income would have been during Period 2 and
The calculation of the claim for loss of pecuniary benefits also requires an
assessment of Sabine's personal consumption
of her income. Specifically, should
that be based on a single-income household or a dual-income household,
which is directly tied
to the threshold issue concerning how James' death is to
be treated.
Loss of services and the boys' additional needs
Sabine's older son, has dyslexia and learning difficulties. Isaac has ADHD (for
which he takes medication, likely for the
rest of his life) and associated
learning difficulties. The parties differ on how, if at all, these conditions
affect the calculation
of the plaintiffs' loss.
plaintiffs contend that they are likely to require more supervision than
children of the same age without these conditions.
Further, as they grow into
adulthood, it is likely that they would require more ongoing financial and
domestic support than would
otherwise be the case.
Commission's position is that to the extent that I find Jethro and Isaac have
these conditions it increases the likelihood they
would not pursue tertiary
educations, and they would be more likely to enter the workforce at or around
the age of 18 and their financial
dependence on Sabine was likely to end at an
earlier age.
What are the issues between the parties to be determined in order to assess
way of summary, in approaching the assessment of damages in this case, I
consider the following issues need to be determined:
the damages for Sabine's wrongful death be calculated on a hypothetical
assumption that from the date of her death she would
be a sole parent or on the
basis that that she would have been a dual parent providing services and income
in a two-parent household?
for her death, what income would Sabine likely have earned from 1 November
2020 to the date of judgment? This requires an assessment
of whether she would
have worked full-time hours from 2021 onwards, her likely pay increases and her
likely rate of promotion at
determining Sabine's future lost earnings so as to determine Jethro and Isaac's
loss of dependency, should her personal consumption
factor assume a single or
dual income household?
Jethro and Isaac require an extended period of financial dependency or care,
supervision and domestic services due to:
(a) Jethro's
dyslexia, dysgraphia and emotional dysregulation;
(b) Isaac's ADHD with associated functional impairment; and
if so, until what ages would Sabine have provided Jethro and Isaac financial
support and domestic services?
is a reasonable allowance for the number of hours for past care, supervision and
domestic services that Sabine would have provided
to Jethro and Isaac from
1 November 2020 until the date of judgment?
to issue 4, what is a reasonable allowance for the number of hours for future
care, supervision and domestic services that
Sabine would have provided to
Jethro and Isaac from the date of these reasons?
to issue 1, should the total allowance for care, supervision and domestic
services be reduced because James' negligent driving
caused Sabine's death? If
so, by what percentage or other method should this reduction be calculated?
the plaintiffs' damages be reduced for general contingencies?
the next part of my reasons, I will set out the legal principles and my view of
how damages should be assessed in light of issue
1. I will then set out
the background facts, so far as can be determined from the evidence, and my
views about how Sabine's employment
and her likely income could be
assessed. Next, I will turn to Jethro and Isaac's medical conditions and their
living arrangements
since their parents' death and how domestic services which
have benefited them have been replaced since their parents' deaths. I
deal with the parties' contentions as to the assessment of damages and the
assumptions I should adopt. Finally, I will
set out my calculations for Jethro
and Isaac's claims for loss of dependency and loss of services.
findings I make with respect to the calculation of Jethro and Isaac's claims for
loss of dependency and loss of services I make
on the basis that I am reasonably
satisfied based on all the information before me that the assessment I have made
is the best estimate
available. In doing so, I appreciate that what I am
assessing is a hypothetical situation of what would have happened if Sabine
lived, which as I will refer to below, has been referred to as a situation
that puts the court in the impossible position of
having to make assumptions and
predictions about a future that cannot
the reasons that follow I have calculated the damages for Jethro and Isaac's
claims for loss of dependency and loss of services,
subject to hearing from the
parties before judgment is entered, in the sum of $2,774,947 which shall be
proportioned:
for Jethro's
benefit $1,272,998.50;
for Isaac's
benefit $1,501,948.50.
parties have agreed that upon publication of these reasons judgment should not
be entered because a trustee to hold and invest
Jethro and Isaac's awards has
not yet been agreed between them. Further, the appointment of a trustee cannot
occur until the quantum
of damages is known and estimates of trustee fees can be
obtained. Accordingly, as I have noted in the conclusion of my reasons,
order the case be adjourned for 14 days after the publication of these reasons,
without any orders being made, so that estimates
of trustee fees can be obtained
and the parties can confer as to the appropriate orders to give effect to these
reasons including,
if it be necessary, the correction of any arithmetical
errors in my calculations so that the judgment amount entered is consistent
these reasons for decision.
Relevant legal principles
Australia's
Fatal Accidents Act
is a derivative of the
Fatal Accidents Act 1846
(UK) which is commonly known as
Lord Campbell's
legislation bears the name of Lord John Campbell who as a politician championed
the law reform achieved by the legislation and
who was responsible for its
introduction.
to the enactment of Lord Campbell's Act, the families of persons killed due to
the negligence of another party could not claim
compensation for the wrongful
death. The common law position was expressed in Lord Ellenborough's ruling
In a civil Court, the death of a human being could not be complained of as an
injury, ....
Accordingly,
the basis of the plaintiffs' cause of action is statutory. Aside from the
Fatal Accidents Act
no remedy would be available to the plaintiffs for
the events of 1 November 2020.
4(1) of the
Fatal Accidents Act,
which confers the right of action,
relevantly provides:
Where the death of a person is caused by a wrongful act, neglect or default, and
the act, neglect or default is such as would (if
death had not ensued) have
entitled the party injured to maintain an action and recover damages in respect
thereof, the person who
would have been liable if death had not ensued is liable
to an action for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person injured,
6(1) provides that the action is brought for the benefit of relatives of the
deceased. The term 'relative' is defined in
sch 2 to include relevantly a
husband or wife, father or mother, son or daughter and people in certain other
specified degrees of
blood relationship and any de facto partner. In this
case, no controversy turns on the sole plaintiffs being Sabine's sons. Section
6(2) relevantly provides:
In every action the court may give such damages as it thinks proportioned to the
injury resulting from the death to the parties respectively
for whom and for
whose benefit the action is
statutory cause of action conferred by the Act (and its equivalents in England
and Australia) have interpreted the 'injury',
for which damages are
recoverable, as being the loss of the chance of obtaining a financial benefit
from the continuance of the life
of the deceased who is the subject of the
action. The monetary value of the 'injury' occasioned by the death is the
product of the
loss of the expectation of material benefits, or of the
reasonable prospect to material benefits, less any gains accruing from the
reason, the cases refer to damages for injury as being calculated on
a balance of pecuniary gains and losses consequent
McHugh J explained in
In an action under the
Fatal Accidents Act
, the first issue is to
determine the value of the gains that the relatives would have obtained from the
deceased if he or she had
not died. That inquiry requires the court to
determine what would have happened if the deceased had lived, a course that
immediately
puts the tribunal of fact into the impossible position of having to
make assumptions and predictions about a future that cannot occur.
simple cases, the probability must be very high that the assumptions and
predictions are wrong and wrong by a wide margin.
damages recoverable by Jethro and Isaac are for the loss of benefits they
expected to receive, dependent upon the continuation
of their mother's
life. This includes her direct financial support to them and the value of
services it was expected she would provide
to them. To calculate damages
for the loss of a reasonable expectation of pecuniary benefit involves
calculating a primary sum and
then making such further adjustments or allowances
as are necessary to produce a result that gives a true reflex of the
claim for damages under Lord Campbell's Act is a claim for recompense for some
tangible advantage which was then lost by reason
of the death of the deceased.
The claim is not related to need. For example, a relative claiming for the
loss of housekeeping services
by reason of the death of a deceased may have no
need of those services in that the relative may be able to perform them herself
or himself. Notwithstanding, if the relative has suffered the loss he or she is
entitled to recover for it. It does not matter
whether the relative intends to
use the damages to replace the services or
are, therefore, three basic principles to be applied in a claim arising
from Lord Campbell's Act:
losses only
: Damages are calculated for pecuniary loss only by reference to
the pecuniary benefits that could reasonably have been expected
continuance of the life of the person whose death has triggered the claim. Loss
of an expected benefit is restricted to
loss of direct financial support but may
include the value of services the deceased would have provided around the
would otherwise have supported the activities of the claimant.
of pecuniary gains and losses resulting from death
: In setting off gains to
a claimant by balancing both pecuniary gains and losses resulting from death,
the savings made by the claimant
in consequence of the death of the deceased
must be taken into account. For example, where a claimant provided
certain services
to the deceased until his or her death, the fact that it is no
longer necessary for the claimant to provide those services to the
deceased, must be considered when assessing benefits the deceased would have
conferred upon the claimant. Further, savings made
by the claimant in
consequence of the death of the deceased must be taken into account.
requirement to establish need
: A claimant's entitlement to be compensated
for the loss of domestic services provided by the deceased is not dependent upon
claimant's need for such
The date of assessment
loss occurs 'at the moment of death' or date of
Nguyen v Nguyen,
Deane J made reference with approval
to the decision of Gibbs J, when he sat as a judge of the Supreme Court of
Queensland, in
Seymour v British Paints (Australia) Pty
his Honour said:
The damages have to be assessed as at the date of [the wife's] death and at
the date the [the husband] had lost [his wife's] services
and that was a
pecuniary loss because the services had a pecuniary value. Evidence of
subsequent events is of course admissible
to show what the facts in reality were
and to render it unnecessary for the court to speculate about probabilities when
are known ...
Toohey and McHugh JJ also made reference with approval to a similar passage of
Gibbs J (as he then was) in the decision of
where he stated:
... The expectation of future benefit was destroyed by the death and no
subsequent event can increase or diminish the extent of
the pecuniary loss then
suffered, although it is true that subsequent events may be relevant to the
assessment of damages in so far
as they render it unnecessary for the court to
speculate about possibilities that may have existed at the date of death when
facts themselves have become known. ...
Application of the principles to the unique factual circumstances of the present
far as I can ascertain, no authority has dealt with an assessment of damages
under Lord Campbell's Act for orphaned children in
circumstances where a
negligent act of one parent killed both of the children's parents in one
first principle, one would expect an assessment of damages for the statutory
cause of action in this case to consider the hypothetical
survivor, but for the
wrongful death, raising the couple's children as a sole parent, as that is
the hypothetical assumption that
the legislation requires.
such circumstances, it would appear to be somewhat anomalous to take into
account domestic services of the 'at fault' parent who
caused both deaths. To
treat services James may have provided had he survived as a 'gain which must be
set off' appears inconsistent
with the principle explained in [27.2] above.
Similarly, it would seem to be anomalous to arbitrarily reduce the direct
support or the value of services Sabine would have provided
around the home on the basis that, for the hypothetical assessment, James
have survived and provided financial support and domestic services when he
clearly could not. This appears inconsistent with
the principle explained in
[27.1] above.
NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation (formerly GIO) v
illustrates the approach courts may take in cases with unusual facts such as the
present. In my view, the case of
demonstrates damages are
assessed by reference to the injury resulting from the fact of the death to the
entitled parties. Further,
damages are assessed by the consequences of the
death and not merely by reference to what services the deceased actually
in the context of the living arrangements that existed at the date of
death. The case also illustrates how evidence of subsequent
events should be
taken into account to avoid speculation when the facts themselves are known.
, Mrs Helen Pietsch, the mother of three infant
children, was killed by negligent driving. By her first marriage she had two
Nicole and Shane who were aged 10 and 7 respectively at the date of
their mother's death. Mrs Pietsch also had a third child, a
named Gelinda, who was aged 3 at the date of her mother's death.
the time of Mrs Pietsch's death, Mr Willis, the father of the two
older children was living on a country property with his second
wife and his
children moved to live with him. Gelinda moved to live with her aunt and
grandmother.
Proceedings
were brought on behalf of the three children. Judgment was entered in favour of
the children for a total sum of $458,244.62.
Gelinda's award was significantly
higher than Nicole's and
the course of the judgment some observations were made which inform how an
assessment of damages under Lord Campbell's Act should
take place. One of the
judgments noted as
Mr Leslie QC for the appellant contended that the available damages could
never exceed the evaluation (at commercial rates) of the
support and services
rendered by the individual deceased or, as he somewhat colourfully pressed his
proposition, a defendant may
not be made to supply two mothers to replace one.
The contention is flawed by its restriction to evaluating the services and
emanating from the deceased rather than - as the statute authorises -
evaluation proportioned to the injury resulting from the death
to the entitled
parties respectively. In relatively unconventional circumstances the result of
calculation may see the latter exceed
the former. This is such a case and
although it may be unusual there is no principle of assessment of damages
which prevents an
award exceeding evaluation of the total benefit provided in
the way the deceased did it in fact, if reasonable replacement in the
comes to be done after the death costs more.
similar terms, Sheller JA
... Against the argument advanced in the present case by the appellant it is
useful to refer to the three ways in which a personal
injury may give rise to
damage, identified by Windeyer J in
Teubner v Humble
[1963] HCA 11
at 505. One was to create needs that would not otherwise exist. This
is also true of the injury to a child caused by the death
of a parent. For
example where a single parent cared for several children of whom one suffers a
disability, the death of that parent
may create a need for the disabled
child to be cared for separately in a special home or hospital. In my opinion,
the Act enables
an award of damages to be made to compensate that child for the
need the parent's death has created. In the present case Mrs Pietsch's
death created a need for Gelinda to be cared for separately from the other two
children. Kirkham DCJ found that in the light of
family circumstances there was
a strong probability that his [sic] would happen if Mrs Pietsch died while
her children were young.
observations apply in this case. A claim for damages under Lord Campbell's Act
is a claim for recompense for a tangible
advantage which had been lost by reason
of the death of the
relation to a claim for damages sustained through the death of a parent,
the loss occurs 'at the moment of death'. In this case,
the expectation of
future benefit on the part of Isaac and Jethro was destroyed by the death of
death, to the extent it was not already evident at the immediate 'moment of
(Sabine's) death', is relevant for the assessment
of damages because that event
renders it unnecessary for the court to speculate about possibilities that may
have existed at the
date of death when the facts themselves have become
is a tension in comments in previously decided cases where reference has been
made to damages being assessed by reference to
the actual circumstances of the
family as they were before the death of
the provider.
Nguyen v Nguyen
, Brennan J observed that the entire family
situation before death must be compared with the entire family situation after
difficulty with ascertaining the 'balance of the loss' in this case is that, as
a matter of reality after Sabine's death, James
could not confer any benefits on
Jethro and Isaac. No financial benefits have been conferred on Jethro and Isaac
as a consequence
of Sabine's death. Nor has James' death caused any beneficial
financial benefits to flow to Jethro and Isaac.
has occurred since Sabine's death is that through the natural love and affection
of their grandparents, who have stepped in
to provide domestic services and
supporting income for them, the boys have been saved from extreme financial
hardship and, at worst,
becoming wards of the State. While it is the case that
if James had survived the fatal accident, one would expect that he would
provided services (and potentially significant domestic services) to his
sons. Notwithstanding, the assessment required is
to determine, at the date of
Sabine's death, the loss of chance of the plaintiffs obtaining a financial
benefit from the continuance
of the life of Sabine.
Accordingly,
in the circumstances as known to the court, the continuance of the life of
Sabine would have seen her providing all
domestic services for her sons and all
financial support for them. As I will turn to later in my reasons, I
accept there would be
short periods when one would expect other family members,
specifically her parents, would have assisted Sabine, but that does not
the fundamental position.
seems anomalous that a claim by Jethro and Isaac in respect of their mother's
death should be liable to abatement on account of
a possibility that
their father could provide domestic services to them when the reality of the
situation is that there was no prospect
which existed at the date of Sabine's
death that that could occur. To assess damages in this way would be a strange
proposition
when the court is required to assess the benefit in monetary terms
of the loss of the chance from the continuance of the life of
Sabine. If she
had lived, in the unusual circumstances of this case, she would have been a
sole parent.
De Sales v Ingrilli
, Kirby J highlighted some anomalies that
exist in Lord Campbell's Act claims by making these observations:
The law requires that 'any benefit accruing to a dependant by reason of the
relevant death must be taken into account ... the
balance of loss and gain
to a dependant by the death must be ascertained, the position of each dependant
being considered separately'.
... This being so, a court must endeavour to
work out the balance of financial gains and losses as best it can.
The law on the subject is full of anomalies and fine distinctions. Why, for
example, should help given by a step-parent to a
child who has lost a
parent be deducted in the calculation of damages under the Act, but not similar
support given by a grandparent
or other volunteer? Sometimes, the only apparent
justification for the lines drawn by judicial decisions in this area has been
of a policy choice. The logic of several of the decisions is questionable,
a fact recognised by this and other courts.
(footnotes omitted)
Determination of issue 1
my view, the assessment of damages for the statutory cause of action takes place
to compensate Jethro and Isaac for loss by reason
of the wrongful death of
their mother. That loss occurs at the moment of her death. The assessment has
to take place on the facts
that have become known at the date of Sabine's death.
In this case, the fact that had become known at the date of death was that
had also died. The two boys were orphans.
assessment of the tangible advantage which Jethro and Isaac lost by reason of
the death of their mother was the loss of the pecuniary
benefits and domestic
services their mother would have provided to them as their parent, taking into
account her primary duty to
maintain her children under s 66B(1) and
Family Law Act 1975
objective of an assessment for the statutory cause of action is to assess
damages by placing a financial value on the pecuniary
benefit that Isaac and
Jethro could reasonably have been expected to receive by the continuance of the
life of their mother. That
requires an assessment of what benefits Sabine would
have brought to the family, in this case to Jethro and Isaac, in the form of
income and the provision of
is difficult to see a rationale for trying to ascertain in the short period of
her sons' lives what domestic services their father
provided to them and to then
extrapolate those services over the entire period of their adolescence and early
adulthood as a means
of mitigating damages for the loss of the services their
provided to them for that entire period of their
childhood (and early adulthood), had she survived the wrongful act of their
as the tortfeasor.
a construction, in my respectful view, would give rise to what Kirby J referred
De Sales v Ingrilli
as an anomaly and fine distinction, the
only apparent justification for which would be of a policy choice.
Accordingly,
I determine that damages for Sabine's wrongful death should be calculated on the
basis that from the date of her death
she would have been a sole parent,
providing all financial support and domestic services to Jethro and Isaac. This
conclusion resolves
issues 1 and 7.
No evidence was led as to Sabine's performance of domestic services
determined that damages should be assessed on the basis that Sabine would have
been a sole parent from the date of her death,
I now turn to the evidence
led at trial and the methodology for calculating the quantum of the lost
benefits that would have been
provided by Sabine to Jethro and Isaac.
plaintiffs did not adduce any evidence of the domestic care and assistance that
either of their parents provided to them prior
to 1 November 2020.
Accordingly, I am unable to make any findings about how domestic tasks were
performed by Sabine and James in
the family home before their deaths or the
division of responsibilities between them. I approach the assessment of
domestic care
and assistance services without this baseline evidence. What is
known is that on the weekend of the fatal crash, Jethro and Isaac
were staying
with their grandparents and being looked after by them.
What was the evidence that was led at trial?
plaintiffs led evidence at the trial from two witnesses, Elke Lunn,
Jethro and Isaac's grandmother and primary carer, and Dr
Jane Steele a
qualified specialist paediatrician. The Commission did not call any
witnesses to give evidence.
plaintiffs prepared a trial bundle containing a number of reports prepared by
Dr Steele, reports from the boys' school psychologists,
various school
reports and school results, and correspondence to Elke from Jethro and
Isaac's teachers. The plaintiffs' trial bundle
also contained a number of
Sabine's tax returns, pay slips and other employment records as well as pay
rates, enterprise agreement
and award classification comparison documents for
the pay rates from BCCA and the relevant award.
Commission did not object to any documents in the plaintiffs' bundle and I
accepted the bundle as Exhibit 1. The Commission
also tendered a
bundle of tax returns and financial documents for James and Sabine which I
received as Exhibit 2. The documents
in Exhibit 2 included
Sabine's 2021 tax return which was filed after her death and which disclosed the
income of her spouse, James
for the four month period 1 July 2020 to
31 October 2020 was $30,316
received a document of hourly pay rates at the BCCA as of 2 December 2024
entitled 'BCCA Argument and Award Classification
Comparison' as Exhibit 3.
One difficulty which arises in the assessment of Sabine's lost income is that
the hourly pay rates of
the BCCA award are not complete for all positions for
the years 2022, 2023 and part of 2024. Nevertheless, I was able to take a
broad brush approach to Sabine's likely income which I explain in
[144] - [146] below.
Sabine and her family - Sabine's background and her family relationships
many people in modern Australia, Sabine was the daughter of migrants. Her
mother Elke (born 3 September 1960) and father, Steve
29 February 1960) were originally from Germany. At the date of the trial
they had been married for over 37 years. They live
in inner suburban Perth.
Jethro and Isaac have lived with Elke and Steve since the death of their
parents. Elke has been their
primary caregiver.
and Steve emigrated to Australia when they were each about 24 years of age.
Sabine was born on 3 August 1989 and her brother,
Daniel, was born in 1991.
When Sabine was in primary school the family lived in Papua New Guinea. In 2000
the family returned to
live in Perth.
attended high school at Chisholm College and completed Year 12 in 2006.
She commenced studying at university, initially accounting
teaching, but she did not complete an undergraduate degree.
2008 or 2009 Sabine met her future husband, James. According to her
mother, the relationship affected her studies as James was
a seaman who
worked away but when he was in Perth, Sabine did not attend university. Elke
said that 'love was more important than
studying at that age' for Sabine.
Sabine eventually deferred her studies and worked on a short-term basis as a
receptionist in several
16 July 2012 Sabine commenced working in the 'long day care' part of BCCA's
Salisbury Child Care Centre business. This part of
the business catered to
children under kindergarten age. Sabine was then 22 years old. She
subsequently obtained qualifications
in child care including a
Certificate III diploma in child care. Sabine was working at the same day
care centre as a team leader
at the date of her death.
Bayswater Child Care Association - Sabine and Elke's employer
Child Care Association is a not-for-profit organisation that conducts three day
care centres, Silverwood Child Care Centre
(Silverwood) in Morley, Noranda Child
Care Centre in Noranda and Salisbury Child Care Centre (Salisbury) in Bedford.
At the date
of trial, Elke had worked for BCCA for 17 years and was employed as
the manager of the long day care operations of BCCA's three day
care centres.
day care centre provides a service to working parents who need child care while
they are working. BCCA also provides other
child care services at each centre
including before and after school care and vacation care. By 'long day care',
Elke explained
that each of the centres provides an educational program plus
child care for children on weekdays from 7.15 am (Silverwood) or
am (Noranda and Salisbury) until 6.00 pm.
said in evidence that lower-middle income families receive child care subsidies.
A government benefit pays part of the centre's
fee leaving a 'gap' which is
payable by the child's parent or guardian to the centre. One of the benefits of
employment for BCCA
staff is that if they require any child care services for
their own children, the centre gives a discounted price which would be
any gap fee.
Employment terms and pay rates
employees are subject to an enterprise bargaining agreement which is negotiated
every five years. The next enterprise bargaining
period was due to
commence by July 2025. BCCA's enterprise bargaining agreement rates
of pay are higher than the child care award
with the result being that BCCA pays
its employees at a higher rate compared with child care centres which pay the
Children's Services Award
full-time employees work 76 hours per fortnight (or 38 hours per
week) and have four weeks of holidays and 76 hours (or two
of special leave. This additional special leave is provided to employees in
consideration of staff members undertaking workplace
training or staff meetings
after hours. Staff members also have available to them 10 days of annual
sick leave.
Employment positions and promotional opportunities available at Bayswater Child
Care Association
senior employment position at each of BCCA's day care centres is a position
called 'Centre Coordinator'. Each centre has three
'team leader' positions.
Sabine occupied a team leader position at Salisbury at the date of her death.
Two or more other child
care workers work under each team leader to support the
team leader.
plaintiffs tendered in evidence an extract of BCCA's pay
plaintiffs also tendered schedules of pay rates for BCCA's various employment
positions for the years 2021 until the date of
trial. The latest document was
prepared in December
the time of her death, Sabine's team leader position was categorised as a
Level 4A position on the BCCA pay scale. A team leader
children's services
educator holding a diploma qualification had three levels of payment rates:
Level 4A (which Sabine held at the
date of her death), Level 4B, and
Level 4C. The position of Centre Coordinator also had three pay rates:
Levels A, B and C.
unchallenged evidence was that, subject to an annual work performance review,
there is an automatic graduation from Level
4A to Level 4B and
Level 4C respectively. The same observations apply to levels of
payment rates for other positions including Centre
Coordinator. Unless an
employee suffers an adverse performance review, there is an automatic graduation
from Level A to Level B
and Level C on an annual basis.
Accordingly,
in 2021 Sabine would have been paid as a Level 4B team leader. On a
full-time basis Sabine would have been paid $1,216.38
gross per week/$979.38 net
Evidence of promotional opportunities
her evidence, Elke described her promotion within BCCA's business. She
described how she originally started working for BCCA
as the team leader in
the 'kindy room', which was the job Sabine was performing at the date of her
death. She started at Silverwood.
In her evidence she said she 'just
climbed up' from there.
a year as a team leader in the kindy room, Elke was promoted to be the Centre
Coordinator at Silverwood. She was then promoted
to the role of an assistant
manager for BCCA and, later, to her current role as the manager of the long
day care aspect of the business.
She has been an assistant manager or manager
for over eight years.
duties as manager of BCCA's long day care include going to each of the three
centres to deal with issues that arise with staff,
any complaints from
parents and regulatory compliance for the business. She sits in on staff
interviews and is involved in decision-making,
with others, as to the employment
of staff. She evaluates pay rises and co-signs wages for employees each
fortnight and, from the
nature of her role, manages the long day care aspect of
the three centres.
evidence was that since the accident, four Centre Coordinators have left BCCA.
Two of the Centre Coordinators that left were
based in Noranda. BCCA had
difficulties in filling each of those vacancies with a suitable applicant
as they arose. One of those
opportunities arose in 2021, another in 2022.
Additionally, two further vacancies arose in 2023, at Silverwood and at
where Sabine had previously
and BCCA's chief executive officer interview candidates for Centre Coordinator
described Sabine's prospects of promotion within BCCA to a Centre
Coordinator's role by saying 'the possibility' was 'quite
high' for her to
actually get that job (the Centre Coordinator position) 'especially when we had
difficulties to find somebody
evidence, Elke also described an instance at BCCA where a daughter was promoted
to the managerial position her mother held.
Assessment of Sabine's career trajectory
assess the plaintiffs' claim for loss of pecuniary benefits, I must
determine two
whether Sabine would have commenced full-time employment from 1 February
2021; and second, whether she would have received
promotions within BCCA. In
making these assessments, I accept that they are based to a degree on
speculation, but I outline below
the evidence upon which I consider those facts
can be assumed for the purposes of the assessment of Sabine's likely promotion
the business.
Would Sabine have worked full-time hours from 1 February 2021?
the time of her death, Sabine was working 60 hours a fortnight. Elke's
unchallenged evidence was that Sabine told her shortly
before her death that she
wanted to go full-time at the beginning of the next school year. Elke also
confirmed that Sabine had made
a request to the Salisbury coordinator and
the coordinator was happy to agree or make that possible. Elke also said that
the general
practice of BCCA's business was that staff would move to the 'next
room' each year because as the children grew up there was a need
for continuity
of care. The request for full-time work also facilitated the change in
care of the children Sabine had been working
Commission did not dispute the evidence that Sabine had made a request to her
coordinator that she wanted to go to full-time
hours. I find that Sabine would
have commenced working full-time hours from 1 February 2021 (38 hours
per week or 76 hours per fortnight)
from 1 February 2021. I am comfortably
satisfied that Sabine would have worked full-time in BCCA's Salisbury Child Care
one of BCCA's other centres) from that date.
Promotion to Centre Coordinator
gave evidence about the structure of BCCA's business, BCCA's enterprise
bargaining arrangements, and the scope for promotions
within the business. She
spoke of her own promotion from the position she was occupying when she first
joined the business, which
was the same as Sabine's. She spoke about her rise
through the business to the position of manager of long day care. I accept
evidence in this respect (and her evidence generally) as being honest,
truthful and reliable.
Notwithstanding
that Elke is Sabine's mother and herself acknowledged that she had a view of her
daughter by virtue of that relationship,
she said that Sabine was very
passionate about the children in her care, was a good mother, responsible and
reliable, and that those
attributes were what the business was looking for in
employees. Her evidence was that BCCA sought out motivated people who were
responsible, reliable and had a good rapport with
She described her daughter as
being passionate
and well respected within the organisation.
the evidence available, I consider there was a strong probability that Sabine
would have been promoted within the business to
the position of Centre
Coordinator, likely in 2022, but possibly as early as 2021 or as late as 2023,
given the availability of positions
and her respect within the business. I
outline my conclusions as to Sabine's promotions within BCCA in [136] and [144]
Sabine's children
was born on 2 February 2013. Jethro is Sabine's older son. At the time of
trial, he had just turned 12 years of age and
was attending his first year at
high school, Year 7 at Chisholm College.
was 7 years and 9 months when his parents died. Since their
death he has lived with his grandparents, Elke and Steve Lunn.
parents' death he attended Hillcrest Primary School. It is intended that he
will remain at Chisholm College until he
finishes school.
has been diagnosed with dyslexia and dysgraphia. He has been in a special needs
program and has had regular tutoring in his
time living with his grandparents.
He has had behavioural issues at school, and although he had delays in his
reading ability, he
can read now but spelling is still an issue for
on occasions in aggressive and defiant
some years he has been under the supervision of Dr Steele, a paediatrician.
a qualified specialist paediatrician gave evidence with respect to both Jethro
and Isaac's medical conditions. She first
met with Jethro on 6 October
prepared a report on 26 October 2021 that stated that multiple members of
Jethro's family had been diagnosed with
including his
father and maternal uncle, Daniel. With respect to the diagnosis of emotional
dysregulation, Dr Steele referred to
that condition as a symptom that is
often seen in children with ADHD where they find it difficult to contain their
emotions, feel
criticism more strongly than other children and find it difficult
to control what comes with those emotions. Having said that, Dr
confirmed that she had not diagnosed Jethro with ADHD.
Steele was taken to further reports of 20 July 2022 and 14 March 2023.
With respect to the diagnosis of emotional dysregulation
as against ADHD,
Dr Steele said that emotional dysregulation is seen more commonly in
children with ADHD but it was also seen in
neurotypical or 'normal' children.
Dr Steele said that her experience is that children who feel things
strongly continue to be adults
who feel things strongly. Into adulthood, some
manage their emotions more readily and it is very difficult at Jethro's age to
the future possible progress of his condition.
Dr Steele's
most recent review of Jethro was on 9 April 2024 and at the time of that
report she stated that he was currently going
well and there were no
significant concerns. During her evidence at trial, Dr Steele clarified
that position to say that she had
had a recent phone call from Elke about
concerns that had been raised since he started high school, and she would be
seeing him again.
When cross-examined about testing for ADHD, she said that
with Jethro she had undertaken two assessments, and he was borderline
'didn't quite meet criteria'.
was asked a question about the inevitability of a person having ADHD having
difficulties with employment and she answered,
'not in every single person with
was born on 18 March 2015. At the date of his parents' death Isaac was 5
years of age. At the date of trial, he was 9 years
of age, about to turn
described Isaac as having difficulty reading and writing, struggling with maths
at school, and requiring tutoring. He has been
diagnosed with ADHD and is
taking medication for his ADHD. He is easily distracted, often
a short attention span.
confirmed that Isaac had been diagnosed with ADHD, dyslexia and dysgraphia. She
described these conditions as follows:
is a specific learning disorder whereby a person suffering from it has
difficulty reading and processing academic information
and learning from it and
that such condition is not curable and is a lifelong condition. Further,
it is extremely difficult to predict
in each individual how it may progress over
his or her lifetime.
is a specific learning disorder of written expression whereby a child struggles
with understanding instructions and being
able to express them in written form.
Similarly to dyslexia, that condition is not curable but manageable in most
children over
is a neuro developmental condition where children who are diagnosed with the
disorder have difficulty maintaining focus, difficulties
with hyperactive
behaviour and impulsivity.
said that Isaac had a combined sub-type of ADHD where he has significant
difficulties with attention and focus and also
with hyperactive and impulsive
behaviour. This is a life-long condition that is managed with medication.
first saw Isaac on 29 September 2021 and has generally seen him every six
months since then. A number of reports of Dr
Steele form part of
Exhibit 1. From the reports, Isaac has been taking Ritalin LA for
some time. In a report of 15 February 2023,
it was recorded that the
Ritalin was working well to help Isaac stay on task and control his hyperactive
behaviour, but late afternoon
Ritalin had worn off by then.
medication was prescribed being methylphenidate hydrochloride which was
administered just before lunch. Prescribing medication
was described as
having been somewhat difficult because Isaac has had difficulties in being under
weight. The most recent report
of September 2024 confirms Isaac's current
problems as being ADHD, developmental trauma, specific learning disorder in
reading, and
specific learning disorder in written expression.
the time of the trial, Isaac was being treated with Ritalin LA 20 mg
in the morning and Ritalin IR 5 mg at lunchtime and also
medication in the early evening, guanfacine.
described assessing and reassessing individuals generally every six months to
address and reassess medication and see how
patients are going from an academic
and behavioural point of
described that where individuals cease taking medication, the ADHD features will
re-emerge, specifically hyperactivity and impulsivity.
Her opinion was, as I
have noted, that it was likely that Isaac would retain the need for medication
to adulthood.
said in her evidence that repercussions can be significant for children,
adolescents and adults with ADHD if the condition
is not managed appropriately
and it is more difficult for sufferers to hold down a job because of their
disorganisation, time management
skills and the way they communicate. They
can be loud and talk a lot which a number of people in the community do not have
an understanding
cross-examination Dr Steele referred to the history presented to her by
Elke was consistent with respect to
having to spend more time that would otherwise be expected in looking after
a child because of the condition of ADHD. Further,
it was not inevitable
that ADHD will cause a problem with employment with every single person with
Jethro and Isaac's living arrangements since their parents' death
gave evidence of a typical week in the lives of Jethro and Isaac as at November
In summary,
both boys get up at around 7.00 am each school day. Elke drives them
to school and walks them to their classroom commencing
at 8.20 am. She
then drives to work, finishing at 3.45 pm. After work Elke picks the boys
up from out-of-school care and they arrive
prepares snacks for the boys, supervises their homework, allows free play while
she prepares dinner, pre-packs
lunches, and lays out uniforms for the next day.
At 6.00 pm the family eats dinner together. At 7.00 pm there is
a late snack and
at 7.45 pm Isaac takes his medication and is
permitted some play time on Xbox. At 8.00 pm Isaac goes to bed and
Jethro's bedtime
is around 8.45 pm. She would read to the boys one to one.
For each weekday the routine is similar.
Saturdays, both boys would attend lessons at Leederville, being described as
'intervention', Isaac for 45 minutes from 8.30 am
and Jethro for one hour
from 9.15 am. They then have a tutor who provides feedback to Elke before
leaving after 10.30 am. For the
rest of the Saturday there is no set
routine, but the family tries to organise fun activities including encouraging
play dates with
friends, meeting up with cousins, going swimming, going to skate
or BMX parks, movies or shopping. On Sundays everyone gets up a
and Steve takes the boys out so that Elke can have some time to herself.
Meals and bedtimes remain the same on weekends.
working hours were less than full-time. She worked Monday, Wednesday and Friday
8.45 am to 3.45 pm and Tuesdays and Thursdays
school holidays Jethro and Isaac would attend vocational care, and Elke would
try to take some days off to arrange fun activities.
Effect of Jethro and Isaac's learning difficulties
issue in assessing damages for loss of pecuniary benefits and services is
determining when Jethro and Isaac would cease to be
financially dependent on
Sabine and would no longer require her domestic services. This requires an
assessment of how their medical
conditions and learning difficulties would
affect their education, workforce participation, and capacity to live
independently.
in some cases, financial dependency might cease at age 18, in other cases
financial independence on the part of a young adult
may take a much longer
period. In case law for family provision matters reference is often made to
what a community expectation
is with respect to a moral obligation of a parent
towards an adult child. It is commonly said that ordinarily, the community
parents to raise, and educate their children to the very best of their
ability while they remain children, probably to assist them
with a tertiary
education, where that is feasible and, where funds allow, to provide them
with a start in life such as a deposit
on a home although it might well take
a different
'community expectation' in a wider sense in the Australian community is very
days when young adults became financially independent a short time after
leaving secondary school appear much more infrequent
than they were, even
several decades ago. Many young adults, upon leaving secondary school, pursue
tertiary education. Tertiary
education commonly takes students until ages
21 - 22 to complete. Some young adults pursue employment immediately
after finishing
secondary school, some go through TAFE and other vocational
training pipelines to achieve permanent employment. It is not uncommon
young adults to be financially dependent on their parents in the age bracket of
18 - 22 years of age. When looking at Sabine's
transition to
employment, she studied for a period, had some short-term receptionist jobs and
then started working in child care
when she was 22. In this case, the evidence
points to neither Jethro's nor Isaac's circumstances as being typical when
to children their age. It appears to me that their conditions will
potentially affect their educational progress and delay their
transition to
permanent employment.
determining a period of dependency, I must assess what benefits Sabine would
reasonably have been expected to provide to her sons
had she lived. This is not
limited to a bare minimum standard but extends to what a reasonable parent in
Sabine's position would
provide, taking into account the particular needs and
circumstances of her children.
I have said, modern Australian experience shows that many young adults remain
partially dependent on their parents well into their
20s, particularly while
completing tertiary education, vocational training and establishing
themselves in the workforce. Young adults
continue to live at home with a
parent (or parents) longer than they once did. Property rental options are more
expensive and less
plentiful than was once the case. So much is obvious to all
members of the community. Where children have additional needs that
their educational outcomes, or outcomes in obtaining permanent employment, it is
reasonable to assume a period of dependency
(full and partial) would extend
further, than the completion of secondary education.
has been diagnosed with dyslexia and dysgraphia. While Dr Steele did
not diagnose him with ADHD, he tested as borderline
and has a family history of
ADHD. In approaching the assessment of damages in this case, on balance, I
consider Jethro's learning
difficulties will affect his educational progress and
his capacity to complete any tertiary education within typical timeframes.
The evidence shows that Jethro has required special needs programs and
regular tutoring, and this pattern of additional support
would likely continue
through his remaining school years and any post-secondary education.
Steele's evidence was that it is very difficult to predict how Jethro's
conditions will progress into adulthood. However, the
available evidence
supports a conclusion that he is likely to require more support than a
'neurotypical' child of the same age which,
in my view, is likely to extend to
Jethro completing his education and ultimately transitioning to employment.
plaintiffs submitted they would be partially financially dependent on Sabine (to
the extent of 50%) from the age of 18 to the
age of 25. Specifically, that
there would be a financial dependence at half the level that existed at the age
Commission's position was that it was appropriate to assess both Jethro and
Isaac's future pecuniary loss during the ages of
18 to 21 at 50% of the level of
financial dependency that existed up to the age of 18. As I will turn to, the
parties adopted different
figures and assumptions for Sabine's net income for
the assessment of future pecuniary loss.
into account the nature of Jethro's medical conditions it is reasonable to
conclude, that:
would remain entirely financially dependent on Sabine until he turned 18 (for
the purposes of issue 4).
most children his age, he will likely undertake some form of tertiary education
or vocational training. Given his learning difficulties,
this could likely
extend beyond the typical completion timeframe. I find he would likely have
remained partially financially dependent
on Sabine through such education or
further training until the age of 22 (for the purposes of issue 4). I deal
with this issue further
at [150] below.
age 22, I find that Jethro would likely have remained requiring financial
assistance from Sabine while establishing himself
in employment. This partial
dependency in all probability would continue to age 25 (for the purposes of
issue 4) but is likely to
reduce after the age of 22. By partial
dependency, I mean Sabine would have been likely to continue to provide
accommodation, some
financial support for living expenses, and assistance
with any out of pocket educational or vocational training costs.
respect to domestic services, Jethro would likely continue to live in the family
or training until his early
20's. He is likely to require more organisational support and household
assistance than a neurotypical
young adult of the same age. I find it
probable Sabine would have provided some level of domestic services to Jethro in
of meal preparation, washing and domestic chores until his early 20's.
conditions are more severe and wide-ranging than Jethro's. He has been
diagnosed with combined subtype ADHD, meaning he
has significant difficulties
with both attention and focus, and with hyperactive and impulsive behaviour.
This is a life-long condition
that will seemingly require ongoing management by
medication into adulthood. Isaac has also been diagnosed with dyslexia and
dysgraphia.
Steele gave evidence that ADHD is managed with medication but that where
individuals cease taking medication, the ADHD features
re-emerge. Her opinion
was that it was likely Isaac would retain the need for medication into
adulthood. Significantly, Dr Steele
described the repercussions as
potentially being significant for children, adolescents and adults with ADHD if
the condition is not
managed appropriately. She said it is more difficult for
sufferers to hold down a job because of their disorganisation, time
skills, and the way they communicate.
combination of ADHD, dyslexia, and dysgraphia self-evidently presents challenges
for timely completion of post-school study and
vocational training and early
transition to permanent full-time employment. While Dr Steele properly
noted that it was not inevitable
that every child with ADHD will have employment
difficulties, it is reasonable to infer that Isaac is likely to face challenges
studying or training after secondary school and establishing himself a career
or employment in his post-school years.
Steele's evidence, supported by Elke's evidence about Isaac's current care
needs, demonstrates that Isaac requires more time and
supervision than would
otherwise be expected for a child of his age. This pattern, in my opinion, is
likely to continue into young
into account the nature of Isaac's conditions it is reasonable to conclude,
would remain financially dependent on Sabine until he reached the age of 18 (for
the purposes of issue 4).
most children his age, he will likely undertake some form of tertiary education
or vocational training. Given his learning difficulties,
this could likely
extend beyond the typical completion timeframe. I find he would likely have
remained partially financially dependent
on Sabine through such education or
further training until the age of 22 (for the purpose of issue 4).
the combination of ADHD, dyslexia, and dysgraphia, any tertiary education
would be significantly more challenging and would
likely take considerably
longer than typical timeframes. If Isaac pursued a three-year
qualification, it would likely take a longer
time to complete, or he may pursue
shorter vocational training options that are less academically intensive.
22, Isaac would face challenges of the nature Dr Steele identified in
obtaining and maintaining employment. It is not unreasonable
to predict that
Isaac would be likely to encounter periods of unemployment or underemployment in
his early to mid-20s. I find Isaac
would likely be partially financially
dependent on Sabine while establishing himself in employment to age 25 (which is
relevant for
the purposes of issue 4).
respect to domestic services, I consider that Isaac would likely have continued
to live in Sabine's home through completion of
his education or training. The
evidence establishes that Isaac requires significantly more supervision,
organisational support,
and household assistance than a neurotypical young
adult. I find it to be probable that he would continue to receive some form of
domestic services and assistance from Sabine, had she survived, until around age
25, or slightly younger (which is relevant to issues
4 and 6). I have assessed
an allowance for the domestic care and assistance services Sabine would likely
have provided to Isaac
in [195] below.
Assessment of contingencies
turning to the quantification of the assessment of past and future pecuniary
benefits and loss of domestic services, the calculation
of an appropriate sum
for damages must ordinarily allow a discount for general contingencies. In
De Sales v Ingrilli
[2002] HCA 52
(2002) 212 CLR 338
, Gleeson CJ
Calculating
damages for the loss of a reasonable expectation of pecuniary benefit usually
involves calculating a primary sum and then
making such further adjustments or
allowances as are necessary to produce a result that gives a true reflex of the
loss. The nature
of such adjustments and allowances will be influenced by the
manner in which the primary sum is calculated. In a case like the present,
there are three main elements in determining the primary sum. Each element
involves speculative judgments, which cannot be made
with accuracy. The court
assesses what benefits the deceased would have brought to the family, in the
form of either income or the
provision of services. The court determines the
share of that benefit that would have been enjoyed by a relative during the
lifetime. And the court determines the period for which a relative
could reasonably have expected to receive the benefit. ...
A child of the
deceased may reasonably expect to receive such a benefit until the child
reaches an age of expected financial independence.
The primary sum awarded is
the present value of a relative's total expected benefit. The calculation
of the primary sum might itself
be done by a method that involves allowing
for contingencies such as are taken up in actuarial calculations of life
expectancy, and
the present value of a future income stream.
court may then be required to allow for further contingencies that may affect
the loss of benefit sustained by the claimant.
Courts take account of
such contingencies in two ways. Certain contingencies may be provided for
by way of a general allowance for
the 'vicissitudes of life'.
Such contingencies may be relatively unlikely to occur, or their occurrence
may be impossible to predict
any accuracy. Other contingencies
may be more likely to occur, and more susceptible to specific calculation in the
circumstances
of a particular case. In these circumstances, if the
tribunal assessing damages is a judge sitting without a jury, it may be
appropriate
to apply a special discount for the specific contingency in
question. For example, a general discount is sometimes applied to allow
contingencies such as the chance of premature death, injury, sickness or
unemployment. ...
involved a claim by a widow and two children
arising from the death of a 31-year-old man who was their husband and father.
question upon which the matter was considered by the High Court
related to contingencies that should be applied to the surviving
widow to take
account of her prospects of remarriage. Before the case of
reached the High Court, the Western Australian
Full Court considered the question of contingencies when assessing the claims of
two infant children.
stated at [33] in the Full Court decision in
that no deduction should be made from the children's damages to allow for
contingencies. However, Miller J (with whom Parker J agreed)
concluded a deduction of 5% would be appropriate for the children's
entitlements. That conclusion did not appear to be controversial
in the High
Court and the discount of 5% for general contingencies seems to have been
accepted for assessing the claims of the two
infant children.
are numerous uncertainties in assessing Jethro and Isaac's future, given their
medical conditions, for the reasons I have already
outlined. I consider a
deduction of 5% is appropriate for the future components of their loss as the
calculations assume that Jethro
and Isaac will continue requiring financial
support from Sabine into early adulthood.
leaving the issue of contingencies, I consider an attractive argument exists
that no contingency should apply for children
in the position of the plaintiffs
in this case given a potential for Jethro and, or, Isaac to continue
dependency beyond the age
when independence may be anticipated to occur in the
normal course of events.
the relatively closed period of dependency in this case, notwithstanding that it
can apply for a period of up to 12 - 15
years from the date of
judgment, is a shorter period than a claim for loss of dependency from a
surviving spouse. These matters
counterbalance the adoption of a percentage
rate reduction for contingencies but nevertheless I will apply a discount of 5%
for general
contingencies for the future components of the plaintiffs' loss for
the purposes of issue 8.
Introduction and methodology
now turn to the assessment of past and future loss of pecuniary benefits,
commonly referred to as loss of dependency.
assessment requires me to determine what financial benefits Jethro and Isaac
would reasonably have expected to receive from Sabine
had she lived, less the
amount she would have spent on her own personal consumption. The parties agreed
on several matters regarding
assumptions for the assessment but differed on
upon my earlier findings and the evidence, my assumptions for the purposes
of calculating loss of dependency are as follows:
parent household
: The assessment is to be conducted on the basis that Sabine
would have been a sole parent from the date of her death, providing all
financial support to her sons.
consumption rate
: Sabine would have spent approximately 25% of her net
income on her personal expenses. This figure is consistent with the
Consumption Percentages in Australia - Current
identifies that a fifth decile single parent with two children utilises 24.2%
for personal consumption. A rate of 25% is a
fair and reasonable figure that
accounts for fluctuations in personal spending. The balance of 75% would have
been spent on Jethro
and Isaac and upon expenses benefiting the whole family. I
do not accept the Commission's submission that a personal consumption
12.4% should be applied. That figure is based on a two-parent household, which
is inconsistent with my determination on
the threshold issue.
: Sabine would have commenced full-time employment (38 hours per
week) from 1 February 2021, working at BCCA's Salisbury Child Care
: Sabine would have been promoted within BCCA to a Centre
Coordinator position, likely in 2022, but no later than 2024 given:
connection with the business;
7  years of service by the date of her death;
her passion for
her work and the children in her care;
her reliability
and value to the organisation;
the career path
evidenced by Elke's own progression; and
the availability
of Centre Coordinator positions in 2021, 2022, and 2023 and the fact that for at
least two of those positions at
Noranda which BCCA had difficulty
: Based on my earlier conclusions at [116] and [121]:
Jethro: Complete
dependency until turning 18; partial dependency until age of 25, or slightly
Isaac: Complete
dependency until turning 18; partial dependency until age 25.
Calculation
methodology
: I will calculate lump sum awards using a 6% discount rate,
which is the appropriate rate for these calculations. Future periodic
are converted to present values using standard actuarial multipliers.
: It is appropriate to allocate the loss of past pecuniary benefits
equally between Jethro and Isaac. For future loss I will calculate
entitlement separately due to their different ages.
pecuniary gains received
: Jethro and Isaac have not received any pecuniary
gains resulting from Sabine's (or James') death. Accordingly, no gains or
need to be balanced or set off from the losses resulting from Sabine's
Past Loss - Period 1 - 1 November 2020 to 1 February 2021
Period 1 Sabine would have continued to work part-time hours as she had been
doing. Based on her payment history between 25
July 2020 and 30 October
earning an average of $919.90 gross per week or $765.90 net per week as a Level
4A Team Leader at
Date period
Gross amount per fortnight
25 July 2020 - 7 August 2020
8 August 2020 - 21 August 2020
22 August 2020 - 4 September 2020
5 September 2020 - 18 September 2020
19 September 2020 - 2 October 2020
3 October 2020 - 16 October 2020
17 October 2020 - 30 October 2020
Average (over a 14-week period)
$919 gross per week /
$765 net per week
calculate the expected pecuniary benefit for Jethro and Isaac for Period 1 as
Sabine's net income per week
Less Sabine's personal consumption (25%)
13 weeks x $573.35
Interest 13 weeks ($7,458.75 x 3% x 0.25 years)
Interest to date of reasons ($7,458.75 x 6% x 4.7 years)
(a) 50% Jethro
Past Loss - Period 2 - 1 February 2021 to date of judgment (20 October
Period 2, I must determine an appropriate blended rate for Sabine's likely net
income from 1 February 2021 to the date of delivery
of these reasons. This
is a period of 4 years and 8  months, or approximately 250
spoke to a document which was tendered in evidence which contained the pay rates
for certain positions for employees of
At the date
of her death, Sabine was a Level 4A Team Leader. Based upon Elke's
evidence that employees went from a Level B to a
Level C position
annually, one disadvantage I have in assessing pecuniary loss is that I do not
have any evidence of what the Level
4B or 4C Team Leader pay rates were
during Period 2.
parties agreed that it was appropriate to apply a blended rate for Period 2
taking into account both pay rises through automatic
progression and her likely
promotion to Centre Coordinator.
the best I can, I find that a reasonably likely career progression for Sabine
during Period 2 would have been:
2021 to 30 June 2022
: Level 4B Team Leader followed by Level 4C Team Leader.
1 July 2022
to 30 June 2024
: Level 8A and Level 8B Centre Coordinator.
1 July 2024
to the date of these reasons
: Level 8C Centre Coordinator.
plaintiffs submitted that for Period 2, I should adopt a blended rate of $1,300
per week net pay and find that Sabine would have
been at least a Level 8B Centre
Coordinator by, at the latest, February 2025. The Commission submitted I should
adopt a blended
rate of $1,100 net per week.
accept the plaintiffs' submission that by the time of trial and for the purposes
of my decision, the date of these reasons, Sabine
would have been promoted to a
centre coordinator position. As I have outlined, I find that she would have
most likely have achieved
the position of 8B Centre Coordinator by no later
than 1 July 2024 and progressed to Level 8C position by the date of these
different scenarios, permutations and hypotheticals of Sabine's promotion
through BCCA can be seen in the following
Period Start
Gross Weekly Pay
Net Weekly Pay
01 July 2021
01 July 2022
01 July 2023
01 July 2024
2 December 2024
46 weeks (to date of reasons)
Total Average
Weighted Average
may be seen from the table, a figure which is less than the hybrid figure of
$1,300 per week net put forward by the plaintiffs
is open on the range of likely
promotions I consider that Sabine would have achieved. Taking all matters into
account I consider
an appropriate hybrid or blended figure for the period from
1 February 2021 until the date of these reasons to be $1,250 net per
In reaching this figure I have taken a broad brush approach taking into
account the evidence that was led. As I have said,
that there were some gaps in
the evidence led because no information of the pay levels of a Level 4C
Team Leader position was provided.
Further, the timing of the opportunities for
promotion (and the competition for any promotion) leads to some imprecision as
an opportunity for Sabine's promotion would have arisen.
consider the approach I have taken is conservative. The approach
potentially understates the likely speed of promotion in positions
likely to have achieved within BCCA and that she could have achieved a Level 8
Centre Coordinator position during 2021.
Calculation for Period 2
calculate the expected pecuniary benefit for Jethro and Isaac for Period 2 as
Sabine's net income per week
Less Sabine's personal consumption (25% = $312.50)
246 weeks ($937.50 x 246)
$230,625.00
Interest 246 weeks ($221,400 x 3% x 4.7 years)
$263,143.13
$263,000.00
Accordingly,
I calculate the past loss of pecuniary benefits for Period 2 (including
interest at 3% per annum from 2 February 2021
to the date of publication of
these reasons) to each of Jethro and Isaac is as follows:
(a) Jethro = $131,500; and
(b) Isaac = $131,500.
Future loss of pecuniary benefits
Sabine's likely future income
at the date of the publication of these reasons, based on the evidence of BCCA's
pay structure and Sabine's likely career progression,
I find that she would have
achieved at least a Level 8C Centre Coordinator position. The most recent
pay evidence (as at 2 December
2024) shows a Level 8C Centre Coordinator
earned $2,045.54 gross per week or $1,568.54 net per week.
new enterprise bargaining agreement was due to take effect in July 2025. While
I do not have evidence of the specific rates under
that agreement, I infer based
on Elke's evidence that it would have resulted in a pay increase. For the
purposes of calculating
future loss, I find it appropriate to use a figure of a
net weekly income of $1,569.00 per week for Sabine's net income at the date
these reasons.
Appropriate net income assumption to adopt for Sabine
deducting 25% for personal consumption, the pecuniary benefit for Jethro and
Isaac would be $1,176.75 net per week (calculated
as $1,569  75%),
allocated equally at $588.38 net per week each. I will round that figure to
$588.00 each.
Jethro's future loss
on my earlier findings at [116], Jethro would have been:
financially dependent on Sabine until age 18 (2 February 2031).
financially dependent (at 50%) from age 18 to age 22 (2 February 2035) and
then from age 22 to 25 partially financially
dependent, but to a lesser extent.
is currently 12 years old. I calculate his future loss of dependency as
Complete dependency (age 12 to 18):
Period: To 2 February 2031
Appropriate multiplier
Weekly loss: $588
Calculation: $588  237.1
$139,414.80
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($6,970.74)
Loss for period to 2 February 2031
$132,444.06
$132,400.00
Partial dependency, 50% dependency (age 18 to 22):
Period: 4 years (3 February 2031 to 2 February 2035)
Appropriate multiplier
Weekly loss: $588
Calculation: $588  136.9
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($4,024.17)
Subtotal - $76,472.34 (less 50%)
($38,236.17)
Loss for period to 2 February 2035
For the period where Jethro is aged 22 - 25 I will allow a further
for his partial dependency which is based on a percentage
dependency a little less than 50%.
Accordingly, my calculation of Jethro's future loss of pecuniary benefits is
as follows:
22 October 2025 to 2 February 2031
$132,400.00
3 February 2031 to 2 February 2038
$190,600.00
Isaac's future loss
on my earlier findings at [121], Isaac would have been:
financially dependent on Sabine until age 18 (18 March 2038).
financially dependent (at 50%) from age 18 to age 25 (18 March
is currently 10 years old. His future losses are calculated as follows:
Complete dependency (age 12 to 18):
Period to 18 March 2033
Appropriate multiplier
Weekly loss: $588
Calculation: $588  313.5
$184,338.00
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($9,216.90)
Loss for period to 2 February 2031
$175,121.10
$175,100.00
Partial dependency, 50% dependency (age 18 to 22):
Period: 4 years (19 March 2033 to 18 March 2037)
Appropriate multiplier
Weekly loss: $588
Calculation: $588  120.9
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($3,554.46)
Subtotal - $67,534.74 (less 50%)
($33,767.37)
Loss for period 19/03/33 to 18/03/37
Partial dependency, 50% dependency (age 22 to 25):
Period: 3 years (19 March 2037 to 18 March 2040)
Appropriate multiplier
Weekly loss: $588
Calculation: $588  73.9
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($2,172.66)
Subtotal - $41,280.54 (less 50%)
($20,640.27)
Loss for period 19/03/37 to 18/03/40
Accordingly, my calculation of Isaac's future loss of pecuniary benefits is
as follows:
22 October 2025 to 18 March 2033
$175,100.00
19 March 2033 to 18 March 2037
19 March 2037 to 18 March 2040
$229,350.00
Accordingly,
the total pecuniary loss is $692,550 being apportioned as
(a) Jethro - $326,900; and
(b) Isaac - $365,650.
Calculation of loss services
now turn to the assessment of damages for loss of domestic care, assistance and
supervision services that Sabine would have provided
to Jethro and Isaac but for
I have referred to in my conclusions on issue 1, the calculation of damages
for loss of domestic services should be undertaken
on the following basis:
into account the circumstances that existed at the date of Sabine's death
(namely that James was dead), I must assess what
domestic services Sabine would
have provided Jethro and Isaac around the home, or which would otherwise have
supported their activities
had she survived.
Sabine's life had continued after 1 November 2020, she would be the sole
parent of Isaac and Jethro. As their parent she had a
legal duty to
provide for them the necessities of life. As James is dead for the purpose
of this assessment, there is no basis to
take into account what services he may
have hypothetically provided had he survived.
and Isaac's entitlement to compensation for loss of domestic services is not
dependent upon their 'need' for such services.
They are entitled to be
compensated for the tangible advantages they have lost as a consequence of
Sabine's wrongful death.
the date when Jethro turns 18, I consider that the loss should be apportioned
equally between them but after Jethro turns 18,
I consider that the losses
should be apportioned individually depending upon their ages.
The parties' submissions and agreed hourly rate
parties had different views as to the reasonable number of hours which should be
permitted in the assessment of damages for lost
domestic services being the
allowances for the care, supervision and services that Sabine would have
provided but for her death.
Before turning to a review of those
submissions, I will make some additional observations with respect to the
assessment of damages.
bear in mind the comments made by Deane J in
that damages under the Lord Campbell's Act are proportioned to the injury
sustained by the death. The word 'proportioned' introduces
an element of what
is reasonable in the circumstances. The notion of what represents 'reasonable'
or 'proportionate' compensation
must take account of the need for the relevant
services in the circumstances of the particular case. Further,
[T]he damages 'proportioned' to the 'injury' which a particular claimant
sustains by way of lost [domestic] services cannot be realistically
without regard being paid to ... whether the particular services [in issue] were
superfluous to the reasonable needs of
the particular claimant.
Honour concluded this passage of his remarks by saying
[W]here the ultimate burden of liability to pay damages under
a Lord Campbell's Act action will ordinarily be cast upon the
generally through the direct and indirect cost of insurance premiums,
that question must be answered by reference to current local
standards and
values. ...
an aside, it is difficult to see any of the services that Elke and Steve have
provided to Jethro and Isaac as being 'superfluous
to [their] reasonable needs'.
When the total number of hours is taken together at the agreed rate, the cost of
replacement services
may be seen to be 'expensive' when extrapolated at the
agreed hourly rate of $35 per hour in the context of the unusual circumstances
of this case.
Nguyen v Nguyen
, Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ said,
at page 265, that the damages assessed cannot always be equated with the
cost of such help.
Further, the services performed by the deceased may not be
capable of being reproduced by services which are commercially available
scope and costs of commercially available services may be disproportionate in
comparison with the value of the services which
were actually provided by the
deceased. Their honours said:
In circumstances such as that it will not be reasonable to regard the cost of
substitute services as any more than a starting point
in assessing
a plaintiff's loss. Indeed, in cases where the disproportion is severe,
the cost of commercially available services
may offer no real guide at all.
It must always be borne in mind that the damages to be assessed are those
suffered by the plaintiff
by reason of the death alone.
case referred to by the parties was the Western Australian Full Court decision
In that case a young child, Codie, was orphaned after the death of both of his
parents through the negligent driving of a third
party. He was only aged 1 at
the time of the death of his parents.
evidence that was led in the case of
included the cost of
replacing lost domestic services provided by Codie's parents with a full-time
nanny. The cost of a full-time
nanny was $625 per week. The trial judge
rejected such cost as being 'far too commercial in all the circumstances of this
On appeal, Steytler J (as his Honour then was) observed that the
market commercial rate for replacing domestic services with a nanny
at $625 per
week should not automatically determine the compensation. His Honour applied
a structure that from the date of death
when Codie was aged 1 to preschool
age, being aged 4, as requiring the full rate of $625 per week for the full-time
live-in nanny.
Then, from preschool to age 6 the full rate of $625 would reduce
to $500 per week on the basis that services would not be required
hours. Then, between the age of 6 and 17 an amount of $400 per week was
allowed. Finally, in his 18
year an amount of $200
per week was considered to be a reasonable allowance. It was said that
'constant supervision' was required
for Codie until age 17. These amounts were
higher than permitted by the trial judge. The result of the appeal was that the
was remitted for reassessment.
can be discerned from
is that the discounting of an award
of domestic services is appropriate where children's needs change as they mature
and their needs
change over time. Further, even when there is evidence of
commercial rates for replacement services, the court must exercise a judgement
development.
view of the present case is that, when considering past loss of domestic
services for the period from the date of death to the
date of the publication of
this decision, the facts of this case are clearly that the plaintiffs
require constant supervision, including
overnight supervision, for the entire
period that has ensued since Sabine's death. Put simply, these children cannot
provide replacement
services themselves.
I have already noted, Elke gave detailed evidence of the services that she (and
Steve) have provided since Sabine's death. No
costs have been incurred in
obtaining domestic services, however, as is well established, that is not an
impediment to assessing
monetary compensation for the provision of such a
evidence was that Jethro had, over the years got up from time to time during the
night and came into Steve and Elke's room,
but by the date of the trial he
was no longer doing
evidence at trial was that Isaac still gets up, he comes and looks for Elke and
wants a cuddle and wants to be tucked back into
bed or even, on occasions,
stays the rest of the night with Elke in her
As I have noted, in
, Steytler J accepted
that Codie would need to be constantly supervised at least until his
birthday. Jethro and Isaac's needs for
constant supervision are similar, if not greater than the position identified
with respect
to Codie by Steytler J in
due to their
medical conditions.
the present case, no part of the assessment of lost domestic services covers a
period when the plaintiffs were not of school age.
At the time of Sabine's
death, Isaac was about to enter Year 1 (a matter of approximately eight
weeks after Sabine's death).
consider that it is appropriate to allow damages for the loss of domestic
services initially by a calculation which takes account
of the commercial cost
of those services on the basis of the rate agreed by the parties and then
proceeds upon a basis that there
will be a progressive lessening in the day
to day care required but taking into account that each of the plaintiffs would
need overnight
supervision until their 18
was no suggestion that there could be any lessening of an hourly rate based upon
the nature of the services provided. For
example, a lesser rate that would
apply for a 'sleeping shift' when Jethro and Isaac would sleep each night. The
Commission's argument
was that no allowance should be made for the hours when
the boys would sleep each night. The plaintiffs argued that they needed
supervision for all of the time they would be asleep. Further, given the
agreement between the parties as to the cost of all services,
the allowance
should be made at the agreed rate of $35 per hour. In the circumstances of the
agreement having been made between
the parties, I will apply this agreed rate to
all hours of services irrespective of any qualitative nature of the services.
consider that it is appropriate to calculate future domestic and supervision
services by reference to Jethro and Isaac's ages.
As the boys get older,
notwithstanding their learning difficulties, it is realistic that they can
become more independent, be left
unsupervised for increasingly greater periods
of time and also contribute to household chores. However, to use the phrase
decision of
of 'constant supervision', in my
view, taking all matters into account, including the plaintiffs' medical
conditions, I consider
an appropriate age for constant supervision to cease is
the age when each of Jethro and Isaac turn 18 respectively.
Notwithstanding
that constant supervision is a term used, it must have some flexibility in that
as teenagers mature to adulthood
ongoing supervision changes such that children
can be left for greater periods of time on their own and still be supervised so
plaintiffs' submission on the assessment of future care, supervision and
assistance services included that Jethro and Isaac will
require a greater level
of care, assistance, services and supervision compared to children without such
conditions and that they
would have remained dependent on Sabine for a
substantially longer period of time. As I have already said, I think there is
in that submission. I also accept the plaintiffs' submission that but for
Sabine's death, Jethro and Isaac would have received the
benefit of parental
care, supervision and services from Sabine for the majority of the time
that they were not at school. That includes
all times Jethro and Isaac would be
(and have been) sleeping, as they could not be left unattended during the night,
and they would
have received the benefit of direct and indirect care,
supervision and assistance services at those times.
plaintiffs submitted that future care, supervision and services benefits should
be calculated on the basis that the current level
of care, supervision and
services (which the plaintiffs had submitted would comprise 144 hours per week)
would continue at the same
level until they were at least 15 years of age
respectively. Further, between 15 and 18 years of age it would be reasonable to
on the basis that their care, supervision and services would have
reduced by 25%. Between the ages of 18 and 25 their care, supervision
services would be progressively reduced. Because of their respective ages,
the plaintiffs submitted that their future losses
of care, supervision and
services benefits should be calculated over six distinct periods based around
age milestones. Those periods
were as follows:
Period 1 from
the date of delivery of reasons until Jethro turns 15 being 2 February
2028. In this period of time Jethro and Isaac
would have continued to
receive care, supervision and services benefits at the same rate as for past
loss of services and that these
benefits should be shared between
themselves evenly.
Period 2 being
the period from Jethro's 15
birthday until he turns
17, during which time Isaac would be 13 and 15, being the period 3 February
2028 - 2 February 2030. In this
period of time, Jethro's loss of care,
supervision and services benefits would have been reduced by 25% but Isaac's
loss of care,
supervision and services benefits would have continued on the
unreduced basis as for Period 1.
Period 3 from
when Jethro turns 17 until the age of 18 which is a period 3 February
2030 to 2 February 2031. During Period 3 Isaac
will go from age 15 to
16 and Jethro would go from age 17 to 18. In this period of time the plaintiffs
submitted that Jethro's loss
of care, supervision and services benefits would
have reduced by 25% from Period 1 and Isaac's loss of care, supervision and
benefits would also reduce by 25% from Period 1.
Period 4 which
is a period from 3 February 2031 to 2 February 2033 from when Jethro
turns 18 until the age of 20 and Isaac goes from
age 16 to 18. The plaintiffs
submitted that Jethro's loss of care, supervision and services benefits in this
period would be reduced
by 50% from Period 1. Isaac's loss of care,
supervision and services benefits would be reduced by 25% from Period 1.
In the period
identified as Period 5 being Jethro being aged 20 to 25 years of age and
Isaac going from age 18 to 23 both Jethro and
Isaac's loss of care, supervision
and services benefits would be reduced by 50% from Period 1. Illustrative
of the plaintiffs' submission
was that in this period of February 2033 to
February 2038 each of Jethro and Isaac would receive 36 hours per week of
care, supervision
and services benefits from Sabine or a total
of 72 hours per week. As I will come to, I think that such
a level is excessive even
with the speculative nature of the services that
Sabine would have provided her young adult sons had she survived.
Period 6 which
is from February 2038 to February 2040 during which time Isaac would receive
care services being between the age of
23 - 25 at the rate of 36 hours per
week. The total claim of the plaintiffs for future loss of care, supervision
and services is
$1,869,000 which the plaintiffs submit should be divided as
(a) Jethro $857,361
(b) Isaac $1,011,674.49.
Commission's submission on past and future loss of care, supervision and
services benefits was, in substance, as follows:
the date of Sabine's death to the date of delivery of reasons a reasonable
allowance for the provision of care, supervision and
services benefits to Jethro
and Isaac that would have been performed by Sabine would equate to 6 hours
per day or 42 hours a
respect to future loss of care, supervision and
(a) Sabine would provide care,
supervision and services for a total of 42 hours per week for both of
the boys until they turned 15.
As I understood the submission, these hours
would not include any of the time that Jethro and Isaac was sleeping overnight.
(b) From the ages of 15 - 18 a 50% reduction should be made to account for
the likelihood that Jethro and Isaac will be working part-time
contributing to household chores (including dishes, cleaning and landscaping)
and generally living more independently without
requiring constant supervision
in waking hours.
(c) From the age of 18 it is unlikely that Sabine would have provided any
care, supervision or services in circumstances where both
Jethro and Isaac were
likely to be working full-time, driving independently and may have entered into
relationships and would likely
be providing services themselves to assist Sabine
while living at home. It was, however, acknowledged by senior counsel for the
Commission that the plaintiffs may still be living at home after the age of 18
and that Sabine for example, '
might be cooking dinner for them
otherwise services would drop off completely after the boys turned 18
respectively.
calculating Jethro and Isaac's future losses of care, supervision and services
benefits, I consider it is appropriate to make
that calculation over four
distinct periods:
1 being the period from the date of delivery of these reasons until the date
Jethro turns 15 being 2 February 2028.
2 being the period from 3 February 2028 until Jethro turns 18 being
2 February 2031.
3 being the period from 3 February 2032 until the date Isaac turns 18 being
18 March 2033.
4 being distinct periods from when Jethro and Isaac each turn 18 until a time
when Sabine would no longer provide domestic
services for their benefit. In
Jethro's case likely in his early 20s but, as I will turn to, in Isaac's case
probably up to age
25. However, over the age of 18 I consider that domestic
services would decrease in frequency and the number of hours Sabine would
Protective supervision during sleeping hours
I have noted, the parties had different views of whether compensation should be
allowed for the hours when the boys would be sleeping.
for the fatal accident, Jethro and Isaac would have received the benefit of
parental care, supervision and services from Sabine
at all times, or the vast
majority of times, they were not at school. This includes times when they
would be sleeping.
and Isaac, being young children, could not be left alone and someone had to be
available to attend to their needs if they
arose. This type of passive
care is a form of service, and the value of such care is compensable. In the
High Court decision of
Van Gervan v
Deane and Dawson JJ described such care (in the different context of
gratuitous services) as 'protective attention' and noted that
constant care and
attention constitutes the provision of services.
consider that protective supervision is a form of domestic service recoverable
within the terms of the Act. So much so was seemingly
recognised by the
calculation of loss in
the reasons already given, I do not accept the Commission's submission that
sleeping hours or 'protective attention' should be
excluded from an assessment
on the basis that James would have provided those services or care jointly as
part of a two-parent household
with Sabine or on any other basis.
Domestic and supervision services date of death to date of trial
the date of the death of their parents Jethro was 7 and Isaac was 5. At the
date of the delivery of these reasons for decision
Jethro is now 12 and Isaac is
10. Clearly from the date of Sabine's death to the date of these reasons the
boys were (and are) of
such a tender age that they required (and continue to
require) supervision and domestic services and assistance. It was not contended
otherwise by the Commission.
starting point for calculating loss of services, as suggested by the plaintiffs,
is to determine the total number of hours in a
week (168 hours) and then
deduct the hours when Sabine would not have been providing domestic services,
care and attention (including
'protective attention') for the benefit of the
boys. I accept Elke's evidence as being honest, accurate, reliable and
and I accept her description of the care services that she and Steve
have provided to Jethro and Isaac since Sabine's death based
primarily on the
schedule Elke prepared in 2022. This evidence informs my assessment of what
services Sabine would have provided.
I also accept the Commission's assessment
that 42 hours of direct services by Sabine is a reasonable estimate of the time
that Sabine
would spend providing care, supervision and services for the benefit
of Jethro and Isaac (but as I have explained, that would not
include the
hours that the boys would be sleeping).
the period from Sabine's death to the date of these reasons, I make the
following findings about the hours when Sabine would
not have been providing
domestic services:
hours and after-school care
: There is approximately 200 school days per year
in Western Australia. Sabine would have worked full-time from February 2021,
as an employee of BCCA, she would have had access to after-school care and
holiday care. The time from drop-off to pick-up, including
after-school care to facilitate her full-time work, would be approximately
8 hours per school day (including mandatory
breaks). This equates to
40 hours approximately per week
on average over the year.
with family, friends and activities
: If Sabine had survived, she would
reasonably have relied on her parents (the boys' grandparents) to assist in
raising the boys.
The evidence shows that on the weekend of the fatal
accident, the boys were being cared for by their grandparents. I consider it
reasonable that the boys would spend time with grandparents, other family
members, and friends, and would participate in supervised
sporting activities
including training. A reasonable allowance is
10 hours per week
holiday programs
: There are approximately 60 weekdays of school
holidays per year (6 weeks summer, 2 weeks in April, 2 weeks in July,
2 weeks in September/October).
As a sole parent working full-time, Sabine would
likely have utilised vacation care programs at BCCA. I consider a reasonable
of Sabine's use of vacation care programs would be 30 days per year to
cover times when she would be working herself, but also potential
periods when
she may not be working but the boys would benefit from being engaged in other
activities. At 7.5 hours per day, this
equates to 225 hours per year or
4.33 hours per week
(rounded to
4.5 hours per week
for calculation
upon these assumptions the total hours when Sabine would reasonably have been
providing domestic services and supervision to
both boys together equates to 111
hours per week calculated as
Description
Number of hours per week
Total hours
Less time Sabine was not providing domestic services
School hours/after school care and time that Sabine was working
Time Jethro and Isaac likely spend with other family members including
their grandparents, friends or sporting activities supervised
by other adults
but not Sabine
Vocational/holiday programs
Total time Sabine provided services to children
consider 111 hours per week to be the appropriate baseline figure for a
calculation of lost domestic services for the period from
Sabine's death to the
date of the publication of these reasons. This figure represents the hours
Sabine would have been providing
domestic services, including both active care
and protective supervision, to both boys together. Given that the boys lived
as a family unit and much of the care would have been provided to them
jointly, it is appropriate to calculate the total hours for
both boys together
and then allocate the allowance equally between them. If an assumption is made
of the average number of hours
the boys were sleeping, the figure of 111 hours
is also broadly consistent with the Commission's submission of 42 hours per week
of direct services being provided by Sabine.
to the weekly figure of 111 hours per week, my calculation of the loss of
Sabine's past services is as
111 hours per week x $35
$3,885 x 259 weeks
$1,006,215.00
Less contingencies of 5%
($50,310.75)
$955,904.25
$955,904.25 x 3% x 4.97 years
$142,525.32
Total (including interest - $1,098,429.57), round to
$1,098,430.00
is appropriate to divide that award, including interest, equally between Jethro
and Isaac. Accordingly, for the loss of Sabine's
past services including
interest to the date of publication of these reasons I calculate that
Jethro and Isaac are each entitled
to a sum $549,215.
Future domestic and supervision services
Period 1: Until Jethro turns 15 (date of reasons - 2 February 2028)
the date of these reasons and 2 February 2028, I consider that the
number of hours required for the domestic care and attention
for both children
will be commenced at a number of hours similar to the figure in [182] above. It
is reasonable to assume that the
likely number of hours that Sabine would have
provided care, supervision and services to each of the boys until they turn 15
be a total of 42 hours per week and which would include the time spent in
waking hours. When combined with the hours for when the
boys would be expected
to be asleep, in the period to 2 February 2028, I would calculate that to
be a further amount of around 63
hours. Combined with the sum of
approximately 42 hours in direct services that would see a slight drop over the
hours from the time
of death. Accordingly, an appropriate calculation for this
period is 105 hours per week. The calculation in this respect is as
105 hours per week x $35
Appropriate multiplier
Calculation: $3,675  111.2
$408,660.00
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($20,433.00)
Loss for period to 2 February 2028
$388,227.00
my opinion it is appropriate to apportion this sum equally,
(a) Jethro: $194,113.50; and
(b) Isaac: $194,113.50.
Period 2: Date Jethro turning 15 until turning 18 (3 February 2028 -
2 February 2031)
consider that a reasonable age to cease any allowance for overnight domestic
supervision services (namely, a time when the boys
are sleeping but require
supervision in the form of 'protective supervision') is until they turn 18
respectively. In the period
from Jethro turning 15 until turning 18 it is
reasonable to assume that, at least in Jethro's case, he will be able to
achieve more
independence in these years. During this period, I consider Isaac
will progressively achieve more independence as well. At the
time Jethro turns
18, Isaac will be about to turn 16. Consequently, it is reasonable to
assume that the number of hours provided
in domestic and supervision services
may would reduce. In my view, an appropriate weekly figure during this period
for the care,
supervision (including overnight supervision) and domestic
services that Sabine would have provided would equate to 85 hours per
calculation in this respect is as follows:
85 hours per week x $35
Appropriate multiplier
Calculation: $2,975 125.8
$374,255.00
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($18,712.75)
Loss for period from 2 February 2028 to 2 February 2031
$355,542.25
$355,540.00
my opinion it is appropriate to apportion this sum equally, being
(a) Jethro: $177,770; and
(b) Isaac: $177,770.
Period 3: Date Isaac turning 18 (from 3 February 2031 to 18 March
Jethro turns 18 and until Isaac turns 18, overnight supervision services
would only be required for Isaac. As I have already
outlined, I
consider a reasonable time for each of the boys to cease being awarded any
overnight supervision services is when they
attain the age of 18. In the period
of time from February 2030 until Isaac turns 18 on 18 March 2033, I consider
that both Jethro
and Isaac will be progressively more independent and at the
date that Isaac turns 18, Jethro would already be 20 years of age. As
shortly turn to, I consider it is reasonable that Sabine would continue to
provide some level of domestic services to both
of her sons after they had
respect to Isaac, I consider a reasonable allowance for the care, domestic and
supervision services that Sabine would have provided
period of time
from 3 February 2031 to 18 March 2033
equates to 67 hours a week, being 12 hours per week in provision of care,
supervision and services
to Isaac during 'waking hours', noting that during
waking hours the need for supervision would be reducing and it is reasonable to
assume that each of the boys would have a greater level of independence.
However, night-time supervision would still be required
in this period for
Isaac. I consider a reasonable weekly allowance of, say, 67 hours,
calculated taking into account an appropriate
deferred multiplier, is as
67 hours per week x $35
Appropriate multiplier
Calculation: $2,345  76.4
$179,158.00
(minus 5% for contingencies)
($8,957.90)
Loss for Isaac from 3 February 2031 to 18 March 2033
$170,200.10
$170,200.00
respect to calculating a reasonable number of hours for the provision of
domestic services for the period from when the boys
each turn 15 until the age
of 18, I have accepted the submissions of the Commission that in that period of
time from when the boys
each turn 15 until the age of 18, a reasonable level of
hours for the provision of domestic services would be around 21 hours per
for the benefit of both boys. The Commission also submitted that no
allowance for domestic services should be made for either
Jethro or Isaac once
they turn 18. I have not accepted this part of the Commission's submissions.
Period 4: After Jethro and Isaac turn 18
the periods after the age of 18 I propose to assess lump sums for each of Jethro
and Isaac. I consider that for the periods
from when both Jethro and Isaac turn
18, it seems probable that they would remain living at home. The number of
services reasonably
expected to be provided by Sabine would be lower and more
infrequent as the plaintiffs get older and after they turn 18. However,
reasons I have outlined when discussing the boys' medical conditions,
I consider it probable that Sabine would continue to
provide domestic
assistance and services to both of her sons into their early 20s.
consider that Sabine would be likely to provide more services to Isaac than
Jethro after the age of 18. For domestic services
for Jethro after he turns 18,
I will make a further total allowance of $25,000. For the period from when
Isaac turns 18, I consider
Sabine would be likely to provide more ongoing care
and assistance services to Isaac and for a longer period of time than for Jethro
given his medical conditions. I consider a reasonable lump sum allowance for
Isaac for domestic care and assistance services after
the age of 18 is $45,000.
I have said, I have reduced the calculation of all future losses by 5% for
contingencies to account for the inherent uncertainties
in long-term
assessments, including the possibilities that the boys may achieve greater
independence than anticipated, that Sabine
may have had periods when she was
unable to provide services, or that circumstances may have changed in ways that
cannot be predicted.
Summary of my calculations
way of summary, my assessment of the calculation of the total damages for Jethro
and Isaac is as follows:
Past Loss of Pecuniary (including interest)
$272,600.00
(a) Jethro: $136,300; and
(b) Isaac: $136,300
Future Loss of Pecuniary
$419,950.00
(a) Jethro: $190,600; and
(b) Isaac: $229,350
Past Loss of Care, Supervision and Services (including interest):
$1,098,430.00
(a) Jethro: $549,215; and
(b) Isaac: $549,215
Future Loss of Care, Supervision and Services
$983,967.00
(a) Jethro: $396,883.50; and
(b) Isaac: $587,083.50
$2,774,947.00
(a) Jethro: $1,272,998.50; and
(b) Isaac: $1,501,948.50
Appropriate orders to be made
parties have agreed that upon publication of these reasons for decision, I
should not enter judgment for a period of at least
14 days so as to enable the
appointment of an appropriate trustee. The reason for this is so that
reasonable trustee fees may be
added to the amounts calculated by way of
damages. It is appropriate to defer entry of judgment, as the sums of money to
which Jethro
and Isaac are entitled to need to be held on trust for their
benefit until they reach the age of 18. Further, there may need to
adjustments to the figures I have calculated to take into account the
period from the delivery of these reasons to the date
when judgment is
ultimately entered including as to interest. Accordingly, I make the following
proceedings be adjourned to 9.15 am on 12 November 2025 for the entry
of judgment and the making of formal orders consistent with
these reasons for
parties confer and file a minute of agreed orders, or absent agreement separate
minutes of orders, to give effect to these reasons
for decision (and where
necessary to correct any arithmetical errors in calculations) and to propose a
trustee (and prescribe a sum
of money which should be set aside for trustee
fees), and for the appropriate costs orders of the proceedings.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to His Honour Judge Curwood
30 OCTOBER 2025
s 7(2) of the
Motor Vehicle (Third Party Insurance) Act 1943
Australian states adopted a version of Lord Campbell's Act after it introduced
the new cause of action for wrongful death into
the law of England.
comprehensive, elucidating and entertaining account of the historical background
of the legislation and Lord Campbell's life
see Professor Peter Handford,
Lord Campbell and the Fatal Accidents Act
(2013) 129 The Law
Quarterly Review 420.
See especially pages 423 - 424 for accounts of how
Lord Campbell was remembered immediately after his death in 1861, including
description that '(he) was the triumph of mediocrity' amongst other pejorative
descriptions of his character and abilities. Happily,
historians and biographers when referring to his attributes as a law reformer
have been much kinder than his
contemporaries.
Baker v Bolton
(1808) 170 ER
6(4) states that any damages recovered shall be divided amongst the persons for
whose benefit the action was brought in such
shares as the court sees fit.
The Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
[13] - [14], [53];
De Sales v Ingrilli
[2002] HCA 52
(2002) 212 CLR 338
[11], [14] (Gleeson CJ);
[91] - [92] (McHugh
Nguyen v Nguyen
(1990) 169 CLR
, 256 - 257 (Deane J);
[9] (Gleeson CJ).
Sales v Ingrilli
[13] - [14] (Gleeson CJ);
Nguyen v Nguyen
(257) (Deane
Nguyen v Nguyen
(262) - (264) (Dawson, Toohey & McHugh
statement of the relevant principles is derived from Luntz H & Harder S,
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death
ed, 2021), par
Nguyen v Nguyen
(255), (256),
Seymour v British Paints (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1967] Qd R
Ruby v Marsh
[1975] HCA 32
(1975) 132 CLR 642
Nguyen v Nguyen
Insurance Ministerial Corporation (formerly GIO) v Willis
(679) (Grove
Nguyen v Nguyen
(262) - (263).
Ruby v Marsh
[186] (Callinan
Nguyen v Nguyen
calculation being for a financial sum of the benefits Sabine would have brought
to her sons being conducted on a basis of pecuniary
gains and losses consequent
upon the death: See for example,
De Sales v Ingrilli
[11] - [12]
(Gleeson CJ).
Although the
tax returns form part of the Exhibit 2, no evidence was led about what James'
occupation was or any of his employment
history. The Commission relied upon
James' income for the purposes of the calculation of Sabine's personal
consumption.
Exhibit 1, plaintiffs' trial bundle, page 244.
the issue of Sabine's level of personal consumption which I turn to later in
these reasons.
See generally
deficit hyperactivity
Plaintiffs' trial bundle (Exhibit 1), pages
See for example
Wheat v Wisbey
[2013] NSWSC 537
Sales v Ingrilli
J Leah CA, Ms Julia Bossert CA & Mr Cory Plover,
Personal Consumption
Percentages in Australia - Current Tables
(25 January
1, based upon pages 210 - 216 inclusive being her relevant payslips for that
Exhibit 3. I
have used the Level 4B Team Leader position for this calculation because I did
not have evidence of the Level 4C Team
Leader position?
Biddulph v Lenegan
(Unreported, WASC, Library No 990076, 19
February 1999).
Defendant's amended schedule of damages filed 28 February 2025, par
Gervan v Fenton
(1992) 175 CLR
separately calculated the services Sabine would have provided to Jethro during
the period 3 February 2030 to 18 March 2033
as part of a global assessment
of services to Jethro after he had turned 18 in the next part of my reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (969 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter