URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACPCmr/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:00:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Decision (Pets) [2025] WACPCmr 7 (23 April 2025)
COMMISSIONER OF CONSUMER
PROTECTION DECISION
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES ACT 1987
Decision (Pets) [2025] WACPCmr 7
DETERMINED :
23 APRIL 2025
PUBLISHED :
4 SEPTEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
REDACTED UNDER S11K OF
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES ACT 1987
PARTIES IDENTITIES REDACTED UNDER S11K OF
RESIDENTIAL
TENANCIES ACT 1987
BOND HELD :
Catchwords:
Residential
Tenancies Act 1987
(WA) – landlord application to refuse pet request
– two Golden Retriever dogs – premises unsuitable – damage
exceeding the bond – undue hardship – landlord’s application
refused – condition that requested pets must
be kept out of carpeted
Legislation:
Residential
Tenancies Act 1987
Application type:
application to refuse pet request
The Commissioner orders:
landlord must approve the tenants’ request to keep the requested pets at
the premises.
tenants are permitted to keep the requested pets at the premises.
following condition applies to the landlord’s approval of the request pet:
requested pets must be kept out of carpeted
On 18 March 2025, the tenants requested to keep two Golden Retriever dogs (the
requested pets) at the premises, following the process
established in the
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
(WA) (RTA).
Application
On 24 March 2025, the landlord applied to Consumer
Protection for approval to refuse the tenants’ request.
landlord’s refusal was on the grounds that:
premises are unsuitable for keeping the requested pet.
Keeping the
requested pet at the premises is likely to cause damage to the premises that
could not be repaired for less than the amount
of the security bond.
Keeping the
requested pet at the premises is likely to cause the landlord undue
The landlord and tenants were invited to provide evidence to support their views
The landlord provided the following evidence:
Pet Request Form
Invoice for
supply and installation of replacement carpet.
Quotation for
supply and installation of replacement carpet.
submissions to Consumer Protection.
statements to Consumer Protection.
Termination for previous tenant.
Vacate carpet
cleaning cost for previous tenant.
landlord from previous tenant.
The tenants provided the following evidence:
submissions to Consumer Protection.
Verbal statement
to Consumer Protection.
communications between tenants and property manager.
Under the RTA, tenants have the right to keep a pet at their rental premises
with the landlord’s
Landlords have the right to apply to Consumer Protection for an order allowing
them to refuse the pet request.
When an application is received, the Commissioner is required to either:
approve the
landlord’s application; or
landlord to approve the tenant’s
The Commissioner may approve this application if satisfied that the grounds
claimed by the landlord are established. In this case,
the claimed grounds
The premises are
unsuitable for keeping the requested pet.
Keeping the
requested pet at the premises is likely to cause damage to the premises that
could not be repaired for less than the amount
of the security bond.
Keeping the
requested pet at the premises is likely to cause the landlord undue
The landlord is responsible for demonstrating that at
least one of these grounds apply.
The Commissioner may set conditions on the approval of the tenant’s
for Decision
As a delegate of the Commissioner, I have reviewed all evidence. Only the
evidence relevant to deciding this application is mentioned
in these reasons for
Are the premises unsuitable for keeping the
requested pets?
The RTA provides examples of why a premise may be unsuitable, such as lack of
fencing, insufficient open spaces, and any other thing
necessary to humanely
In a written submission to Consumer Protection the landlord stated the
premises is small, carpeted and lacks space to manage the requested
pets. Having
carpeted flooring does not make a premises unsuitable for the keeping of pets.
Research conducted by Consumer Protection appears to show:
The premises is
a four-bedroom, two-bathroom house on a 606 square-metre section.
The premises is
fully fenced.
The bedrooms are
square of carpeting in the space opposite the kitchen.
The remainder of
the internal flooring is tiled.
There is a large
outdoor area with brick-paving and a patio for shade.
The tenants advised they have previous experience in training puppies, and that
one tenant is a stay-at-home parent. They also provided
details of their plan
for managing the requested pets, as outlined below:
Sleep in the
Supervised when
out of play pen.
conducted outside with tenants’ supervision.
disposed of immediately.
In the play pen
when left unsupervised.
Regular cleaning
of the outdoor paved areas.
training will take place outside.
Professional
puppy training.
The landlord raised concern that the tenants
“lack rental history with me or proof of pet care”. This was not a
consideration. The requirement for an established rental history and
proof of pet care is not mandatory for the tenants' application
and places a
higher burden on the tenants than what is specified by the RTA.
landlord has not supplied any evidence to demonstrate how the premises is
unsuitable for keeping the requested pets. For these
reasons, I am not satisfied
that keeping the premises is unsuitable for keeping the requested pets.
Is keeping the requested pets at the premises likely to cause damage to the
premises that could not be repaired for less than the
The security bond held by the Bond Administrator for this premises is $2600.
In a written submission to Consumer Protection, the landlord raised concerns
that the requested pets may cause damage to the premises,
stating “In this
case, the likelihood of damage is increased due to:
The young age of
both dogs and high-destructive behaviour expected in littermates
The lack of
non-carpeted, fenced-off confinement areas inside the home
The household
already includes two young children and a pregnant tenant, reducing the capacity
for full-time supervision.”
The tenants’ plan to manage the requested pets is described in the above
heading and addresses the landlord’s concerns
with the requested pets to be trained, supervised and enclosed in a play pen
when unsupervised. The landlord
has not provided any evidence to show the
requested pets will not be adequately supervised.
The landlord submitted the following as evidence towards the costs of having
to replace the carpets at the premises if they are damaged
by the requested
An online quote
for $8,265 (plus GST) to purchase and install 87 meters of carpet.
A tax invoice
for $10,968, to supply and lay carpet at the premises.
statement advising “The carpets are 5 years old (midway through the ATO's
10-year effective life). Even on a depreciated
basis, the remaining value
exceeds $4137.50—159% of the bond”.
The landlord has
not provided evidence demonstrating how or why the requested pets are likely to
cause damage which would require
replacement of
the carpets at the
premises, which would exceed the bond.
In a written submission, the landlord referred to a published decision,
previously made by Consumer Protection (Decision (Pets) [2025]
WACPCmr 2), to
support their refusal of the requested pets, claiming the case “similarly
involves foreseeable, documented
The published
decision referenced by the landlord was a different factual scenario. In
(Decision (Pets) [2025] WACPCmr 2) the requested
pet was residing in the
premises and had already caused damages.
Consumer Protection was
satisfied that the refusal ground had been met in (Decision (Pets) [2025]
WACPCmr 2), as the landlord provided
evidence to show the requested pets had
already caused damage exceeding the amount of security bond held. In this
current application,
no evidence has been provided by the landlord to
demonstrate the requested pets have a history of causing damage.
Considering the information from the landlord and the tenants, I am not
satisfied that keeping the requested pets at the premises
is likely to cause
damage to the premises that could not be repaired for less than the bond.
Condition – the requested pets must be kept out of carpeted
Whilst I am not satisfied the requested pets are likely to cause damage to the
carpet which would exceed the bond, I acknowledge
the possibility for carpets to
require replacement in multiple rooms if the requested pets (as puppies) were to
have a toileting
accident in multiple carpeted rooms.
As such, I have decided to impose the following condition, which will limit the
risk of damage being caused to carpets:
The requested pets must be kept out of carpeted bedrooms.
Is keeping the requested pets at the premises likely to cause the landlord
undue hardship?
The term ‘undue hardship’ is not defined in the RTA.
The Macquarie Dictionary defines the terms as:
unwarranted; excessive; not proper, fitting or right; unjustified.
Hardship: a
condition that bears hard upon one; severe toil, trial, oppression or need.
The New South Wales Supreme Court has previously concluded that the phrase
“undue hardship” means “greater hardship
circumstances warrant”.
means that hardship alone is not sufficient, it must be a level of hardship that
is not proportionate to the situation.
The landlord indicated that allowing the requested pets to reside at the
premises would result in financial hardship exceeding ordinary
leasing burdens,
as well as a personal and operational burden, because:
The previous
tenant caused damage, resulting in:
Significant
financial losses for the landlord.
and operational effort by the landlord to have the premises
The security
bond, including a $260 pet bond which could be requested, is not enough to cover
the probable cost of replacing carpets.
Despite the landlord providing evidence of the costs incurred due to damage by
the previous tenant, this evidence does not demonstrate
that the landlord would
suffer a financial loss if the requested pets were to be approved. The tenants
should not be disadvantaged
because of the landlord’s financial situation
or the actions of a previous tenant. Behaviour by a previous tenant has no
on how the current tenants or the requested pets will behave. As
established in the heading above, there is no evidence to show the
pets are likely to cause damage that would exceed the bond, and a condition has
been placed on the approval of the requested
pets, to lessen the likelihood of
There is a general risk with every tenancy that a tenant may damage the premise
they are renting. This is addressed in the RTA by
outlining the tenants’
responsibilities; the tenant shall not intentionally or negligently cause or
permit damage to the premises.
RTA similarly outlines tenant responsibilities for keeping a pet; the tenant is
responsible for nuisance caused by a pet, and
repairing damage caused by a
The landlord has not
provided evidence to satisfy me that keeping the requested pets is likely to
cause the landlord hardship which
exceeds the general risk of renting a
property, or that any hardship would meet the definition of undue hardship.
In written submissions to Consumer Protection, the landlord raised concern
that the tenants did not disclose their intention to request
a pet when applying
to rent at the property. The RTA now allows tenants to request to keep a pet at
their rental home at any time
during their tenancy, regardless of whether they
disclosed their desire to keep a pet at the time of entering into the lease
Having regard to the evidence provided by the landlord, I am not satisfied
that keeping the requested pet at the premises is likely
to cause the landlord
undue hardship.
A tenant or landlord who is dissatisfied with this decision can appeal to the
Magistrates Court of Western Australia. Appeals must
be lodged within seven days
after receiving this decision, or a later date if leave is granted by the Court.
The appeal can be started by lodging both a
– Appeal Against Registrar’s Decision
and a copy of this notice
with the Magistrates Court online at
ecourts.justice.wa.gov.au/eCourtsPortal
For information about appealing the decision see
http://www.commerce.wa.gov.au/consumer-protection/commissioner-determinations
Delegate of the Commissioner for Consumer Protection
DATE OF ORDER AND WRITTEN REASONS
23 April 2025
Section 50A
Residential
Tenancies Act 1987
Section 50E(1)
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Section 50E(2)
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Section 50E(3)
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Section 50E(4)
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
[redacted].
https://www.consumerprotection.wa.gov.au/system/files/documents/2025-04/RedDec-PRD2025-2.pdf
State of New South Wales v Austeel Pty Limited
[2004] NSWSC 81
Liberian Shipping Corporation v A King & Sons Ltd
Lloyd’s Rep 302 at [307].
Section 38(1)(C)
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Section 50I
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter