URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
OKERE -v- E'CO AUSTRALIA PTY LTD [2025] WADC 71 (8 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
OKERE -v- E'CO AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
[2025] WADC 71
JEYAMOHAN DCJ
2 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
8 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
APP 26 of 2025
CHINEDU NNANNA OKERE
E'CO AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
MAGISTRATES COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MAGISTRATE DARGE
File Number :
PER/GCLM/3175/2023
Magistrates Court appeal - Denial of procedural
fairness - Application to set aside default judgment on condition of payment
court - Miscarriage of justice - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
District Court Rules 2005
(WA), r 50, r
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Appeal allowed
Application remitted to the
Magistrates Court to be tried before a different magistrate
Representation:
Mr P Lafferty
Solicitors:
Hoe Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
ACN 076 676 438 Pty Ltd (in liq) v A-Comms Teledata Pty
[2000] WASC 214
Allegro Pty Ltd v Famicorp Pty Ltd (Unreported, WASC, Library No 930313, 14
Batiste v Gilmour-Latham
[2001] NSWCA 392
Brocklehurst v Wolinski
[2015] WADC 36
Carrier Air Conditioning Pty Ltd v Richard Kevin Thommesen and Rachael Anne
Thommesen as Trustees for the Thommesen Family Trust
[2005] WADC 195
Defendi v Szigligeti
[2019] WASCA 115
Fleming v Duneda Pty Ltd
[2000] WADC 17
Frigger v Frigger
[2023] WASCA 103
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
Hall v Hall
[2007] WASC 198
Hazart Pty Ltd v Rademaker
(1993) 11 WAR 26
Johnston v Morien
[2006] WADC 46
La Trobe Financial Asset Management Ltd v Wallabie Constructions Pty Ltd
[2024] WASC 482
McDiarmid v Rycar Pty Ltd
[2006] WADC 39
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 65
National Australia Bank Ltd v Watkins
[2024] WASC 30
Neil v Nott
[1994] HCA 23
(1994) 68 ALJR 509
(1994) 121 ALR 148
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
Parker v Transfield Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 382
Sethi v Bhavsar
[2020] WASCA 52
Stanley v Layne Christensen Company
[2006] WASCA 56
Starrs v Retravision (WA) Ltd
[2012] WASCA 67
Ward v West Coast Suzuki Marine Pty Ltd
[2021] WADC 37
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
West v Wood
[2002] WADC 245
Woodley v Woodley
[2018] WASCA 149
Zerjavic v Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 40
Introduction
13 March 2023, E'Co Australia Pty Ltd (E'Co) commenced proceedings
against Chinedu Nnanna Okere (Mr Okere) in the Magistrates
claiming damages of $45,416.41 in respect of wrongful conversion of certain
goods the property of
2 May 2023, E'Co applied for default judgment on the basis that
Mr Okere had not lodged, within the prescribed time, a response
19 July 2023, the E'Co obtained default judgment against the Mr Okere
for the sum of $47,633.91, made up of claimed amount of
$46,389.91 and costs of
24 March 2025, Mr Okere filed an application to set aside the default
(Application).
16 May 2025, the learned magistrate made orders setting aside the
default judgment on condition that within 14 days Mr Okere pay
of $46,389.91 into court; and lodge a Form 15 - Response to General
Procedure Claim; and that Mr Okere pay E'Co's costs thrown
away as a result
of the Application (Decision).
notice of appeal filed 30 May 2025, Mr Okere appeals against the
notice of respondent's intention filed 26 June 2025, E'Co indicated
its intention to take part in the appeal and will argue that
the primary court's
Decision should be upheld on the grounds relied on by the primary court in its
decision. No cross-appeal was
appeal proceeded to substantive hearing before this court on 2 September
the reasons which follow, I am satisfied that the principal ground of appeal is
made out, the appeal should be allowed, the Decision
learned magistrate made on 16 May 2025 and the order for default
judgment made on 21 July 2025 be set aside, and the proceedings
remitted to the Magistrates Court before a different magistrate for further
directions and hearing.
Proceedings in the Magistrates Court
General Procedure Claim 3175/2023 filed 13 March
Magistrates Court, E'Co claims as follows against Mr Okere:
In or about September 2021 the Defendant wrongfully converted certain goods the
property of the Plaintiff to his own use. The Plaintiff
is claiming damages of
$45,416.41 being the value of the said goods as at September 2021.
5 April 2023, the General Procedure Claim form was reissued by the
Magistrates Court.
2 May 2023, E'Co applied for default judgment on the basis that
Mr Okere had not lodged, within the prescribed time, a response
19 July 2023, E'Co obtained default judgment against the Mr Okere for
the sum of $47,633.91, made up of the claimed amount of
$46,389.91 and costs of
24 March 2025, Mr Okere filed the Application to set aside the said
default judgment
together with a supporting affidavit of Chinedu Nnanna Okere sworn on
22 March 2025 (First Okere
Affidavit).
matters Mr Okere deposed to in the First Okere Affidavit, can be
summarised as follows:
is a director of Shaonnana & Sons Enterprises Pty Ltd
(Shaonnana).
and Shaonnana are duly incorporated companies in the State of
Western Australia.
Keay (Mr Keay) is the Director of
business transaction the subject of the claim was between E'Co and Shaonnana and
not between E'Co and Mr Okere himself. Mr Keay
elected to commence
the claim against Mr Okere despite
delayed by more than one-year in applying to set aside default judgment due to
being busy with personal
had serious health issues at the time and was going through a lot.
Mr Okere says that he was under intense pressure and
a bit overwhelmed, and
in hindsight, should have done
grounds for setting aside the Default Judgment are as
(a) that setting aside the Default Judgment would
not prejudice E'Co because the default judgment was obtained against the wrong
(b) the Default Judgment was obtained by fraud (deceit), given that the claim
was deliberately filed against Mr Okere and not
24 April 2025, E'Co filed its response to the
Application
together with the affidavit of Mark Brian Keay sworn on 24 April 2025
(Keay Affidavit).
matters deposed to by Mr Keay, in his capacity as the sole director of
E'Co, can be summarised as follows:
opposes the orders sought by Mr Okere in the
Application.
first met Mr Okere in or around May or June 2021 when E'Co was in the
process of relocating its premises to
carries on the business of collecting and selling second-hand goods for export
has been exporting second-hand goods from Western Australia to Africa for
many years.
informed Mr Keay at their first meeting that he wanted to purchase certain
second-hand goods from E'Co for export to
or around July 2021, E'Co supplied certain second-hand goods to
Mr Okere for and at his request and those goods were successfully
(July Transaction).
July Transaction with Mr Okere was conducted on a strict cash basis
which is E'Co's standard practice with any party in Australia
wishing to export
whether E'Co was interested in selling and supplying full
containers of
second-hand goods for export to his sorting and grading facility in Lome, Togo
West Africa.
informed Mr Okere that E'Co was happy to provide full containers of
second-hand goods on the same basis as the July Transaction,
namely cash
payments in advance of
8 September 2021, Mr Okere orally placed an order with Mr Keay
for one container of used clothing and one container of used
was orally agreed between Mr Keay and Mr Okere that E'Co would charge
the rates per kilogram for the goods supplied as particularised
in the invoices
annexed to the First Okere Affidavit and marked
rates were discounted on the basis that it was agreed between Mr Okere and
Mr Keay that once the goods were sold in Africa, he
would account to E'Co
for any profit earned by Mr Okere over and above the discounted rate and
E'Co and Mr Okere would share those
was further agreed that Mr Okere would deliver the required containers to
E'Co's premises and that E'Co would fill the containers
supplied by
Mr Okere with the ordered
was further agreed Mr Okere would collect the containers once filled from
E'Co's premises and after payment in cash in advance
for the goods at the
discounted rate Mr Okere would be entitled to uplift the filled containers
for export to
or around early September, Mr Okere arranged for only one container to be
delivered to E'Co's premises and E'Co set about filling
the container with the
second-hand
was required to deliver the goods and the subject matter of Invoice CHI-001
to Mr Okere's premises in
Cannington.
29 September 2021, Mr Keay informed Mr Okere the container
would be ready to be uplifted from E'Co's premises after 12.30 pm and
sometime before midday that day, the container was removed from E'Co's
premises, purportedly by Mr Okere without reference to
container was not completely full at the time it was removed and the container
was not closed or sealed as required for export
presumes that Mr Okere caused the second container to be loaded at his
premises. Mr Keay was himself unaware whether the
container was either
closed or sealed in accordance with proper export
did not pay for any of the goods in advance as orally agreed or at
30 September 2021, Mr Keay raised two invoices annexed and marked
'CNO-02' to the First Okere
addressed the invoices to Shaonnana as that was the name Mr Okere gave
him when he carried out the July Transaction with
informed Mr Keay that the name Shaonnana was the business name he used and
was an acronym for certain members of his
Mr Keay was never informed at any stage that Mr Okere was acting on
behalf of a proprietary limited
December 2021 and December 2022 Mr Keay was in constant contact
with Mr Okere via
March 2022, Mr Okere informed Mr Keay that he had offloaded the
containers in Africa and in April 2022 he informed Mr Keay that
he had sold the goods and would forward payment to
making numerous promises of payment via WhatsApp between April 2022 and
December 2022 no payment has been
forthcoming.
no time during the WhatsApp exchanges did Mr Okere assert he was not
personally liable for payment of the goods or that he had
been acting on
behalf of any entity described as Shaonnana & Sons Pty
in its submissions
opposed the
Application on the grounds of delay and relied on the matters set out in
Keay's Affidavit. E'Co further raised in its
submissions, that should
Mr Okere be granted leave to defend, that he should be required to pay the
whole of the judgment sum into
court pending the resolution of the
proceedings.
14 May 2025, Mr Okere filed a further affidavit of Chinedu Nnanna
Okere sworn on 14 May 20256 in support of the Application
Affidavit).
in the Second Okere Affidavit deposed that:
approached Mr Okere's company, Shaonnana for a joint venture with
never entered into any contract or business arrangement with E'Co or
Mr Keay. All discussions and actions were undertaken
on behalf of
never misrepresented Shaonnana's corporate identity or blurred his role as a
director of
2 September 2021, Shaonnana bought some used toys from E'Co at
58 Buckingham Drive, Wangara, Western Australia. Mr Keay gave
Okere his personal Commonwealth Bank account to make payments.
Mr Okere used Shaonnana's company account to effect payment for the
This payment reflected Shaonnana's corporate name on Mr Keay's personal
bank account
transaction occurred before the shipment of second-hand goods and the latter
issuance of the invoice. A copy of Business Extra
Statement Number 61
is attached and marked Annexure
uses its company bank account and corporate name in all transactions and
Mr Keay was informed of Shaonnana's legal status.
The name Shaonnana &
Sons appeared on Mr Keay's personal bank account statement on
2 September 2021, with the payment of
payment was the subject of an inquiry from the accountant who audits Shaonnana's
affairs as to the reason for the
shipment of the second-hand goods to Africa, before the issuance of the said
invoices, the Non-Negotiable Waybill, Bill of Lading
and Telex were in the
name of 'Shaonnana & Sons Enterprises Pty Ltd' and copies were also
did not cause the container to be removed from E'Co's business premises as
alleged. Rather, on 29 September 2021, Mr Keay
informed Mr Okere
that the container was ready to be picked up. This led Mr Okere to notify
the transport company, to pick up the
container and transport it to the
transaction was between E'Co and Shaonnana and not between E'Co and
Mr Okere as established by the invoice issued by Mr Keay to
in his submissions in support of the Application, amongst other things, took
issue with the judgment having been regularly
entered in circumstances where on
Mr Okere's submission, the proper party had not been named in the
proceedings.
The learned magistrate's reasons to set aside default judgment
16 May 2025, the Application proceeded to substantive hearing before the
learned magistrate. Mr Okere was self-represented at
the hearing.
E'Co was represented by counsel.
learned magistrate observed that the Application had been brought 'at
a very late
learned magistrate, having considered the lateness of the bringing of
the Application, was ultimately minded to set aside default
forming this view, the learned magistrate
HIS HONOUR:
The challenge I have is, as you well know, the bar set for
setting aside default judgements - - -
HIS HONOUR:
- - - is whether there is an arguable
reaching his Decision, the learned magistrate determined
Mr Okere had explained he had delayed bringing the Application due to his
health issues in the intervening period, this did
not explain why Mr Okere
had not defended the proceedings brought against him by E'Co in the first
instance or applied to set aside
the default judgment when it was
Mr Okere had raised an argument in respect of the incorrect party being
named to the proceedings, this argument 'barely meets
the test' but does meet
the test of there being some arguable defence to the claim. That is, the
defence that there was an unidentified
agency arrangement in place, that there
was a company that was the contracting party (and not Mr Okere).
these were all matters that would be the subject of oral evidence in
circumstances where the documentary evidence trial 'is very
in the circumstances, the default judgment entered against Mr Okere
personally on 19 July 2023 on condition that within 14 days
Mr Okere pay the sum of $46,389.91 into court.
this payment be a security.
Mr Okere is to lodge a form 15 response to claim.
concluding his determination, the learned magistrate made it clear to
Mr Okere that if he fails to make the payment, or file a
response to
claim, within 14 days 'then the default judgment just
learned magistrate proceeded to make the following
Default Judgment entered on 19 July 2023 is set aside on condition
that within 14 days the Judgment Debtor is to:
(a) pay the sum of $46,389.91 into Court; and
(b) lodge a Form 15 - Response to General Procedure Claim.
Defendant is to pay the costs thrown away as a result of this Application to be
assessed if not agreed.
Mr Okere did not make did not make payment of the sum of $46,389.91 into
court within the 14 days specified, on 21 July 2025,
the Magistrates Court on its own motion, made orders that the default
judgment entered on 19 July 2023 stands and is
enforceable.
The appeal to this court
appeal is brought pursuant to
Magistrates Court (Civil Proceedings)
appeal from a decision of a magistrate to the District Court is by way of
rehearing. It is not a hearing
. Given the appeal is by way of a
rehearing it is necessary for the appellant to demonstrate error in the court
below. This error
must be a legal, factual or discretionary
appeal proceeded to hearing on 2 September 2025. Both parties were
represented by counsel at the hearing of the appeal.
Grounds of appeal
notice of appeal contains the following six grounds of appeal:
Magistrate erred in setting aside the Default Judgment entered on 19 July
2023, on condition that the Judgment Debtor [Mr Okere]
pay $46,389.91 into
the court account within 14 days.
Magistrate erred in law because the usual order for a default judgment entered
irregularly (performed without legal authority)
is to set it aside without a
security of cost order.
Magistrate did not consider that the Defendant [Mr Okere], notwithstanding
being the director of Shaonnana & Sons Enterprises
Pty Ltd, was the wrong
party to be sued.
Magistrate made a mistake in overlooking that the default judgment was
irregularly entered, relying on the falsely alleged claim
by the Claimant [E'Co]
that it was regularly entered.
was procedural unfairness and a miscarriage of justice, as the evidence did not
support the Magistrate's decision.
Magistrate erred in exercising discretion in awarding costs against the
defendant, who was the wrong party.
grounds of appeal were further augmented in in the submissions filed on behalf
of Mr Okere dated 25 August 2025
characterised the grounds of appeal as follows:
it is proper or justifiable to make a conditional order for payment of
$46,389.91 into court (Ground 1)?
the conditional order for payment of $46,389.91 a security for costs made
against the appellant (Ground 2)?
the wrong party being sued (Ground 3)?
the default judgment regularly entered (Grounds 4 and 5)?
the learned magistrate wrong in awarding costs 'thrown away' against the
appellant (Ground 6)?
Issues for determination
parties relied on oral and written submissions in respect of the appeal.
Mr Okere's grounds of appeal are at times difficult
to follow and confuses
a condition of payment into court with a security for costs orders. However,
Mr Okere's grounds of appeal
can be understood including by having had
regard to the parties' respective written and oral submissions made by counsel
at the hearing
of the appeal.
following four issues arise for determination:
the learned magistrate err in imposing a condition of payment into court in
setting aside default judgment? (Grounds 1 and 2)
the learned magistrate err in imposing a condition of payment and a costs
order against Mr Okere personally? (Grounds 3 and 6).
the default judgment regularly entered? (Ground 4)
the appellant denied procedural fairness in relation to the Decision?
Did the learned magistrate err in imposing a condition of payment into
court in setting aside default judgment? (Grounds 1 and 2)
does not take issue with the setting aside of the default judgment, but the
learned magistrate's decision to impose a condition
of payment into
court by Mr Okere for the full amount of E'Co's claim (ie $46,389.91)
within 14 days of the Decision.
position can be summarised as follows:
making of a conditional payment order by the learned magistrate in setting
aside default judgment is not proper or justifiable
as it is too excessive and
onerous and amounts to a penalty in circumstances where the amount is for the
entirety of E'Co's claim.
learned magistrate had 'prejudged the case' in favour of E'Co in
circumstances where there was very limited evidence as to the
nature of the
claim and the basis on which E'Co had quantified the claim.
position can be summarised as follows: That the making of a conditional payment
order by the learned magistrate does not constitute
a proper ground of
appeal in that it does not identify an error, and is not a penalty, in
circumstances where it was open to the
learned magistrate to do so in the
exercise of his discretion.
my review of the lower court file, Mr Okere brought the Application some
22 months after default judgment had been obtained by
E'Co. Mr Okere
in the First Okere Affidavit deposes that he delayed by more than one-year
in applying to set aside default judgment
due to being busy with personal
Mr Okere deposes that he had serious health issues at the time and was
under intense pressure, a bit overwhelmed, and in hindsight,
have done so.
There is no suggestion that Mr Okere was unaware that E'Co had
obtained default judgment against Mr Okere. The learned magistrate,
having considered the lateness of the bringing of the Application,
was ultimately minded to set aside default
court has an unfettered discretion to set aside default judgment. However, the
appellant must show a credible argument that,
if default judgment is set aside,
it would have a real prospect of success. The purpose of the discretionary
power is to avoid the
injustice which would follow automatically on
by party, Court's powers to deal with
(1) This section
does not apply to a failure to comply with the judgment of the Court in a case
or any order made in or as a consequence
of the judgment.
(2) If a party does not comply with this Act, rules of court, or an order or
direction made by the Court, the Court may -
(a) order the party to pay the costs occasioned by the non-compliance
irrespective of whether the party ultimately succeeds in the
(b) give judgment against the party without a trial.
(3) The Court may set aside a judgment given under subsection (2) and
may do so on conditions as to the payment of costs or as to
other matters.
this matter, the relevant term was the learned magistrate's decision to
impose a condition of payment into court by Mr Okere in
setting aside
default judgment. The learned magistrate
determined:
HIS HONOUR:
You've raised an argument which, to my mind, barely meets
the test, but does meet the test of there being some arguable defence,
that there was an unidentified agency arrangement in place, that there was a
company that was, essentially, the contracting
party. Now, that really is going
to depend on what oral evidence is given, because it seems to me the documentary
evidence trail
is very thin.
... But, in any event, I'm going to set aside the judgment that was entered
against you personally on 19 July 2023. But that is
on condition.
And the conditions are that within 14 days you are to pay the sum of
46,389.91 into court. So, you pay it into court
as a security for you saying
that there is a good defence in this matter, and you ought to be able to defend
it. Secondly, you're
to lodge the form 15 response to claim, which is the
document should have lodged. So, if either of those things do not happen within
14 days, then the default judgment just stays. But you now have the
opportunity to put money where your mouth is and pay that money
into court.
: Your Honour - - -
HIS HONOUR:
Secondly, you would pay the costs thrown away as
a result of this application. Okay.
the defence put forward in the affidavit of merits is 'shadowy' it may be
appropriate to order that money be paid into court as
a condition of
default judgment being set
However, in the present matter, in imposing a condition of
payment into court, Mr Okere was not given the opportunity, including
during the hearing of the Application, to give evidence as to his financial
capacity to pay the $46,389.91 into court, being the
entirety of the amount
claimed by E'Co, into court within 14 days.
relies on the principles enunciated in
McDiarmid v
support of its position that the payment condition is commonly imposed in debt
recovery proceedings where the court has reservations
defence. The conditions imposed on the grant of leave to the defendant in
to defend the action was done having had express regard to
the rules in respect of summary
court has the power to set aside default judgment on conditions which could
include security to be given or payment into court
of the judgment sum and also
strict time limits with which the defendants would need to comply for the filing
of a defence and
counterclaim.
Anderson J with whom Malcolm CJ and Scott J agreed, stated the
following about the grant of conditional leave to defend:
In my experience of the practice in this Court, when the Court concludes that
the bona fides of a defence and/or counterclaim are
in doubt, the Court
will usually require that the defendant provide some security. This is to
ensure that a defence that appears
to be very weak on its merits is at least
being put forward in good faith. Unless the court was prepared to take this
step in appropriate
cases, injustice often would be done to plaintiffs pursuing
good causes of action against debtors claim for time. When the plaintiff's
appears clear cut, as, for example, in the case of the sale and
delivery of goods for an agreed price, and the Court is left
in real doubt about
the defendant's good faith (although not able to say for certain there is no
triable issue) it is not unusual
for the Court to order, as a condition of leave
to defend, that the full amount of the claim be secured. This will usually be
payment into court. If to do so would impose hardship on the defendant,
the court may order that less than the full amount be paid
Anderson J,
, went on to say that the court should not order payment
into court of the amount of the claim where the defendant was able to show
'compliance with such condition would be so onerous as to practically deny the
defendant a real opportunity to present his
is usual therefore for the defendant to be given an opportunity to produce
evidence as to its financial position to assist the
court within the exercise of
its discretion. On my review of the transcript and the materials before the
lower court, there was
nothing before the court as to Mr Okere's ability to
satisfy the conditional payment. To the contrary, Mr Okere's evidence from
the bar table was that he lacked the financial capacity to pay the money
Your Honour, with due respect, I
don't have that money. I've been going through - it's a small business. And,
Marc, I took to
Africa to cover my business in Africa. That is why I'm
saying he is suing the wrong person.
HIS HONOUR:
Okay. Again, Mr Okere, you were within bringing this
application at the very limits of being permitted to bring it, in the first
place, because of the delays that have occurred. Everything there is well
outside what the court would consider is acceptable.
But I'm going to give you
a lifeline. And that lifeline is that you are able to set aside this judgment
so that the company, if
needs be, can be joined to the proceedings at some
stage. More information can be provided. But that comes at a cost. And
cost is that the money has to be paid into court.
Your Honour, I don't have that money. The thing is,
we have to - - -
HIS HONOUR:
Well, ultimately, that's the order of the court,
Your Honour - - -
HIS HONOUR:
You can comply with it or not comply with it. It's up to
you. Okay. Thank you.
learned magistrate, having exercised his discretion to set aside default
judgment, went onto impose a condition of payment into
court of the entirety of
the claimed amount within a truncated time frame (ie 14 days from the
date of the Decision) making it impossible
for Mr Okere to defend the
Sleight CJDC observed in
It is a wrongful exercise of discretion to impose a condition which the
defendant would never be able to meet, but it is for the
defendant to put
sufficient proper evidence of his or her impecuniosity before the court and to
make a full and frank disclosure.
A defendant cannot complain because a
financial condition is difficult for him to fulfil. He can complain only when a
condition is imposed which it is impossible for him to fulfil and
that impossibility was known or should have been known to the court
reason of the evidence placed before it. (See
Motors (a firm) v Edwards
[1982] 1 All
at 1027). There may be circumstances where it is appropriate
to order the defendant to pay into court the full amount of the plaintiff's
Hazart Pty Ltd v Rademaker
Mr Okere was not given the opportunity to give evidence as to his financial
capacity to meet the payment within the prescribed
time period, in reaching his
determination, could not be satisfied that Mr Okere was in a position to
meet the condition. No consideration
was given as to whether it would have been
appropriate to order that only part of the amount claimed be paid into court or
else in the manner contemplated by
would therefore allow the appeal on grounds 1 and
Did the learned magistrate err in imposing a condition of payment and a
costs order against Mr Okere personally? (Grounds 3 and 6)
in grounds 3 and 6 submits that it was improper and/or premature for the
learned magistrate to make an order imposing a
condition of payment
into court and a costs order against Mr Okere personally in circumstances
where E'Co ought to have properly
sued Shaonnanna instead. Mr Okere's
submissions in respect of grounds 3 and 6 intersects with some of the
matters raised by Mr Okere
in respect of grounds 1 and 2.
respect of the condition of payment being imposed on Mr Okere personally,
Mr Okere relies on the matters deposed to in the First
Second Okere Affidavits in support of his submission that E'Co elected to
commence proceedings against the 'wrong defendant'
in circumstances where
at all relevant times, E'Co had been carrying out business with Shaonnanna.
Related to this, in respect of
Mr Okere being ordered to meet E'Co's costs
thrown away, Mr Okere submits that the appropriate costs order in the
circumstances ought
to have been costs in the cause, and is broadly tied to the
proceedings being brought against Mr Okere and not Shaonnanna.
respondent submits that the issue to be determined at the hearing on 16 May
2025 was whether Mr Okere had an arguable defence
and not the question of
whether the correct party had been joined to the proceedings. The respondent
submits that in any event,
the learned magistrate took into consideration
Mr Okere's evidence that he may not be personally
Disposition
the hearing, the learned magistrate heard submissions from Mr Okere in
respect of the party named as the defendant in the
proceedings:
HIS HONOUR:
... So, Mr Okere, you've said that you wish to defend
this, ultimately, on the basis that there is a company in place, and that
proceedings ought to have been commenced against a company; is that
HIS HONOUR:
Okay. When I've read through your affidavit explaining why
you want to defend the proceedings you've said that the proceedings
have been commenced against you personally.
HIS HONOUR:
That they should have been commenced against your company.
HIS HONOUR:
Is that company still trading?
HIS HONOUR:
Yes. Okay. So you're disputing this judgment and wanting
to set it aside, is that because you don't have the money to pay it?
HIS HONOUR:
: The thing is E'Co, Marc did a business. Like,
the business was with E'Co Australia and Shawa Nnanna, which is my company.
the only director, and I'm the representative. So the invoice was issued on
Shawa Nnanna, not on my name. Then - - -
HIS HONOUR:
We just had the name of that at the top of the invoice. It
didn't identify who traded as that business, even if, indeed, it was
a business name. It didn't have any more details on there, did it?
HIS HONOUR:
It did - it has, because there are a few - if you look at - -
HIS HONOUR:
There is no purchase orders or anything.
There's nothing from you to E'Co Australia, is there, saying - or letters
from that company,
or anything like that? There is only
WhatsApp messages.
No. No. We - we - we talk. He - he - the thing is,
the first transaction, we were going to - to church. Then we saw some -
toys and other things. I - me and my wife, she is here, we went. And the
first money I paid to him when I bought stuff, Shawa Nnanna
paid from Shawa
Nnanna to him. But he told me not to put it in E'Co's account, that I should
put it in - in his personal name, which
I also stated in the affidavit.
learned magistrate in reaching his Decision thereafter proceeded to make
orders in respect of costs.
starting point with respect to costs is
of the MCCPA relevantly provides:
Court may order a party to a case to pay the whole or a part of another party's
costs in the case.
successful party is entitled to an order under subsection (1) that the whole of
its costs in the case be paid by the unsuccessful
party, unless the Court
considers there is good reason not to make such an order ...
v Layne Christensen
the Court of Appeal said, with respect to cost orders in circumstances where the
indulgence of the court is sought, the following:
The general rule is, and should remain, that where a party is seeking the
indulgence of the Court, that party will be required to
pay the costs of the
application, including costs thrown away, and will not normally receive the
costs of the application. However,
it is also a normal rule that the Court will
have regard to the extent to which it might be said that costs were
unnecessarily incurred
by a party, and will have regard to the reasonableness of
the party's conduct in determining how costs should be awarded. In particular,
where a contested application, even for an indulgence, is unnecessary
because a party acting reasonably would have consented to appropriate
the party who has caused the costs to be unnecessarily incurred will not obtain
its costs of such a proceeding merely because
the application is for some
indulgence. That is implicitly recognised in
at 14, where
Owen and Parker JJ appear to accept that an unreasonable withholding of consent
might form an appropriate basis for
a ruling on costs which departed from the
'normal rule' relating to indulgences. However, in that case their Honours
that it could not be said that the other party was unreasonable to
require that the proposed amendment be justified to the satisfaction
judicial officer.
of the Supreme Court
O 13, r 14 expressly provides that the
court may set aside or vary default judgment 'on whatever terms it thinks just'.
That discretion
to be exercised 'so as to do justice between the parties, having regard to
the circumstances of the
orders upon the setting aside of a regular judgment is that all the costs of and
occasioned by the entry and setting aside
of the judgment shall be the
plaintiff's in any event.
was not invited to make submissions with respect to the matter of costs and
whilst Mr Okere was seeking an indulgence of
the court, on my review
of the transcript of the hearing of the Application, there is some conflation on
the part of the learned
magistrate as to the question of who will meet
payment of the condition and costs. Relevantly, the
learned magistrate observed,
having heard Mr Okere's submissions that
the proceedings ought to have been commenced against a company and not him
personally,
HIS HONOUR:
But, I don't think there was any problem if that company
wanted to pay the bill, I'm sure the claimant would not have any difficulties
dismissing - - -
All I'm asking, if - if - if Marc want to sue, let him sue
Shawa Nnanna. I - Shawa Nnanna would defend. Because there
are conversations
that are not in the office.
of these matters, I am not satisfied that the learned magistrate erred in
exercising his discretion to award costs to E'Co.
Having regard to the
principles enunciated in
and the matters known to the
learned magistrate in respect of the question of the party sued, an order
that E'Co have the costs of
the application was entirely appropriate.
is for Mr Okere to develop the argument that the wrong party has been sued
and raise this as a potential defence. Subject to
my views in respect of
grounds 1 and 2 above, Mr Okere has not been denied this opportunity
by the mere fact that the learned magistrate
was not persuaded to accept
Mr Okere's assertion that the wrong party had been sued.
grounds of appeal have not been established.
Was the default judgment regularly entered? (Ground 4)
submits that the default judgment was not regularly entered at the first
instance as there was no evidence provided by E'Co
to establish that the default
judgment was regularly entered. Mr Okere submits that prior to default
judgment being granted, the
court should have considered the following:
E'Co had previously issued any written notices of demand to Mr Okere
personally prior to the filing of the claim.
there had been proper service of the claim on Mr Okere.
E'Co had first given Mr Okere notice prior to applying for default
there had been proper service of the default judgment on
submits that Mr Okere has not provided any basis for the assertions made
and that the assertions lack merit.
Disposition
obtained default judgment against the Mr Okere for the sum of $47,633.91 on
19 July 2023 pursuant to
in circumstances where
Mr Okere had not lodged, within the prescribed time, a response to claim.
On 24 March 2025, Mr Okere filed
the Application to set aside default
judgment which has been entered without proper compliance with the court's
rules, or entered for more than the amount due,
is irregular.
On my review of the materials before the lower court, it is not clear what
is said to constitute the 'irregularly entered judgment'.
The matters
Mr Okere simply asserts that:
default judgment was obtained by fraud (deceit), given that the claim was
deliberately filed against Mr Okere and not
proper party had not been named in the
proceedings.
do not consider that this ground has merit. Based on the materials available,
this is a 'rolled up' ground of appeal that is vague
and does little to
establish the assertions made.
Starrs v Retravision
, makes it clear that:
every irregularity in the means by which a judgment in default is obtained will
necessarily entitle the defendant to have the
judgment set aside as of
court has power to amend an irregularly entered judgment which has been entered
for more than the amount
an appropriate case (particularly if it would be futile to set aside a judgment
rather than vary it by substituting the amount
now owing) the court may, in the
exercise of its discretion, amend an irregularly entered judgment rather than
set it aside.
power can be exercised even where the application for an amendment is made after
the defendant has applied to set it
ground of appeal has not been established.
Was the appellant denied procedural fairness in relation to the Decision?
submissions in respect of this ground of appeal relate to the
learned magistrate not accepting Mr Okere's submission that
default judgment was not regularly entered at the first instance. Mr Okere
submits that this amounts to a denial of procedural
fairness in relation to the
submits that Mr Okere has made no attempt to identify the alleged
procedural unfairness or miscarriage of justice of the evidence
which did not
support the learned magistrate's Decision. E'Co submits that contrary to
Mr Okere's assertion, Mr Okere was afforded
procedural fairness and
there has been no miscarriage of justice.
Disposition
is no doubt that the learned magistrate was obliged to afford procedural
fairness to both Mr Okere and E'Co as parties to the
lower court
proceedings.
a litigant in person, Mr Okere was entitled to some leniency in relation to
compliance with the court
was required to approach the documents in which he articulated his case with
some flexibility.
The court needed to be astute to ensure that, in a poorly expressed or
unstructured document in which he set out his case, there
was no viable
case which, with appropriate amendment or permissible assistance from the court,
could be put into proper
A 'frequent
consequence of self-representation is that the court must assume the burden of
endeavouring to ascertain the rights
of parties which are obfuscated by their
court also needs to ensure that any latitude given to one party as a litigant in
person does not deprive the other of their right
to procedural fairness and a
fair hearing.
balance is ordinarily struck by limiting the assistance given to a litigant in
person to that which is necessary to overcome,
so far as is reasonably
practicable, the procedural disadvantages a litigant in person faces by
reason of not being legally
self-represented litigant is subject to the practice and procedure of the court
as much as any other
77 The application of the requirements of procedural fairness to
a court requires analysis of the procedures of the court, and the
legislation and rules which govern
The content of procedural fairness also needs to be understood having regard to
the nature of the
proceedings.
is in this overall context that the question arises as to whether Mr Okere
was afforded procedural fairness by the learned magistrate
at the hearing
of the Application in its entirety, including the question of whether default
judgment had been regularly entered.
my review of the manner in which the hearing proceeded, it is evident
that Mr Okere has not been denied procedural fairness by
the mere fact that
the learned magistrate was not persuaded to accept Mr Okere's
assertion that the wrong party had been sued. More
generally, having
reviewed the transcript of the hearing before the learned magistrate
available to me, and reviewing the materials,
it is not apparent that
Mr Okere was denied natural justice or procedural fairness in respect of
the question of whether default
judgment had been irregularly entered.
as noted earlier, Mr Okere was not given the opportunity to give evidence
as to his financial capacity to meet the payment
within the prescribed
time period. Relevantly, no consideration was given as to whether it would
have been appropriate to order
that only part of the amount claimed be paid into
court or something else in the manner contemplated by
a consequence, I am of the view that Mr Okere was denied procedural
fairness in relation to the Decision.
would therefore allow the appeal on ground 5.
Conclusions and final orders
upheld grounds 1, 2 and 5 of this appeal, for completeness, I turn to the
question of the effect of this determination on
the lower court
proceedings.
noted above, given Mr Okere did not make payment of the sum of $46,389.91
into court within the 14 days specified, on 21 July
Magistrates Court on its own motion, made orders that the default judgment
entered on 19 July 2023 stands and is enforceable.
However, in upholding
grounds 1, 2 and 5 of this appeal, I am of the view that the
learned magistrate erred in imposing a condition
of payment into court in
setting aside default judgment for the reasons set out in detail above.
the circumstances of this case, I conclude it would be unjust to allow the
condition of payment into court to remain in existence.
am otherwise of the view that the default judgment should be set aside for the
following reasons.
by reason of the matters deposed to in the First Okere Affidavit, Mr Okere has
provided a satisfactory explanation for the
delay in bringing his application to
set aside default judgment. There is no evidence to suggest that E'Co would be
in any different
position had the application to set aside default judgment been
filed on time. Further, there is nothing to suggest irreparable
prejudice to
E'Co as a result of the setting aside of the default judgment.
is also relevant that Mr Okere has disclosed an arguable defence to E'Co's
claim. That is, that the relevant contracting parties
to the disputed
transaction are E'Co and Shaonnana and not E'Co and Mr Okere. Mr Okere
relies on the invoice issued by Mr Keay to
Shaonnana in support of
not necessary for me to express any view as to the merits of the claim given the
lower court proceedings are at the interlocutory
stage. For the purposes of the
present application, it is sufficient for me to observe that, if Mr Okere's
version of events is
accepted, he would have a good defence to E'Co's claim on
the merits. To not set aside default judgment would be an injustice which
follow automatically on default.
exercising its discretion to set aside the default judgment, the court is
not required to impose a condition. In any event, there
is no evidence before
this court as to Mr Okere's financial capacity to satisfy a condition of payment
else in the manner contemplated
such that to impose any
condition of payment in the making of these orders would be inconsistent with
the established principles.
the sake of completeness and to limit any confusion, in setting aside the
default judgment, the following orders for default
judgment are to be set aside:
default judgment entered 19 July 2023 and default judgment entered
21 July 2025.
Accordingly,
I allow the appeal and I make the following orders:
appeal in this matter be allowed.
Decision of the learned magistrate made on 16 May 2025 be set
order for default judgment made on 19 July 2023 in General Procedure
Claim 3175/2023 be set aside.
order for default judgment made on 21 July 2025 in General Procedure
Claim 3175/2023 be set aside.
appellant pay the respondent's costs thrown away of the application to set aside
the default judgment filed 24 March 2025 in General
Claim 3175/2023.
proceedings be remitted back to the Magistrates Court before a different
magistrate for further directions and hearing.
be liberty to apply in relation to these orders.
will hear further from the parties as to whether an order for costs should be
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
6 OCTOBER 2025
Magistrates Court
lower court file General Procedure Claim 3175/2023 (MB), page
First Okere
Affidavit, par 1.1; MB, page
First Okere
Affidavit, par 3; MB, page
First Okere
Affidavit, par 3; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, pars 6 - 7; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 10; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 11; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 13; MB, page
Keay Affidavit, par 4; MB, page
Affidavit, par 5; MB, page
Affidavit, par 6; MB, page
Affidavit, par 7; MB, page
Affidavit, par 9; MB, page
Affidavit, par 10; MB, page
Affidavit, par 11; MB, page
Affidavit, par 12; MB, page
Affidavit, par 13; MB, page
Affidavit, par 14; MB, page
Affidavit, par 15; MB, page
Affidavit, par 16; MB, page
Affidavit, par 17; MB, page
Affidavit, par 18; MB, page
Affidavit, par 19; MB, page
Affidavit, par 20; MB, page
Affidavit, pars 20 - 21; MB, page
Affidavit, par 23; MB, page
Affidavit, pars 24 - 25; MB, page
Affidavit, par 26; MB, page
Affidavit, par 29; MB, page
Affidavit, par 30; MB, page
Affidavit, par 31; MB, page
Affidavit, par 32; MB, page
Affidavit, par 36; MB, page
Affidavit, par 37; MB, page
Affidavit, par 38; MB, page
Affidavit, par 41; MB, page 180; Annexure 'MBK-1'; MB, pages
Second Okere Affidavit, par 7; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 8; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 11; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, pars 15 - 16; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 17; MB, page 238; Annexure 'CNO-04'; MB, pages
Second Okere Affidavit, par 18; MB, page 238; Annexure 'CNO-04'; MB, pages
Second Okere Affidavit, par 19; MB, page 238; Annexure 'CNO-05'; MB, pages
Second Okere Affidavit, par 20; MB, page 238; Annexure 'CNO-06'; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 21; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 22; MB, page 239; Annexure 'CNO-07'; MB, pages
Transcript of Magistrates Court proceedings held on 16 May 2025 (16 May 2025
ts), page 10; MB,
16 May 2025 ts 10 - ts 11; MB, pages
16 May 2025 ts 5; MB, page
2025 ts 10 - ts 11; MB, pages
16 May 2025 ts 10 - ts 11; MB, pages
MB, page 19.
Notice of appeal filed 30 April
Brocklehurst v Wolinski
[2015] WADC 36
[13] - [15];
Ward v West Coast
Suzuki Marine Pty Ltd
[2021] WADC
Okere Affidavit, par 10; MB, page
Okere Affidavit, par 11; MB, page
2025 ts 10 - ts 11; MB, pages
Parker v Transfield Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 382
Hall v Hall
[2007] WASC 198
[61] - [67].
16 May 2025 ts 11; MB, page
West v Wood
[2002] WADC 245
(2002) 30 SR (WA)
Carrier Air Conditioning Pty Ltd v Richard Kevin Thommesen and Rachael
Anne Thommesen as Trustees for the Thommesen Family Trust
[2005] WADC
Fleming v Duneda Pty Ltd
[2000] WADC 17
[21] - [25];
Allegro Pty Ltd v Famicorp Pty Ltd
(Unreported, WASC, Library No 930313, 14 May
McDiarmid v Rycar Pty Ltd
[2006] WADC 39
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
Hazart Pty Ltd v Rademaker
(1993) 11 WAR 26
Batiste v Gilmour-Latham
[2001] NSWCA
(31) - (32).
2025 ts 11 - ts 12; MB, pages 289 -
2025 ts 12; MB, page
Johnston v Morien
[2006] WADC 46
2025 ts 2 - ts 3; MB, pages
Stanley v Layne Christensen Company
[2006] WASCA 56
Starrs v Retravision (WA) Ltd
[2012] WASCA 67
Retravision
La Trobe Financial Asset Management Ltd v Wallabie
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2024] WASC 482
National Australia Bank Ltd v Watkins
[2024] WASC 30
2025 ts 9 - ts 10; MB, pages
MB, page 116.
ACN 076 676 438 Pty Ltd (in liq)
v A-Comms Teledata Pty
[2000] WASC 214
Starrs v Retravision
Okere Affidavit, par 13; MB, page
Starrs v Retravision
Starrs v Retravision
Starrs v Retravision
[36], [48], [75] and
Starrs v Retravision
Glew v Frank Jasper Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 87
[10] (judgment of the
Wentworth v Rogers
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
537 (Kirby P with whom Hope & Samuels JJA agreed);
Smart v Prisoner
Review Board (WA)
[2012] WASC 48
[10] (Pritchard
Sethi v Bhavsar
[2020] WASCA 52
[27] (reasons of the court)
Neil v Nott
[1994] HCA 23
[1994] HCA 23
(1994) 68 ALJR 509
[1994] HCA 23
, 150 (judgment of the court);
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
[47] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Nettle, Gordon & Edelman JJ);
Woodley v Woodley
[76] (judgment of the court);
Moleirinho v Talbot & Olivier
Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] WASCA 65
[51] (judgment of the
v Chevron Australia
[2020] WASCA 40
[74] - [75] (
[75] - [76] (references
Defendi v Szigligeti
[2019] WASCA 115
Frigger v Frigger
[2023] WASCA 103
Second Okere Affidavit, par 22; MB, page 239; Annexure 'CNO-07'; MB, pages
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (446 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter