URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/108.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SIMCOCK and THE OWNERS OF 48 AND 50 PARKIN ST ROCKINGHAM STRATA PLAN 8069 [2025] WASAT 108 (7 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
STRATA TITLES ACT 1985
SIMCOCK and THE OWNERS OF 48 AND 50 PARKIN ST ROCKINGHAM
STRATA PLAN 8069
[2025] WASAT 108
MS R PETRUCCI, MEMBER
12 AUGUST 2025
FINAL WRITTEN SUBMISSION FILED 29 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
7 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CC 351 of 2025
CAITLIN JADE SIMCOCK
THE OWNERS OF 48 AND 50 PARKIN ST ROCKINGHAM STRATA PLAN 8069
Strata Titles Act 1985
(WA) - Application
seeking resolution of scheme dispute - Common property - Exclusive use by-law -
Patio/pergola - Flashings - Gutters
- Downpipes - Structure - Finishes -
Replacement brickwork - Mediation agreement - Expert evidence - Non-expert
evidence - Discretionary
powers of Tribunal to make declarations and orders
Legislation:
Building Act 2011
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Strata Titles Act
Strata Titles Act 1985
s 91(1)(c)(i)
s 200(2)(n)
Application successful
Declarations and orders
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Ainsworth v Albrecht
[2016] HCA 40
(2016) 261 CLR 167
Carr and The Owners of 252 Cosy Corner Road Kronkup Survey-Strata Scheme
[2024] WASAT 132
Clay and The Owners of Carinya Court Rockingham Strata Plan
[2024] WASAT 121
Erbrich and The Owners of 125 Herdsman Parade Wembley (Strata Plan
[2020] WASAT 109
Hopkins and Clayton
[2007] WASAT 255
The Owners of Arbor North Strata Plan 67510 and Sun
[2020] WASAT 28
The Owners of Mandurah Terrace Apartments Strata Plan 17113 and Russell
[2009] WASAT 1
The Owners of Strata Plan No 3397 v Tate
(2007) 70 NSWLR 344
[2007] NSWCA 207
Wong v Reid
[2016] WASC 59
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
45 years ago, on 3 June 1980, Strata Plan 8069 (
registered pursuant to the (then)
Strata Titles Act 1966
and the strata scheme known as '48 & 50 Parkin St, Rockingham' was created.
The strata scheme comprises seven residential lots
located close by the shores
of Rockingham Beach.
Simcock purchased Lot 1 on the strata plan in 2013. It is her investment
26 May 2025, Ms Simcock commenced proceedings in the Tribunal under
Strata Titles Act 1985
seeking the
resolution of a scheme dispute against The Owners of
48 & 50 Parkin St, Rockingham Strata Plan 8069 (
these proceedings, the parties are in dispute about a previous matter before the
Tribunal (see below at [
]) in respect of the following two key
current application
(a) the patio installed in
November 2024 in the exclusive use area of Lot 1 (
current patio
(b) the replacement brickwork on the external wall of Lot 1 where an
air-conditioning unit was removed.
short, Ms Simcock says she has done everything to comply with the mediation
agreement (see below at [
seeks orders from the Tribunal that the current patio is approved in its current
form and that the replacement brickwork on
the external wall of Lot 1 is
short, the strata company's position, as expressed by Ms Shirley Anne Tuffin
), the chairperson and secretary of the
Simcock is in breach of the mediation agreement and urges the Tribunal to
dismiss the
application.
role of the Tribunal is not inquisitorial. That is, while the Tribunal may
determine how to proceed with a hearing as provided
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
), it is not the
role of the Tribunal to take the lead in the investigation of the facts.
Rather, the role of the Tribunal is to
make a decision on the basis of the
evidence presented to it and the usual practice is that the parties have the
management of their
respective case. Therefore, Ms Simcock, as the applicant,
bears the burden of proving her case, that is, persuading the Tribunal
is entitled to the relief (orders) she seeks, being the civil standard of proof,
being on the balance of probabilities.
the addition of by-law 16 on 23 May 1997 (by notification G483466) which is
discussed below at [95] to [101] there have not
been any other amendments to the
scheme by-laws.
the following reasons, I explain why, ultimately, I have exercised the
Tribunal's discretionary powers to make declarations and
orders in regards to
the two key issues (see above at [4]). The result is that Ms Simcock's
application is successful.
Previous proceeding
order to understand the current application (see below at [16] to [20), it is
necessary to briefly set out the application and
the resulting orders made by
the Tribunal (differently constituted) in matter CC 1411 of 2023 (
30 November 2023, Ms Simcock commenced the previous proceeding under s 197(4) of
the ST Act seeking the resolution of a scheme
dispute against the strata company
concerning proposed works to the exclusive use area between the carport and the
residence of Lot
1. In that application, Ms Simcock stated that she wanted to
undertake the proposed works, which she described as being in a state
disrepair, in particular, that the timber beams were rotting, to a state of good
repair at her cost in compliance with by-law
16 (which has to do with exclusive
use area of lots).
were several attempts at mediation.
the last of those attempts, the parties reached agreement at mediation to settle
the previous proceeding (
mediation agreement
). The terms of the
mediation agreement were set out by way of a lengthy note to the orders made by
the Tribunal (differently constituted)
on 11 June 2024. Where necessary,
in the following reasons, I will set out the clauses or parts of the mediation
agreement that
are the genesis of the current application.
orders made by the Tribunal (differently constituted) on 11 June 2024 are
as follows:
In order to give effect to the agreed settlement, the Tribunal orders by
no later than 30 September 2024, the applicant [Ms Simcock] shall have the
existing lean-to structure removed from Lot 1 and the
area where the lean-to was
attached to the main building made good.
carport of Lot 1 is otherwise approved in its current configuration.
applicant [Ms Simcock] has leave to otherwise withdraw the proceedings pursuant
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
[WA] and the
proceeding[ ] [is] otherwise withdrawn.
parties disagree as to whether Lot 1 had a 'patio' or a 'pergola' installed in
the exclusive use area of Lot 1. I am informed
that in order to reach
agreement, the parties settled by using the term 'pergola' in the mediation
agreement. Nothing in this decision
turns on whether what was installed is a
'pergola' or is a 'patio.' Therefore, for the sake of convenience, in these
reasons I have
used the term 'patio' as that is the term that Ms Simcock has
used in her current application.
Ms Simcock's current application
long after the parties signed the mediation agreement in the previous proceeding
(see above at [
]), Ms Simcock filed the current
application (see above at [
the current application, Ms Simcock sets out the following orders that she seeks
against the strata company under s 200(2)(n)
of the ST Act to resolve the
... that the strata company is taken to have passed the following
resolution(s):
the [a]pplicant has faithfully met all requirements and/or actions allocated to
them as part of the Mediation Agreement
made on June 11, 2024 regarding matter #
CC1411/2023.
Patio in the front exclusive-use area at Lot 1, between residential building and
carport is approved in its current form.
brickwork on the external wall of Lot 1 is confirmed as structurally sound. Any
further repair work or cosmetic adjustments shall
be at [the] [s]trata [c]ompany
[c]ompany shall provide written confirmation to the [a]pplicant stating there
are no outstanding issues regarding Lot 1.
Simcock contends that the strata company is reneging on the mediation agreement
by claiming that the current patio is not approved
by the strata company and
that the maintenance and repair of the external wall of the residence of Lot 1,
where an air conditioner
was removed is her
responsibility.
addition, Ms Simcock states that the strata company's actions
[a] blatant disregard and disrespect of Tribunal proceedings and for not
adhering to the [mediation agreement] made in good faith.
strata company's position, as previously stated, and repeated here is that Ms
Simcock has not met all the requirements of the
mediation agreement and
therefore urges the Tribunal to dismiss the current
application.
is usual with these types of matters before the Tribunal, all the documents
filed with the Tribunal were taken into evidence (noting
that submissions are
not evidence). In making my decision for the Tribunal, I have had regard to the
documents which at the final
hearing, the Tribunal marked as exhibits as
Hearing book prepared by the Tribunal
dated 29 July 2025 (184 pages);
BA14 Building approval certificate dated 12 April 2024
(two pages) (
) and BA18 Certificate of building compliance dated
12 April 2024 (four pages) (
) handed up by Ms Simcock at the final
hearing; and
Photograph of the front of Lot 1 taken in approximately
March/April 2016 handed up by Ms Simcock at the final hearing.
had the benefit of a site inspection immediately before the final hearing on 12
August 2025 (
final hearing
). Ms Simcock, Mr Wayne Simcock, Mr Hayden
Evans, Ms Tuffin and Ms Ingrid Tuffin (Ms Tuffin's daughter) attended
the site inspection.
also had the benefit of hearing the oral evidence given by the following
witnesses at the final hearing.
Expert evidence
(a) Mr Hayden Evans who has been building patios for
Hallmark Australasia currently employs him. Mr Evans gave
sworn evidence that he has a practising certificate for working as a
was engaged by Ms Simcock to design and install the current patio in accordance
with the mediation agreement, and that improvements
were made with regard to
water delivery to the ground in two areas were one flows into the garden in
normal rain conditions and the
other flows off into the culvert in the common
property. Further, Mr Evans gave evidence about the approval process with
of Rockingham for installation of patios, his installation of the
current patio and a comparison of it to the other patios at the
strata complex.
(b) Mr Wayne Simcock who is Ms Simcock's father. Mr Simcock has
qualifications as an occupational health and safety adviser and worked
safety adviser for many years. Mr Simcock also has formal training and
practical experience with hand tools, power tools and
building construction
techniques. Mr Simcock currently operates Waikiki Home Maintenance
Services. Mr Simcock gave affirmed evidence
original patio, his removal of the original patio, his installation of the
lean-to structure and then
its removal, and his involvement in the previous
proceeding.
Non-expert evidence
(a) Ms Simcock gave sworn evidence about the
original patio, the removal of the original patio, the installation and removal
lean-to structure, the installation of the current patio, the
building inspector written report prepared by Mr Steve Flint of Home
Building Consultants on 27 June 2024, information received from the City of
Rockingham, her involvement in the previous
proceeding, and the challenges she
faced in trying to comply with the ongoing requests from the council.
(b) Ms Tuffin representing 135 Kent Pty Ltd gave sworn evidence about strata
meetings and the inspection of Lot 1 on 23 February 2025
emails sent both to Ms Simcock and to Mr Evans notifying them that approvals
were required, the information she received
from the City of Rockingham and her
involvement in the previous proceeding.
considering whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine Ms Simcock's
application, I will turn to consider the two key
issues which Ms Simcock
expressed as
(a) whether
the current patio installed in the front exclusive use area of Lot 1, between
the residential building and carport, is
approved in its current form
current patio issue
(b) whether the replacement brickwork on the external wall of Lot 1 is
confirmed as structurally sound and that any further repair
work or cosmetic
adjustments are the responsibility of the strata company (
replacement
brickwork issue
will be necessary for me to ultimately consider whether to exercise the
Tribunal's discretionary powers under s 199 and s 200
of the ST Act to make
declarations and/or orders or both in order to resolve each of the two key
the course of the hearing, a number of other issues arose. I briefly
comment on the other issues below at [
Consideration
not challenged by the parties, I am satisfied that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to determine the dispute. This is on the
basis that:
Ms Simcock and
the strata company are each a 'scheme participant' as that term is defined in s
197(2) of the ST Act;
the 'scheme
dispute' as that term is defined in s 197(1) of the ST Act comprises the
issues (see above at [
]), that is
whether the patio is of the same design and material as previously existed on
Lot 1 prior to the installation of the lean-to
structure subject to any
necessary council approval being obtained and whether the replacement brickwork
on the external wall of
Lot 1 where the air conditioner was removed is
structurally sound; and
Ms Simcock as
the owner of Lot 1, made the application to the Tribunal under s 197(4) of the
the dispute between Ms Simcock and the strata company comes within the
Tribunal's original jurisdiction (s 209 of ST Act).
Current patio issue
way of background, Ms Simcock states that when she purchased Lot 1 in 2013
there was a wooden patio covered with Alsynite (fibreglass
polycarbonate roofing
sheets) spanning the distance between the residence and the carport and the
length between the carport pillars
original patio
Simcock explained that between 2013 and about 2021 the strata complex was
managed by a strata manger. Ms Simcock described the
overall feel of the strata
meetings as 'good' and
'informal.'
Ms Simcock said that everyone was friendly and generally happy and amenable
to the needs of the owners and items put forward at
the meetings. Ms Simcock
recalls the discussion that was had about patios at the strata meetings where
by [Ms] Nisha [McGeough] [strata manager] that '[i]t's your exclusive use area.
It's up to you.
Simcock said she took what Ms McGeough said as
Ms Simcock stated that everyone that was at the strata meeting, knew about the
installation of the lean-to structure and
no issue was raised. It was only in
2021 that the lean-to structure became an issue which is when the strata complex
no longer had
is the evidence of Mr Simcock that the original patio was rotting, dilapidated
and had become a serious safety hazard after storm
damage and deemed it to be
Simcock described the original patio as
The original structure that was there when [Ms Simcock] purchased [Lot 1],
it had a fascia board which was bolted into the - you
know, it's the fascia
underneath the gutter. And then there was jarrah support purlins heading
towards the west. They were nailed
in from an angle on the side. They were not
supported by any recognised construction bracket. So those nails were rusting,
the holes had opened up in the wood so they were - you could actually move
them. So I viewed them as being, you know, very, very
poor construction. And
they were then attached to a bearer beam that was supported from the two main
brick pillars in the carport,
and those support beams were just angled brackets
which were mild steel with no coating. So they were very rusted. So it was a
hazard from its poor construction and its environmental degradation over the
years. It did have Alsynite on it, and the Alsynite
sheeting didn't provide a
lot of protection, but the water that did rain on it poured back into the
in comparing the original patio to the current patio, Mr Simcock
There are several differences, but they are differences of improved quality. As
far as the design, there is no - no difference.
It's still bearers, purlins,
brackets. The improvement are the fixture to the fascia of the unit which is
now done properly and
the addition of the guttering and the downpipes is the
only real difference. The other thing is it now has full covering of Alysnite
from one end to the other and a proper protective coating. So the differences
are all positive improvements.
Simcock testified that he removed the original patio in or about 2013 without
first seeking the approval of the strata
The reason Mr Simcock did not seek approval was
it was obviously a hazard that required a level of urgency to address.
I think from a public liability perspective you can remove a hazard if you can
demonstrate it was a hazard.
Simcock now recognises that it would have been prudent for him to have informed
the strata company of the removal of the original
removing the original patio, Mr Simcock installed what the parties refer to as
the 'lean-to structure.' Mr Simcock conceded
that written approval of the
strata company was not requested, however Ms Simcock
talked to the strata people and they said, [Ms Simcock], go ahead and build
whatever you like unless it looks ridiculous.
Simcock said he installed the 'lean-to structure' which 'would be safe' and 'in
keeping with the appearance with the other [lots].
Fair enough the pitch
was different, but it was certainly not an
to Ms Simcock, the initial catalyst for the changes to the patio from the
original patio design, was the strata company's
insistence that all water run
off had to be away from the residence (rather than flowing into the gutter on
the residence as it was
previously). Ms Simcock explained that the
subsequent decision to include guttering and downpipes is directly related to
this requirement
of the strata company. Finally, Ms Simcock said that in the
hope of achieving an agreeable outcome with the strata company, the
patio was designed to pitch the roof away from the residence to allow water run
off to be managed with the guttering and
Whether same person removed the lean-to structure?
mediation agreement required Ms Simcock to:
(a) .... arrange for the same person who installed
the lean-to structure at Lot 1 [...] to remove the lean-to and make good the
where the lean-to was attached to the
[residence].
is common ground that the lean-to structure was removed.
Tuffin for the strata company challenges whether the 'same person' who installed
the lean-to structure also removed it as required
by the mediation
Simcock testified that he originally installed the lean-to structure and that
he, though his business Waikiki Home Maintenance
Services, removed the structure
in about September 2024.
the noun 'person' means any human being or an artificial body of people, having
rights and duties before the
being, Mr Simcock is a 'person.' Similarly, Waikiki Home Maintenance Services
is a 'person' as it is an artificial body
with rights and duties before the law.
While at law Mr Simcock and Waikiki Home Maintenance Services are two different
accept that Mr Simcock, is the same human being who installed
the lean-to structure and then removed it.
find that the requirements as set out in (a) of the mediation agreement (see
]) were complied with in
that Mr Simcock is the same the person who installed the lean-to structure
and then removed it.
previously set out, but repeated here, order 1 of the Tribunal (differently
constituted) of 11 June 2024 required the following:
no later than 30 September 2024, the applicant shall have the existing lean-to
structure removed from Lot 1 and the areas where
the lean-to was attached to the
main building made good.
above order is inconsistent with what is provided in the mediation agreement
(see above at [
]). This is because
there is nothing in order 1 that requires the 'same person' who installed the
lean­to structure to remove
it. Rather, the order simply requires
Ms Simcock to have the existing lean-to structure removed from Lot 1 and to
have the area
where the lean-to structure was installed to be made good by
30 September 2024.
this case, to the extent there is an inconsistency between what is provided for
in the mediation agreement and order 1, the order
of the Tribunal must prevail.
This is because, at best, the mediation agreement is an outline of the
understanding between the parties
to settle the previous proceeding. It does
not set out in any detail the rights and obligations of each party such as the
of works for the removal of the lean-to structure and the installation of
the current patio and what is to happen if there is a failure
to comply with the
mediation agreement. Further, it is not clear from the mediation agreement if
the parties intended to be legally
bound by it.
conclusion, Mr Simcock is the human being (being a person) who testified that he
installed the lean-to structure and that he also
removed it through his business
Waikiki Maintenance Services. This satisfies the requirement of the mediation
agreement and it also
satisfied order 1 as the lean-to structure has been
removed. Therefore, the strata company's challenge that the 'person' who
the lean-to structure was not the 'same person' as who removed it,
Whether the current patio is of the same design and materials as the original
mediation agreement relevantly provides:
(b) The [s]trata [c]ompany, as represented by the [c]ouncil [...], will not
object to the owner of Lot 1 installing a pergola of
the same design and
materials as previously existed on Lot 1 prior to the installation of the
current lean-to structure, subject
to any necessary [City of Rockingham]
approval being obtained. For the avoidance of doubt, this includes the
pergola having polycarbonate
roofing in the same manner as the previous pergola.
got off to a bad start when on 7 August 2024, Mr Evans left a telephone and text
message for Ms Tuffin and left his business
card at her Lot 6. The text message
Before we get plans drawn up or do anything, I would like to meet with you on
site and go over your concerns and share the design
that I was discussing with
[Ms Simcock] today. I think you'll be rather happy with this concept and it
will be very similar. If
not just about identical to the ones next door and
further along towards your property.
Can we make a time this weekend morning or evening that best suits you?
is useful to start by setting out in some detail the correspondence concerning
the current patio between Ms Simcock and Ms Tuffin/the
council between August
2024 to November 2024 before turning to consider if the current patio is of the
same 'design' and 'materials'
as the original patio.
reply to Mr Evans' phone call and text message, on 8 August 2024, Ms Tuffin
answered as
Further to your phone call on Wednesday 7 August 2024 property ownership at lot
[...] is as follows:
Strata [c]ompany
8069 owns external wall and doors, windows, ceiling, roof, concrete floor of the
residential building; carport; front
and back courtyards including garden and
Front and back
courtyards are [s]trata [c]ompany common property for the exclusive use of lot 1
A registered
by-law states lot owner repairs and maintains exclusive use areas.
The registered
by-law does not give ownership to lot 1 owner.
pertaining to [s]trata [c]ompany and common property are determined by majority
vote of the [c]ouncil [...] unless a resolution
without dissent vote is required
as per the [ST] Act.
To clarify the proposed structure at Lot 1 will be installed on [s]trata
[c]ompany common property and once approved by [council]
become the property of
the [s]trata [c]ompany.
Simcock immediately responded to Ms Tuffin on 8 August 2024. She wrote in
This (hopefully well-meaning) email has come across as intimidating and an
assertion of power, rather than helpful.
I am unsure how structure ownership came up as the latest discussion regarding
approved paint colours?
I have ensured the contractor [Mr Evans] they have not done anything wrong.
That once plans are ready they will be submitted for
review and there is no
foreseeable issues as we are building in accordance with the [mediation]
The contractor has been engaged by [Lot] 1 owner for a new patio to be erected
in the [e]xclusive [u]se [a]rea of [Lot] 1 following
the current patio's
removal, in accordance with agreements made in
[the] SAT [m]ediation.
These are initial discussions. Once an agreement has been made the plans and
request will be submitted for approval to both [the]
[s]trata [c]ompany and
Rockingham City Council.
next correspondence was on 4 October 2024 when Ms Simcock emailed the council
I hereby submit my intention to re-build the patio within the front common area
of [Lot] 1 and am seeking [s]trata [c]ouncil approval
to proceed.
This is in accordance with item 2 of the [...] Mediation Agreement which
Please find attached [hand drawn] graphic representation of the proposed patio,
and outline by City of Rockingham concluding no council
perimetry required for
Details as follows:
Patio to be
along the same design as previous patio at [Lot] 1, and existing patios in
Frame - painted Mission Brown
Polycarbonate
Sheeting on top
Patio to span
gap between residence and Carport (approx. 8.m²)
Roof pitch to be
'flat' (slight pitch to allow water run off away from residence)
Roof height
determined by residence eaves (<2.4m as per WA
This work will be conducted by Hallmark Australasia[.]
Work currently planned to begin the first week of November (weather
dependent).
Please advise if there are any concerns with this proposal.
Tuffin replied on 14 October 2024
Please be advised your submitted plan is being reviewed by [the council].
The process to date:
At first glance the submitted plan appears to vary from the [mediation
agreement][.]
Council of Owners concerns and questions received within timeframe given
avoidance of doubt, the [mediation] agreement [ ] is for a timber framed
pergola with timber slatted permeable roof covered
with removable polycarbonate
clear sheeting (as was the design and materials of the original Lot 1
Any variation from the original structure will require a resolution without
dissent vote by all lot owners.
attachment of Gutters on the pergola.
Water run-off
catchment, does this require a soak well?
Where is pergola
being attached to residential building.
2. The submitted
plan does not show how the polycarbonate roof is going to be attached to the
pergola frame? Will there be interior
frame work for this to be attached to as
this is not on the plan?
3. The water run
off of a solid roof of this area is likely to be a future issue if not addressed
and planned for correctly. What
is being put in place to accommodate the water
run off of the polycarbonate roof and where is this excess water going to be
re­directed
to? It appears by the plan the complete roof area is covered
with a non-permeable product.
Further process required
Your action is
required to address all concerns and questions listed above and respond
accordingly.
If plans differ
to agreement made at [the Tribunal], [the] [c]ouncil [ ] will research
obligations made in this agreement.
permitting from [the mediation] agreement plans may be taken to [the] City of
Rockingham by [the] [c]ouncil [ ] for advice.
Proposed plan
can be submitted to all Lot owners for resolution without dissent
following is Ms Simcock's reply to the council two days later on 16 October
I am very confused [as] to how the design of the patio is varying from what was
I am installing what was there before - a wooden patio with polycarbonate
roofing, as agreed in the [...] mediation.
I want to ensure you all that I am committed to honouring what was agreed at
[the] mediation in good faith and I want nothing more
than an amicable
I am not trying to vary anything at all from what the intention of the agreement
Responses to [c]ouncil [ ] questions:
avoidance of doubt, the agreement made at [the Tribunal] is for a timber framed
pergola with timber slatted permeable roof
covered with removable polycarbonate
clear sheeting (as was the design and materials of the original Lot 1
Any variation
from the original structure will require a resolution without dissent vote by
all lot owners.
- the word 'permeable' was never part of the discussion at the [...]
- the word 'removable' was never part of the discussion at the [...]
agreement is for a wooden frame with polycarbonate sheeting on top - as per
previous installation.
always referred to it as a patio - as by definition that is what it is.
your and [Ms Linda Tion's] insistence that the word 'pergola' be used, which is
why the mediator[s] ensured the additional
information of polycarbonate sheeting
on top was referred to.
the design is as agreed.
attachment of [g]utters on the pergola
gutter within end run of polycarbonate
Water run-off
catchment, does this require a soak well?
well required - small m² area of roof
attachment to carport and main building.
via barge board to facia.
to brick pillars
Where is pergola
being attached to residential building
practice is to attach patio to the facia via barge board.
submitted plan does not show how the polycarbonate roof is going to be attached
to the pergola frame? Will there be interior
frame work for this to be attached
to as this is not on the plan?
be screwed in to the wooden batons
3. The water
run off of a solid roof of this area is likely to be a future issue if not
addressed and planned for correctly. What
is being put in place to accommodate
the water run off of the polycarbonate roof and where is this excess water going
to be re-directed
to? It appears by the plan the complete roof area is covered
with a non-permeable product.
I understand the timeframes associated with voting periods, which would be
required if I was planning a structure outside the frame
of what was agreed in
the [...] mediation.
As the agreement stated there would be no objection.
I will be forwarding this email to my builder for further confirmation to
hopefully alleviate your concerns.
thereafter, on 18 October 2024, Ms Tuffin replied to Ms Simcock,
Yes, confirmation from the builder would be appreciated.
The attached photos of Lot 7 pergola should clearly define the original design
and material used.
It is to be noted that there was no mention of gutters being installed during
mediation and there were no gutters on the original
Lot 1 pergola hence the
questions on all issues around the gutters - design, water volume [and]
catchment, fixtures to the main structure.
It was not clearly shown on the design submitted the polycarbonate sheets will
be attached on top of the wooden batons in the same
manner of the previous
pergola hence the questions of fixture of the polycarbonate sheets.
City of Rockingham advice will be sought once we have the builder's responses on
concerns of the proposed design.
Simcock replied to Ms Tuffin the same day,
I received a phone call from the builder regarding this email query confirming
my comments sent through to your queries are in line
with the design and
standard engineering practice.
As much as I would have liked confirmation from himself in writing, we can all
appreciate building trades are stretched thin.
I can assure you the design of the patio is in keeping with the original design
I cannot confirm that the original patio at Lot 1 was the same as Lot 7, I don't
believe they were at all - apart from wood paint
Looking at the pictures of Lot 7, it seems there are a lot more overhead batons
to Lot 7[']s pergola that what is seen in the partial
pictures of Lot 1[']s
patio - the ones we reviewed at [the] [m]ediation whilst making this
Perhaps this is because Lot 1 had polycarbonate overhead and Lot 7 doesn't?
Yes - the internal guttering is a modern feature that was not included on the
original design, however, has been included for obvious
water/drainage management.
As my intentions are fully in line with the intention of the [...] [m]ediation
agreement I have no desire to wait at the mercy of
the [...] [c]ouncil
Voting is redundant as the agreement stated there would be no objection.
The work remains planned for execution first week in November.
Evans commenced installing the current patio on 16 November 2024 which resulted
in the following email from Ms Tuffin to
Ms Simcock:
Strata [c]ouncillors have noticed a builder is on site building a pergola to
have gutters.
Please provide [s]trata [c]ouncil with:
of Rockingham building permit
Builder[']s
Builder[']s
registration
17 November 2024, Ms Simcock replied to Ms Tuffin but addressed to the council
Strata [c]ouncil has been made fully aware of the intention to re-build a patio
at Lot 1 for some time, and was notified of the revised
start date in an email
sent 12/11/24.
I was notified by my builder that you confronted them at the property on Sunday
November claiming the work was not [s]trata
[a]pproved.
The build of the patio at Lot 1 is well within the bounds of the [...]
[m]ediation [a]greement[.]
You are trying to renege on this agreement.
The addition of gutters to manage water flow has not wholly changed the patio
design or intent of the structure that was agreed to.
I have already provided adequate information to [s]t[r]ata [c]ouncil on the
project plans and builder that are required for a project
of this scale.
This work will be restarted as soon as arrangements [can] be made with the
If any further disruptions occur [s]trata [c]oucil will be liable for delay
then went quiet for a bit. Then, on 3 February 2025, Ms Simcock wrote to
the council informing that she had completed all
aspects of the mediation
agreement. In addition, in that email Ms Simcock requested confirmation
from the council that there are
'no active [s]trata issues relating to
request from Ms Simcock resulted in Ms Tuffin sending the following email to Ms
Simcock on 21 February
To enable confirmation of Lot 1 issues as requested by Lot 1 owner, please be
advised an inspection of work carried out on property
owned by [the] [s]trata
[c]ompany [ ] is necessary.
The inspection will be undertaken by [the] [...] council [...].
Inspection to be undertaken this Sunday morning.
Inspection day and time: Sunday 23 February 2025 between 10am and noon.
summary, the strata company contends the current patio is 'non­compliant to
the design agreed
mediation agreement. This is because, according to Ms Tuffin:
design elements
have been added since the mediation agreement was made on 11 June 2024;
the added design
elements are not included in the patio descriptions/drawings submitted to the
strata company by Ms Simcock;
the current
patio is not the same design and materials as the original patio and other
currently installed patios in the strata complex;
the current
patio is to span gap between residence and carport (approximately
), roof pitch to be flat (slight pitch to allow
water run off away from residence) and roof height determined by residence eaves
than 2.4 metres).
her email to Ms Simcock on 4 March 2025, Ms Tuffin states that the
... finds the newly installed patio at Lot 1 is not a replacement of the
original design but is structurally different.
coming to this conclusion, Ms Tuffin wrote, in
Polycarbonate
roof is higher than fascia level of main building and it was questioned whether
water run-off would overflow into main
building gutter.
Metal flashing
patio ends hook over the main building gutter. The concern was raised as
to who would pay for removal and replacement
of metal flashing to maintain or
replace residential building gutter.
Water run-off
from the downpipes enters directly into the carport which is the only access to
the entrance of the residence at Lot
1, thereby creating a potential public
liability risk for the [s]trata [c]ompany.
Water run-off
from downpipes directs water to base of decking which is not flush with the
ground allowing water seepage under the
wooden decking, creating potential
degeneration issues of the decking and main building brick wall.
There appears to
be space to install a soak well within Lot 1.
framework and polycarbonate sheeting are materials agreed to at [...] mediation.
All other materials have been added since
making [the mediation]
agreement[.]
Simcock explained she did not reply to the email of 4 March 2025 stating that
the email is a re-hash of questions that she has
already answered and clarified
previously. Further, Ms Simcock contends that no matter what she does to comply
with the seemingly
endless requests from the council, in particular from Ms
Tuffin, that the council will never be
to the expert evidence. Mr Evans stated that the design of the current patio is
'very similar [i]f not just about identical
to the ones next door and further
along towards Ms Tuffin's
giving evidence, Mr Evans'
We proceeded to build the same patio which was permitted under that lot. Just
the pitch was changed. And the pitch was basically
taken from a way flowing
overflow the gutters, even
though we have witnessed today [at the site
inspection] that most of the other patios there do have a lean on but are
leaning back
towards the gutter, which is in contrast to what was asked of [Ms
Simcock] and what [Ms Simcock] showed me for the current patio
that is built
there. So at his stage, the patio, as by direction of the strata [council] is
now sloping away from the house. It
has gutters to prevent water and that
running over the framework and causing rot and damage to the
The patio that is currently there is of the same square metreage, same size,
same material types as the – as the patio that
is on this building permit
[BA14 and BA18]. The only thing that is different to that is that – the
pitch of the roof.
further when Mr Evans was asked if a water plan was submitted to the City of
Rockingham, he
[The City of Rockingham] have never asked for one yet.
Evans explained that he did not submit the building permit application to the
City of Rockingham, rather Ms Simcock submitted
the application, and that he
installed the current patio per her set of
Evans testified the current patio is built to the current building code - the
National Construction Code (
) where it is best practice to include
guttering and downpipes. In addition, Mr Evans gave evidence that gutters and
downpipes on
the current patio are necessary because the strata company required
water run off from the patio to not flow into the gutter on the
of Lot 1 (being the water run off course of the original patio) but rather away
from the residence.
Mr Evans stated that in dealing with the City of Rockingham for the past 13
years, they give building approvals for patios
but do not require information
a street view, Mr Simcock stated that the current patio looks the same as the
original patio other than '[what] you have now
addition, Mr Simcock stated that the current patio covers the same square
meterage as did the original patio, is made of wood,
like the original patio, is
painted mission brown and covered with polycarbonate sheeting like the original
patio but with the following
metal flashings
on the side bearers to protect the wood from the elements; and
gutters and two
downpipes to manage water and run off directing the water towards its natural
watercourse, being the stormwater drain
in the common property.
mediation agreement requires that the current patio have the same 'design' and
'materials' as the original patio.
the noun 'design' means a preliminary drawing or sketch; a plan, outline, or
model produced to show the look or function
of a building, machine, or other
object before it is made or
noun 'materials' ordinarily means the matter or substance from which a thing is
design of the current patio presented to the Tribunal is a hand drawn sketch or
outline of what the current patio is to look
It clearly shows guttering but does not show any downpipes. Unfortunately,
there is no design of the original patio before the
Tribunal. However, there is
no contest between the parties that the original patio did not have guttering
with downpipes. This
is because water run off from the original patio flowed
into the gutter on the residence of Lot 1.
parties appear to be at crossroads about whether water run off from the current
patio had to be away from the gutter on the residence.
Ms Simcock and Mr
Evans are clear that this is what the strata company required. Ms Tuffin
challenges this stating that water flowing
back into the main gutter was not an
issue, but it was with the lean-to structure because of the pitch of the
Unfortunately, there is nothing documented between the parties concerning this.
It is not necessary for me to resolve this difference,
because later in these
reasons I explain why it reasonable to exercise the Tribunal's discretionary
powers to make a declaration
and an order to resolve the dispute about the
current patio which includes this difference.
reasons set out later in these reasons (see below at [
]), I find the structure of the
current patio does
include the finishings such as the flashings,
guttering and downpipes. Consequently, I find the current patio structure (that
apart from the finishings) is made of wood, painted mission brown and covered
with polycarbonate sheeting. This makes the materials
of the structure (being
the current patio but excluding the finishings) the same materials as the
original patio. Further, I find
the design of the current patio is different
from the original patio in that there are downpipes.
I find the design of the current patio is not the same design as the original
patio and it could not be because the water
run off from the original patio
flowed into the gutter on the residence of Lot 1 but the water run off with the
current patio flows
away from the residence. Further, although not clear from
the hand drawn sketch, the pitch of the current patio is different from
original patio. This was necessary according to Mr Evans to deal with the water
conclusion, while the design of the original patio is not before the Tribunal,
it is uncontroversial that there were, at least,
no downpipes on the original
patio which there are on the current patio. In circumstances where water
run off is away from the gutter
on the residence of Lot 1 and in accordance with
the expert evidence of Mr Evans that it is best practice in accordance with
NCC to have guttering and downpipes on patios, latter in these reasons I
explain why I exercise the Tribunal's discretionary powers
to make a declaration
and an order in respect to the current patio issue (see below at [
Whether amended or updated building approvals required?
building approval (BA14) and a certificate of building compliance (BA18) was
issued by the City of Rockingham for a class 10a 'carport
and patio' for Lot 1
on or about 12 April
refers to the following technical documents: 'All plans stamped 1.2024.851.1 -
Expert witness structural inspection: Structerre
Consulting'. It is
uncontroversial that these documents relate to the lean­to structure (that
was removed in September 2024)
and not the current
Simcock testified that she was informed verbally by an officer of the City of
Rockingham that as the pitch of the current patio
roof was only being altered,
the previously approved permits (BA14 and BA18) remain valid for the current
patio. Unfortunately,
Ms Simcock did not request the City of Rockingham to
confirm this in writing. However, Mr Evans corroborated Ms Simcock's
That is, Mr Evans testified that the current patio is covered by the
previous BA14 and BA18 approved by the City of Rockingham because
the current
patio is of the same square meterage and with the same tie-in points as the
previous lean-to structure. Further, Mr
Evans stated that the only change was
the pitch which based on his experience with installing patios for over
13 years and dealing
with the City of Rockingham did not require a new or
amended BA14 and BA18.
giving evidence that the removal of the lean-to structure and the installation
of the current patio do not require an amended
or new BA14 and BA18, Mr Evans
If I take that patio that's still on the house, and I pull it off because I want
to do the gutters, for example, and I put it back
on, do I require a building
permit? The answer is no. The same structure was identical, was there before.
So what I'm saying is if I pull one - if I put a gutter - if I put a new gutter
on a house, and I think, '[t]hat gutter is not working
very well. I would
like to extend it a little bit past there, where there was no gutter before',
does not require a building permit.
Tuffin for the strata company dismisses Ms Simcock's and Mr Evans' evidence
and states the BA14 and BA18 are not valid for the
current patio. This is for
the following two reasons.
according to Ms Tuffin, she and her daughter attended the offices of the City of
Rockingham and spoke with an officer by the
name of 'Jessica' who backs their
claim that the current patio would not be
Ms Tuffin submits that Ms Simcock provided no evidence of approval from the City
of Rockingham or from the strata company
for the current patio. In particular,
Ms Tuffin says that as the BA14 and BA18 are dated on or about 12 April 2024,
which predates
the mediation agreement, is for a retrospective building approval
Building Act 2011
(WA) and for the construction of a
building in 2017 and therefore are not for the current patio. Further, and in
any event, Ms Tuffin
says that no plans relevant to the BA14 and BA18 were
ever provided to the council by Ms Simcock.
do not accept Ms Tuffin's position for the strata company. This is for the
following reasons.
in giving evidence, Ms Tuffin was not able to provide any details of what
Jessica's role at the City of Rockingham is, or
what her expertise are.
Further, Ms Tuffin was not able to identify what information she provided to
Jessica. Because of this,
I find Ms Tuffin's testimony unreliable in regards to
her enquiry with the City of Rockingham.
prefer the evidence of Mr Evans who testified that he has been dealing with the
City of Rockingham for over 13 years in relation
to installing patios. Mr
Evans' evidence corroborates the information Ms Simcock received from the
City of Rockingham than an amended
or new BA14 and BA18 is not required for the
current patio.
for reasons set out later in these reasons (see below at [
]), the structure of a patio does
include finishings (such as guttering and downpipes).
conclusion, I find that Ms Simcock received approval from the City of Rockingham
in the form of the BA14 and BA18 for the lean-to
structure and that based on the
expert evidence of Mr Evans there was no requirement for an amended or new BA14
and BA18 for the
current patio as the only difference to the structure (which
does not include the finishings) of the current patio is the pitch.
I am wrong, and an amended or new BA14 and/or BA18 is required, in this case, I
would still exercise the Tribunal's discretionary
powers to make a declaration
and an order in regards to the current patio issue (see below at [
Whether there is a breach of by-law 16?
23 May 1997, the Registrar of Titles registered a change of by­law
(notification G483466) by amending the scheme by-laws
to include a new by-law 16
as follows:
The registered proprietor of each lot will be entitled to the exclusive use
enjoyment and will maintain and repair that part of the
common property as
marked on the attached sketch as being 'for the use of' each lot,
respectively.
to Form 1 of the strata plan, the areas and carports for exclusive use of lots
are prefixed and numbered. Each of the
seven lots in the strata scheme has an
exclusive use area. In relation to Lot 1, the marking 'A1' and word 'carport'
on the Form
1 is for the exclusive use of Lot 1.
described, the current patio is located within the exclusive use area of Lot 1.
The strata company does not dispute this.
proper construction of by-law 16 requires a consideration of the language of
by-law 16, viewed in the statutory context of the
sections of ST Act dealing
with by-laws, and whilst recourse to surrounding circumstances may be
permissible as an aid to construction
it is necessary, particularly bearing in
mind the public purpose of strata scheme by-laws, to exercise caution
in going beyond the
language of the by-law and the ST Act:
of Strata Plan No 3397 v Tate
(2007) 70 NSWLR 344
[2007] NSWCA 207.
properly construing by-law 16, a reasonable person would understand the
language of by-law 16 to mean that the owner is required
to maintain and repair
the common property which is designated the exclusive use area for the owner's
lot. This means, therefore,
in relation to Lot 1 that Ms Simcock has:
the exclusive
use and enjoyment of the area marked by way of cross hatching on Form 1 of the
strata plan headed
responsibility for the performance of the duty of the strata company under
the ST Act to keep in good and serviceable repair,
properly maintain
and where necessary, renew and replace whether the damage or deterioration
arises from fair wear and tear, inherent
defect or any other cause, in respect
of both the non­structural components of the exclusive-use area of Lot
1 which, as explained
earlier in these reasons, include the flashing,
guttering and downpipes as well as the structural components which include the
columns, steel beams, joists and columns of the current
Simcock accepts that by-law 16 requires her to maintain and repair the exclusive
use area where the current patio is installed
(and she was required to maintain
and repair any previous patio). As the original patio was rotten and
dilapidated, Ms Simcock had
it removed in order to comply with by-law 16. The
strata company did not dispute this.
conclusion, I find Ms Simcock's action in having the original patio, being
rotten and dilapidated, and having the lean-to structure
removed from the
exclusive use area of Lot 1 as well as the installation of the current patio is
not a breach of by-law 16. It is,
however, a requirement that Ms Simcock, as
the owner of Lot 1 maintain and repair the common property area that is
designated the
exclusive use area of Lot 1 which includes both the
structural and non-structural components of the current
Whether a resolution without dissent is required?
noted earlier in these reasons, but repeated here, Ms Tuffin, in her capacity as
secretary of the council, emailed Ms Simcock
on 4 March 2025. In that email Ms
Tuffin notes that an inspection of '[s]trata [c]ompany property of Lot 1' took
place on 23 February
2025. I understand that the inspection was of the
exclusive use area of Lot 1 (
following is reported about the
inspection:
Material used
Polycarbonate
roof sheeting on top screwed to timber framework
Colorbond gutter
along patio edge facing Bell Street
downpipes x 2
Metal flashing
patio ends x 2
Patio design
Polycarbonate
roof sheeting on top of timber framework
downpipes and metal flashing patio ends are additions post SAT agreement.
Polycarbonate
roof is higher than fascia level of main building and it was questioned whether
water run-off would overflow into main
building gutter.
Metal flashing
patio ends hook over the main building gutter. The concern was raised as
to who would pay for removal and replacement
of metal flashing to maintain or
replace residential building gutter.
Water run-off
from downpipes enters directly into carport, which is the only access to the
unit entrance, creating a potential public
liability risk for the [s]trata
Water run-off
from downpipes directs water to base of decking which is not flush with the
ground allowing water seepage under the
wooden decking; creating potential
degeneration issues of the decking and main building brick wall.
It was observed
there appears to be space to install a soak well within Lot
It is noted timber framework and polycarbonate sheeting are materials agreed to
at SAT mediation. All other materials have been
added since making SAT
The [...] [c]ouncil finds the newly installed patio at Lot 1 is not a
replacement of the original design but is structurally
that, Ms Tuffin set out the following actions that the council required Ms
Patio design as
installed requires resolution without dissent vote as design changes have been
made post [...] [mediation] agreement.
Water run-off
management to be addressed by Lot 1 owner.
installation is possible and installation to be at Lot 1 owner
giving evidence, Ms Tuffin explained that she (as chairman and secretary of the
council), Ms Linda Tion (as treasurer of the council)
and Mr Alan Knight (member
of council) undertook the inspection to see
what was buil[t] aligned with what we agreed to [in the previous
proceeding].
Tuffin explained that neither she, nor Ms Tion nor Mr Knight have any
qualifications in building or construction. Ms Tuffin said
she is retired; Ms
Tion works in aged care and has done so for about 18 years and Mr Knight works
in hydraulics and has done so for
Tuffin said she came up with the idea of a soak well because she had water
ingress into the kitchen area of Lot 6 and it was from
water overflow from the
Simcock challenges the position of the strata company that a resolution without
dissent of the strata company is required in regard
to the current patio on the
basis that the strata company contends that the current patio is 'not a
replacement of the original design
but is structurally different'. This is
because, according to Ms Simcock the only items
explicitly stated in
the mediation agreement are the flashings, guttering and downpipes which, in her
view, are not structural changes
to the current patio.
Whether the current patio is structurally different?
terms' 'structure' and 'structural' are not defined in the ST Act as explained
Erbrich and The Owners of 125 Herdsman Parade Wembley (Strata Plan
[2020] WASAT 109
case, the Tribunal was considering whether timber floor decking boards and the
timber pergola roof louvres were a 'structure.'
the Tribunal held that the decking boards and louvres were
not part of the integral structure of the building but rather were 'finishings.'
The Tribunal explained at [49] to [54]:
stated by the Tribunal
[21], the term 'structure' is not defined in the ST Act apart from s 7(6) of the
ST Act which provides that the term structure
includes 'any prescribed
improvement'.
means that the ordinary meaning of 'structure' is to be used. This
was confirmed in the recent decision of
The Owners of 5 Thor Street
Innaloo Strata Plan 72475 and Maul
[2020] WASAT 81
, where the
Tribunal stated at [79] that the word 'structure' in the context of s
7 of the ST Act is to take its ordinary meaning.
the term 'structure' means built up as in a building. This is
supported by the decision
where the Tribunal
stated at [23]:
The term 'structure' ordinarily means
something which is constructed in the way of being built up as in a
building. In
South Wales Aluminium Co Ltd v Assessment
Committee for the Neath Assessment Area
[1943] 2 All ER 587
Atkinson J stated at 592: ("Legal database - View: Cases: South Wales Aluminium
Co Ltd v. Neath ...")
...There is nothing to suggest here that the word 'structure' is not to be
used in its ordinary sense ... I suppose it means something
constructed in a way of being built up as in a building; it is in the nature of
a building. It seems to me it is not in
the nature of a building, or
a structure analogous to a building, unless it is something which you can say
quite fairly has been
built up. I do not think that is the only guide
or the only test, but roughly, I think that must be the main guide: how has it
there? Is it something which you can fairly say has been
built up[?]
a thing is a structure in any particular case is a mixed question of law and
fact. This was stated by the Tribunal
at [26] as follows:
Whether a thing
is a structure in any particular case is a mixed question of law and fact having
regards to the ST Act in context
of which its meaning must
be ascertained.
the word 'structure' its ordinary meaning as set out in [51], the Tribunal finds
that the timber floor decking boards and the
timber pergola roof louvres are not
structures but rather they are finishings. In other words, the
Tribunal is of the view that the
timber floor decking boards and the timber
pergola roof louvres are not essential to the structure of the building but give
or finished appearance.
the Tribunal's view, it cannot be fairly said that the timber floor decking
boards have been 'built up' in the way of being built
building. The same is true for the timber pergola roof louvres, that
is, they have not been 'built up' in the way of
being built up as in a
building. The mere fact that the timber floor decking boards and the
timber pergola roof louvres are fixed
to the building does not make them a part
of the integral structure of the building. The timber floor decking
boards and the timber
pergola roof louvres cannot be equated to such items as
the steel columns, steel beams, steel balustrades and timber joists that
the building which must be maintained by the strata company pursuant
to its duty in s 35(1)(c) of the ST Act.
, I find the flashing, guttering and downpipes attached to
the current patio are not a structure but rather are finishings. That
flashing, guttering and downpipes give a complete or finished appearance but are
not part of the integral structure of the
current patio. In other words, the
finishings have no structural elements and if they are removed, the 'building'
(which include
the steel beams, joists and columns of the current patio) would
retain its structural integrity.
in these reasons (see above at [
made the finding that the design of the current patio is not the same as the
original patio as the pitch of the roof is different
and there is at least two
downpipes. It is uncontroversial that there was no resolution put to a general
meeting of the strata company
with regard to the current patio, which the strata
company contends is required.
mediation agreement does
expressly require Ms Simcock to obtain the
approval of the strata company for the installation of the current patio in the
use area of Lot 1. Rather, the mediation agreement provides that the
strata company 'will not object' to the installation of a patio
of the same
design and material as previously existed. Ordinarily the process for seeking
an 'approval' is different to the process
for 'objecting'.
any event, as stated by Beech J. in
Wong v Reid
[2016] WASC 59
an entitlement to exclusive use of land does
not give rise to a right to construct or install. To be clear, without the
approval of all other owners and without the approval of the strata
company, the current patio could not be constructed or installed
on the common
property unless it was of the same design and materials as the original patio
(as provided for the in the mediation
agreement).
though I have made the finding that the current patio is not of the same design
as the original patio, in my view, it is not
necessary to resolve this
difference for the reasons set out below at [157] to [
] where I conclude that it is
reasonable to exercise the Tribunal's statutory discretion to make a declaration
and order to resolve
the scheme dispute concerning the current patio.
other issue that the council requires Ms Simcock to address, that of water run
off management including installation of a soak
well is considered in the next
section at [
Whether water run off onto the carport concrete floor is of concern?
during the site inspection and in giving evidence, Ms Tuffin claimed that water
run off on to the carport concrete floor of
Lot 1 is a public liability risk for
the strata company. However, Ms Tuffin failed to provide any expert evidence to
support her
the site inspection, Mr Evans and Mr Simcock demonstrated where water disperses
from the guttering and downpipes by pouring
a bucket of water into the gutter.
Ms Simcock described the water dispersing in the following
downpipe dispersed onto the driveway [and] flowed out and away from the property
towards existing storm water drains.
downpipe dispersed onto the driveway [and] flowed towards the garden bed at the
South end of the carport.
amount of water that makes its way under the existing deck drains freely away in
the loose soil that exists under the deck[.]
Evans in giving evidence stated the following about what he described as the
'saga around water
discharge':
The previous patio ran the water straight onto the area in question where the
downpipes are. It would have splattered and gone everywhere.
There could
have been slip hazards or whatever. At the moment, this general water from that
downpipe runs down in a controlled
manner. But, and there's a big but, there's
a big gap between the roof of the existing patio and the carport. The water
would bellow
in there no matter what we put in there. So we're arguing about
nothing. The gutters help.
Basically, in a nutshell, the gutters are an argument about nothing. Doesn't
require a building permit to put a gutter on a patio.
openness of the carport of Lot 1 (as for other lots) is evident when looking at
the photographs.
Due to this openness when it rains, there will be water run off on to the
carport's concrete floor. Further, during the site inspection
it was obvious
that many, if not all, of the carports in the strata complex are exposed to the
this case, I find that it was appropriate for Ms Simcock to have the current
patio finished with guttering and downpipes in accordance
with the expert
evidence of Mr Evans. Further, I find that the guttering and downpipes
adequately capture the storm water and is
dispersed as described by Ms Simcock
(see above at [
Whether aquaplaning is of concern?
Tuffin claims aquaplaning is of concern to the strata company due to a mixture
of water run off from the guttering and oil spots
in the carport. It is Ms
Tuffin's evidence that she has seen aquaplaning happen before and that it is
very 'scary.'
Simcock described Ms Tuffin's concern as 'nonsense' on the basis that
aquaplaning is generally more likely to occur when a vehicle
is driven at about
70 kilometres/hour and is subject to the tyre tread depth, tyre pressure and the
amount of water on the road
Aquaplaning
(also known as hydroplaning) occurs when a layer of water builds up between the
tyres of a vehicle and the road surface
causing a loss of traction and control.
In other words, vehicle tyres encounter more water than they can displace. The
water pressure
lifts the tyres off the road surface, creating a thin layer of
water between the tyre and the road surface. This loss of contact
with the road
surface results in a loss of traction, making the vehicle difficult to steer,
brake, or accelerate effectively. Factors
that contribute to aquaplaning
include driving at higher speeds, worn or improperly inflated tyres with a
shallow tread depth and
the amount of water on the road surface.
usual approach when driving a vehicle along the road surface into a carport
be at high speeds. Whether the vehicle has properly inflated
Finally, the amount of water on the road surface, in this case, the carport, as
evidenced by where the water disperses from the
downpipes during the on-site
inspection does not appear to puddle within the carport but either travels to
the culvert on the common
property, under the wooden deck or into the
conclusion, apart from Ms Tuffin's view, which is not supported by any evidence,
I find Ms Tuffin's concern about aquaplaning
is without merit.
Conclusion - current patio issue
conclusion, Ms Simcock
[T]he [s]trata [c]ompany want to have their cake and eat it too by not allowing
[the] use of gutters [for water run off to flow into
the gutters] on the
residence and then not being satisfied with a separate gutter on the
Tuffin accepts that the patios in the strata complex are not all the same. In
giving evidence, Ms Tuffin said the pergola at
Lot 5 had a polycarbonate roof,
the pergola at Lot 6 had shade cloth and the pergola at Lot 7 had no
conclusion, I find the structure of the current patio is not of the same design
as the original patio as there is the addition
of finishings comprised of
flashings, guttering and downpipes and the pitch of the roof is different.
Ms Simcock strongly asserts that it was the council that required for the water
run off to be away from the residence of Lot
and Ms Tuffin
contends that water run off flowing back into the main gutter was only an issue
with the lean-to structure because
difference between the parties is resolved by exercising the Tribunal's
discretionary powers to make a declaration and order
(see below at [
] to [170]).
Replacement brickwork issue
is common ground that an in wall air-conditioning unit was removed from the
external wall of Lot 1 in about June 2018 and replacement
brickwork was
undertaken to fill in the void left by the removal of the air-conditioning
unit. Further, the parties agree that the
external wall of Lot 1 is common
is also uncontroversial that approval of the strata company was not obtained by
Ms Simcock at that time to remove the air-conditioning
unit. Further, it is
common ground that the replacement bricks and mortar are not an exact match to
the existing wall making the
repair work easily visible as witnessed during the
site inspection.
mediation agreement
(e) In respect of the replacement brickwork on the external wall of Lot 1
undertaken as a result of the removal of previous air­conditioning
the owner of Lot 1 shall at her expense have the replacement brickwork inspected
by a registered building inspector to confirm
whether the replacement brickwork
is structurally sound and, if not, will pay for any remedial works identified by
the building inspector.
What does the expert report say?
Simcock engaged Home Integrity Building Consultants to undertake the inspection.
Mr Steve Flint, a registered builder inspected
the external wall of Lot 1 on 27
June 2024. Mr Flint was not called to give evidence at the final hearing.
Rather, Ms Simcock relied
on his 'Building Defect Inspection Report' dated 27
June 2024. In that report, Mr Flint states that the purpose of the inspection
check reported wall cracking and non-approved building work.
his report, Mr Flint described the overall condition of the building as being
average, that is consistent with buildings of roughly
the same age and that
there will be some building elements that require some repair and/or
maintenance. Further, Mr Flint reported
that the occurrence and/or extent of
defects in the building is as he would anticipate when compared to a comparable
building of
roughly the same age that has been maintained as
viewing the 'west elevation,' Mr Flint noted the previous brickwork remedial
work is evident. Mr Flint also noted the face bricks
and mortar repair colour
were evident giving a 'compromised finish'. In referring to the guidance
notes to the NCC regarding masonry
repair work, Mr Flint noted that a perfect
mortar colour match may not be possible and differences may diminish over
Flint also noted the appearance of wall cracking in some areas to which he
recommended maintenance/repair. Mr Flint concluded
the appearance cracking
(crack width) to be a category '2' which is not a defect. Mr Flint wrote that a
category '2' crack is 'not
structural'.
conclusion, Mr Flint made no recommendations (apart from maintenance/repair of
wall cracking in some areas) and opined that no
further inspection was
4 March 2025, Ms Tuffin wrote to Ms Simcock following the council's inspection
on 23 February 2025. In her email, Ms Tuffin
On inspection of the external brick wall to main building [Lot 1] it is
Appears poor
workmanship used where air conditioner was removed and brickwork replaced.
Appearance of
the external brick wall has been compromised due to poor workmanship as
documented in building inspector report.
The external
wall has several areas of cracking around the area where the air conditioner was
The building
inspector report documented external brick wall cracking is obvious and
maintenance/repair is required.
Tuffin concluded her email by stating that the 'external brick wall cracking
around areas where air conditioner was removed is
to be repaired at Lot 1 owner
the final hearing Ms Tuffin, for the strata company, initially did not accept Mr
Flint's report. Instead, without any independent
building expert evidence, Ms
Tuffin asserted that the brickwork cracking was structural and remedial work is
necessary at Ms Simcock's
expense. When questioned, Ms Tuffin (correctly)
conceded that Mr Flint in his report only 'recommended' rather than 'required'
maintenance/repair
of the wall cracking in some areas. Ms Tuffin also
(correctly) conceded that Mr Flint's report did
suggest the
replacement brickwork was structurally unsound.
Notwithstanding
the above, Ms Tuffin, for the strata company, refused to concede this issue, and
therefore required the issue to
be heard and determined. In her written closing
written submissions, Ms Tuffin refers to the guidance notes to the NCC included
in Mr Flint's report which provides:
Category 2 cracks should be monitored for a period of 12 months after appearing.
If, after the monitoring period, such cracking is
rated as category 3, it will
be considered a defect and will require rectification.
there is no evidence that Ms Simcock monitored the category 2 cracking to ensure
the cracking is now not rated a category
3 and requiring
rectification.
Ms Tuffin in her closing written submission asserts that the strata company
should not bear the cost of repairing the cracks
in the wall where the
air-conditioning unit was removed when Ms
did not seek
strata company approval to remove the air­conditioning unit;
engaged family
members to make alteration to the common property;
permitted poor
workmanship to strata company property; and
has not been
transparent with work being carried out at Lot 1.
it would have been preferable for Ms Simcock to call Mr Flint to give
evidence at the final hearing, Ms Tuffin failed to provide
any expert building
inspector evidence. Rather, Ms Tuffin relied on her and the other council
members, none of whom are registered
building inspectors, builders or involved
in the building industry, to carry out the inspection. In such circumstances, I
the independent building inspection report of Mr Flint and I find that,
while the replacement brickwork may not be aesthetically
pleasing as there is
not a perfect brick and mortar colour match in view of the building's age and
that there is the appearance of
wall cracking in some areas, there is nothing
structurally unsound about the replacement brickwork.
Tuffin's assertion that Ms Simcock failed to provide evidence of her monitoring
the category 2 cracks for a period of 12 months
was not put to Ms Simcock during
the final hearing. In any event Ms Tuffin's assertion is without merit for the
following reasons.
the guidance notes to the NCC to which Ms Tuffin refers simply states that the
cracking 'should' be monitored rather than
'must' be monitored. While it may be
prudent to monitor the cracking, there is no obligation on Ms Simcock to do so
under the guidance
the mediation agreement only requires Ms Simcock to have a registered building
inspector inspect the replacement brickwork
and to confirm whether or not it is
structurally sound, and if it is not to pay for the remedial works. There is
nothing in the
mediation agreement which obligates Ms Simcock to undertake
monitoring of the replacement brickwork or appearance cracking for any
other issue raised by Ms Tuffin that Ms Simcock should be responsible for cost
of repairing the cracks in circumstances including
that she did not seek strata
company approval for the removal of the air­conditioning unit is not part
of the mediation agreement.
However, the external wall of Lot 1, which the
parties agree is common property, is required to be maintained and repaired by
strata company in accordance with s 91(1)(c)(i) of the ST Act which
relevantly provides:
(1) A strata company must –
(c) keep in good and serviceable repair, properly maintain and, if necessary,
renew and replace –
(i) the common property, including the fittings, fixtures ... used in
connection with the common property; and
and to do so whether damage or deterioration arises from fair wear and tear,
inherent defect or any other cause.
find that Ms Simcock has complied with the mediation agreement in respect of the
replacement brick work as set out in item (e)
of the mediation agreement (see
Conclusion - replacement brickwork issue
Simcock's position is that Mr Flint's report is clear that there is no
structural concern regarding the external brick wall of
Lot 1 where the
air-conditioning unit was removed.
appears from Ms Tuffin's closing written submissions that she seeks to require
Ms Simcock to monitor the category 2 cracking for
a period of 12 months.
Nothing in the mediation agreement requires this. Further, nothing in the
guidance notes to the NCC referred
to by Mr Flint makes monitoring of cracking
obligatory. It would therefore be unreasonable for the strata company to
require, in
this case, that Ms Simcock as the owner of Lot 1 to continue
monitoring common property and to repair it unless such was provided
agreement or there is in place an exclusive use by-law in regards to the
external wall of Lot 1. Neither is the case here.
In short, Ms Tuffin's
assertions are without merit.
find, following Mr Flint's report that he inspected the replacement brickwork on
the external wall of Lot 1 and that he concluded
that the replacement brickwork
is structurally sound. There was no objective evidence, such as from a building
inspector, to the
contrary from the strata company.
I find the strata company must maintain/repair the category 2 cracking on the
external wall of Lot 1 in accordance with
its obligation under s 91 of the ST
Act to keep in good and serviceable repair, properly maintain and, if necessary
renew and replace
the common property and to do so whether damage or
deterioration arises from fair wear and tear, inherent defect or any other
Other issues
became apparent during the final hearing, as asserted by Ms Tuffin that
there are 'changes made at Lot 1 that have not been put
forward to [the]
[s]trata [c]ompany for
are 17 items listed by the strata company in a letter dated 20 February
2023 to Ms Simcock's
Tuffin appears to take particular issue with a ceiling manhole with an in-built
ladder in the ceiling space of the living area
and the paving of the back
courtyard area.
from the current patio issue and the replacement brickwork issue, which are
dealt with in these reasons for decision, the other
items are not before the
Tribunal. Consequently, in regards to the other issues as set out in the letter
of 20 February 2023, in
my view, it would be appropriate for the council to work
through and resolve any differences with Ms Simcock, with the assistance
new strata manager appointed on 15 August 2025, in order to avoid any
further disputes and litigation.
Exercise of discretion
What are the principles in exercising the Tribunal's discretion to make
declarations and orders?
power of the Tribunal to make orders to resolve a scheme dispute or the
proceeding under s 200(1) of the ST Act is a statutory
discretionary power.
Similarly, the power of the Tribunal to make a declaration under s 199(3) of the
ST Act is a statutory discretionary
Tribunal may make a declaration concerning a matter instead of an order or in
addition to any order the Tribunal makes in the
proceeding (s 199(1) of the
and The Owners of Carinya Court Rockingham Strata Plan
[2024] WASAT 121
, the principles and factors to
consider in determining whether or not to exercise the Tribunal's powers under
s 199(3) and s 200(1)
of the ST Act are summarised at [60] to [67].
I adopt those principles and factors and have applied them in this case in
my exercise
of the Tribunal's discretionary powers.
Importantly,
as stated in previous decisions of the Tribunal, including in
Carr and The
Owners of 252 Cosy Corner Road Kronkup Survey-Strata Scheme
[2024] WASAT 132
, the discretion conferred by s
200(1) of the ST Act to make an order is not limited by any mandatory
considerations. I adopt the
statements made in [138] to [140] of that
Whether to exercise discretion - current patio issue?
and Clayton
[2007] WASAT 255
it was held that the
management of the strata company is best left to the strata company and that the
Tribunal should not too readily
impose its own views. However, in
Owners of Mandurah Terrace Apartments Strata Plan 17113 and Russell
[2009] WASAT 1
it was held that where there is a deadlock
between the members of the strata company who are the co-owners of the common
the ST Act intends that there be a practicable means to break that
is of course no requirement for an owner to assist another owner or to assist
the strata company, or that an owner acts altruistically
or sympathetically at
the expense of their own interests:
Ainsworth v Albrecht
[2016] HCA 40
(2016) 261 CLR 167.
orders sought by Ms Simcock (as set out above at [
]) were drafted without the assistance
of legal advice. However, it is clear that Ms Simcock urges the
Tribunal to make an order
that the strata company has passed a resolution
without dissent approving the current patio on the common property which Ms
has exclusive use of and is subject to by-law 16 in order to resolve the
impasse between the parties.
considering the interests of both Ms Simcock and the strata company (which has
the responsibility to control and manage the common
property for the benefit of
all the owners), it is reasonable and necessary, in my view, to intervene to
break the impasse between
the parties. The intervention is by way of exercising
the Tribunal's statutory discretionary powers to make a declaration under
199(3) of the ST Act and an order under s 200(1) of the ST Act to resolve
the current patio issue. The reasons for this are as
there is a real issue concerning actions taken by the strata company which Ms
Simcock testifies is not acting in the best
interests of the strata complex.
The issue in respect of the current patio is a live issue and it is not a
hypothetical or theoretical
Ms Simcock who seeks the order has a real interest in this matter. This is
because she has incurred cost to remove the lean-to
structure and to install the
current patio in an endeavour to comply with the mediation agreement.
there is utility or benefit in making a declaration and an order as some real
consequences must flow for the parties. There
is a real disharmony between
Ms Simcock and the strata company - in particular with Ms Tuffin. This
disharmony has persisted since
2021 according to Ms Simcock and that the
conflict continues with the consequence they are unable to agree a way
back on the orders sought by Ms Simcock, I will make the following declaration
(a) a declaration that the patio installed in the
exclusive use area of Lot 1 in or about November 2024 which includes finishings
including the flashings, guttering and downpipes complies with the requirements
of paragraph (b) of the agreement reached by the
parties on or about 11 June
(b) an order that the strata company is to be taken to have passed as a
resolution without dissent the patio installed in the exclusive
use area of Lot
1 (inclusive of the finishings including the flashings, guttering and downpipes)
in or about November 2024 and that
this order is taken to have come into effect
in or about November 2024 and is to remain in force until the earlier of when
is removed or a further order is made by the Tribunal.
order for the resolution without dissent will be taken to have been made in or
installed and will continue until
a further order is made by the Tribunal or the current patio is removed (s
200(4) and s 200(7)
of the ST Act).
conclusion, by making the above declaration and orders, this should create
certainty between Ms Simcock and the strata company
thus reduce any further disputes and litigation.
Whether to exercise of discretion - replacement brickwork?
orders sought by Ms Simcock (see above at [
]) are that the strata company has
passed a resolution that the replacement brickwork is structurally sound and
that it is the responsibility
for the strata company to maintain/repair the
appearance cracking in the brickwork.
is reasonable, in my view, to exercise the Tribunal's statutory discretionary
powers to make a declaration under s 199(3) of the
ST Act and an order
under s 200(1) of the ST Act to resolve the replacement brickwork issue. The
reasons for this are as follows.
there is a real issue concerning actions taken by the strata company which again
Ms Simcock testifies is not acting in the
best interests of the strata complex.
Again, this is a real issue concerning the replacement brickwork and it is not a
hypothetical
or theoretical issue.
Ms Simcock who seeks the order has a real interest in this matter. This is
because she has incurred cost to engage Home
Integrity Building Consultants to
inspect and report on the replacement brickwork as to its structural soundness
in compliance with
the mediation agreement.
there is utility or benefit in making the declaration and order as some real
consequences must flow for the parties. In
my view, a declaration and an order
signals that the strata company's behaviour in respect of the replacement
brickwork issue is
not acceptable and is to be rectified promptly. I will make
the following declaration and order:
(a) a declaration that the
written report of Home Integrity Building Consultants dated 27 June 2024 which
sets out findings, on the
inspection of the replacement brickwork on the
external wall of Lot 1 where an air-conditioning unit was removed, that:
(i) it is evident there are different face bricks and mortar repair colour
giving a compromised finish; and
(ii) appearance cracking observed is considered a category 2 cracking,
and not structural and recommends that maintenance/repair is
undertaken;
complies with the requirements of paragraph (d) of the agreement reached by
the parties on or about 11 June 2024; and
(b) an order that the respondent must undertake maintenance/repair of the
external wall of Lot 1 where there is appearance cracking
(category 2) and that
this order is taken to have come into effect on 27 June 2024 and is to remain in
force until a further order
is made by the Tribunal.
conclusion, by making the above declaration and order, this should create
certainty between Ms Simcock and the strata company
in regards to the
replacement brickwork and thus reduce any further disputes and
litigation.
recently (15 August 2025) there has been no strata
manager. This
self-management, according to Ms Simcock, has created more disharmony, animosity
and pure frustration than she had
ever seen throughout the 12 years she has been
the owner of Lot
Simcock says she is trying to appease the strata
... that is seemingly never satisfied [...] [and] is no longer acting in the
best interest of the [strata] complex but to its own
self-gratifying need for
power and control.
Simcock asserts that despite the state of disrepair of other lots within the
strata complex, the strata company is overreaching
and is targeting action
against her Lot 1. Ms Simcock described the strata company as 'nit-picking' and
appearing to 'revel in their
position of power' including that it is only Lot 1
that required a building permit for the patio yet other lot owners in the strata
complex do not have any building permit for their
Tuffin for the strata company disagrees with Ms Simcock's view.
Tuffin described an 'ongoing usual behaviour' where Ms Simcock engages
family members and associates to make changes to the common
property without
relevant approvals including Mr Simcock removing the original patio,
installing the lean-to structure and decking
without prior approval. Ms Tuffin
in her letter of 10 July 2025 was
The [...] [c]ouncil cannot give approval to [Ms Simcock's] patio as design
elements have been added to the patio since the [mediation]
agreement was
... The added design elements could cause detriment to the [s]trata
There were changes made at Lot 1 since purchased by [Ms Simcock] in June 2013
that have not been put forward to [the] [s]trata [c]ompany
is concerning for the strata company that it does not know the extent of the
alterations made to Lot 1 because according to Ms
Tuffin, the information
received from Ms Simcock is non-transparent or is misleading and requests for
information is ignored. The
consequence, according to Ms Tuffin, is that it is
impossible for the council to keep a true and accurate record of alterations to
the common property (the exclusive use area) of Lot
Ms Tuffin says that any attempts to request rectification of unapproved works at
Lot 1 has created ongoing hostility from
Ms Simcock and her associates
towards the council which has resulting in the engagement of a strata manager
from 15 August 2025.
find that Ms Simcock took the mediation agreement seriously and endeavoured to
satisfy its requirements in regards to the current
patio issue and the
replacement brickwork issue.
the other hand, I find the approach of the strata company was unreasonable and
without merit in respect of the replacement brickwork
issue. The suggestion
that Ms Simcock is required to monitor the external wall of Lot 1, which is
common property, and to undertake
maintenance and repair of it is without merit.
regards to the current patio issue the parties reached an impasse which they
could not resolve because the 'design' of the current
patio is not the same as
the original patio due to the pitch of the roof and the finishings which
includes the downpipes.
doubt Ms Simcock finds the council and in particular Ms Tuffin unreasonable in
circumstances where the council is seeking to ensure
all 'changes' to Lot 1 have
the necessary approvals by the strata company. Similarly, no doubt Ms Tuffin
finds Ms Simcock as being
unreasonable in circumstances where Ms Simcock says
that she had to make the current application in order to get a decision from
Tribunal to 'clear the deck' and to ensure that 'there are no more instances of
the [s]trata [c]ompany overreach of
she again attempts to sell her Lot 1. It is unfortunate that the parties were
not able to resolve their differences without
the intervention of the
Tribunal's objectives requires that it achieve the resolution of matters
according to the substantial merits of the case with
as little formality
and technicality as is practicable (s 9 of the SAT Act).
back on the findings that I made in relation to the two keys issues (see
above at [4]), it is reasonable in all of the
circumstances of this case, to
exercise the Tribunal's discretionary powers under s 199(3), s 200(2), s 200(4)
and s 200(7) of the
ST Act to make the following declarations and orders,
for all of the reasons explained earlier in these reasons (see above at [161]
[176]) including to create certainty for the parties and to minimise any further
disputes and litigation.
I make the following orders:
The Tribunal orders:
Strata Titles Act 1985
(WA) the Tribunal
(a) the patio installed in the exclusive use area of Lot 1
in or about November 2024 which includes the finishings comprised of flashings,
guttering and downpipes complies with the requirements of paragraph (b) of the
agreement reached by the parties on or about 11 June
(b) the written report of Home Integrity Building Consultants dated 27 June
2024 setting out its findings of the inspection of the
replacement brickwork on
the external wall of Lot 1 where an air-conditioning unit was removed, that: (i)
it is evident there are
different face bricks and mortar repair colour giving a
compromised finish; and (ii) appearance cracking observed is considered a
category 2 cracking, and not structural and it is recommended that
maintenance/repair is undertaken complies with the requirements
of paragraph (d)
of the agreement reached by the parties on or about 11 June 2024.
Strata Titles Act
(WA) the Tribunal orders:
(a) the respondent is to be
taken to have passed a resolution without dissent that the patio installed in
the exclusive use area of
Lot 1 (inclusive of the flashings, guttering,
downpipes and any other finishes) in or about November 2024 and that this
taken to have come into effect in or about November 2024 and is to
remain in force until the earlier of when the patio is removed
or a further
order is made by the Tribunal; and
(b) the respondent must undertake maintenance/repair of the common property
external wall of Lot 1 including the appearance cracking
(category 2) and this
order is taken to have come into effect on 27 June 2024 and is to remain in
force until a further order is
made by the Tribunal.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MS R PETRUCCI, MEMBER
7 OCTOBER 2025
The 1966 Act was
repealed on 30 June 1985.
replaced the 1966
Exhibit 1 at
'council' is defined in s 3 of the ST Act. It is the governing body of the
strata company.
Exhibit 1 at page
Section 3 of
the ST Act provides that scheme by-laws are the by-laws registered for the
scheme as a scheme
1 at page 40. Ms Simcock did not press for orders 1 and 4 at the final
Simcock's final closing submissions filed on 28 August 2025 at pages 1 to
23, 12 August
Simcock's final closing submissions filed on 28 August 2025 at page
August 2025.
ts 48, 12 August
49, 12 August
38, 12 August
Macquarie Dictionary
Exhibit 1 at page
at page 75.
Exhibit 1 at page
at pages 76 to
at pages 78 to
at pages 80 to
at pages 82 to
at pages 83 to
at pages 84 to
at pages 85 to
at page 86.
Exhibit 1 at page
company's closing written submissions filed on 29 August 2025 at page
at pages 87 to
at pages 88 to
at pages 90 to
August 2025.
31, 12 August
Oxford Dictionary
1 at page 78.
ts 92, 12 August
August 2025.
ts 32, 12 August
1 at pages 58 to
at page 90.
74, 12 August
The Owners of Arbor North Strata Plan 67510 and Sun
[2020] WASAT
Simcock's closing written submissions filed on 28 August 2025 at page
August 2025.
Exhibit 1 at pages 5 to
107, 12 August
Simcock's closing written submissions filed on 28 August 2025 at pages 8 to
12, 12 August
1 at page 11.
Exhibit 1 at page
at pages 28 to
1 at page 60.
1 at page 5.
1 at page 160.
Exhibit 1 at page
Simcock's closing written submissions filed on 28 August 2025 at page
1 at page 160.
Strata company's closing written submissions filed on 29 August 2025 at pages 6
1 at page 62.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (660 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter