URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:58:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WINGO [2022] WACIC 2 (10 March 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION 2003
[2022] WACIC 2
C F HOLYOAK-ROBERTS
DELIVERED :
10 MARCH 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 580 of 2018
CIC 184 of 2021
KARLENE WINGO
Multiple incidents - Separate offenders -
assessment of damages
Legislation:
Criminal Code
Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation awarded
Compensation refused
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Kuscevich & Associates
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
for Decision
Wingo (the applicant), who was born on 23 September 1976, made an
application for compensation on 3 April 2018 resubmitted
16 November 2020. Her applications were for injuries and losses suffered as
consequences of proved or alleged offences perpetrated
by John Alfred Papertalk
(Papertalk) on 2 March 1995, 12 April 1995, 19 April 1996,
31 August 1996, 5 September 2007, 13 September
2007, between
13 February 2009 and 5 April 2009, 6 June 2009, 12 June
2009, 15 August 2009, 28 June 2011 and 1 January 2014 (CIC
580/2018). In addition, the applicant made an application on 12 February
2021 for compensation for injuries and losses she suffered
as a consequence of
an incident on 9 July 2015 perpetrated by Bianca Louise Abdullah
(Abdullah). She also made separate applications
in relation to other incidents
and offenders that do not form part of these reasons.
relation to the claim relating to Papertalk, on 23 February 2022, I awarded
the applicant $27,895 compensation for incidents on
13 August 2010,
13 November 2009, 15 August 2009, 6 June 2009, 5 April 2009,
between 2 April 2009 and 5 April 2009, between 13 February
14 February 2009 and on 31 August 1996. On the same day I refused the
applicant's application for and incident which occurred
on 1 January 2014
as I was not satisfied an alleged offence was committed on that date nor that
the applicant suffered injuries as
a consequence of the commission of an alleged
also refused her application in relation to the incident on 28 June 2011 as
I was not satisfied an alleged offence was committed
by the alleged offender on
that date. In addition, her application in relation to an incident on
12 June 2009 was refused as the
alleged offence was committed by someone
other than the alleged offender. I refused her application for an incident on
5 September
2007 as I had insufficient particulars of the incident to
satisfy me on the balance of probabilities an alleged offence occurred.
I refused her application for incidents on 19 April 1996, 12 April
1995 and 2 March 1995 as I had insufficient evidence
to satisfy me alleged
offences were committed on those dates by the alleged offender.
relation to the claim relating to Abdullah, having allowed the application
pursuant to
section 9(2)
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
(the Act), I awarded the applicant $4,000 compensation for the incident
which occurred on 9 July 2015.
letter e-lodged on 24 February 2022, the applicant's solicitors, Kusevich
& Associates, requested my reasons for decision
in relation to the claim
regarding Papertalk and by letter e-lodged 2 March 2022 requested my
reasons for decision in relation to
the claim regarding Abdullah. These are set
applicant's application was made pursuant to
sections 12
authorises an assessor to award an applicant compensation
if satisfied a claimed injury and any claimed loss occurred as a consequence
the commission of a proved offence. Proved offence is defined in
of the Act to mean a crime, misdemeanour or simple offence of which a person has
been convicted.
of the Act authorises an assessor to award an
applicant compensation if satisfied the claimed injury and any claimed loss
as a consequence of the commission of an alleged offence. Alleged
offence is defined in
of the Act to mean a crime, misdemeanour or
simple offence of which no person has been convicted.
will first deal with the offences for which the applicant's application was
refused and thereafter will provide reasons in relation
to the offences and
alleged offences for which the applicant's application was
Refused incidents
Incident – 1 January 2014
applicant claimed compensation for an incident on 1 January 2014. In her
victim impact statement dated 12 June 2018 the applicant
stated she went to
Mullewa to look for her sister's baby. Papertalk saw her and asked her if she
wanted to go for a drive to New
Forrest Station for an uncle's birthday. She
agreed to go along to have a few drinks. The following morning they drove back
Mullewa and engaged in an argument. The applicant, who was sitting in the
back seat, said she asked the alleged offender to stop
the car but he refused to
do so. She said Papertalk then attempted to reach over to assault her but was
unable to reach her. She
asked him again to stop the car otherwise she would
jump. He did not stop so she opened the back door and jumped out of the car
on her right hand. She said Papertalk called an ambulance which took
her to Mullewa District Hospital, then to Geraldton Hospital.
From there she
was flown by Royal Flying Doctor Service to Royal Perth Hospital. She
complained of a lack of sensation in her right
hand. She underwent surgery
stating doctors took a nerve from her leg and put it into her right hand. She
has a scar on her leg
and arm as a result of that procedure.
incident was reported to police, so I obtained documents from the Western
Australian Police for that incident. The contents
of the police incident report
were consistent with the applicant's victim impact statement save for the
alleged attempted assault
by Papertalk. Police record in the incident report
the applicant was sitting in the back left hand seat of the car with her
She had Carlton Dry stubbies in a holding pocket behind the front
passenger seat which she was drinking whilst travelling back to
Mullewa. On the
way, it is recorded the applicant and Papertalk were talking about the breakup
of their relationship. On approaching
a cattle grid, out the front of the
Bullardoo Station, Papertalk slowed the car to go over the grid when the
applicant, who is recorded
as being heavily intoxicated, opened the door and
jumped out of the vehicle while travelling at approximately 60 kilometres
Papertalk returned to where the applicant was lying on the ground and
poured water on her to wake her up as she was unconscious.
He then placed the
applicant in the vehicle and drove to Mullewa Hospital so she could receive
treatment for her injuries. It is
recorded in the running sheet of the police
incident report on 1 January 2014, the applicant advised police she and
Papertalk were
travelling back to Mullewa after spending the night at New
Forrest Station. She said they were talking about why their relationship
ended when she, whilst heavily intoxicated, opened the back door and jumped out.
Photographs in the police brief are of the applicant
in hospital with an injured
right wrist, an abrasion to the left eyebrow and cuts to her lips. The Mid-West
Country Health Service
discharge summary contained in the police brief,
identifies the applicant was referred to Royal Perth Hospital by Sajid Qamar,
Resident. It is recorded in the summary the applicant suffered a post
traumatic right C7 transverse process fracture and right brachial
plexus injury.
The summary also recorded the applicant had an argument with her partner in the
car 'yesterday evening' (that is 1
January 2014) and jumped out of a moving
vehicle at 40-60 kilometres per hour landing on the right side of her body
whilst intoxicated.
She complained of severe pain in the right arm and was
unable to move the right arm. Previous bleeding from the left ear had ceased
presentation to the Emergency Department. On examination she was noted to have
bruising to the right forearm and forehead, right
arm paralysis, with no
sensation. A past medical history of alcohol abuse and pancreatitis was
in-patient discharge letter from Royal Perth Hospital dated 5 January 2014
identified the applicant suffered a number of injuries
including an avulsion of
the C5/6 nerve roots of the right brachial plexus, the middle trunk appeared
injured possibly avulsed, a
C8 nerve root avulsion from the cord and extensive
soft tissue oedema. The conclusion was the applicant suffered severe traumatic
right brachial plexus injury, ligamentous injury to the cervical spine with
torn ligaments and suspected cord oedema at C4-C5 level.
She also suffered a C7
person was charged with the commission of the alleged offence on this date.
Therefore, I considered her application pursuant to
of the Act.
To award compensation I must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities, the
applicant's claimed injury and any claimed
loss occurred as a consequence of the
commission of an alleged offence.
are some differences between the applicant's victim impact statement made
approximately four and a half years after the incident
and the contemporaneous
records of police and hospital staff. Specifically, the applicant alleged in
her victim impact statement
Papertalk attempted to assault her before she
decided to jump out of a moving car. Having considered the matter, I preferred
contemporaneous evidence provided by the applicant to police and hospital
staff and was not satisfied Papertalk attempted to assault
the applicant prior
to her exiting the vehicle. In addition, I was not satisfied there was
sufficient evidence to conclude Papertalk
was depriving the applicant of her
liberty such as to constitute an alleged offence pursuant to section 333 of the
Criminal Code.
the information available to me I concluded the applicant was the author of her
own misfortune as, in an intoxicated state, she
chose to jump out of a moving
vehicle. Whilst the applicant said she did not report the incident to police,
there was an incident
report made on 1 January 2014 generated from
information gained from the applicant. There is no mention in the incident
running sheet that the applicant jumped out of the car to avoid being
hit by the alleged offender. Even on her own version of events
in her victim
impact statement she jumped out of the car because the alleged offender did not
stop the car when she asked him to
do so. Taking the applicant's version of
events at their best, I was still unable to find an offence had occurred.
I was not satisfied an alleged offence occurred and refused her application for
this incident.
Incident – 28 June 2011
applicant claimed compensation for injuries suffered in an incident on
28 June 2011. She alleged in her statement of events
18 February 2020 she was hit on the head with a metal pot by Papertalk. She
suffered a haematoma and a small laceration to
her head. She said she attended
Geraldton Hospital for treatment but had no recollection of the incident. She
alleged Papertalk
was the perpetrator because she had not been assaulted by any
other person.
Information
from St John Ambulance identified ambulance officers attended pos-assault
and noted the applicant was bleeding from her
head. They observed the applicant
appeared intoxicated and had a two centimetre laceration to the top of the right
side of her skull.
was recorded in the medical notes from Geraldton Hospital the applicant
complained of being hit with a metal pot over the head.
Limited history was
noted. She was observed to be intoxicated but coherent and complained of
headache and scalp pain. She was
diagnosed with a haematoma and small
laceration and kept overnight for observation.
obtained from the Western Australian Police included an incident report. Police
recorded in the incident report on attendance,
they located the applicant
heavily intoxicated. She told police her uncle and others had been drinking
together and claimed to have
had an altercation with her uncle who hit her in
the head with a metal frame from the stove causing a minor cut. There were no
noted to the offence. She nominated her uncle, CL, as the alleged
offender though he was noted not to be at the scene. Police advised
attend the station when sober before they could continue with the investigation.
It is recorded in the running sheet to the
incident report the applicant did not
attend the station to provide a statement. All witnesses declined to identify
the alleged
offender and on 28 June 2011 the running sheet records the
applicant was unsure if she wanted to proceed with any charges though
police she would attend to make a formal statement. She was advised if she did
not do so the case would be closed. It
was recorded in the running sheet the
following day the alleged offender was not added as a person of interest because
the applicant
was unsure/unwilling to charge. She did not subsequently attend
the station to provide a statement. As such the police investigation
person was charged with the commission of this alleged offence. I therefore
considered the applicant's application pursuant to
section 17 of the Act.
On the information available to me the applicant identified CL as the alleged
offender and not Papertalk.
As such, I wrote to the applicant's solicitors on
23 September 2021 advising I was not satisfied an alleged offence was
by Papertalk on 28 June 2011 and would refuse her application
although her application could be amended to name the correct alleged
I also advised the applicant's solicitors if an amendment was made my
preliminary view was the application should be refused
because the applicant did
not comply with section 38 of the Act; ergo she did not attend the police
station to make a formal complaint
and provide a statement so as to identify the
alleged offender. In addition, I alerted her solicitors to the need for an
of time as her application for that incident had been lodged out of
being granted an extension of time to respond, the applicant's solicitors
responded to my preliminary view by letter dated
17 November 2021 and
stated the applicant maintained CL was the alleged offender and not Papertalk
and the applicant did not wish
to proceed with an application regarding the
incident on 28 June 2011. As such, I refused her application for
compensation for an
incident on this date.
Incident – 12 June 2009
applicant claimed compensation for injuries and losses as a result of an
incident on 12 June 2009. In her statement of evidence
the applicant
claimed to have suffered injuries to the face with lumps to her head and facial
swelling as a consequence of an assault.
She attended Mullewa Hospital for
treatment. Hospital records record the applicant was hit in the face and head
and had a lump
on the right side of head. She was observed to have a swollen
nose and was swollen under the right eye. She had a red mark to her
which was also noted to be swollen. It is recorded in the hospital notes the
applicant said she argued with 'Julie Ryan'
and Julie's daughter, 'Jolene' which
escalated to a physical fight.
person was charged with the commission of an alleged offence, so I considered
the applicant's application pursuant to section
17 of the Act. According
to the hospital notes which were taken contemporaneously to the incident, the
applicant identified someone
other than Papertalk as the alleged offender. As
such I was not satisfied the applicant suffered injury as a result of an alleged
offence committed by Papertalk and refused her
application.
Incident – 5 September 2007
applicant claimed compensation for an incident which occurred on
5 September 2007. In her statement of events dated 12 June
said on the 13 September 2007 she asked the police to visit her in relation
to an unrelated matter and whilst there reported
to police that on
5 September 2007 the alleged offender punched her whilst they were on the
front veranda of her house. She said
the police attempted to help her find a
refuge. She made this complaint to the police in the context of wanting to get
the alleged offender. On 13 October 2007 the alleged offender
was spoken to by police and denied any abuse. There was no formal
made to police about this incident, other than having been mentioned when police
attended upon the applicant on 13 September
2017 for an unrelated
applicant bears the onus of proving an alleged offence occurred on that date.
Pursuant to section 3 'satisfied' means satisfied
on the balance of
probabilities. The applicant provided little information to police about the
incident. The complaint was made
in the context of wanting assistance from
police to get away from the alleged offender because she said she was sick and
being treated like a child. The alleged offender denied any abuse. In
circumstances where both explanations are equally plausible
and there is no
reason to prefer one version of events over the other, I was not satisfied on
the balance of probabilities there
was sufficient evidence to satisfy me an
alleged offence occurred, and I refused her application.
Incident – 19 April 1996
applicant claimed compensation for an alleged offence which occurred on
19 April 1996. In her statement of evidence, the applicant
said the alleged
offender hit her on the head. She suffered pain to the head and had a swollen
area on the top of her head. She
also said she suffered a deep large laceration
to the scalp requiring sutures and attended Mullewa Hospital for treatment on
19 and 21 April 1996. On 30 November 2021, pursuant to
section 19 of the Act, I issued a notice to Mullewa Hospital for a copy of
the applicant's medical records. The documents provided from Mullewa Hospital
did not contain any notes in relation to the alleged
incident on 19 April
1996. There does not appear to have been any complaint to police of the
incident. As no person was charged
with the commission of an alleged offence, I
considered the applicant's application pursuant to section 17 of the Act.
On the information
available to me there was insufficient evidence to satisfy me
on the balance of probabilities the applicant suffered an injury as
a result of
an alleged offence on this date and I refused her
application.
Incident – 12 April 1995
applicant also claimed compensation for an incident which occurred on
12 April 1995. In her statement of evidence she said Papertalk
elbowed her
in the stomach whilst she was four months pregnant. She suffered cramps and
heavily bleeding on the 14 April 1995.
She said she attended Mullewa
Hospital for treatment and I referred to records already provided pursuant to
the notice issued referred
to above. Those notes provided no indication of the
applicant attending for treatment for an incident on or about 12 April 1995
and as such I was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities an alleged
offence occurred and refused her application.
Incident – 2 March 1995
applicant also claimed compensation for an incident on 2 March 1995
alleging in her statement of evidence Papertalk kicked her
to the left cheek
bone which caused it to become swollen. She said she attended Mullewa Hospital
for treatment, but pursuant to
documents received under section 19 notice
issued to the hospital, there was no reference of this incident in the notes.
I was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities an alleged offence
occurred and refused her application.
will now turn to the incidents for which compensation was
Compensation Allowed
Incidents – 13 August 2010, 13 November 2009, 15 August 2009,
6 June 2009, 5 April 2009, 31 August 1996, between
13 February
2009 and 5 April 2009
of the above dates were successful applications for which she received an award
of compensation. I will deal with these incidents
separately.
Incident – 13 August 2010
the 15 December 2010 the offender was convicted of breach of violence
restraining order for an incident which occurred on the
13 August 2010. I
was satisfied a proved offence was constituted pursuant to section 12 of the
Act. As to the circumstances, the
applicant said Papertalk drove past her in
his car and did a U-turn, stopping at the front of her house. He motioned with
for her to go and see him. She refused to do so and he drove away.
Papertalk told police he went to see someone else to pick up
clothes and did not
know the applicant was there. He said she came out yelling and was intoxicated
so he drove away. There was
no physical violence alleged in relation to this
incident, although the applicant stated she suffered psychological trauma. In
of her application for compensation for psychological trauma she
provided a medical report from Dr Frederick Ng dated 1 August 2018.
There is no specific mention of this incident in Dr Ng's medical report,
although he reported the relationship had ended in approximately
which she had taken out a violence restraining order which Papertalk had
breached on many occasions. This, together with
identified and non-identified
incidents contributed to her psychological presentation. As a result of this
and other incidents with
this offender and other offenders, the applicant was
diagnosed by Dr Ng with an unspecified trauma related disorder with
disassociated
depressive symptoms, though the post trauma anxiety symptoms fell
short of a diagnosis of PTSD. Dr Ng formed the view as a consequence
the physical and emotional abuse arising from her relationship with Papertalk
she developed this disorder and those symptoms which
were exacerbated by other
incidents perpetrated by other offenders. I was therefore satisfied this
incident, whilst not specifically
referred to in Dr Ng's report, was a
contributing factor to that diagnosis and those symptoms. I therefore awarded
her $1,000 compensation
for this incident.
Incident – 13 November 2009
her victim impact statement the applicant alleged Papertalk took her keycard and
would not allow her outside her residence. It
was recorded in the incident
report obtained from the Western Australian Police Papertalk approached the
applicant in the street
and the applicant asked him to "go" and walked away.
Papertalk followed and tried to talk to her. She started to run to call police
and Papertalk gave chase. The applicant went into a hotel to call police and
Papertalk ran away. Papertalk was convicted in the
Magistrates Court at Mullewa
on the 15 December 2010 of breach of violence restraining order as a result
of that incident. I was
therefore satisfied a proved offence pursuant to section
12 of the Act was constituted. There was no mention of this specific incident
the report from Dr Ng. However, as with the previous incident of the
13 August 2010 I was satisfied this incident was part of
her overall
psychological presentation and found she suffered psychological injury as a
result of it. I therefore awarded her $1,000
compensation for this
Incident – 15 August 2009
her victim impact statement the applicant said Papertalk entered her house
whilst she was away. When she came home, he grabbed
her in front of her
children. She broke free and ran. When she returned home the children were
missing so she reported it to police.
In the incident report obtained from the
Western Australian Police it is recorded Papertalk attended the applicant's
premises and
gained entry awaiting her return. When she returned, Papertalk
opened the front door and pulled her into the house. It is recorded
struggled and broke free, staying out all night drinking. She returned home to
discover the children missing so she called police.
This incident is mentioned
in Dr Ng's report, although he noted the applicant could not clearly recall
this incident which was not
unsurprising given the number of violent incidents
which occurred over the lengthy period of her relationship with Papertalk and
thereafter. Papertalk was convicted of aggravated unlawful assault and breach
of violence restraining order in the Magistrates Court
at Mullewa on
8 March 2010 as a result of that incident. I was satisfied a proved
offence pursuant to section 12 of the Act was
constituted. I was therefore
satisfied this incident contributed to the overall presentation of her
psychological
and she suffered psychological injury as a result
of it. I awarded $3,000 compensation for this incident
Incident – 6 June 2009
her victim impact statement the applicant alleged Papertalk gained entry to her
house. She attempted to call police but one of
her children ran away and did
so. The police incident report recorded the applicant returned home and
Papertalk ran from the rear
garden and brushed past her through the front door
of the house where he entered the main living area. He pled with her to see the
children. She demanded he leave. A child grabbed a phone and ran to call
police. Papertalk left and ran off on foot. Papertalk
was convicted in the
Magistrates Court at Mullewa on 8 March 2010 of breach of violence
restraining order. I was satisfied a proved
offence pursuant to section 12
of the Act was constituted. This incident is mentioned in the report from
Dr Ng who recorded the applicant
said there were many occasions when
Papertalk breached a violence restraining order and she may have a vague
recollection of that
incident. As with the previous incidents, I was satisfied
this incident was part of her overall psychological presentation and
and that she suffered a psychological injury as a result of it. I awarded
her $1,000 compensation for this incident.
Incident – 5 April 2009
her victim impact statement the applicant said she was at her sister-in-law's
funeral when Papertalk came to the house in breach
of a violence restraining
order and threatened to kill her. He struck her to the left eye with his fist
causing her to fall to her
knees and then he kicked her. Hospital notes from
Mullewa Hospital noted Papertalk threatened to kill the applicant, punched her
to the eye and pulled her hair. She fell to her knees suffering abrasions and
grazing and a sore upper leg. This incident is mentioned
in Dr Ng's report
as having occurred on 6 April 2009 and it is recorded she could not clearly
recall the incident. She reported
she had been punched and kicked so many times
she could not recall what this particular incident was about. Papertalk was
in the Magistrates Court at Geraldton on 28 April 2009 of
2 counts of breach of violence restraining order. I was therefore
proved offences pursuant to section 12 of the Act were
constituted and suffered injuries as a consequence of them. I awarded her
$5,000 compensation for this incident.
31 August 1996
her statement of evidence the applicant said she was involved in an argument
with Papertalk. She alleged he hit her on the side
of the head causing her to
suffer a sore ear. She noticed blood on the pillow the next day and attended
Mullewa Hospital for treatment.
Hospital notes identified the applicant
complained of bleeding from the left ear after being hit on the side of the
head. However,
there was no evidence of bleeding on examination and she was
treated with Panadol. I have no evidence the incident was reported
and therefore considered the matter pursuant to section 17 of the Act.
Given the incident was recorded in the hospital
notes with some particularity I
was satisfied an alleged offence occurred and the applicant suffered injury as a
result of it. I
awarded her $2,000 compensation for this
Incidents – between 13 February 2009 and 5 April 2009
is recorded in the police incident report, on the 13 February 2009
Papertalk was driving towards her and did a U-turn and followed
approached her and spoke to her when he stopped. The applicant was later
visiting a friend in hospital and Papertalk was
also there. He approached her
car as she parked and asked to speak to her, which she refused. She left the
hospital and later saw
Papertalk parked out the front of her home and told him
to leave but he refused. He manipulated her to allow him to stay with her
which he did from that date. On the 2 April 2009 he attended her house and
called out to the children. He asked the applicant to
iron his shirt and
pestered her for sex, which she refused. He generally annoyed her. He was
following her around so she would
not leave. Between the 2 April and
5 April 2009 he stayed at the applicant's house to ensure she did not
leave. He followed her
and monitored her movements. On the 5 April 2009
she went for a walk to her friend's house. Papertalk turned up wanting to talk
to her. He became angry when she refused to do so and punched her to the face.
He later returned and parked out the front of the
the incident report, two discreet periods of offending were identified; that is
between 13 February
and 14 February 2009 and 2 April and
5 April 2009 and then on 5 April 2009. Papertalk was convicted of
breach of violence retraining
order for an incident between 2 April 2009
and 5 April 2009 in the Magistrates Court at Geraldton on 28 April
2009. He was convicted
in the Magistrates Court at Geraldton on the same day of
3 counts of breach violence restraining order for the period
13-14 February
2009 and was convicted of 2 counts of breach of
violence restraining order for incidents which occurred on 5 April 2009 on
date. I was therefore satisfied proved offences pursuant to
section 12 of the Act were constituted. Whilst there was no specific
mention of these in the report from Dr Ng I was satisfied they contributed
to her overall psychological presentation and that she
suffered injury. As such,
I awarded her $10,000 compensation for the incidents between 12-14 February 2009
and between 2 and 5 April
2009. The incident on 5 April 2009 has
already been addressed in paragraph 33 above.
considered the physical and psychological consequences experienced by the
applicant in relation to the applications that I
allowed and having considered
the matters relevant to granting the applicant an extension of time to bring her
application, I granted
an extension of time pursuant to section 9(2) of the Act
and assessed her injuries at $23,000 as
13 August 2010
13 November 2009
15 August 2009
6 June 2009
5 April 2009
31 August 1996
between 13 and 14 February 2009 and 2-5 April 2009
applicant also made reference in her statement of effects dated 12 June
2018 to additional incidents in 1998, 2004 and 2008 but
no specific claim was
made for incidents on these dates. As such, I wrote to the applicant's
solicitors on 23 September 2021 asking
whether the applicant wished to make
claims for these incidents. By letter dated 17 November 2021, the
applicant's solicitors advised
the applicant did not wish to make claims for
these incidents and clarified the 2008 incident to be 9 November 2008.
addition to the above, the applicant claimed report expenses for Dr Ng in
the sum of $1,815 and Dr Slinger in the sum of $3,080.
She also claimed
the cost of the Freedom of Information Application from the Western Australian
Police in the sum of $30, but that
item was disallowed as it did not fall within
the definition of 'loss' under section 6 of the Act.
Dr Slinger's report was in relation to the injuries she suffered in the
incident on or about 1 January 2014, I allowed the
cost of that report
notwithstanding I refused that application as it was reasonable and necessary
for the solicitors to obtain that
report in support of her application. I also
allowed the cost of Dr Ng's report in the sum of $1,815. Whilst Dr Ng
mentioned incidents
by other offenders in that report, I was satisfied the bulk
of the report related to the incidents perpetrated by Papertalk and as
allowed the entirety of this invoice in this award. I therefore awarded the
applicant $27,895 for injuries and losses with
respect to incidents involving
Papertalk and made the award accordingly.
applicant's application for compensation for injuries suffered as a result of an
incident on 9 July 2015 perpetrated by Abdullah
was made pursuant to
section 12 of the Act. The application was out of time. It ought to have
been lodged on or before 9 July 2018
but was not lodged until
12 February 2021. Given the circumstances of the applicant in relation to
her relationship with and offences
perpetrated by Papertalk and the contents of
the report of Dr Ng, I was satisfied it was just to extend the time within
applicant could bring her application and granted an extension of time
for her to do so pursuant to section 9(2) of the Act.
circumstances of this incident as recorded by Police in the incident report were
the applicant and another attended the Wiluna
Club Hotel and when approaching
the entry, Abdullah shouted "you're a trouble maker" and punched the applicant
to the face. She
suffered pain as a result. Abdullah then grabbed the
applicant's hair and punched her. They both fell to the floor. The applicant's
friend intervened to separate the applicant and Abdullah. A second offender then
approached, kicked the applicant in the back and
pushed her friend in the chest
causing her to fall to the ground. Abdullah eventually let go of the
applicant's hair allowing the
applicant to stand. She walked to the police
station to make a complaint.
circumstances of the incident were described in the statement of material facts
as follows:-
At around 1:50 pm on Thursday the 9th of July 2015 the victim and witness were
at the Wiluna Club Hotel. As they were approaching
the steps to the front door
the accused approached the victim and punched her to the face. She said "You've
been making trouble"
She grabbed the victim's hair and held it whilst she
continued punching her in the face. It is not known how many times she was
The victim had her right arm in a sling due to an injury so was doing
her best to fend off the attack with her left arm. The witness
intervened and
tried to separate the pair but could not. The victim and accused fell to the
floor where the tussle continued. The
accused eventually stopped the attack and
the victim got to her feet. The victim then told the accused she was going to
Station to make a complaint. The victim and witness then attended
Wiluna Police Station and made statements. The accused was visited
by 1/C DONE
at her home address and questioned about the matter. She stated that she heard
the victim had been talking about her
and accusing her of doing things she
hadn't done. She said that she walked up to her when she saw her at the pub and
punched her.
is no mention in the statement of material facts to another person kicking the
applicant in the back and no other person was
investigated or charged for this
incident and in any event the applicant did not complain of any injury to her
her statement to police dated 9 July 2015, the applicant said she suffered
redness to her left eye. The pain had subsided by
the time she completed her
was convicted of common assault in the Magistrates Court at Wiluna on
18 August 2015. I was therefore satisfied a proved
offence pursuant to
section 12 of the Act was constituted.
applicant suffered pain and redness to her left eye. There is no mention of
this incident in Dr Ng's report. I was satisfied
the applicant suffered
pain and redness to her left eye as a result of this incident. I had
insufficient evidence to satisfy me she
suffered psychological injury as a
result of it, though I accept she would likely have suffered immediate shock.
After granting
an extension of time to bring her application pursuant to section
9(2) of the Act, I awarded the applicant $4,000 compensation for
the injuries
sustained in this incident and made an award order accordingly.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
C F Holyoak-Roberts, CHIEF ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
10 MARCH 2022
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (244 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter