URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/227.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Raybould v Shire of Peppermint Grove [2004] WATPAT 227 (23 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 272 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 227
Heard: 21 December 2004
Decision: 23 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
SIMON ANDREW RAYBOULD
SHIRE OF PEPPERMINT GROVE
Ms B Moharich
(Senior Member)
Setbacks – carport – crossover – site lines
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr A Connor (Agent) appeared for the Appellant
Mr T Mayor (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal against the refusal of the Respondent of a development
application at 43 Johnston Street, Peppermint Grove.
2. The proposal in contention is:
(a) the demolition of the existing double carport at the western side of the lot
in front of the existing residence, and removal
of the existing crossover; and
(b) the construction of a new gabled and tiled-roof double carport on the
eastern side of the lot, 0.5 metres from the eastern boundary
and 1 metre from
the front boundary. The proposed carport is open on all
3. According to Mr Connor, an architect who appeared on behalf of the Appellant,
the relocation of the carport and crossover is part
of a larger landscaping
project which will see the changing in levels of the front garden, and a return
to a more formal garden design
which better reflects the era of the residence on
4. The subject land is 744m
in area, with a frontage to the northern
side of Johnston Street of 16 metres. The depth of the lot is 39.49 metres.
Existing on
the land is a single dwelling with a setback of 20 metres from
Johnston Street, and an existing double carport on the western boundary
site, setback 9 metres from Johnston Street. The existing carport is constructed
of limestone pillars, and a tiled roof, matching
in construction and form to the
roof of the dwelling. The existing carport has a parapet wall on the boundary
with 41 Johnston Street.
5. The subject site and the lot immediately to the rear (43R Johnston Street)
are the result of a previous subdivision. The handle
of the battleaxe of 43R
(and its associated crossover) adjoins the subject site’s boundary to the
east. Further to the east
is 45A Johnston Street, a single residence built
within the 9 metre setback, with its crossover adjacent to the crossover of 43R.
6. To the west of the subject site is 41 Johnston Street. This lot has a single
residence, built behind the 9 metre setback line,
but with a high brick fence at
the street boundary.
Legislative Framework
7. The subject land is zoned Residential R12.5 under the Shire of Peppermint
Grove Town Planning Scheme No.3 (“
”). Two planning
policies, made pursuant to TPS3 are also relevant, and are discussed in detail
8. The Respondent’s concern is that the proposed crossover will compromise
pedestrian and vehicular safety, being located in
close proximity to the
crossovers for 43R and 45 Johnston Street to the east. Mr Mayor, the town
planner for the Respondent, noted
that conflict could occur because cars from
the proposed crossover at 43 Johnston Street and the existing crossover at 45
Street will move on to the road in reverse gear, while cars from 43R
Johnston Street will traverse the crossover in forward gear.
This, according to
Mr Mayor, will increase the likelihood of vehicle conflict. No traffic evidence
was adduced by either party as
to whether in fact such a situation is likely to
cause traffic accidents.
9. It should be noted that immediately to the west of the subject site, a
similar situation of a “forward gear” battleaxe
access leg for 39R
and 41R Johnston Street, and a “reverse gear” crossover for 41
Johnston Street already exists, as
does one at 43R and 45A Johnston Street.
10. Under the Streetscape Policy, a policy made in accordance with TPS3 (clause
8.6 and 4.11), one of the objectives is:
“Consider the
position and size of crossovers in relation to street trees, crossovers on
adjoining properties, proximity to
right of ways and streets to preserve safety
and achieve good appearance.”
11. In the absence of traffic evidence to the contrary, and in light of the
other examples of combined crossovers in the immediate
vicinity, it is my view
that the location of the new crossover is appropriate from a safety viewpoint,
is not detrimental to the
streetscape, and should be
12. Clause 4.3.3 of TPS3 provides that residential development is to be in
accordance with the Residential Planning Codes, now the
Residential Design Codes
”) unless otherwise provided for in TPS3.
13. An exception to the requirements of the Codes is set out in clause 4.4(c) of
TPS3. This clause requires a minimum street setback
of 9 metres. Lesser setbacks
may be permitted under clause 4.4(c), relevantly, where there are a significant
number of existing houses
having a lesser setback to the same street block and
where it is considered that the lesser setback will not detrimentally affect
quality of the streetscape.
14. The Carports and Garages Policy reiterates clause 4.4(c) of TPS3, requiring
a 9 metre setback. Variations to this setback can
be given where the criteria
in clause 4 of the policy are met:
“The materials of
construction, design and appearance of a carport or garage, shall be in
character with the residence upon
the site and be in harmony with the
surrounding streetscape.
Further, the location of the building:-
(a) shall not significantly affect view lines of adjacent properties;
(b) shall maintain adequate manoeuvring space for safe ingress and egress of
motor vehicles.
In consideration of the variations to setback, Council shall also have regard
(a) the objectives set out in Clause 1.2 of the Residential Codes;
(b) the effect of such variation on the streetscape and the amenity of any
adjoining lot;
(c) the existing and potential future use and development of any adjoining
(d) existing setbacks from the street alignment in the immediate locality in
the case of the setback from the principal street alignment;
provision of an open aspect
from boundary fence.”
15. In addition, the Respondent also cites its Streetscape Policy as being
relevant. The objectives of the Streetscape Policy
(a) The preservation of an open outlook from the street reserve so that front
gardens and building are visible;
(b) The provision of a setback appropriate to the width, height and bulk of the
proposed building in relation to the adjoining
16. It is clear that the proposed location of the carport does not comply with
the requirement for a 9 metre setback, while the existing
carport does. The
question therefore is, pursuant to the capacity to vary the setback in clause
4.4(c) of TPS3 and clause 4 of the
Garage and Carport Policy, whether such a
variation should be granted.
17. In accordance with clause 4.4(c) of TPS3 and the polices, for a variation to
be granted, the Tribunal must be satisfied
(a) There are a significant number of existing houses having a lesser setback to
the same street block: clause 4.4(c) TPS3.
(b) A lesser setback will not detrimentally affect the quality of the
streetscape, (clause 4.4(c) TPS3), and shall not significantly
affect view lines
of adjacent properties (clause 4, Garages and Carports Policy);
(c) A lesser setback will maintain adequate manoeuvring space for safe ingress
and egress of motor vehicles: clause 4, Garages and
Carports Policy.
(d) The materials of construction, design and appearance of a carport or garage,
shall be in character with the residence upon the
site and be in harmony with
the surrounding streetscape: clause 4, Garages and Carports
18. Each of these issues is dealt with in turn below.
Lesser Setbacks
19. In his evidence, Mr Connor pointed out a number of lots along Johnston
Street with lesser setbacks. Mr Mayor noted that the lots
on the opposite
(southern) side of Johnstone Street were significantly smaller, and therefore,
there were less options for location
of a carport.
20. The wording of clause 4.4(c) refers to a number of houses in “the same
street block”. “Street block”
is not defined. In the context
of streetscape, it must relate to the street upon which the development is
proposed to be located,
and not the streets which surround the block upon which
the subject site is located. In this case, therefore, the street block is
to be from the corner of Venn Street to the west, to the T-junction at
Palmerston Street to the east. In this street block,
the following lots have
development forward of the 9 metre setback
(a) Northern side of Johnston
Johnston: carport and high brick boundary
45A Johnston:
(b) Southern side of Johnston
(i) 24B Johnston: brick enclosed double garage with roller-doors and high brick
front fence
(ii) 26 Johnston: brick enclosed garage and high brick front fence
(iii) 28 Johnston: brick enclosed garage and high brick front fence
(iv) 30A Johnston: brick enclosed double garage with roller-doors
(v) 32A Johnston: carport, and high brick front fence
(vi) 34 Johnston: carport
(vii) 34A Johnston: brick enclosed double garage with roller-doors and high
brick front fence
(viii) 40 Johnston: brick enclosed garage (opposite the subject
21. Mr Mayor noted that many of these structures were approved some time ago, or
on Ministerial appeal. That, however, is not the
question. TPS3 asks whether, in
fact, there are a significant number of existing houses with a lesser setback.
Along this part of
Johnston Street, there are a significant number of incursions
into the 9 metre setback.
Impact on streetscape and site
22. Mr Connor stated that the purpose of the proposal was to open up the house
to the street. He noted that the current carport
“crowds” the
house, because it is so close to it, and does not allow the whole of the house
to be viewed from the street.
In addition, because the carport is located behind
the 9 metre setback line, it requires over 9 metres of paving for vehicles to
access it, thereby using up a significant proportion of the front garden for
paving. The benefit, Mr Connor says, in the proposal,
is that will allow this
area to be landscaped, thereby “giving back” to the streetscape.
23. Mr Mayor conceded at the hearing that the carport would improve sightlines
to the street.
24. I concur with this view. Providing distance between a visually permeable
carport and the house itself will give great opportunity
for the house in its
entirety to be viewed from the street.
25. It should also be noted that the proposal does not affect view lines of
adjacent properties. As noted, immediately adjacent to
the eastern boundary of
the site is the access leg of 43R Johnston Street. In addition, the carport of
45A Johnston Street is located
immediately adjacent to 43R’s access leg.
26. In relation to streetscape, in my view the reduction of the 9 metre setback
is well repaid by the removal of the extent of paving
currently required to
access the existing carport.
27. The reduction of the setback, of itself, will not cause heightened safety
concerns for ingress and egress to the carport. Short
of providing a circular
driveway, or room for the turning of a vehicle, from wherever the carport is
located at 43 Johnston Street,
there will be a requirement to exit the site in
reverse gear. Therefore, the proposed location of the carport complies with the
criteria in clause 4 of the Garages and Carports Policy.
28. Mr Mayor was also concerned that the construction of a carport at the
proposed location would obscure the view of the road of
cars leaving 45A and 43R
Johnston Street. It should be noted however, that pursuant to clause 4.1.2(b)
of TPS3, a boundary fence
can be erected without the requirement for planning
consent. Such a fence would be likely to create a greater obscuring of the view
than an open carport. This argument cannot therefore be given
Materials of construction
29. Mr Mayor commented on the materials of construction of the proposed
“Unlike the existing carport, the new structure
would not be in keeping with the design of the existing dwelling. The existing
carport has masonry and limestone columns whilst the proposed carport shows
simple steel columns which do not compliment the design
30. Mr Connor noted that the limestone columns on the house, and also used in
the existing carport are not original to the house,
although provided no
evidence to confirm this. In any event, Mr Connor noted that the steel columns
had been used to create a “lighter”,
more visually permeable
31. It should also be noted that the dominant element of the structure, the
roof, is shown on the plans to have a roofline, eaves
and tiling which matches
that of the house.
32. I am therefore satisfied that the design of the carport will be in character
with the residence.
33. In relation to whether the design of the carport will “be in harmony
with the surrounding streetscape”, as noted
above, the streetscape in the
area is varied, and includes high brick front fences, wire mesh fences enclosing
tennis courts, and
a number of roller doors at the front boundary of lots. The
design of these structures spans a number of decades, and varies in construction
materials. I am therefore satisfied that the design of the carport will not
create disharmony in the streetscape.
34. For the forgoing reasons, I allow the appeal, and make the following
(a) The appeal is allowed.
(b) The application for planning consent dated 13 September 2004 for the
construction of a carport and new crossover is approved,
subject to the
conditions:
(i) The removal of the existing crossover on the western side of the
(ii) The removal of:
existing carport on the western side of the property;
the paving between the existing
carport and the existing crossover;
revegetation / landscaping of this area.
(iii) The roof of the new carport to use the same, or similar tiling to that of
the roof of the residence on the
(c) The parties have 21 days to agree to any further conditions of planning
approval that the Respondent considers are appropriate
for a development of this
(d) If agreement cannot be reached, the parties have liberty to apply to the
Tribunal for any further conditions of approval to be
determined.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter