URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/127.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GM [2025] WASAT 127 (14 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
GM [2025] WASAT 127
MS M HIPWORTH, MEMBER
10 JULY AND 21 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
14 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
GAA 2650 of 2025
Represented Person
Application for review of guardianship order -
Suitability of proposed guardian - Family conflict - Appointment of the Public
as guardian - Jurisdiction of the State Administrative Tribunal
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Public Advocate reappointed limited guardian for
functions of accommodation, medical treatment, contact, services, aged care
restrictive
Representation:
Represented Person
Solicitors:
Represented Person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
TL v Office of The Public Advocate
[2020] WASC 455
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
is a review of a guardianship order that is currently in place for GM.
is an elder who holds significant cultural authority and is recognised and
celebrated within her community.
was first declared to be in need of a guardian and administrator in August 2023,
and her daughter VH was appointed in both roles.
Since that date, VH has
continued as GM's Administrator, however, as a result of family conflict, there
have been several reviews
of GM's guardianship order, resulting in the
appointment of the Public Advocate as GM's sole limited guardian in June 2024
and reappointment
in that role on 11 December 2024.
made this application to review the order made on 11 December 2024,
alleging the Public Advocate's delegated guardian
delegated guardian
) was exposing GM to serious risk by virtue of a
decision she was considering, to remove GM from the residential aged care
) where she had recently been accommodated, to return her
to her own home. In her application, VH stated there was extensive evidence
elder abuse and safety risks at GM's home and that GM should not be returned
there. In the circumstances, VH requested an urgent
review, seeking orders to
remove the Public Advocate and for herself to be appointed as sole limited
conducted a review hearing on 10 July and 21 August 2025 and reserved the
decision and these are the reasons for the decision I
is a respected elder and her family and culture are very important to her.
has three children in Western Australia, her eldest daughter, EK, son, QC, and
youngest daughter, VH. GM is close to her sister
SR, who lives in a [rural
town]. GM has a large family and a number of grandchildren.
was diagnosed with dementia in 2022. Her geriatrician is of the view that her
cognitive abilities have been deteriorating since
that date, and that GM lacks
insight into her condition, and her care and support needs.
family agree with the diagnosis of dementia and agree she has problems with her
GM's family members do not agree on matters affecting her safety and welfare.
GM's children and her sister SR are divided
division effectively creates two factions in the family - one faction supports
VH's views that
GM cannot be safely cared for at home and has no other option
than to reside permanently in a RACF, and the other faction supports
that GM can be safely cared for in her own home with family and formal
herself says she does not want to live at a RACF, rather, she wants to be at
is of the view that GM's views
and wishes should be followed.
History of Orders
has had a guardian and administrator appointed since August 2023.
original application for the appointment of a guardian and administrator was
made on 11 July 2023 by Hospital A.
GM had some appreciation of her memory problems at that time, it was the view of
her treating health practitioners that
due to a cognitive impairment, GM lacked
insight into her care and support needs and was at risk of being exposed to harm
the hearing of the original application, on 8 August 2023, VH was appointed as
plenary administrator, and as limited guardian,
to make decisions about GM's
accommodation, treatment, services, the use of restrictive practices in the aged
care setting, and as
GM's legal next friend. Both guardian and administrator
orders were made for a five-year period. They were to be reviewed on 8
the period from 8 August 2023 until 13 June 2024, as GM's guardian and
administrator, VH voiced her concerns about GM being
exposed to risks in her own
GM's home for some 26 years
and had also been home to various other family
voiced her concerns to GM's doctors and to Department of Housing staff about
family violence and risks associated with illicit
drug use at the home, about
GM's safety, about the neglect of her needs and financial exploitation by family
members residing with
2 January 2024, VH applied to the Tribunal to review GM's guardianship order,
seeking to include a contact function, to enable
VH as GM's guardian to restrain
certain people from being at GM's home, or coming into contact with GM.
her application, VH reported, in the context of GM's worsening dementia
symptoms, she had significant concerns about harm that
GM was being exposed to
in her own home.
alleged that people affected by illicit drug use were living at the house, that
people were engaging in drug dealing there, and
undesirable and drug affected
people were frequenting the house.
her application, VH stated that she had wanted to move GM to an aged care
facility nearby, though this plan had been met with
resistance from family
members, namely EK and QC. VH reported that EK and QC had threatened her and
were behaving aggressively towards
the hearing of VH's application on 5 January 2024, conflict between family
members was evident and the Member found it was not
appropriate to give to VH as
limited guardian, the power to make decisions about contact that GM could have
with others.
Member determined that the personal conflict between siblings could impact on
VH's decisions as guardian and it was not appropriate
for VH to make decisions
that would effectively restrain some family members from seeing GM.
Member found however, that there was a need for a guardian to make decisions
order if required and
appointed the Public Advocate as limited guardian to conduct those functions, as
no one else was suitable to
appoint to that role. The Member found VH suitable
to be re-appointed as limited guardian to make decisions about accommodation,
treatment, services and restrictive practices. That guardianship order was made
for five years, to be reviewed by 9 January
late 2023 and early 2024, VH took steps to terminate GM's Department of Housing
lease and move GM to a RACF. This was met with
resistance from GM herself, EK,
and other members of the family. On 21 May 2024, out of concern for
GM's safety, VH decided to place
GM at a RACF, though other family members
managed to locate GM and return her home. This event caused family
relationships to fracture
that event, VH liaised with GM's delegated guardian to seek review of the
guardianship order, with the intention of VH
'relinquishing' her role as
guardian, in order to have the Public Advocate appointed to make all decisions,
including an anticipated
decision about GM's eventual placement into an aged
care facility. On 23 May 2024, the Public Advocate made an application to
the guardianship order and at a hearing on 13 June 2024, the Public
Advocate was appointed as GM's sole limited guardian, to make
decisions about
accommodation, treatment, contact, services, to decide on restrictive practices,
and act as GM's legal next friend
for a short, six-month period.
the scheduled review of that six-month order in December 2024, as family
tensions remained high and decisions about where GM was
to live and whether she
could be safely cared for at home, had not yet been resolved, the Public
Advocate was reappointed as sole
limited guardian with the same functions, for a
further period of one year. That guardianship order was to be reviewed in
early April 2025, a significant safety incident occurred while GM was staying
with QC, in that GM set out to walk to her own home,
a distance of some
30 kms. On the way, GM sought assistance and went on to be admitted to
hospital as a social admission. Following
this incident, whilst GM was an
inpatient, VH found a bed for her at [RACF], and the delegated guardian decided
to admit GM to [RACF].
On 11 April 2025, GM was transferred from hospital to
the memory support unit at [RACF].
Current proceedings
Evidence and material before the Tribunal
19 May 2025, VH lodged this application to review GM's guardianship order, I
granted leave to apply for the review, and I commenced
hearing the matter on 10
July 2025 (
the first hearing
first hearing was attended in person by GM, her sister SR, her daughter EK and
her niece, RT. Also in attendance was VH, VH's
husband AP, GM's son, QC, and
GM's niece LP. The delegated guardian and a senior officer from the Office of
the Public Advocate
were also in attendance.
to the hearing commencing, tensions broke out between family members who had
come together on the same floor at the Tribunal,
requiring separate hearing
rooms to be arranged. The family was effectively separated into its two
factions, with GM, EK, SR and
RT seated together in one room, and VH, AP, QC,
and LP, in the other.
to the apparent conflict and heightened emotion, prior to opening the hearing to
all attendees, I decided it was in GM's best
interests to hear from her in
private to ascertain her views and wishes, with only the delegated guardian
the commencement of the hearing VH explained the reason for her application. VH
is concerned about what she believes is the delegated
guardian's intention to
return GM home. She also says that the delegated guardian has not made a
decision about permanent accommodation
for GM at [RACF] and has not taken steps
to surrender GM's home to the Department of Housing. VH proposed herself as
sole guardian
to make all decisions needed for GM.
is firmly of the view that GM should reside permanently in residential care due
to risks associated with her cognitive decline
in the context of risks posed by
family and other people who reside at, or frequent, GM's home.
opposition to VH's view, EK and SR are firmly of the view that GM should remain
living at her home, and say that it is safe, or
can be made safe, for her to do
so. As an elder, they maintain GM should be cared for by family and the family
should have regard
to GM's views and wishes. Initially, QC supported GM
remaining at home with family and additional support, though he is now firmly
the view that due to risks associated with alleged illicit drug use at GM's
the hearing, EK, SR and RT provided a different view about GM's safety and
wellbeing and there was strong disagreement about whether
GM should reside at a
RACF at all. GM was of the view she should be allowed to return home and be
cared for, or live with, family.
hearing was disrupted numerous times. Family members openly addressed each
other with animosity and made disparaging remarks
the hearing.
faction of the family accused EK's faction of illicit drug use, and of exposing
GM to harms associated with that.
and other family seated with GM, accused VH of forcing GM to reside at a RACF
against her will and of over stating her concerns
the hearing and family's exchanges GM became increasingly agitated and
distressed and I brought the hearing to a close,
reserving my decision.
11 July 2025, VH filed a letter with the Tribunal, stating that due to EK's
disruptive behaviour at the hearing, she had not been
given an opportunity to
speak and requested a further hearing.
her letter, VH responded to a question I had asked her, as to whether, if
appointed as guardian, she would be able to communicate
with EK about medical
treatment decisions. In her letter, VH stated that if medical decisions had to
be made, that she would work
with her brother QC, and her son N who maintains a
close relationship with EK's sons L and D, to obtain EK's views, and VH says she
would take EK's views, and those of her children, into account.
the letter, VH set out again her dissatisfaction with the delegated guardian's
conduct and alleged the delegated guardian had
'... significantly increased
family conflict by siding with and supporting [EK] and family members who have
been exploiting [GM]'.
response to VH's request for a further hearing, I made an order listing the
matter for a further three-hour hearing, with issues
to be limited
(a) whether GM is in need of a
(b) if so, who should be appointed in accordance with
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(c) the scope and duration of a guardianship order if one is made.
the event family members were to attend again in person, the Tribunal prepared
to separate people across three hearing rooms,
to control disruption and avoid
the distress previously experienced.
further hearing took place on 21 August 2025 (
further hearing
GM, EK, SR, the delegated guardian and another officer from the Office of the
Public Advocate attending in person, and VH,
AP and QC attending by
RT, nor LP were in attendance.
the further hearing, I heard from VH, AP, QC, from EK and SR, and from GM
herself. I also heard from the delegated guardian.
was firmly of the view that she should be appointed to replace the Public
Advocate as guardian. VH claimed that as matters had
relatively stabilised for
GM, there was no need for the Public Advocate to play a role in decision-making
for GM, and VH should once
again be appointed as GM's sole guardian.
in support of VH's application, asserted that in making a decision about who to
appoint as guardian, I must consider whether
the delegated guardian had acted in
GM's best interests in seeking to keep GM's house open for her return to when
there was evidence
before the Tribunal that it was demonstrably unsafe for
AP asserted that
a decision about suitability of the guardian could not be made without forming a
view about where it is safe for
GM to live.
asserted that matters of safety were paramount and urged me to consider the
delegated guardian's actions in the context of information
provided by the
inter-agency committee that had been set up to monitor GM's safety in the
and SR gave evidence stating that VH had not considered GM's views and wishes
strongly about GM's desire to
return home, and stated GM's home had been 'cleaned up', that no undesirable
people were there, and
it was safe for GM to return there.
her evidence at hearing, the delegated guardian gave an account of the manner in
which she meets with and communicates with GM,
the enquiries she has made in
relation to GM's health and welfare, and how she considers the factors set out
in the GA Act when making
decisions for her. As of 21 August 2025, the
delegated guardian explained that a permanent accommodation decision for GM had
been made. The delegated guardian had considered alternative
accommodation options for GM, out of concern for her level of distress
[RACF], and for her overall wellbeing. The options included making enquiries to
determine whether there was a way to keep
GM's home with her family. The
delegated guardian explained, due to the significance of the home to GM, there
was a concern about
completely relinquishing it.
states that the failure to make a permanent accommodation decision and hand GM's
implications for GM and is a
point of concern for VH as her administrator. VH wants the home handed back to
the Department of Housing.
the further hearing, it transpired that QC and EK also proposed themselves for
appointment as GM's guardian.
addition to evidence given by interested parties at the first and further
hearing, I also read and considered the following documentary
evidence filed
with the Tribunal:
Medical and service provider evidence
(a) Letter dated 14 September 2022 from Prof W and
Dr B to GM's general practitioner, following G's first assessment at [hospital]
geriatric outpatient clinic.
(b) Letter dated 3 October 2024 from Prof W to GM's general practitioner.
(c) Letter dated 6 February 2025 from Prof W to GM's general
practitioner.
(d) Report dated 27 May 2025, from IH, a registered nurse and the facility
manager at [RACF] where GM currently resides.
(e) Report dated 10 June 2025, from SM the co-ordinator of the home care
package service that GM was receiving prior to her entering
(f) Report of Dr Y dated 26 June 2025.
(g) Report of Prof W dated 3 July 2025.
Submissions from VH
(a) A three-page statutory declaration, made by VH
dated 19 October 2024.
(b) A two-page submission from VH filed on 11 June 2025.
(c) A 14-page statutory declaration made by VH, dated 12 June 2025.
(d) Letter from VH addressed to the Tribunal dated 11 July 2025.
Various documents provided by other parties
(a) The Department of Communities virtual file
containing meeting minutes from Family and Domestic Violence Multi Agency Case
) meetings, held on 26 March 2025, 8 April 2025 and
12 May 2025.
The MACM meetings were convened by KC, the Family Safety Service Coordinator
at Department of Communities and were attended by various
agency leads,
including from the Department of Communities, the WAPOL Family Violence Team,
and the Department of Housing. GM's
delegated guardian and the director from the Office of the Public Advocate also
these meetings.
(b) A copy of GM's tenancy agreement with Department of Housing, commencing 1
(c) Email dated 23 June 2025, from the Area Manager at Department of
Communities Housing Division forwarding three pages of file notes
Department of Communities Housing Division, to the MACM team lead from
Department of Housing. The file notes record interactions
February 2022 to June 2025 between Department staff and VH, and Department
staff and GM and EK.
(d) A ten-page Family and Domestic Violence Risk Assessment Tool completed on
28 May 2025 by KC, the Family Safety Service Coordinator
at the Department of
Communities.
(e) A 29-page table recording events from 11 December 2023 to 1 July
2025. This record appears to be a register of certain activities
conducted by
several agencies and includes references to correspondence in relation to GM.
There are several references to correspondence
from VH as GM's administrator
addressed to various agencies in relation to her concerns about the delegated
guardian, and complaints
made by VH to various agencies, local members of
parliament, government ministers and the Ombudsman.
(f) A short letter dated 6 June 2025, from GM's friend of some fifty years,
ER. ER is of the view that GM has an advanced form of
dementia and that she is
very concerned for GM's welfare if she is returned to live at her home or if she
lives with any of her family.
ER reports that she has visited GM at [RACF] and
has observed her happily living there. ER notes that when she has been
unavailable,
GM has tried to contact her more than 20 times, which ER takes
as a sign of GM's confusion.
(g) A formal letter of endorsement from Dr Z, the interim chief executive
officer of [health service], filed with the Tribunal 7 July
supporting the appointment of VH as G's guardian and administrator. Dr Z states
VH's appointment is essential to ensure GM's
interests are protected and her
care is managed in a manner that respects her cultural identity and personal
(h) Four WAPOL documents:
(i) 16 November 2024 incident report that GM's phone was missing or stolen.
(ii) WAPOL file created on 27 March 2025 as MACM member.
(iii) 22 February 2025 incident report - report by VH to Police about threats
of violence made towards AP, and allegations that GM
was the victim of elder
(iv) A family violence restraining order, protecting GM, as well as five
other family members, from M, for a two-year period commencing
(i) Two-page document submitted by SR at the hearing on 21 August 2025,
reiterating SR's oral submissions.
Reports from the Office of the Public Advocate
(a) Three reports prepared by the delegated guardian
for the purpose of hearings at the Tribunal.
(b) The first report dated 6 December 2024, was prepared for the scheduled s
84 review of the guardianship order on 11 December 2024.
(c) The second and third reports, dated 8 July and 20 August 2025 were
prepared for the current s 86 review.
Principles and legislation to be observed
all proceedings brought under the GA Act the Tribunal must observe the
principles set out in s 4 of the GA Act.
primary concern of the Tribunal when making decisions under the GA Act, is
the best interests of the represented person for whom
an application is
represented person is presumed to be capable of looking after her own health and
safety and making reasonable judgments in respect
of matters relating to her
person, until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the
guardianship order should only be made if it is needed; if the needs of the
person can be met by less restrictive means then a
guardianship order should not
be made for her.
an order is made it should be in the least restrictive terms
plenary guardian should not be appointed if a limited order will meet the
represented person's
the principles require that in considering any matter relating to a represented
person, the Tribunal is required, as far
as possible, to seek to ascertain her
views and wishes as expressed at the time or gathered from her previous
Nature of the s 86 review
role, in conducting a review of GM's guardianship order, is to determine, on the
evidence before me, whether it is necessary and
in GM's best interests to
confirm, revoke or vary the
Making a guardianship order
appoint a guardian either initially or on review, I must be satisfied that GM
(a) incapable of looking after her own health and safety; or
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments about her person; or
(c) in need of oversight and care in the interest of her own health and
safety or for the protection of
(d) I must also be satisfied that there is a need for a
I decide that GM is in in need of a guardian, I must appoint
order appointing a guardian must also specify the functions that are vested in
the guardian.
Who may be appointed as guardian
44 of the GA Act provides that I may appoint a guardian, only if I am satisfied
that the proposed guardian:
(a) is 18 years or older;
(b) will act in GM's best interests;
(c) is not in a position where their interests conflict or may conflict with
GM's interests, noting that by s 44(3) being a relative
is not enough on its own
to create a conflict or potential conflict of interest; and
(d) is otherwise suitable to act as GM's guardian.
seeking to understand whether a proposed guardian is otherwise suitable to act
as GM's guardian, I am to take into account:
(a) the desirability of
preserving existing relationships within GM's family;
(b) the compatibility of the proposed appointee with that person and with the
administrator of GM's estate;
(c) GM's wishes; and
(d) whether the proposed appointee will be able to perform the functions
vested in him or her.
44(5) of the GA Act provides that the Tribunal must not appoint the Public
Advocate as a guardian unless there is no other
person who is suitable and
willing to act as guardian.
Powers of a guardian
powers of a guardian are set out at s 45 of the GA Act and include the
power to make decisions about where and with whom the
represented person is to
live, whether permanent or temporary, medical treatment, who the represented
person is to associate with
and legal proceedings, as the represented person's
next friend or as the guardian ad litem.
13 of the GA Act invests the Tribunal with the power to appoint a guardian or
administrator. Once a guardian or administrator
is appointed, the powers that
may be exercised by that guardian or administrator are set out in the GA Act,
or, in the order itself.
Best interests of the represented person
are required to act according to their opinion of the represented person's best
interests. Section 51 of the GA Act provides
guidance about what that involves,
including, if the guardian acts as far as possible:
advocate for the represented person;
(b) in such a way as to encourage the represented person to live in the
general community and participate as much as possible in the
life of the
(c) in such a way as to encourage and assist the represented person to become
capable of caring for themselves and of making reasonable
judgments in respect
of matters relating to their person;
(d) in such a way as to protect the represented person from neglect, abuse or
exploitation;
(e) in consultation with the represented person, taking into account as far
as possible, the wishes of that person as expressed, in
whatever manner, or as
gathered from the persons previous actions;
(f) in the manner that is least restrictive of the rights while consistent
with the proper protection of the represented person;
(g) in such a way as to maintain supportive relationships the represented
person has; and
(h) in such a way as to maintain the represented person's familiar cultural,
linguistic and religious environment.
GM's views and wishes
attended and gave evidence, in private on the first day, and openly, with others
present, on both days.
the closed hearing and during the further hearing, GM advised that if she had to
have another person make decisions for her, she
would want that person to be EK.
She said as EK was the eldest daughter, culturally it was expected that the role
should fall to
said if EK wanted GM to live with her, she would rather be with
her evidence, although she appeared to be confused at times between the role of
a carer and that of a guardian, GM stated that
both VH and EK take her out and
will buy her things. However, she said that EK takes her out quite a lot, she
enjoys her company,
that she is the eldest daughter and that is her main role,
she is the first one GM will
stated she would not want VH as her
said that as VH fosters children and has little children, that she does not
expect to see her as often. GM also observed that
VH is '... busy ... that
[s]he has got a lot to do ... travels ... a lot, so if I had the choice
[about who she wants to be her guardian],
... it would be
the hearing on 21 August 2025, in discussing who should be GM's guardian, GM
expressed herself, saying '... in the [...] way
it should be the oldest one ...
that if [EK] wants to be, I would prefer her
the possibility of appointing QC was raised, GM paid little attention to that
suggestion, shaking her head in the hearing to
indicate she did not agree with
the proposal.
did not appear to be keen to explore QC's
appointment.
her evidence, GM also expressed her views and wishes about wanting to return to
live in her own home and wanting to be with her
that living at [RACF] was like jail and being locked up, that she wants to be
free. GM acknowledged that there were good
people at [RACF] though she said she
wanted to be with people from her own culture, stating, '...I'm with all [...]
people, not with
stated a number of times during the hearings, that she was an elder, to add
context to the importance of her views and wishes.
her report of 8 July 2025, the delegated guardian stated that GM often expresses
her views and wishes to her, that GM often and
currently shares her views about
who she deems is her priority carer and who she would prefer to live with,
citing EK with whom she
states she feels a particular
connection.
her evidence GM stated that she knew EK and VH were fighting.
the conclusion of the first hearing, in a distressed state, GM stated VH just
wanted to put her away and questioned why she
wanted to take her life from
not obliged to give effect to GM's wishes, I give them due weight. Ultimately,
my decision about who to appoint as guardian
must be reached on the basis of my
conclusion as to what is in GM's best interests.
set out in s 4 of the GA Act, the starting position is that GM is presumed to be
capable of making reasonable judgments about
her person until such time as the
evidence clearly shows that that presumption is displaced.
is no dispute about GM's diagnosis of dementia. In Prof W's report of 3 July
2025, he states he has known GM for three years
and is of the view that she has
a mental disability, being mixed Alzheimer's and vascular dementia. He states
GM lacks capacity
in all spheres of decision-making.
regard to the professional reports and other evidence, including the views of
family members present on both hearing days,
and with reference to GM's
short-term memory issues and confusion that was apparent at the hearings, I am
satisfied and find that
the presumption of capacity is set aside. I am
satisfied and find that GM is a person for whom a guardianship order may be
their letter of 14 September 2025, Dr B and Prof W set out that GM has a number
of significant medical conditions that need to
be monitored, and, for which, she
takes daily medications. I am satisfied on the medical evidence, the evidence
of family members
and the report from service provider, SM, dated 10 June 2025
that GM's dementia affects her ability to understand her mental and
condition and renders her incapable of caring for herself.
am satisfied on the evidence in VH's submissions, Prof W's reports, the
Department of Communities virtual file, and the evidence
of family members at
hearings that GM does not have the capacity to make reasonable decisions in
respect of matters relating to her
person, particularly as to where she should
live, and how necessary support services may be provided to her.
his letter of 3 October 2024, Prof W opines that GM is at high risk and gives an
example that GM was lost in the city and had
to be returned by a stranger. In
addition to that, I note the incident when GM set off to walk to her house, from
QC's home, and
had to seek physical assistance on that occasion. On this
evidence, I am satisfied that GM is in need of oversight, care and control
the interests of her own health and safety.
submits that although there is friction in the family, the issue of GM's care
arrangements now seems quite settled. She submitted
there was no need for the
Public Advocate to be involved any
contrast to VH's submission, is GM's ongoing expressed desire to return home and
to EK and SR's strong belief that G should not
reside in a RACF at all.
both the first and further hearing, EK and SR were of the view that the risks to
GM at her home were being overstated by VH.
They were of the view that
GM's needs could be met safely at
they were of the view that GM's views and wishes about not wanting to be in
residential aged care should be taken into
consideration, and that for cultural
reasons, GM should not be in residential aged care.
addition to her oral evidence and advocacy for GM, SR submitted a document at
the further hearing, listing the reasons why GM
should be cared for at home and
the complicating effect that family conflict was having on people meeting GM's
the evidence before me, I find that the matter of where GM is to live, and how
her care needs are to be met, is not resolved.
to the chronic family conflict about where GM should live, how she is to have
her care and support needs met, whether she goes
to hospital and stays for
treatment at
should make personal decisions for her, it is clear that informal family
arrangements cannot be relied on to make decisions
and welfare.
such circumstances, to leave GM without formal orders granting certainty about
substitute decision-making for her, is to leave
her as the likely subject of
conflict and dispute. That is not in her best interests.
follows, and I find, that there are no less restrictive means to meet GM's
needs, and I find that GM is in need of a guardian.
What decision-making functions does the guardian need?
am satisfied that the appointment of a limited guardian will be sufficient to
meet GM's needs.
decision about where and with whom GM lives, whether temporarily or permanently,
needs to be made and I find GM needs a guardian
with this function.
to her cognitive impairment and chronic medical conditions, I find that GM will
also require a guardian to make treatment decisions
to GM's symptoms of dementia including confusion and wandering and at times,
emotional dysregulation, I find that GM will need
a guardian to give or withhold
consent to the use of restrictive practices that may be used in the aged care
to GM's functional frailty and cognitive impairment, I find she needs a guardian
to identify and arrange for appropriate support
services to be provided to
to longstanding family conflict and openly hostile relationships between GM's
family members, I find that GM will need a guardian
to make contact decisions,
to ensure she has access to, and can socialise with all of her family and to
ensure that she is protected
from people that may cause harm.
there is no evidence of GM being threatened personally since the last orders
were made, and the family violence restraining order
protecting GM from M
expired in October 2025, there is no current need for a guardian to act as GM's
next friend in legal proceedings.
Who should be appointed as GM's guardian?
44 of the GA Act sets out the criteria for who may be appointed a guardian.
seeks appointment as GM's sole guardian. VH's appointment is supported by AP
and QC and is opposed by EK and GM.
the course of the further hearing, VH nominated QC for appointment as GM's
guardian, and EK proposed herself for appointment as
the evidence, I am satisfied and find that neither VH, QC nor EK are suitable to
appoint as GM's guardian.
endorsement by the CEO of [health service] and without reflection on VH's good
character, I find that VH is unsuitable to
appoint as guardian for the following
evidence supports the conclusion, and I find, that in the past, VH has not
communicated with EK about significant decisions in
relation to
For example,
VH did not communicate with EK when she placed GM at a RACF in May 2024.
is a history of tension between the sisters, with EK stating that their
relationship has never been
she has declined mediation with EK as she finds it a form of family
the sisters' relationship is so fractured, and in light of the views they
expressed about each other at the hearings, I also find
that VH would not
adequately communicate with EK in the future.
VH's letter filed on 11 July 2025, in response to being asked whether she could
communicate with EK, VH states if she was to be
appointed as guardian, in
relation to medical decisions, that she would work with her brother QC, and her
son N who maintains a close
relationship with EK's sons L and D, to enable them
to discuss and obtain the views of EK, and VH will take EK's views, and those
her children, into account.
states that her family has managed ongoing conflict with EK due to her drug
issues for over 30 years without the need for external
authorities to intervene
in family disputes.
states that I should consider and place significant weight on her professional
history and her professional ability to act in
an impartial and fair manner when
it comes to making decisions in GM's best interest.
response to VH's proposed consultation method, without reflection on VH's
professional ability or experience, I find that the
proposal is without merit.
At the hearing on 21 August 2025, neither VH's son nor EK's sons were in
attendance, nor did they provide
a submission of their own about their
willingness or ability to take part in VH's proposal. Rather, EK's evidence
suggested that
conflict between EK and VH has at times affected communication
between EK and VH's
Additionally,
I find the proposed consultation method would not be in GM's best interests as
medical decisions may need to be made
for her in a timely manner.
I do not accept that VH would take EK's views into account. Numerous times in
her written submissions and oral evidence,
VH has stated that EK has been an
illicit drug user for many years and alleges that EK has financially exploited
GM. VH has reported
EK to Centrelink for alleged fraudulent behaviour. VH has
a very poor opinion of her sister.
both the first and further hearings, VH and EK continued to say disparaging
things about each other, making allegations about
neglect of their own children
and the lack of care and respect they have for family.
dislike of each other was apparent and they do not tolerate being in the same
room whether at the Tribunal or when visiting
there is no evidence before me that VH has sought EK's views or opinions about
GM's health or wellbeing or taken EK's views
into consideration. EK's evidence
is that an independent decision-maker is needed, so that she may have input, as
VH does not acknowledge,
or speak to
is my view that a guardian appointed for GM must be able to communicate
effectively with GM's family members. This is crucial
in relation to all
aspects of GM's health and lifestyle.
accept that both VH and EK have a close relationship with GM, however GM
consistently states that she would choose EK as her guardian
and that it is
culturally preferable for EK as the eldest to be her guardian. In addition to
EK being consulted in her role as GM's
eldest daughter, I find it is also
necessary for EK, on the evidence of GM's expressed wish for EK to be her
guardian, to be consulted
and have input into decisions about GM's health and
there is no evidence to suggest that VH consults with GM about lifestyle
decisions or takes GM's wishes into account. This
is evident from VH, EK and
GM's evidence about decisions VH has made about moving GM to residential care in
the past, from VH's view
Department of Housing file notes from December 2023, and January and
is no evidence before me that VH has consulted with GM, or sought GM's views
alternatives to a RACF, with GM.
am also satisfied and find that a decision about GM's accommodation is likely to
cause harm to family relationships if it is not
consistent with GM's views and
wishes. This is a further consideration in determining whether any family
member would be suitable
as guardian.
accept VH's submission that the family has experienced ongoing conflict for many
years without the need for external authorities
to intervene in family
However, I note it is only in recent times that GM has been affected by her
cognitive impairment, and disputes amongst her family
have arisen about GM's
safety and where she should live. This is new territory for the family.
decisions about GM's health and lifestyle need to be made and cannot be agreed
upon in an informal way by her children, in accordance
with Western Australian
law, a Tribunal appointed guardian is required. If no family member is found
suitable and willing to appoint,
the Public Advocate as guardian of last
resort must be appointed. I do not accept that GM's family will be able to rely
on the conflict
management methods they have used in the past, when dealing with
conflict about GM's health and lifestyle.
similar reasons related to chronic family conflict, mistrust and breakdown in
communication, I also find that EK and QC are unsuitable
to appoint as GM's
his evidence, QC accepted that GM was not willing to have him appointed as her
EK's evidence, although she said she was happy to be considered for appointment,
she was of the view that an independent person
was preferable in the
circumstances, with GM making the observation that EK '...doesn't want the
fight, that's
significant family members disagree on lifestyle decisions that need to be made
for GM, I am of the view that GM continues to
need a formally appointed guardian
with clear authority to make personal and lifestyle decisions for her.
GA Act provides for the appointment of the Public Advocate when there is no
other person suitable or willing to act. The appointment
of the Public Advocate
is not determined by the Public Advocate's suitability, rather, it is determined
by all other proposed appointee's
unsuitability.
I find that there is no other person suitable and willing to appoint as GM's
guardian, it follows, in accordance with s 44 of
the GA Act, that I must
appoint the Public Advocate.
am satisfied on the evidence before me that it is in GM's best interests to
reappoint the Public Advocate as an independent guardian
to make decisions in
accordance with GM's best interests, free of family conflict.
Public Advocate as guardian
and AP, on her behalf, assert that the Public Advocate has made and intends to
make further decisions about GM's accommodation
that are unsafe. They contend
that GM's safety is paramount and rely on evidence filed in this matter to prove
that the Public Advocate
is not looking at GM's safety at all.
VH and AP assert that I must come to a view about where it is safe for GM to
live in order to come to a view about whether it
is in GM's best interests to
continue with the Public Advocate as guardian.
accept that material has been filed with the Tribunal that raises concerns about
GM's safety at her own home, and I acknowledge
VH, AP and QC's concerns about
illicit drug use in general. I also accept, in the context of GM's declining
cognitive capacity,
that she requires greater supervision, care and support at
this time in her life than ever before.
have considered the oral and documentary evidence before me, and I have observed
and interacted with GM over the course of two
hearings. I am satisfied
that GM is incapable of looking after her own health and safety, that she is
unable to make reasonable
decisions in respect of matters relating to her person
and that she is in need of oversight care or control in the interests of her
health and safety. I am satisfied that GM is in need a guardian.
is beyond my authority to choose where GM should live. It is the role of the
delegated guardian to make an accommodation decision,
weighing the factors set
out in s 51 of the GA Act and it is not for the Tribunal to review how such
a decision is made by
Duration of the order
lives with dementia and she is unable to make decisions about her own health and
the commencement of the guardianship order, GM's accommodation and support needs
have been significant issues that continue
to divide the family.
making short-term orders previously, the Tribunal acknowledged that it was
undesirable for GM and her family to appoint a non-[...]
person as GM's
guardian. In previous review hearings, it had been hoped that if an
accommodation decision was made which was accepted
by all, that family tensions
might ease and the need for a guardian might abate.
the evidence before me, the family remains divided about what is best for GM and
family relationships remain fractured.
have witnessed GM become very distressed during hearings and believe it is best
not to subject her to a further hearing without
good reason. These issues
provide a sound basis for the making of a guardianship order that remains in
place for a considerable
period of time.
am of the view that a period of three years is appropriate. Due to the
intractable nature of conflict between significant members
of GM's family, it is
unlikely that a family member will become suitable to appoint as guardian in the
near future. I am satisfied
it is in GM's best interests to align the review
date with the current administration order - being 8 August 2028.
anyone consider that GM's guardianship or administration orders require review
prior to August 2028, they can apply (or seek
leave to apply) for such review
under s 86 of the GA Act.
For these reasons I make the following orders
The Tribunal makes the following orders:
The Tribunal orders:
is granted to [VH] to apply for the review.
Tribunal declares that the represented person, [GM],
(a) incapable of looking after her own health and safety;
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to her
(c) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of her own health
and safety; and
(d) in need of a guardian.
guardianship order dated 11 December 2024 is revoked and replaced with the
following order:
Public Advocate of David Malcolm Justice Centre, Level 23, 28 Barrack Street,
Perth, Western Australia, is appointed limited guardian
of the represented
person with the following functions:
(a) to decide where the
represented person is to live, whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live;
(c) to make treatment decisions for the represented person, subject to
Division 3 of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(d) to determine what contact, if any, the represented person should have
with others and the extent of that contact;
(e) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
access; and
(f) to decide whether to give or withhold consent to the use of any
restrictive practices for the represented person proposed from
time to time
Aged Care Act 2024
subsidiary legislation.
Tribunal approves delegation by the Public Advocate of her functions as guardian
of the represented person to an officer or employee
employed in the Office of
the Public Advocate.
guardianship order is to be reviewed before 8 August 2028.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
MS M Hipworth, MEMBER
14 NOVEMBER 2025
On 2 February
2024, VH made an application to appeal the decision of the single member, though
withdrew her application shortly after
it was lodged, without an appeal being
that she had to leave the further hearing at 12 noon for another appointment,
and both VH and AP left at that time. The
other parties left when the hearing
concluded at 1.00
August 2025.
Act, s 4(3).
Act, s 4(4).
Act, s 4(6).
Act, s 4(5).
Act, s 4(7).
Act, s 43(4).
ts 44, 21 August 2025.
August 2025.
ts 84, 21 August
and ts 77, 21 August
Delegated guardian's report dated 8 July 2025, page 10.
ts 16, 10 July 2025.
37, ts 45, ts 46, ts 47, 21 August 2025, R's submission handed up at the hearing
on 21 August
submission handed up at the hearing on 21 August
December 2024, GM allegedly discharged herself from hospital against medical
advice after being visited by EK and RT.
communicate with family members or advise as to where she had taken GM in May
10 July 2025.
ts 20 - ts 21, 21 August
the contact roster being in place at [RACF] there have been incidents there, ts
17, 10 July 2025 and ts 69, 21 August 2025.
August 2025.
VH's letter to the Tribunal, filed 11 July
21 August 2025.
Office of The Public Advocate
[2020] WASC 455
[89] (Curthoys J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (621 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter