URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRComm/2016/962.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brian John Nathan -v- Hevbren Pty Ltd as Trustee of the Annandale Family Trust t/as Lagoon Realty [2016] WAIRComm 962 (22 December 2016)
APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE COMMISSION IN MATTER NO. B 22
OF 2016 GIVEN ON 19 JULY 2016
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS COMMISSION
THE HONOURABLE J H SMITH, ACTING PRESIDENT
ACTING SENIOR COMMISSIONER S J KENNER
COMMISSIONER D J MATTHEWS
TUESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2016
DELIVERED :
THURSDAY, 22 DECEMBER 2016
FBA 8 OF 2016
BRIAN JOHN NATHAN
HEVBREN PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE OF THE
ANNANDALE FAMILY TRUST T/AS LAGOON REALTY
ON APPEAL FROM:
Coram : Chief Commissioner P E Scott
[2016] WAIRC 00665
(2016) 96 WAIG 1312
File Nos : B 22 of 2016
Industrial Law (WA) - Appeal against
decision of Commission - Claim of contractual benefits - Appellant's claim for
commissions for
the sale of land - Implied term of appellant's contract
requiring him to prove his work was the effective cause of the listing of
property for sale - Principles entitling a real estate agent to commission
considered - Turns on own facts
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979 (WA) s 29(1)(b)(ii),
Real Estate and Business Agents Act 1978 (WA) s 60, s 60(1)(b),
Auctioneers
and Agents Act 1971 (Qld) s 76(1)(c)
Appeal dismissed
Representation:
Mr P Mullally, as agent
Mr I Curlewis (of counsel)
Solicitors:
Lavan Legal
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
[1993] HCA 78
; (1993) 177
L J Hooker Ltd v Dominion Factors Pty Ltd
[1963] SR (NSW) 146
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
[1977] HCA 13
(1977) 138 CLR
Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd v Cooper
[1941] AC 108
Moneywood Pty Ltd v Salamon Nominees Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 2
(2001) 202 CLR
(2001) 177 ALR 390
Reasons for Decision
is an appeal instituted under s 49 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) (the IR Act) against a decision made by the Commission on 19 July
2016 dismissing application B 22 of 2016.
Application
B 22 of 2016 was referred to the Commission by Brian John Nathan (the
appellant) under s 29(1)(b)(ii) of the IR Act.
The appellant was employed
by Hevbren Pty Ltd as trustee of the Annandale Family Trust trading as Lagoon
Realty (the respondent)
as a full-time real estate sales representative from
mid-October 2004 to July 2013. The appellant claims that he is owed
in commissions for the sale of 29 lots of land on grounds that he
listed the lots for sale as part of a parcel of 31 lots.
principal of the real estate agency operated by the respondent is
Mr Brendon Annandale.
terms of the appellant's contract of employment were oral. His remuneration was
wholly by commission, to be earned on the following
of the respondent's commission on the sale of a property which was listed by the
(b) 50% of the respondent's commission on the sale of a property which was
both listed and sold by the appellant; and
(c) 25% of the respondent's commission on a property the appellant sold but
which had been listed by the respondent.
29 lots of land formed part of a proposed sub-division of 31 vacant
residential cottage lots in a development known as the Capricorn
listed for sale by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (Deloitte) as receivers and managers
by entering into a selling agency agreement
authorising Lagoon Realty to sell
each of the 31 lots of land in late September 2012. Twenty-nine lots were
sold by Mr Annandale
while the appellant was employed. The appellant's
claim is that he is entitled to 25% of the respondent's commission on the sale
of each of the 29 lots as each of those lots were listed by him.
lots became listed by the respondent for sale following an approach sometime in
July or August 2012 to Mr Annandale by Mikael
Boisen from Deloitte for
a proposal to sell the lots as agent for Deloitte.
28 August 2012, Mr Boisen sent an email to Mr Annandale in which he
asked Mr Annandale to provide a formal selling submission to
sell the 31
proposed lots (exhibit R1, BA1, AB 56 - 58). In the email,
Mr Boisen said that the submission should include at a
 Commission and fee structure
 Proposed listing price (per lot)
 Selling strategy (assuming the Completed Lots are all released at
 Proposed marketing mediums (and associated cost)
 Recent comparable sales you have made
 Suggested incentives (i.e. landscaping, cash back)
 Yanchep general market commentary
 Your view of the market's perception of buying off the plans
 A demonstrated understanding of building restrictions in Yanchep and
particularly the Completed Lots
 Anything else you consider relevant.
3 September 2012, Mr Annandale sent by email to Mr Boisen a
selling submission for the proposed 31 cottage lots (exhibit R1, BA2,
AB 61 - 64). The selling submission comprised four pages in which
Mr Annandale comprehensively set out:
(a) An assessment of the
market for ocean view lots in the area.
(b) Proposed market mediums, including recommendations for aerial
photography, internet, advertising, banner advertising and a large
custom photo
the submission, Mr Annandale referred to the agency's database of clients
that could be contacted should they be appointed as the
selling agent. He also
addressed each of the matters requested by Mr Boisen. These
(a) In respect of commission and fee structure, he made an
offer of a discounted selling fee of 2% of the selling price plus GST with
exclusive agency for an initial period of 180 days, renewable by mutual
agreement for a further term if required. He also indicated
that the respondent
would be happy to allow conjunctional dealings with any other agent should they
have a prospective buyer.
(b) A commencement date for a marketing program and proposed marketing and
initial set up costs totalling an estimate of $9,700.
(c) In respect of proposed listing prices, Mr Annandale stated that to
achieve sales within a reasonable timeframe and to meet valuation
by banks on
finance deals he saw the lots selling between $750 - $966 per square metre. He
also stated that he was of the opinion
they should be kept below $1,000 per
square metre in order to achieve realistic expectations in today's market. He
then set out
a proposed listing price for each one of the lots by their lot
number and size in square metres.
(d) A selling strategy was proposed to utilise a relatively low cost budget
campaign, together with a small budget for classified
advertising when titles
had been issued.
(e) Incentives were proposed which included fencing, front yard landscaping
package with automatic reticulation off mains to front
only, Colorbond fencing
to sides (not Timberlap) all co-ordinated with one neutral colour, together with
front boundary fencing with
small limestone walls and powder coated or
galvanised upright steel with built-in letterboxes to provide a quality
streetscape.
(f) Some general observations were made about the Yanchep market and the cost
of blocks in other estates and the market that the Capricorn
Esplanade should
(g) An assessment was provided about the ease it would be to sell to
participants in the market off the plans.
(h) Observations were made about the understanding by the agency of
restrictive covenants, building conditions, guidelines and selling
the same day, Mr Annandale emailed the proposal to Mr Boisen,
Mr Boisen sent Mr Annandale an email thanking him for the submission
and asking for the submission to be resent in a word document or pdf
16 September 2012, Mr Annandale and his wife flew to China for a
holiday. Mr Annandale did not return to Perth until 29 September
The evidence of the work carried out by the appellant in respect of the listing
of the 31 lots at the Capricorn Esplanade at Yanchep
appellant was the only witness who gave evidence in the proceedings at first
instance. The respondent did, however, go into evidence
by tendering of a
number of emails and documents that comprised the selling agency agreement for
the 31 lots (exhibit R1).
appellant gave his evidence in part through a written statement which was signed
by him on 20 June 2016 (exhibit A1). He also
gave oral evidence. He
has a hearing disability. The transcript of proceedings at first instance
records that when asked questions
in cross-examination, on occasions some
questions had to be repeated to the appellant as he had difficulty hearing
questions put
by counsel.
statements made by the appellant in his witness statement are material in this
appeal as the Chief Commissioner found in her reasons
for decision that the
appellant made a number of statements when giving his evidence on oath orally in
the witness box that was,
in some respects, inconsistent with the matters stated
by him in his witness statement.
the appellant's witness statement, he made the following
statements:
(a) Prior to Mr Annandale leaving to go overseas,
Mr Annandale did not brief him on the proposal or tell him that he may
call from Deloitte.
(b) On or about 17 September 2012, Mr Boisen telephoned the office
and he answered the call. Mr Boisen asked to speak to Mr Annandale.
He explained that Mr Annandale was away on holidays in China and told
Mr Boisen that he was a sales representative and was 'Brendon's
man'. He offered to give Mr Annandale's mobile number to Mr Boisen,
but Mr Boisen said it was okay to speak with him.
Mr Boisen explained
that he had received the proposal sent by Mr Annandale and he was now
looking at progressing the matter further.
In this conversation, he discussed
his experience selling land and told Mr Boisen he was very familiar with
the Capricorn Estate
(c) He gave Mr Boisen his mobile number during this conversation. He
then rang Mr Annandale and told him of the contact from Deloitte
whether he wished to deal with Mr Boisen, but Mr Annandale did not
take that up. He (Mr Annandale) simply wished him good
(d) Over the ensuing few days after the initial call from Mr Boisen, he
had numerous telephone discussions with Mr Boisen about the
Mr Boisen told him he would receive a call from Caplan Real Estate in
Queensland who were consultants to Deloitte. Mr Boisen
discussed with him
the advertising of the lots and the requirement of Deloitte that if Lagoon
Realty got the listing then conjunctional
sales with other local agents would be
permitted. During these conversations, he says he won Mr Boisen's
confidence and that Mr
Boisen told him that no decision had been made about
who to appoint and that he (Mr Boisen) was also in discussion with a rival
Lagoon Realty, Bloomfields.
(e) He received a telephone call from Caplan Real Estate, but says their
ideas were quite unrealistic as they wanted to build a display
estate, but that was over the top as there were only 31 lots.
(f) Later in the week, probably on Thursday, 20 September 2012, he was
asked to attend a meeting with a senior manager of Deloitte
and Mr Boisen.
He was invited to meet in the city, but as he was on his own, apart from an
assistant property manager, he suggested
that they come to the office of Lagoon
Realty. In the end, they agreed on a telephone conference. He saw this as an
opportunity
to convince the senior manager of Deloitte that Lagoon Realty was
the right business for the job, to expand on the proposal and to
brain storm
ideas for the project.
(g) During the telephone conference, Mr Boisen and the senior manager
were very interested in the correct pricing for the lots and
the timeline for
the sales. He explained that Lagoon Realty were well placed for land sales and
the lots should all be sold in a
period of 90 to 120 days. He also
explained that the pricing could probably be rounded up. He also told them in
the conference
call that he had strong relationships and contacts in the
building industry. He informed them that the lots had been listed with
Century 21 for at least two years and they needed a local agent and Lagoon
Realty was a leading local agent selling land in Yanchep
and that they would be
making a wise decision to choose Lagoon Realty.
(h) At the conclusion of the conference call, the senior manager thanked him
for his presentation and knowledge and said that they
would be in touch when a
decision was made.
(i) The following day, he received a telephone call from Mr Boisen
requesting that he prepare and send to Deloitte a completed agency
with respect to the lots. He did this and signed the document on behalf of the
respondent as the selling real estate agent.
emails tendered by the respondent in exhibit R1, it is recorded that the
following events occurred:
(a) On 20 September 2012 at
6.18 am, Mr Boisen sent an email to the appellant in which he stated
that (exhibit R1, BA4, AB 66):
Here are my contact details. I look forward to receiving the agency
agreement (incorporating all the details of your selling submission)
have spoken to Brendon.
Any questions, please let me know.
(b) Later that day at 2.29 pm, the appellant sent an email to
Mr Annandale in which he stated (exhibit R1, BA5, AB 67):
Hi Mate, we got the blocks Michale wants to do paperwork asap please advise
where proposal is so I can do paperwork or call ASAP regards
(c) At 2.41 pm on 20 September 2012, the appellant sent another
email to Mr Annandale in which he stated (exhibit R1, BA6,
Hi Mate, please confirm, should I write up 4 listings for the 4 lots and put
in the advertising costs ETC and send to Mikael regards
or do you want me to email you the paperwork to sign off please advise
(d) At 4.46 pm on 20 September 2012, the appellant sent an email to
Mr Boisen in which he attached a listing agreement for the 31
proposed lots
at Capricorn Esplanade Yanchep for signing by Deloitte (exhibit R1, BA7,
the attached proposed listing agreement was sent by the appellant to
Mr Boisen on 20 September 2012, the appellant dated
the agreement
(which he signed on behalf of Lagoon Realty) 21 September 2012.
Importantly, the proposed listing agreement reflected
all of the essential terms
set out in the proposal prepared by Mr Annandale, including the initial
listing prices, the agent's selling
fee and marketing charges and expenses of
$9,700. Also, the appellant included a handwritten note on the proposed
agreement that,
'NB Lagoon Realty agree to offer conjunctional selling terms to
the other local agents as per normal'.
25 September 2012, Mr Boisen sent the appellant an email in which he
informed the appellant that he may be contacted by a number
of sales and
marketing agents who will ask questions about the development. Mr Boisen
also said in the email (exhibit R1, BA9, AB
will be employing an external agency in due course to assist with the sales and
marketing campaign, we ask that you attend to
their questions and, if needed,
ask them to call back again when Brendon has returned from leave.
27 September 2012, Mr Boisen returned by email a signed copy of the
agency agreement. The only substantial alteration to the document
inclusion of a schedule A containing additional terms of appointment of
agent comprising three pages which had been prepared
by solicitors acting for
Deloitte (exhibit R1, BA10, AB 75 - 81).
30 September 2012, Mr Annandale sent an email to Mr Boisen in
which he stated (exhibit R1, BA12, AB 82):
Good Morning
Mikael & Clayton
I have returned from my vacation in China.
I am very pleased that Lagoon Realty have been selected to sell the proposed
31 Capricorn Lots and our formal appointment via our
Selling Agency Agreement
has been signed by the parties.
Brian Nathan has been the point of Contact in my absence. I would ask that
all future communication comes now to me by email to brendon@lagoonrealty.com.au
or my mobile 0414 474 476.
I understand Lavan Legal are preparing the Offer document and we can expect
the same early this week.
Lot signage has been ordered for the individual lots to help direct buyers to
the location of the proposed Lots.
I now presume we can commence advertising.
Looking forward to working with Deloitte's on this exciting project.
the appellant gave oral evidence he said that he had not seen the written
proposal prepared by Mr Annandale until after Mr Boisen
asked him to
write up the listing agreement. The appellant agreed that he wrote up the terms
of the proposed agreement in accordance
with the terms set out in the proposal,
including a handwritten note on the agreement that if other agents sell any of
the 31 lots
the payment of the rate of commission would be the same as the
commission payable to Lagoon Realty.
appellant maintained in his evidence that he received a telephone call from
Mr Boisen on 17 September 2012. He described this
telephone call to
be 'a cold call' which he said was very delicate for him to handle because he
had not been briefed on the proposal
that had been put to Deloitte. He also
said that he discussed pricing and marketing with Mr Boisen. However, he
maintained throughout
all of his discussions with Deloitte he was unaware that
Mr Annandale had in the selling submission provided proposed listing prices
for each of the proposed lots or the amount allocated for advertising.
appellant said at the time he first received a telephone call from
Mr Boisen he was in negotiations with a builder, 101 Constructions,
ocean view blocks and after he spoke to Mr Boisen he emailed that enquiry
to Mr Boisen straight away to give Mr Boisen an example
as to the type
of enquiries that Lagoon Realty receive.
appellant also said that over four days he had about six or eight telephone
calls with Deloitte which included the teleconference.
When asked what
triggered his entitlement to a commission, he said that 'signing the listing
form was a good start', but then said
that the trigger was engaging in the
conference call with Mr Boisen and two other senior managers from Deloitte.
In particular, 'he
felt that' his communication with them, his boldness during a
very long exhaustive teleconference during which he spoke about his
history with
a previous attempt to sell blocks in the Capricorn Estate, the fact that the
property had been on the market in excess
of two years with Century 21 Real
Estate (which was not a local agent), how good Lagoon Realty were at selling
beach blocks and that
he had a reputation for selling ocean view blocks in the
area. He also said that the services of Lagoon Realty got the listing 'based
our capacity as a sales force, the location of the office, our capacity to sell
... coastal real estate, and two very confident
- extremely confident sales
the appellant stated when giving oral evidence that he was not aware that
Mr Annandale had priced each of the lots, he maintained
that he discussed
pricing of each of the lots with Mr Boisen. He said he told Mr Boisen
that he thought that the lots were too cheap.
However, the appellant conceded
that the pricing of the lots did not change until after Lagoon Realty had
secured the agency listing.
Ultimately the pricing for each of the lots were
rounded up after three valuers had valued the lots after the selling agency
had been executed by both parties.
the appellant was advised by Mr Boisen that they had obtained the listing,
the appellant said when giving oral evidence that
he telephoned
Mr Annandale in China and told him that they had the lots and asked him
where was the proposal. He also said that
when he spoke to Mr Annandale it
was in the evening that Mr Annandale was having dinner in Macau. When
asked about this telephone
call, it was pointed out to the appellant that he had
received an email on 20 September 2012 from Mr Boisen at 6.18 am
to say that
Deloitte would enter into a contract with Lagoon Realty to sell the
lots as agent. When questioned further about this issue, the
appellant was
unable to recollect whether he spoke to Mr Annandale and told him that they
were getting close (to obtaining the authority
to sell the lots) or that he
telephoned him to tell him that they had secured the listing
Reasons for decision at first instance
learned Chief Commissioner applied the principles applicable to the construction
of a real estate agent's commission in circumstances
where the real estate agent
sells a property. The learned Chief Commissioner referred to the fact that the
appellant's contract
of employment entitled him to commission on the sale of a
property which was listed by him. The learned Chief Commissioner found
principles that apply to entitlement to commission on sales made by a real
estate agent were set out in
L J Hooker Ltd v
W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
[1977] HCA 13
(1977) 138 CLR
and referred to the judgment of Barwick CJ wherein his Honour applied
the principle that the entitlement to commission on a sale
of real property
arises when the agent has been the effective cause of the sale.
the test enunciated by Barwick CJ in
L J Hooker Ltd v
W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
, by applying references to 'sales'
as references to 'listings', the learned Chief Commissioner posed the question
whether the appellant
was the effective cause of the listing, did he introduce
the client to the listing, did he really bring about the listing?
learned Chief Commissioner then went on to assess the reliability of the
evidence given by the appellant and found his oral evidence
was inconsistent
with the documentary evidence and certain aspects of his oral evidence were
inconsistent with the matters stated
by him in his witness statement. In these
circumstances, the learned Chief Commissioner was unable to find that the
appellant's
work was the cause of the listings and dismissed the application.
In making the finding that she was unable to rely upon the appellant's
the learned Chief Commissioner took into account:
(a) The appellant
bears the onus of proof.
(b) The appellant does not claim to have brought about the listing by
introducing the client.
(c) The appellant signed the listing form but she was not satisfied that that
was the cause of the listing.
(d) The appellant's hearing difficulties. Those difficulties made his
comprehension of some of the questions in cross-examination
problematic.
However, he was intent on telling his sales story rather than answering the
(e) The passage of time has caused some confusion.
(f) In his witness statement, the appellant said that Mr Boisen
he had with Mr Boisen, Mr Boisen referred to having received the
proposal (prepared by Mr Annandale). Yet, in his oral evidence,
examination-in-chief and in cross-examination, the appellant said he thought
that Mr Boisen's phone call was a 'cold call'
and he was not aware of
Mr Annandale having previous dealings with Mr Boisen about the lots or
that Mr Annandale had sent off a proposal.
He also said he was not aware
of the proposal at all until sometime 'further down the track'.
(g) The appellant was most adamant about his evidence but when challenged
said he was confused about some of the timing. However,
not only was his
evidence inconsistent within itself, it was also inconsistent with documentary
evidence regarding such things as
whether he had engaged in email communications
with Mr Boisen between 17 and 19 September 2012. He was quite certain
that he had.
However, Mr Boisen's email of 20 September 2012 makes a
point of providing his contact details, which strongly suggests that
Boisen had not previously provided those email communication details and
that they had not previously communicated by email.
(h) There was inconsistency about whether the appellant had telephoned
Mr Annandale, either to say they were very close to securing
the listing or
that they had won the listing. This is further added to by the fact that the
appellant appeared to suggest that he
sent an email which was in the same terms
as the telephone call that he had made to say that they had won the
(i) Most significantly, the listing agreement form which the appellant sent
to Deloitte was solely based upon Mr Annandale's proposal.
The terms of
this proposal were what Mr Boisen instructed the appellant to include, and
he did so. None of the matters which the
appellant said he discussed with
Mr Boisen were included in that document. Deloitte sent back the document
prepared by the appellant
on direction from Mr Boisen, but it contained
some changes to the document itself and added conditions sought by Deloitte
all the circumstances, the learned Chief Commissioner was unable to be satisfied
listing, other than prepare the
paperwork as directed and thus was unable to conclude that the appellant was
responsible for the
respondent obtaining the listing. The learned Chief
Commissioner then found that the evidence pointed strongly to
Mr Annandale's
work being the cause of the listing and found that it may be
that the appellant's telephone and email communications with Deloitte
in some way, but she was unable to conclude what those communications were, what
assistance, if any, they might have been
and whether they were in any way a
trigger for the listing, based on her concerns regarding the reliability of the
The grounds of appeal
grounds of appeal are as follows:
GROUND A: THE APPELLANT WAS NOT
THE CAUSE OF THE LISTING
learned Chief Commissioner erred in fact and in law when she ruled that the
appellant was not the cause of the listing of the
blocks the subject of his
application below:
PARTICULARS
1.1 The appellant signed and submitted the Selling Agency Agreement to the
1.2 The vendor accepted the Selling Agency Agreement submitted by the
1.3 As a matter of law the appellant secured the legal document which the
respondent required by the operation of the
Real Estate and Business Agent's
GROUND B: APPLICATION OF THE TERMS OF THE EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT
learned Chief Commissioner erred in fact and in law when she failed to apply the
terms of the appellant's employment contract
PARTICULARS
2.1 The relevant term of the employment contract was set out in paragraph 4
of the Further and Better Particulars and relevantly provided:
applicant's remuneration was wholly by the way of commission on the following
4.1 at the rate of 25% of the respondent's commission on the sale of a
properly which was listed by the applicant
2.2 The term ought to have been given its ordinary and natural meaning namely
that the appellant had listed the blocks;
2.3 The appellant was entitled to his remuneration if he listed the
GROUND C: NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR OBTAINING THE LISTING
learned Chief Commissioner erred in fact and in law when she found that she was
unable to conclude that the appellant was responsible
for obtaining the listing
of the blocks the subject of his application.
PARTICULARS
3.1 The employment contract did not require the appellant to be responsible
for obtaining the listing;
3.2 The relevant term of the employment contract required the appellant to
make the listing;
3.3 The evidence was overwhelmingly in support of the appellant making the
listing when he obtained the vendor's acceptance of the
Selling Agency
The submissions made on behalf of the appellant
ground A of the grounds of appeal, the appellant challenges the finding
made by the Chief Commissioner that he was not the cause
of the listing of the
lots the subject of his application. It is pointed out on behalf of the
appellant that he was a full-time
employee for the respondent and was required
to be in attendance at the office during normal office hours and was responsible
generating listings and selling properties already listed for sale by the
respondent.
Importantly,
the principal of the business, Mr Annandale, was away in China between 16
and 29 September 2012 during which time the
work the appellant carried out
was the effective cause of listing of the 29 lots, the subject of the
is argued that the appellant's work, whatever its quantity, it was significant
qualitatively as it achieved the legal requirements
for the respondent to act on
behalf of the vendor (Deloitte) and to ultimately sell the lots which resulted
in earning commissions
for the business. It is said that without the work of
the appellant in September 2012, the respondent would not have been in a
to sell the lots.
support of this argument, the appellant relies upon the effect of s 60 of
Real Estate and Business Agents Act 1978
(WA). Section 60(1)(b)
Real Estate and Business Agents Act
provides that a licenced real
estate agent is not entitled to receive any commission unless it or he or she
has a valid appointment
to act in writing signed by the person for whom the
services are to be rendered. It is argued that pursuant to s 60, the
could not offer for sale, nor could it lawfully expect to earn a
commission from offering for sale the 31 lots in the Capricorn Esplanade,
until it had a written authority to sell. Thus, there was no listing validly at
law until Deloitte provided an authority in writing
to Lagoon Realty to act as
in support of this argument, the appellant relies upon the observations of
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates Pty
where his Honour said (66 - 67):
When an agent is
employed to sell a property, or to find a buyer, he does not earn his commission
simply by finding someone who is
ready, willing and able to buy, or who offers
to buy. Nothwithstanding [sic] what was said in an earlier decision of this
[1908] ArgusLawRp 162
7 C.L.R. 699)
, it has become
clear since
Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd.
([1941] A.C. 108)
that in such a case it is at least necessary that a binding contract of sale
should have been executed: see
Luxor (Eastboume) Ltd.
([1941] A.C., at pp. 126, 129, 154);
([1950] 2 K.B. 96);
([1950] 2 K.B. 271).
it is argued that the triggering for the payment of commission on each of the
29 lots was the preparation and execution of the
listing agreement by the
appellant and it matters little what work was done by Mr Annandale before
he left to go overseas because
that work was worthless without a written
authority that complied with the requirements of s 60 of the
Real Estate
and Business Agents Act
. It is argued that however unsatisfactory the
evidence of the appellant was at first instance it cannot be disputed that while
Annandale was away overseas that the appellant dealt with
Mr Boisen. The emails independently verify that to be the case and the
documents tendered into evidence show that he prepared the legal requirements
for the triggering for payment of commission by ensuring
s 60 of the
Real Estate and Business Agents Act
was complied with. Thus, the legal
effect of interaction between the appellant and Mr Boisen, the preparation
of the listing agreement,
the communication of the documentation to Deloitte,
its execution by Deloitte and return of the completed listing agreement to the
respondent all occurred during the period when the appellant was on his own
effectively running the business of the respondent insofar
as sales and listings
were concerned. The authorities make it clear an agent can earn a substantial
commission for very little exertion:
Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd v
[1941] AC 108
ground B of the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the learned Chief
Commissioner erred in fact and in law when she failed to
apply the terms of the
appellant's employment contract to his claim. It is put that the term of the
contract, that the appellant's
remuneration was wholly by way of commission at
the rate of 25% of the respondent's commission on the sale of a property listed
the appellant, ought to be given its ordinary and natural meaning; that is
where the appellant listed land for sale he was entitled
to the remuneration as
provided for in his contract. In support of this ground of appeal, the
submissions put on behalf of the appellant
in support of ground A of the
appeal are repeated. It is also pointed out that it was not an agreed term that
to be eligible for
a listing commission the appellant would have had to
introduce to the respondent the client whose property was subsequently listed
and sold by the respondent.
ground C of the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the learned Chief
Commissioner erred in fact and in law when she found that
she was unable to
conclude that the appellant was responsible for obtaining the listing of the
lots the subject of the application.
In support of this argument, it is argued
that the terms of the appellant's contract did not require him to be responsible
listing; the terms of his contract simply required him to list the
property to enable the entitlement to be triggered.
addition to the matters raised on behalf of the appellant in respect of
ground A, an argument is raised that there should be very
interpretation of the terms of the appellant's oral contract of employment which
is said to be in breach of cl 16 of the
Real Estate Industry Award
(Cth). It is argued that pursuant to cl 16 of the terms of that
award, the respondent was required to commit to writing the terms
appellant's employment contract and that in the absence of the terms of the
appellant's contract being in writing, the oral
terms should be legally
construed liberally as the provisions of the modern award are intended to
protect the interests of employees
of real estate agents such as the
learned Chief Commissioner's findings on the credibility of the appellant are
not substantially challenged in this appeal.
a finding of fact at first instance depends to any substantial degree on the
credibility of the witness, the finding must stand
unless it can be shown the
finder of fact has failed to use or has palpably misused his or her advantage in
hearing the witness or
has acted on evidence that was inconsistent with the
facts incontrovertibly established by the evidence or which was glaring
improbable:
Devries v Australian National Railways Commission
[1993] HCA 78
; (1993) 177 CLR 472, 479.
light of the inconsistencies between some of the matters stated in the
appellant's witness statement, his oral evidence and email
correspondence, it is
clear that the learned Chief Commissioner's finding that the appellant's
evidence was unreliable cannot be
challenged.
Consequently,
the only reliable and relevant evidence of the work carried out by the appellant
before the learned Chief Commissioner
is that the appellant prepared and sent by
email to Mr Boisen the selling agreement (which reflected the terms
proposed by Mr Annandale
in his selling submission dated 3 September
2012) for execution by Deloitte as receivers and managers for Yanchep
Developments Pty
Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed)
ACN 134 225 835.
is common ground that Mr Annandale was the holder of a triennial
certificate and the appellant was engaged as a real estate representative
licensed as such under the
Real Estate and Business Agents Act
requirements of s 60 of the
Real Estate and Business Agents Act
not assist the appellant's claim for commission. Section 60 of the
Estate and Business Agents Act
renders void an appointment to act as an
agent a licensed real estate agent who holds a triennial certificate and
disentitles that
agent to any valuable consideration in respect of services in
respect of the sale of real property if an appointment to act is not
containing terms prescribed in s 60(2) and signed by the client.
effect of s 60 is that if the formalities are complied with in respect of
land the subject of a complying written agreement a
licenced real estate agent
who holds a triennial certificate is entitled to payment of commission as the
principal and if a licenced
real estate agent sells the land in question, the
real estate representative subject to his or her express or implied terms of
is entitled to payment of commission. In this matter it is an implied
term that to be entitled to commission the work and conduct
of the respondent
must be the effective cause of a listing.
the argument that until a contract of agency for the sale of land is executed in
writing pursuant to s 60 of the
Real Estate and Business Agents Act
merely preparing a selling agreement which provides for terms of contract that
have been proposed by another party (in this case
Mr Annandale) is not
sufficient to raise a right to be paid commission as a listing agent unless it
can be found there is an effective
causal relationship between the work of the
appellant and the agreement by Deloitte to list the 31 cottage lots for sale by
Moneywood Pty Ltd v Salamon Nominees Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 2
202 CLR 351
(2001) 177 ALR 390
, the High Court considered the effect
of a legislative provision that was similar to s 60 of the
Real Estate
and Business Agents Act
. Section 76(1)(c) of the
Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971
(Qld) provided:
No person shall be entitled to
sue for or recover or retain any fees, charges, commission, reward, or other
remuneration for or in
respect of any transaction as an auctioneer, a real
estate agent, a commercial agent, or a motor dealer, unless -
(c) the engagement or appointment to act as ... real estate agent ... in
respect of such transaction is in writing signed by the person
to be charged
with such ... commission ... or the person's agent or representative ...
compliance with s 76(1)(c) of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
Moneywood Pty Ltd
did not absolve the appellant from satisfying
the court that its conduct was the 'effective cause' of the sale of part of a
of land. Justice Gummow, after considering the observations of
Jacobs J in
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates
, found to secure an entitlement to commission where two agents
separately introduce a purchase, the essential issue is whether the
claiming a commission brought about a state of affairs giving rise to the
contractual right to the commission [86].
cause' is not the same as 'exclusive cause'. In
L J Hooker Ltd
v W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
, Jacobs J explained what is
meant by the requirement of 'effective cause' in the law of contract which
entitles a real estate agent
to commission. At (86) he
The inquiry is a factual one and it probably does not
matter in the long run whether the definite or indefinite pronoun is used before
the words 'effective cause'. Thus in
Gowrie and Blockhouse
Collieries Ltd.
([1910] A.C. 614, at p. 625) Lord Atkinson used the phrases
'the effective cause' and 'an effective cause' without distinction between
In almost any factual situation a result will have more than one cause and if
there could only be one effective cause in relation
to a sale within the meaning
of the implication, then there are plenty of events in this case which would
have strong claims for
the title in competition with the appellant's actions.
'Effective cause' means more than simply 'cause'. The inquiry is whether the
actions of the agent really brought about the relation of buyer and seller and
it is seldom conclusive that there were other events
which couuld [sic] each be
described as a cause of the ensuing sale. The factual inquiry is whether a sale
is really brought about
by the act of the agent:
14 C.B. (N.S.) 681
, at p. 685
[143 E.R. 613
, at p. 614]) quoted in
Burchell's Case
([1910] A.C., at p. 624).
L J Hooker Ltd v Dominion Factors Pty Ltd
SR (NSW) 146
, Sugerman J raised the possibility that two or more
agents who have taken part in a series of negotiations can claim that what each
has done has been an efficient cause of sale (149). Justice Walsh (150)
and Else-Mitchell J (151) made similar observations.
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
Barwick CJ also considered whether two agents could be entitled to
commission and went on to consider what was said in
Ltd v Dominion Factors Pty Ltd
and indicated that a case of two agents
being entitled to commission may be unusual but not inconceivable. At (60 - 61)
The case of
L. J. Hooker Ltd.
Dominion Factors Pty. Ltd.
63 S.R. (N.S.W.) 146)
was much relied
upon by counsel for the appellant. He claimed that the case decided that it was
possible for two agents each to be
entitled to full commission in respect of a
sale of a piece of real estate. The present is not a case in which more than one
claims commission. But the appellant seeks to draw some relevant principle
from the case. I would agree that it is better to speak
of the basis of the
agent's entitlement to commission being that he is an effective cause of the
sale. Where the performance of the
agent's obligation is based upon his
introduction of the property to the purchaser or of the purchaser to the vendor
I have some
difficulty in conceiving how two agents in relation to a sale of the
whole of a property to a single purchaser should at an identical
time introduce
the property to the purchaser or the purchaser to the vendor. I would have
thought that in the ordinary course of
things, one introduction would have
preceded the other, and in that case the efforts of the second agent on the
scene might well
be thought not to have been causal of the sale. But, if the
case can be made out that an agent without introducing the property to
purchaser or the purchaser to the vendor, none the less causally assists in
bringing about the sale, I suppose it is conceivable
that two agents may each
establish his right to a full commission: one, it may be, through the
introduction of the purchaser to the
property or of the purchaser to the vendor
and the other by actions which are properly held to be an effective cause of the
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates Pty
also made a similar observation and considered the prospect of two
agents being the effective cause of sale as not a matter of generalisation.
(87) his Honour said:
That rare case, if it exists at all, can be
left until it arises. If and when it does, I do not think that it will be simply
by seeking to distinguish between an effective cause and the effective
cause of a sale. I do not find it necessary to determine whether
certain dicta
L. J. Hooker Ltd.
Dominion Factors Pty. Ltd.
(N.S.W.) 146)
are correct.
Consequently,
each case will turn on its own facts. Thus, whether an agent was the effective
cause of a transaction is a question
L J Hooker Ltd v
W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
(68) (Gibbs J). This principle
also applies where the facts reveal more than one agent has carried out work in
relation to securing
a sale or listing of a property.
efforts of a real estate agent may go unrewarded even when an agent has not been
unconnected with the occurrence of a sale.
Justice Stephen made this point
L J Hooker Ltd v W J Adams Estates Pty Ltd
and then went on to observe (78):
Rightly or wrongly the law, as it
has evolved, has made the earning of an agreed commission an all or nothing
affair, on the one hand
denying to agents any reward despite substantial labour
on their part and on the other handsomely rewarding agents who with little
effort manage to effect a sale. As Lord Russell of Killowen said in
(Eastbourne) Ltd.
'The agent takes the risk in the hope of
a substantial remuneration for comparatively small exertion' ([1941] A.C., at p.
law has seized upon their success or failure in bringing about a sale
as the sole criterion of reward and rates of commission have
no doubt come to
reflect this state of affairs. To adopt unduly extended concepts of effective
cause in an individual endeavour to
do what may appear to be justice in a
particular case not only disregards the settled approach of the law in this
field but may,
by its effect as a precedent, disrupt the existing pattern of
acceptable scales of reward for services rendered by estate agents.
the appellant did not introduce Deloitte to Lagoon Realty, introduction of a
client is not sufficient of itself to establish
'effective cause'. As
Moneywood Pty Ltd
Introduction is necessary because, without it, no completed
transaction will usually be possible. But it is insufficient because (as
decided cases repeatedly demonstrate) many transactions fail. The purchaser who
is introduced may be willing, but not able, to
complete the contemplated
transaction (
[1977] HCA 13
(1977) 138 CLR 52
at 67. As Gibbs J
there points out, in some jurisdictions it had been held that 'it is enough
. . . that a binding contract has been entered into as
a result of the agency,
even though the purchaser subsequently proves unable to complete it';
[1949] VicLawRp 21
[1949] VLR 113
Latter v Parsons
[1906] NZGazLawRp 54
26 NZLR 645
Manns v Bradley
[1960] NZLR 586.
In Queensland, on the other
hand, 'it has been held that the agent is not entitled to commission unless the
purchaser who signed
the contract was ready, willing and able to complete it';
Pettigrew v Klumpp
[1942] St R Qd 131
Hill v Davidson
[1950] St R
Anderson v Densley
[1953] HCA 47
(1953) 90 CLR 460
at 467, this Court
effectively resolved this dispute by holding that the commission only becomes
payable if the sale is completed).
Into the failure of one transaction will
often step other agents with the same principals but with access to funding that
purchaser's previous inability to complete the transaction (cf
Blocksidge and Ferguson Ltd v Campbell
[1947] St R Qd 22
[1955] St R Qd 515
Rasmussen & Russo Pty Ltd v Gaviglio
[1982] Qd R 571
Bradley v Adams
[1989] 1 Qd R 256
When this happens, such agents will commonly stake their own claims to
commission. This will then oblige courts, in resolving
disputed claims, to
determine the contested issues of causation which such claims present (
Wood & Co v Dantata
[1987] 2 EGLR 23
at 25 applying Reynolds,
Bowstead on Agency
, 15th ed (1985), p 230).
appellant would be entitled to commission if the agreement by Deloitte was in
fact secured by his efforts. Put another way, was
the conduct of the appellant
in fact the effective cause of the agreement by Deloitte to list the lots for
sale by Lagoon Realty?
this matter, there was no direct evidence before the learned Chief Commissioner
of what was in the mind of Mr Boisen or any other
employee of Deloitte who
made the decision to list the lots for sale by Lagoon Realty. In particular,
there was no reliable direct
evidence of why Deloitte chose to enter into a
listing agreement with the respondent.
circumstances where the only reliable evidence before the learned Chief
Commissioner was a listing agreement prepared by and signed
by the appellant in
which all material terms reflected matters proposed by Mr Annandale, it is
not open to find that the learned
Chief Commissioner erred in fact or in law in
finding in effect that the appellant failed to prove that his work was the cause
the listing of the lots.
do I agree that cl 16 of the
Real Estate Industry Award 2010
the appellant's case. This provision of the award is not relevant to the
construction of the terms of his contract of employment.
Firstly, there is no
dispute about the terms entitling the appellant to commission. Secondly, the
obligation created by cl 16 of
the award to enter into a written agreement
setting out the terms of a commission-only basis of remuneration, other than the
specification
of a minimum rate to be paid to a commission-only employee of 35%
of the employer's net commission in cl 16.5, does not raise any
matter that
is relevant to the construction of terms of the appellant's contract of
employment. It is not argued that the minimum
rate specified in cl 16.5 is
relevant to the rate claimed by the appellant pursuant to the oral terms of
contract. Thirdly, cl 16
may not create a retrospective obligation as the
award had not come into effect when the appellant commenced employment as a real
estate representative with the respondent.
these reasons, I am not satisfied any of the grounds of appeal have been made
out and I am of the opinion that an order should
be made to dismiss the
KENNER ASC:
this appeal, the appellant maintained that he listed 29 lots of residential land
for sale at the "Capricorn Esplanade" in Yanchep,
as an employed real estate
representative of the respondent. At first instance he claimed $42,700 in
commissions said to be owed
to him under the terms of his contract of
employment. The respondent maintained that it was the principal of the firm, Mr
who was the effective cause of the listing of the lots. This was said
to arise as a consequence of a detailed proposal for the sale
of the 31 lot
parcel of land prepared by Mr Annandale and submitted to Deloitte Touche
Tohmatsu, the accounting firm appointed as
Receiver and Manager of the
development. The Commission at first instance found in favour of the
respondent.
the reasons given by Smith AP, which I have had the opportunity of reading
in draft, the appeal should be dismissed. The essential
question arising on the
appeal was whether the appellant was the "effective cause of the listing" for
the purposes of his contract
of employment with the respondent. The relevant
principles are set out in the decision of the High Court in
LJ Hooker Ltd v
WJ Adams Estates Pty Ltd
[1977] HCA 13
(1997) 138 CLR 52.
was not contended by the appellant that those principles did not apply in the
present circumstances. That being the case and
those principles not being
satisfied, the appellant has not established that he was the effective cause of
the listing, as he maintained.
MATTHEWS C:
have read a draft of the reasons for decision of the Acting President. I agree
with those reasons and agree that an order should
be made to dismiss the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter