URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/77.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- PLATO [2025] WADC 77 (6 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CRIMINAL
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- PLATO [2025] WADC 77
22 OCTOBER & 6 NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
6 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
IND 681 of 2023
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
PHILLIP JAMES PLATO
Factual basis for sentence - Attempted
possession - Intent to sell as opposed to supply - Circumstantial evidence -
Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
The offender is to be sentenced on the basis that he
intended to possess the entirety of the three packages, giving rise to counts
And that, in respect of each of the four counts on the indictment, the
offender intended to sell at least some of the relevant drug
for commercial
Representation:
The State of Western Australia
Ms P J Hudson & Mr S M Stocks
Solicitors:
The State of Western Australia
State Director of Public Prosecutions
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Atholwood v The Queen
[2000] WASCA 76
(2000) 110 A Crim R 417
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
(1989) 167 CLR 590
Harvey v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 250
Law v The State of Western Australia
[2009] WASCA 193
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618
Strbak v The Queen
[2020] HCA 10
(2020) 267 CLR 494
matter has a considerable background which I set out in detail in my oral
reasons for refusing the accused, Mr Phillip Plato's
application to change his
guilty pleas on 10 October 2025. I will not repeat what I said then,
unless it is necessary to provide
the necessary context for this aspect of the
was arrested on 13 July 2021 and charged with drug offences which in due
course became the four counts on this indictment.
On counts 1 - 3 he
was in each case indicted on an allegation that he attempted to possess a
trafficable quantity of methylamphetamine
with intent to sell or supply. By
count 4 the State alleged that Mr Plato possessed ketamine with intent to
sell or supply.
pleaded not guilty in the Magistrates Court and having been committed to this
court for trial, Mr Plato eventually pleaded
guilty to all four counts on
7 November 2024. No qualifications were identified on his behalf. The
Chief Judge entered judgments
of conviction, and the matter was adjourned to a
sentence mention hearing.
matter then came before me for sentence on 12 June 2025. The State
prosecutor read the statement of material facts and Mr Plato's
then counsel
began to address me in mitigation. It became apparent, for the first time,
that there were significant issues between
the prosecution and the defence in
respect of each of the four counts on the indictment. Accordingly, I
adjourned the matter for
a trial of issues.
due course, written submissions revealed that on counts 1 and
4 Mr Plato denied any intention to sell or supply. In respect of
counts 2 and 3, Mr Plato denied attempted possession.
a result, I vacated the trial of issues and instead listed the matter for a
change of plea application which I heard on 26 September
2025. By this
stage Mr Plato was representing himself. On 10 October 2025 I found
that Mr Plato had not established any miscarriage
of justice and his
application to set aside his pleas of guilty was dismissed.
trial of issues was reinstated for 22 October 2025. Previously, on
12 June 2025 the State had read in the amended statement
of material facts
and tendered the State brief. At the 22 October 2025 hearing the State
tendered as electronic exhibits, the search
of Mr Plato's vehicle, the
the Innaloo unit
) and the police interview
with Mr Plato, all on 13 July 2021. The State also relied upon the
investigating officer, Detective Senior
Constable Psaila-Borrie's most recent
witness statement of 21 October 2025.
State called Detective Psaila-Borrie to give evidence, both specifically in
relation to the arrest and investigation of Mr Plato
and more generally as
a 'drug expert'.
State tendered as exhibits, six photos from the search of the Innaloo
The State also
tendered 16 pages from Mr Plato's NAB bank
statements.
chose not to give evidence. Although I had made adverse credibility findings
when he gave evidence on 26 September 2025
in support of his application to
change his guilty pleas, because he did not give evidence at this hearing, those
findings are irrelevant.
The elements of the offences established by Mr Plato's guilty pleas
plea of guilty is a formal admission of each of the legal ingredients of the
elements that are established because of Mr Plato's guilty pleas are as
follows. For each of counts 1 - 3:
relevant package or envelope contained methylamphetamine. The
(WA) provides that methylamphetamine is a
prohibited drug.
knew that the package or envelope contained a prohibited drug of some kind.
The State does not need to prove that Mr Plato
knew the precise kind of
prohibited drug, nor the weight or quantity of prohibited drug.
intended to possess the prohibited drugs in the package or envelope.
began to put his intention to possess the prohibited drugs in the package or
envelope into execution by personally doing
an act that was more than merely
preparatory to obtaining possession of those drugs.
Mr Plato obtained possession of the prohibited drugs in the package or
envelope, he intended to sell or supply at least some of
those prohibited
regard to count 4, Mr Plato possessed the ketamine found at the Innaloo
unit on 13 July 2021. Ketamine is a prohibited drug.
He intended to
sell or supply at least some of that ketamine to
The established facts directly relevant to counts 1 - 3
the brief, Detective Psaila-Borrie's evidence, the two exhibits tendered at the
trial of issues, and in the context of the elements
established by
Mr Plato's guilty pleas, I find the following facts established.
7.55 am on 7 July 2021, a DHL package sent from Germany was
intercepted and examined by officers of the Australian Border Force,
), at the air cargo facility at Perth International Airport.
It was seemingly sent by a William Bockhorn in Germany on 3 July
ABF officer conducted an X-ray examination of the
consignment.
ABF officer noted that it was addressed to Phillip James, at a particular
address in Kingsley (
the Kingsley
Following the presumptive
placed into an evidence bag seal number
sealed with Australian Federal Police (
) reference number
GR-210179007.
note that when a person consigns an item using DHL they are provided with a
'House Air Way Bill' number which enables them to track
evidence bag then came into the custody of the Western Australia Police Force
and was placed in conveyance movement envelope
electronic evidence recording shows that the package (GR-210179007, physical
material number 1A) contained (1AAAAA) 56 g of
methylamphetamine. It was
placed in security movement envelope
W001648667.
drugs W001648667 when subsequently analysed was found to contain 55.3 g of
methylamphetamine at a purity of
rise to count 1.
the same morning, another DHL package sent from Germany was also intercepted and
examined by ABF officers at Perth
parcel was addressed to 'JAMES Phillip' also at the Kingsley address. It had
seemingly been sent by a James Attick in Germany
it through again, following examination it was sealed with AFP reference number
GR-210178204.
was placed inside evidence bag
in conveyance movement envelope
electronic evidence recording shows that the package (GR-210178204, physical
material number 1B) contained (1BAAA) 55.54 g of
methylamphetamine. It was
placed in security movement envelope
W001648668.
drugs in that envelope when subsequently analysed was found to contain
54.8 g of methylamphetamine at a purity of
rise to count 2.
am satisfied that on 29 June and 3 July 2021 a total of 101.1 g
of methylamphetamine in two packages was sent from Germany to the
address linked to Mr Plato. As soon as those packages (although now the
methylamphetamine had been swapped for an inert
substance) were delivered to the
Kingsley address, Mr Plato collected them.
to that delivery and collection, however, the authorities discovered another
consignment linked to Mr Plato. At about 9.10
am on 9 July 2021,
a mail article inside an Australia Post envelope was intercepted and opened.
The envelope was addressed to 'attention
James Phillips' at the Innaloo unit.
This was Mr Plato's address at the time. The envelope is said to have
originated in the United
not clear from the brief when it was sent.
envelope contained a vacuum-sealed silver foil bag, within which was a
vacuum sealed bag containing a crystallised opaque substance.
It was repacked
into the mail article in its original state and placed into the ABF temporary
storage facility as
sealed with AFP reference number
GR-210180676.
police did not attempt to deliver it to Mr Plato.
electronic evidence recording shows that the package (GR-210180676 physical
material number 1C) contained (1CAAAA) 102.34 g of
methylamphetamine. It
was placed in security movement envelope
W001648669.
drugs in that envelope, when subsequently analysed was found to contain
101 g of methylamphetamine at a purity of
rise to count 3.
total quantity of methylamphetamine was 211.1 g at a purity of
13 July 2021, police officers made a controlled delivery of the two DHL
envelopes that relate to count 1 and count 2. In each
the methylamphetamine was replaced with an inert substance and the packages
reconstructed. Posing as a delivery man, a police
officer knocked on the front
door of the Kingsley address at 1.34 pm. The officer handed both
packages to Mr Plato's father who
signed a delivery register
arrived at this address in his car at 1.47 pm and departed in the same car
at 2.03 pm.
I am satisfied that he had unsuccessfully attempted to collect the packages from
DHL Express at Perth International Airport at
vehicle. The two DHL envelopes were in the front centre console.
Samsung Galaxy mobile phone was in the centre
The established facts directly relevant to count 4
Mr Plato accepted that he lived there at the
They found the following:
electronic scales with traces of methylamphetamine on the top surface of the
a total of 28
small clip seal bags of ketamine, each marked either 'KHW' or 'K5' in
weights varying from 0.47 g to 1.97 g and totalling
clip seal bags located with the ketamine; and
a notebook in
the same drawer as the ketamine, as photographed at Exhibits 1.4 to
Issues and legal principles
respect of counts 1 - 3, on each count the issues between the
prosecution and Mr Plato are:
what quantity of
methylamphetamine did Mr Plato intend to gain possession of?
Mr Plato intend to sell at least some of the methylamphetamine as opposed
to merely supply some of it?
respect of count 4, the issue between the prosecution and Mr Plato is, did
Mr Plato intend to sell at least some of the ketamine
as opposed to merely
supply some of it?
State correctly accepted that to establish that Mr Plato intended to obtain
the actual quantity of methylamphetamine that was
sent to him, as opposed to
some lesser quantity, it would be necessary for the State to prove that fact
beyond reasonable doubt.
Equally, to establish that Mr Plato intended
to sell at least some of the relevant drug it would, again, be necessary to
fact beyond reasonable doubt. There is no onus on Mr Plato. I
cannot draw any adverse inference against Mr Plato because he chose
give evidence in the trial of issues.
the effect of a plea of guilty means that all defences have been negatived, it
does not necessarily constitute an admission
of all the facts relied upon by the
State for the purposes of sentencing.
disputed facts are raised in a trial of issues, if a sentencing judge is not
persuaded of the existence of a particular fact
or circumstance, whether
mitigating or aggravating, the absence of that fact does not mean that the
converse fact is proved. In
such circumstances the fact simply does not exist
for the purposes of
sentencing.
is not open to me to make any finding against Mr Plato by inference unless
the inferred finding is the only reasonable and rational
conclusion open on the
material before me taken as a whole.
Other relevant evidence bearing on the disputed issues
police seized Mr Plato's Samsung phone he declined to provide his PIN code.
The Digital Forensics Unit within WA Police were
able to access the mobile phone
using the Cellebrite program. The result of that analysis is set out in an
extraction report.
The 'Settings' area of the phone refers to Phillip Plato, and seemingly
gives his Hotmail email address.
25 November 2020
, a person referred to as 'Jelly Tits' (owner) began
to message an unknown person from this mobile phone using the application
The State allege that 'Jelly Tits' is Mr Plato. In one
message, Mr Plato is alleged to have
State allege that Mr Plato, made Notes on the phone at 5.38 pm on
5 January 2021
. Set out in the Notes are six names or nicknames
with what appears to be cash
7 January 2021
the State allege the following conversation occurred
between Mr Plato and a person called Lee:
What you after, boss? 200 worth?
Yeah, mate, if cool
I have to include travel in my time, et cetera, so I could
only do two pt
That's fine. If you can drop, bro, would be
14 January 2021
the State allege that Mr Plato was asked by
someone on Telegram, 'How much cash for 4 pts?' And that he
Hw 350 or 80/pt.
there are messages on the phone, using the application
Grindr, from the person referred to as 'owner', said by the State to be
Plato, with the handle or nickname 'Classy'. The State allege that
Mr Plato had a conversation with a person called David and referred
'grabbing the
participants then messaged in
25 May 2021
, the State allege that Mr Plato began to message a
person called 'Lettario Amadeus' using the application Signal and referring to
'Sprite' and 'mechanical
State allege that on
26 May 2021
Mr Plato sent a message which
Can you do 10 mil drink and 2 p for 200, my dear?
Drinks are n/a until this arvo. Food is 60 each.
the participants in these messages are using code.
on Signal, there are exchanges between the person referred to as Phillip Plato
(owner) and a person referred to as 'Jack' on
How much cash bro
It's gross price but it could be cut fifty-fifty. You
And I'm low.
Could do max 1g
I'm just finishing at mum's. Can come to you now if free.
You only have me 500, ha, ha, ha. I'll cop it though.
Should have counted it when you were here.
10 July 2021
can you get be a gram asap?
I've just sold out sorry.
10 July 2021
a person referred to as 'R u chasin!?'
sent a message on Grindr to 'Classy' (said to be Mr Plato)
do you want any gear.
this person (perhaps unsurprisingly given his less than opaque nickname) did not
believe in using code.
State allege that the following conversation involving Mr Plato
signal me bitch $.
R U CHASIN:
you don't reply on
I've got the best stuff in town bar
what's your budget?
400hw is the upper
R U CHASIN:
let's do 375
and you can round it down to
so I can bring you cash mid-morning, you obvs know I'm not
going to skip a
the day before Mr Plato's arrest,
12 July 2021
the State allege
that Mr Plato sent a message, via Signal:
Hey buddy. You have by chance? How much for hw?
recipient responded:
It's fucked at the moment so really expensive but the stuff is actually decent.
State allege that Mr Plato
1 see. Would you go 300 + 1g of ketamine? Or is cash king atm
bear in mind that on the following day Mr Plato was in possession of
28 clip seal bags of ketamine and also the mobile phone used
and receive these messages.
police searched Mr Plato's car, they found an empty DHL package in the boot
which related to a delivery to the Kingsley address
of an item weighing
0.24 kg and which had been sent from Germany on 16 June
Conclusions
am satisfied that the 5 January 2021 Notes section on Mr Plato's phone
is a 'tick list', namely a list of persons owing money for
the supply of
further satisfied that the pages of his notebook found with the ketamine as
photographed as Exhibits 1.4 and 1.6 constitute
tick lists recording money owed
for drugs. I am not sufficiently satisfied of page 5. I am satisfied that
Mr Plato compiled the
list in his phone and the two lists in the
accept Detective Psaila-Borrie's evidence that phones seized from persons
suspected of dealing with drugs often contain encrypted
applications such as
Telegram and Signal. Both, as noted, were found on Mr Plato's phone.
was no evidence in the trial of issues hearing of anyone else having access to
Mr Plato's phone. Mr Plato was found in possession
of the phone
within 24 hours of some of the messages relied upon by the State being sent
and received. It is implausible in the
extreme that over a period of some eight
to nine months another person or persons was routinely sending messages on
Mr Plato's phone,
purporting to be Mr Plato, in a manner that would
incriminate Mr Plato if the phone came to the attention of the police. I
am entirely
satisfied that Mr Plato sent the messages attributed to
tendering the messages, the State was not seeking to prove that the contents of
any of them were true, or that they were directly
connected to any of the
quantities of methylamphetamine or ketamine the subject of the counts in the
indictment. Their potential
relevance was that they had been found on a mobile
phone in Mr Plato's vehicle, and were part of the circumstantial case
Mr Plato that he intended to sell at least some of the
methylamphetamine in each of the three packages and also intended to sell
of the ketamine.
State did not seek to rely upon the previous conduct as revealed in the messages
as propensity evidence under
Evidence Act
(WA) and I take the State to have relied upon this evidence as circumstantial
evidence at common law.
was no objection to the State relying on this material.
Harriman v The
Atholwood v The
are authorities for the proposition that evidence that an accused was
involved in drug dealing at a time approximate to the period
of the alleged
offence is probative of the element of intent to sell or supply.
this case, given the fact that the elements of the offences are admitted, the
evidence bears upon the aspect of whether there
was an intent to sell at least
some of the relevant drug. If there had been an objection, I would have
held that the probative value
of this evidence exceeded any potential for
respect of the latter point, I remind myself that merely because Mr Plato
was involved in drug dealing transactions in the months
that led up to July
2021, it does not automatically follow that he must have intended to sell at
least some of the drugs that he
attempted to possess and did possess as of
13 July 2021.
bank statements shows that he was seemingly employed by an entity called
Northern Suburbs Community Legal Centre. I calculate
from those statements
that in the three months up to his arrest he received $14,902.24 in remuneration
from that source.
accept Detective Psaila-Borrie's unchallenged evidence that if someone in
Western Australia was purchasing prohibited drugs from
overseas, using 'the
Darkweb', the seller would expect the purchaser to pay upfront for the drugs.
It would be very unlikely for
a drug supplier to extend credit to a person half
the world away without an established business relationship.
accept Detective Psaila-Borrie's unchallenged evidence that as of July 2021 in
Western Australia, 0.1 g of methylamphetamine, or
a point, sold for $100 to
$150. And that, 28 g, or an ounce, would sell for between $11,750 to
$26,000. It follows that 211.1 g
of methylamphetamine had a 'retail value'
of between $88,548 and $316,500.
evidence clearly establishes that a person or persons overseas sent three
separate packages containing a total of 211 g of methylamphetamine
Mr Plato. This total amount was worth at least $88,548 if it was all sold
in Western Australia. It is entirely implausible that
any of the three packages
would have been sent without having been specifically requested by Mr Plato
and paid for by him in advance.
I am prepared to accept that, as the State
acknowledged in earlier written submissions, the purchase price may well have
been substantially
less than this minimum value of $88,548.
Circumstantial
evidence must not, of course, be considered on a piecemeal basis. It must
be evaluated in its entirety:
am satisfied from the evidence, considered as a whole, that as of 13 July
2021 Mr Plato had a client base for illicit drugs and
was able, therefore,
to sell some of the drugs he intended to possess to that base.
to the State's submission, it is speculative to reason that Mr Plato only
ordered the third package because of the apparent
delay in delivery of the first
two packages. I note that Mr Plato had seemingly received an earlier
delivery from Germany in mid-June
am satisfied that the only reasonable and rational inference is that
Mr Plato intended to possess the entirety of each of the three
totalling, therefore 211.1 g of methylamphetamine.
messages sent by Mr Plato, together with the tick lists, clearly show
him to be in the business of drug dealing in 2021.
had the means to source drugs, but not to the extent that he could take custody
of such a valuable commodity without seeking
to recoup some of the cost of
acquiring it. Whilst accepting that his outlay for these drugs may well have
been significantly less
than the potential sale price, there would have been an
outlay which would have to be recouped. These drugs had a very high potential
also accepting that Mr Plato may have had a drug habit at this time and
would have consumed some of this consignment of methylamphetamine
himself, I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he intended to sell at least some of the
drugs in respect of each of counts
1, 2 and 3.
I consider the quantity of the ketamine as a whole, the fact that it was
individually packaged into 28 separate clip seal bags
of broadly comparable
weights, the declaration of an intention to use ketamine as part purchase of
methylamphetamine, the tick list
found with the ketamine, as well as the empty
clip seal bags, I am driven to the conclusion that Mr Plato intended
to sell at least
some of it. Given the packaging, it is distinctly
possible that he intended to sell all of it, but I will draw back from such a
conclusion.
Accordingly,
in respect of counts 1, 2 and 3, I will sentence Mr Plato on the basis that
he intended to possess the entirety of each
of the three packages, and that, on
each count, he intended to sell at least some of it for commercial gain.
count 4 I will sentence Mr Plato on the basis that he intended to sell at
least some of the ketamine for commercial gain.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
Associate to Judge Troy
6 NOVEMBER 2025
In conformity
with the principles discussed in, for example,
Harvey v The State of Western
[2015] WASCA 250
Strbak v The Queen
[2020] HCA 10
267 CLR 494
Prosecution Brief, page (PB)
House Airway
Bill Number (HAWB) 141515700, PB
Certificate of analysis at PB
631352116, PB
Certificate of analysis at PB
Certificate of analysis at PB
and PB 160 - PB
Certificates of analysis at PB 147 - PB
Law v The State of Western Australia
[2009] WASCA 193
say a reference to a half weight, namely
say a reference to two
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
(1989) 167 CLR
Atholwood v The Queen
[2000] WASCA 76
(2000) 110 A Crim R
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618
[46] (Gummow, Hayne & Crennan JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (292 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter