URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/96.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Delia Gavril -v- Director General Department of Education, WA [2025] WAIRC 96; (18 February 2025)
APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE IN MATTER NUMBER M 17/2024 GIVEN ON 13 JUNE 2024
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R COSENTINO
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
COMMISSIONER T KUCERA
WEDNESDAY, 22 JANUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
18 FEBRUARY 2025
DELIA GAVRIL
DIRECTOR GENERAL DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION, WA
Industrial Law (WA) - Appeal
against a decision of the Industrial Magistrate – What constitutes a
‘decision’ of
the Industrial Magistrates Court for the purpose of an
appeal to the Full Bench under s 84(2) of the Industrial Relations Act –
Whether an order to strike out pleadings is a ‘decision’ –
‘decision’ in s 84 means a final determination
substantive application – Appeal dismissed
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Industrial Magistrate's Court (General Jurisdiction) Regulations 2005
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment Act 2021
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
(No 20 of 2002)
Long Service Leave Act 1958
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Representation:
Ms D Gavril on her own behalf
Mr J Carroll of counsel
Solicitors:
State Solicitor’s Office
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Anderson v Pope
(1986) 66 WAIG 1563
Arc Holdings (WA) Pty Ltd v Industrial Inspector
[2023] WAIRC 00991
(2023) 04 WAIG 97
Armet v CFC Consolidated Pty Ltd
[2019] WASCA 165
Baker Hughes Australia Pty Ltd v Martin Venier
[2016] WAIRC 00843
(2016) 96 WAIG 1488
Chubb Security Australia Pty Ltd v Paul Raymond Danson
81 WAIG 783
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426
Delia Gavril v Director General Department of Education, WA
[2024] WAIRC 00378
(2024) 104 WAIG 862
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 22
G Parri and M Parri trading as G & M Parri v The Western
Australian Builders’ Labourers,
Painters and Plasterers Union of
(1998) 78 WAIG 586
Giovanni Basilio Nicoletti v Transport Workers’
Union of Australia, Industrial Union of Workers, Western Australian Branch
(1998) 86 IR 97
(1998) 78 WAIG 4316
Governing Council of North Metropolitan TAFE
v The State School
Teachers’ Union of WA
[2019] WASCA 120
Graham McCorry v Como Investments Pty Ltd
70 WAIG 658
Ian Barrett and Tracey Barrett v The Western Australian Builders’
Labourers, Painters and Plasterers Union of Workers
(1998) 78 WAIG 2340
Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia
[1998] HCA 30;
(1998) 195 CLR 1
[2003] HCA 70
(2003) 78 ALJR 177
Terence Tamiana v Team Global Express Pty Ltd
[2024] WAIRC 00185
(2024) 104 WAIG 543
The Governing Council of North Metropolitan TAFE v State School
Teachers’ Union of WA (Incorporated)
[2018] WAIRC 00746
(2018) 98 WAIG 1209
Case(s) also referred to:
R v McGowan and Another; Ex parte
Macko and Another
[1984] VicRp 78
[1984] VR 1000
Reasons for Decision
The Full Bench:
appellant, Delia Gavril, commenced a claim in the Industrial Magistrates Court
) alleging that the respondent, the Director General Department of
Education, WA (
), took damaging action against her in
contravention of
Industrial Relations Act 1979
). She tried to articulate her claims by a Statement of the Claimant
) and Further and Better Particulars (
Particulars
13 June 2024, the IMC made orders, on the Department’s application,
striking out parts of the Statement and the Particulars,
on the basis that those
parts did not disclose a cause of action under
of the Act, and were not
salvageable by any further amendments:
Delia Gavril v Director General
Department of Education, WA
[2024] WAIRC 00378
(2024) 104 WAIG 862
) per Scaddan IM at [74]. Industrial Magistrate Scadden
considered the struck-out parts alluded to other possible claims beyond the
IMC’s jurisdiction, but did not disclose a cause of action for damaging
action under
Reasons at [75]. Her Honour did not strike out all of the
Statement nor all of the Particulars, intending to preserve three distinct
claims under
Gavril was ordered to file further and better particulars of one of her
remaining causes of action, that is, that damaging action
in the form of being
deprived of or had a reduced opportunity to be a permanent employee as a result
of making enquiries or complaints:
Reasons at Schedule III, order 3.
the effect of the Court’s orders was that two purported causes of action,
relating to Ms Gavril’s time working
as a Payroll Officer, were struck
out. These parts of the claim were referred to in the Statement at [194] and in
the Particulars
Working as a Payroll Officer’ and
Payroll Officer Renew Contract’: see Schedule II of the
Gavril has appealed from the IMC’s orders striking out the paragraphs of
the Statement and Particulars relating to
Her appeal was
confined to a single ground, that the IMC had made an error of
The Magistrate concluded in error that the appellant was
transferred to another position after the payroll contract ended.
an aside, we note that it is unlikely that the Industrial Magistrate made any
such finding. First, there is no statement in the
Reasons that Ms Gavril was
transferred to another position after the payroll contract ended.
her Honour was determining whether pleadings should be struck out. She was not
engaged in a fact-finding exercise. Her Honour’s
reasons for striking out
parts of the pleadings was because the facts as pleaded did not disclose a cause
of action, not because
she found the facts could not themselves be established
Honour did say at [52]:
refers to the complaints made by the
claimant regarding a supervisor’s ‘substandard’ training while
she was [presumably]
undertaking training as a pay roll officer. The claimant
refers to a refusal to renew her contract (which must have been renewed
claimant continued to work in the Department). The claimant says the respondent
engaged in damaging action and various other
alleged contraventions of the
Public Sector Management Act 1994
(WA) (PSMA)],
Public Service Award
(WA) (the Award) and the Public Sector Code of Ethics and Staff Conduct
Gavril says this conclusion does not accord with the facts. She says that the
reason she continued to work for the Department was
because she successfully
applied for another position. This does not detract from her allegation that she
failed to secure the renewal
of a previous contract, which she alleged was
damaging action.
the reason her Honour struck out the relevant part of Ms Gavril’s claim
was not because she found, as a fact, that there
was no refusal to renew her
contract. Rather, the reason was that the facts pleaded did not disclose a cause
of action. Ms Gavril’s
agent did not argue otherwise during the course of
the hearing at first instance, despite the Industrial Magistrate’s careful
and patient insistence that the agent pinpoint any damaging action that Ms
Gavril relied upon, other than the three causes of action
her Honour ultimately
preserved: ts 6-8, 11-14.
there is a threshold issue the Full Bench needs to decide. Does an appeal lie to
the Full Bench under s 84 of the Act, from
the IMC’s orders?
appeal lies from any ‘decision’ of the IMC to the Full Bench under s
84(2) of the Act. Section 84 says:
(1) In this section
includes a penalty, order, order of dismissal, and any
other determination of an industrial magistrate’s court, but does not
include a decision made by such a court in the exercise of the jurisdiction
conferred on it by section 96J.
(2) Subject to this section, an appeal lies to the Full Bench in the manner
prescribed from any decision of an industrial magistrate’s
(3) An appeal under this section must be instituted within 21 days from the
date of the decision against which the appeal is brought
and may be instituted
by any party to the proceedings in which the decision was made.
(4) On the hearing of the appeal the Full Bench —
(a) may confirm, reverse, vary, amend, rescind, set aside, or quash the
decision the subject of the appeal; and
(b) may remit the matter to the industrial magistrate’s court or to
another industrial magistrate’s court for further
hearing and
determination according to law; and
(c) subject to subsection (5), may make such order as to costs as the Full
Bench considers appropriate.
(5) In proceedings under this section costs must not be given to any party to
the proceedings for the services of a legal practitioner
or agent of that party
(a) in respect of an appeal from proceedings under section 83 or 83E —
to the party that was the applicant in those proceedings,
if the Full Bench
finds, or upholds a finding, that the other party has committed a serious
contravention; or
(b) if, in the opinion of the Full Bench, the proceedings have been
frivolously or vexatiously instituted or defended, as the case
requires, by the
other party.
(6) At any time after an appeal to the Full Bench has been instituted under
this section, a party to the proceedings may apply to
the Commission for an
order that the operation of the decision appealed against be stayed, wholly or
in part, pending the hearing
and determination of the appeal.
(7) For the purposes of hearing and determining an application under
subsection (6) for an order in respect of a decision, the Commission
constituted by the presiding commissioner of the Full Bench allocated the appeal
against the decision.
84(1) expressly defines ‘decision’ for the purposes of s 84 to
include a penalty, order, order of dismissal, and
any other determination of an
industrial magistrate’s court.
7(1) of the Act provides that, unless the contrary intention appears,
‘decision’ includes an ‘award, order,
declaration or
finding’. A ‘finding’ is defined in s 7(1) to mean ‘a
decision, determination or ruling made
in the course of proceedings that does
not finally decide, determine or dispose of the matter to which the proceedings
(which would include an interlocutory decision of the IMC).
definition of ‘decision’ in s 7(1) of the Act has been held not to
apply to s 84. In
Anderson v Pope
66 WAIG 1563
, the Industrial Appeal Court (
) held that the
words used to define ‘decision’ in s 84(1) demonstrate a contrary
intention, sufficient to indicate that
the definition of ‘decision’
in s 7(1) has no application in the construction of s 84. In these
circumstances, their
Honours found that an appeal against a
‘decision’ of an Industrial Magistrate only lies against a final
determination
of the substantive application before the Industrial
Magistrate.
Gavril argued that the Full Bench is not bound to and should not follow
Anderson v Pope
because the Act has been amended by the
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
(No 20 of 2002)
2002 amendments
since that decision was delivered and the
was broadened by the 2002 amendments: Appellant’s
Written Submissions at [19]-[22]. Ms Gavril relied on
Governing Council of
North Metropolitan TAFE
v The State School Teachers’ Union of
[2019] WASCA 120
North Metropolitan TAFE 2019
) as authority in support of her proposition that
should not be followed. She also argued that to follow
would be inconsistent with industrial fairness.
Gavril argued that if the
Anderson v Pope
principle does apply, and it is
necessary for the orders to constitute a final determination for her to be able
to appeal under
, then the orders were a final determination. She said that
the orders effectively and finally prevented her from pursuing her claims
relating to
(although in her written submissions,
Ms Gavril also concedes that the Industrial Magistrate’s exercise of
powers was pursuant
to ‘procedural tools’ designed to streamline
case management without resolving substantive legal rights or claims: [3].)
Gavril may be correct to say
Anderson v Pope
is not binding on the Full
Bench because the Act has subsequently been amended. However, for the following
reasons, we are of the
view that the reference to ‘decision’ in
continues to mean a final determination of the substantive
application.
principle in
Anderson v Pope
has consistently been applied by the Full
The Governing Council of North Metropolitan TAFE v State School
Teachers’ Union of WA (Incorporated)
[2018] WAIRC 00746
(2018) 98 WAIG 1209
North Metropolitan TAFE 2018
Ian Barrett and Tracey Barrett v The Western Australian
Builders’ Labourers, Painters and Plasterers Union of Workers
(1998) 78 WAIG 2340
Barrett v WABLF
and M Parri trading as G & M Parri v The Western Australian Builders’
Labourers, Painters and Plasterers Union of
(1998) 78 WAIG 586
G & M Parri v WABLPPU
Giovanni Basilio Nicoletti v Transport Workers’
Union of Australia, Industrial Union of Workers, Western Australian
(1998) 86 IR 97
(1998) 78 WAIG 4316
Graham McCorry v Como Investments Pty
(1989) 70 WAIG 658
Chubb Security
Australia Pty Ltd v Paul Raymond Danson
81 WAIG 783.
Full Bench considered the impact of the 2002 amendments on the construction of
North Metropolitan TAFE 2018
. The majority (Matthews C dissenting) concluded the 2002 amendments
did not reveal an intention that the meaning of ‘decision’
‘finding’ should change from the
Anderson v Pope
respectfully agree with the majority reasoning, principally because the 2002
amendments did not effect any significant change to
itself. The only change
by the substitution of the words ‘by – (a) section
96J; (b) Division 1 of
Workplace Agreements Act 1993
section 100
of that Act’ with ‘by section 96J’. While the
2002 amendments gave the IMC a new power in s 83 to make interim
they otherwise did not change the scheme of the IMC’s enforcement powers
or the right of appeal. As Smith AP stated
subsequent enactment of s 83(5) and s 83(7) (by
Relations Reform Act 2002
(WA)) conferring the power to make orders for the
purpose of preventing any further (future) contravention or failure to comply
a provision of an instrument does not, in my respectful opinion, materially
affect the role of the Industrial Magistrate’s
Court from the role of the
Industrial Magistrate considered in
Anderson v Pope
in 1986. The
role of the Industrial Magistrate’s Court in 2018 continues as a court
vested with the power to enforce instruments
by making limited coercive
also refer to Kenner SC’s observations at [85]-[87]:
is not without some oscillation that I consider the approach of the respondent
to this matter should be preferred to that of the
appellant. I do not think the
amendments to
of the Act to introduce subsections (5) and (7), has
fundamentally altered the principle stated by the Court in
consider that an appeal to the Full Bench under
, lies from an order or
determination of an Industrial Magistrate which finally determines the
application brought to the Industrial
Magistrates Court under
is the case that the interim orders have the effect of reinstating the
respondent’s member, it does not finally determine
the issue as to
whether, if there is found ultimately to have been a contravention of cl 23.1 of
the Agreement, final relief of the
kind claimed by the respondent at first
instance could or should be made.
Furthermore,
I think there is something to be said for the fact that the language of s 83(7)
of the Act, when read in its ordinary
sense, emphasises the nature of an interim
order and that such an order can only be made “pending the final
determination”
by an Industrial Magistrate of a substantive application
brought under s 83(1) of the Act. This is consistent with the tenor of the
reasons of the Court in
. If it was intended by Parliament that
amendments to the Act given effect by the
Labour Relations Reform Act
were to be accompanied by an expanded right of appeal to the Full Bench, then,
given the conclusions of the Court in
, one would have thought,
consistent with the approach taken to appeals from decisions of the Commission
in relation to “findings”
as defined in
, that an appropriate
amendment to
of the Act would have also been made at the same time, to
make this clear.
Additionally,
consistent with the circumstances dealt with in
, the functions
and powers of the Industrial Magistrates Court remain, respectfully, within a
relatively narrow compass in relation
to the enforcement of industrial
instruments as defined in
of the Act. The powers of the Industrial
Magistrates Court, on the hearing of an application to enforce an industrial
instrument,
of the Act, to issue a caution or to impose a penalty,
remain largely the same as those in existence when
was decided.
The additional powers conferred by
and (7) are in aid of the
Industrial Magistrate to
enquire into and determine industrial disputes
generally, which is the role of the Commissioner under
and IIA of the
IAC’s reasons in the
North Metropolitan TAFE 2019 Decision
assist Ms Gavril. The IAC did not question the correctness of
. The issue before the IAC was whether a ‘decision’ in s 84
extended to an interim order made under s 83(5). The IAC expressed
reservations about the application of
Anderson v Pope
at least to interim
orders made under s 83(5) and s 83(7). But the IAC ultimately did not
decide the construction question, absent
full argument on the point, and in any
event, the Court was not concerned with orders other than those which s 83
empowers the IMC
to make. The orders the Full Bench is currently concerned with
were not made under s 83, but under reg 7 of the
Magistrate’s Court (General Jurisdiction) Regulations 2005
Regulations
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment Act
2021 amendments
), amongst other things but
relevantly:
the dual appointment of Commissioners as Industrial Magistrates:
Significantly
increased the amount of the penalties which could be imposed by the IMC:
a new provision and a higher penalty regime for serious contraventions in
a reverse onus of proof in s 83EB:
new provisions s 97B and s 97G to empower the IMC to make orders where damaging
action under s 97A or sham contracting under
Division 3 is established:
new enforcement functions by substituting the list of the types of instruments
applied with the defined term ‘entitlement provision’:
new sub-sections 84(5), (6) and (7):
Gavril did not suggest these or any other aspects of the 2021 amendments should
result in the meaning of ‘decision’
being anything other
than a final determination. The nature of the functions performed by the IMC is
wider compared with its previous
functions of enforcing awards and industrial
agreements as described by Onley J in
Anderson v Pope
However, the key to the IAC’s rejection of a broader meaning of
‘decision’ incorporating a ‘finding’
as defined in
was the difference between the IMC’s functions, and the Commission’s
functions: see Rowland J at 1566. The expansion
of the IMC’s functions
does not change the dichotomy between the IMC and the Commission. The IMC is
akin to a civil court exercising
civil or criminal jurisdiction from which
appeals generally only lie as of right from final determinations.
Accordingly,
nothing about the 2021 amendments causes us to consider the legislature intended
to effect a change to the existing law,
as expressed in
Anderson v Pope
permits an appeal from a ‘decision’ it means a final
determination of the application before the IMC.
Ms Gavril also argued that
Anderson v Pope
should not be applied because
it is industrially unfair, we would simply note that an appeal is a creature of
statute. There is no
scope for implying a right of appeal based on principles of
industrial fairness.
Accordingly,
Ms Gavril may only appeal from the IMC’s orders, if they are a decision
which finally disposes of or finally determines
Ms Gavril’s claims.
Department pointed out that the orders from which Ms Gavril is seeking to appeal
are of the same type considered by the Full Bench
Barrett v WABLF
that case, President Sharkey said at 2342:
An order striking
out a complaint is not a curial determination of the merits of the charge
alleged and, therefore, does not put an
end to the proceedings. Until such time
as the court determines the matter on its merits and records an order convicting
the defendant
or dismissing a complaint, an order striking out a complaint is no
more than a removal from the list for want of form, or from the
list of matters
for hearing and determination by the Court (see
R v McGowan and Another; Ex
parte Macko and Another
[1984] VicRp 78
[1984] VR 1000).
Since a striking out, and the striking out in this case, is and was not a
final disposition or determination of the complaint, there
was no decision
finally determining or disposing of the complaint made by the learned Industrial
Magistrate in terms of the definition
of “decision” in
the Act (see
Anderson v Pope
(IAC) (op cit) and
G & M Parri v
(FB) (op cit)).
correctness of this position is beyond question. In the case of
[2003] HCA 70
(2003) 78 ALJR 177
, the High Court held, in
effect, that an order dismissing an action because it is frivolous, vexatious or
an abuse of process, or
does not disclose a reasonable cause of action, is an
interlocutory order for appeal purposes. The same must be true of an order
strike out pleadings on those grounds:
Armet v CFC Consolidated Pty
[2019] WASCA 165
Gavril’s appeal falls into this category. The IMC’s orders striking
out parts of the Statement and Particulars are
not a determination of Ms
Gavril’s claims on their merits. While currently, as a consequence of some
paragraphs being struck
out, Ms Gavril cannot progress her claims related to
events, her rights in relation to those matters have not been
finally determined. The order does not prevent the subject matter of
being revived by a fresh and valid claim, subject to it being made within time.
The order does not prevent Ms Gavril making
an application to amend to
reintroduce claims arising out the
course, whether such an application succeeds will depend on whether a cause of
action is disclosed, and on the balancing
of case management considerations.
the Industrial Magistrate expressly said that if Ms Gavril is relying on the
cumulative effect of the complaints or enquiries
referenced in
, as the reasons for the Ground 3 damaging action, then she ought to properly
plead that in compliance with Order 3: Reasons at [75].
note that Ms Gavril referred to five authorities in support of her argument that
the appeal is competent. We will address these
Gavril submits that in
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426,
French J recognised that orders or decisions with significant consequences for
rights and obligations could be appealable,
even if they do not resolve
proceedings entirely: Appellant’s Written Submissions at [16]. Ms Gavril
says the case ‘emphasizes
the importance of considering the context and
purpose of industrial provisions and awards, ensuring their interpretation
aligns with
industrial realities rather than rigid legal formalities’ and
supported a liberal interpretation of awards: [16]. She submits
rigid application of reg 7 of the IMC Regulations is inconsistent with the
principle which this case stands for:
Appellant’s Written Submissions at
Gavril was unable to point to where in this decision there is any statement of
principle to the effect that orders that are not
a final determination of a
claim but have significant consequences should be appealable. The decision
concerns the approach to interpretation
of awards. The Full Bench is not
required to interpret an award, but rather a statutory provision, namely
s 84 of the Act.
City of Wanneroo
is not authority for any principle
that is relevant to this
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd
v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
Gavril submits that
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 22
(2007) 230 CLR 89
establishes the principle that appellate courts
may depart from precedent to avoid injustice and have both the authority and
responsibility
to intervene when an interim order significantly affects
substantive rights or creates legal inconsistency: Appellant’s Written
Submissions at [22]. Somewhat conflictingly, in oral submissions she said the
High Court emphasised the importance of resolving confusion
and ensuring
consistency in judicial interpretation.
Constructions
is a lengthy judgment of the High Court dealing with complex
appeals concerning fiduciary duties in relation to land development.
and notice of contention raised 13 issues for the High Court’s
determination, including issues concerning whether
certain disclosures were made
in the course of a development transaction, the duty to disclose certain matters
and compliance with
any duty of disclosure. Much of the High Court’s
reasons concern factual matters specific to the case and the duty of disclosure.
the passage Ms Gavril refers to, [135], the High Court was dealing with an error
by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in its
approach to restitutionary
liability. The High Court considered the Court of Appeal’s approach
created confusion, if not a
significant departure from established authority:
[134]. The High Court observed that a trial judge of the Supreme Court was
faced with a difficult situation of having to reconcile old dicta in the
High Court which conflicted with recent dicta in the Court
of Appeal, and
that the confusion might extend to other intermediate appellate courts in
Australia: [135].
reasoning is not relevant to the issues before the Full Bench. This appeal does
not call for the Full Bench to resolve any conflicting
Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v
Gavril relies on
Patrick Stevedores Operations
No 2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia (No 3)
[1998] HCA 30;
as support for the idea that orders with significant consequences for
parties’ rights and obligations ‘could’ be
the subject of an
appeal, even if they do not resolve proceedings entirely. We understand Ms
Gavril derives this support from the
fact that the case was an appeal from
interlocutory orders, namely, an interlocutory injunction, and the High Court
granted special
leave to appeal. While Ms Gavril asked the Full Bench to
refer to [29]-[33], [36], [42] and [45]-[50] of the High Court’s decision,
we cannot glean any relevant principles from those passages.
Tamiana v Team Global Express Pty Ltd
Gavril argued that the decision of
Tamiana v Team Global Express Pty Ltd
[2024] WAIRC 00185
confirms that s 84 provides for appeals from decisions of the IMC
to the Full Bench, creating an appellate hierarchy.
Industrial Magistrate was considering a claim by an employee under the
Long Service Leave Act 1958
). The relevant issue the Industrial Magistrate was required to determine
was whether the employee had the requisite ‘continuous
employment with one
and the same employer’ for the purpose of a long service leave
entitlement. Secondary to this issue was
whether the Industrial Magistrate was
bound by a decision of the Full Bench of the Western Australian Industrial
Relations Commission,
Baker Hughes
Australia Pty Ltd v Martin Venier
[2016] WAIRC 00843
(2016) 96 WAIG
Baker Hughes
, on the relevant point.
Industrial Magistrate concluded that
Baker Hughes
decided the proper
construction of the relevant parts of the LSL Act ([12]-[15]), and then also
concluded that the determination
of the construction was a matter of law and so
was binding on the IMC: [28]-[30].
is uncontroversial that appeals lie from the IMC to the Full Bench. This plain
fact does not assist Ms Gavril. It is not a legal
principle relevant to the
particular construction issue we are currently concerned
Arc Holdings
Gavril argued that in
Arc Holdings (WA) Pty
Ltd v Industrial Inspector
[2023] WAIRC 00991
; (2023) 04 WAIG 97,
the Industrial Magistrate acknowledged that ‘certain interlocutory
decisions could be subject to appeal,
particularly when they have significant
implications for the parties involved’.
was a decision concerning a claim under the LSL Act. The Industrial Magistrate
was required to determine whether the employee
qualified as having the requisite
period of continuous employment, in circumstances where the employee’s
contract of employment
as an apprentice ended on one day, and a new contract of
employment as a trade qualified employee commenced the next day. In determining
this issue, the Industrial Magistrate discussed the approach to interpreting
legislation. None of what her Honour says about the
task of interpretation is
controversial. It does not deal with appeal rights. It does not assist Ms
the conclusion of the hearing, Ms Gavril provided the Full Bench with further
written submissions to supplement those she made
prior to and at the hearing. We
have considered those submissions which deal with the merits of Ms
Gavril’s single ground of
appeal, and perhaps also seek to expand upon the
ground of appeal, or add further grounds. Because we have concluded that no
lies from the Industrial Magistrate’s orders, it is unnecessary for
us to address Ms Gavril’s further written submissions.
the above reasons, we dismiss the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (140 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter