URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/165.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DYER -v- THE KING [2025] WASCA 165 (5 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE KING
[2025] WASCA 165
NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACR 123 of 2024
EDWARD DYER
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND 1051 of 2024
law - Appeal against sentence - Whether trial judge erred in sentencing the
appellant on the basis that he was criminally
responsible for the importation of
the quantity of heroin carried by his co‑offender - Appeal allowed -
Appellant resentenced
to a term of 5 years and 6 months' imprisonment with a
non‑parole period of 3 years and 6 months.
Legislation:
Representation:
Solicitors:
Legal Aid (WA)
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
referred to in
decision(s):
reasons were delivered ex temporaneously and have been edited from the court's
record of the
agree with the reasons of Doyle
also agree with the reasons of Doyle
appellant was convicted, following a plea of guilty, of one count of importing a
marketable quantity of heroin, in contravention
of s 307.2(1) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth). This
offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 25 years, a fine of
5,000 penalty units ($1,565,000) or both.
appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for 7 years and 4 months, with
a non‑parole period of 4 years and 6 months.
appellant's partner, Ms Baker, was convicted of the same offence, and
sentenced to imprisonment for 4 years, with a non‑parole
period of 2 years
and 4 months.
appellant appeals his sentence on two grounds.
1 involves a complaint that the sentencing judge erred in sentencing the
appellant on the basis that he was criminally responsible
for the importation of
the quantity of heroin carried by his co‑offender, Ms Baker.
2 involves a complaint that the sentence imposed upon the appellant involved a
failure to properly apply the parity principle
in that there was an unwarranted
disparity between the sentences of the appellant and his co‑offender.
respondent concedes Ground 1. For the reasons which follow, that
concession was properly made, and it is appropriate that this
court allow the
appeal, and resentence the appellant.
the circumstances, it is not necessary to address Ground 2.
Circumstances of the offending
14 February 2024, the appellant and Ms Baker arrived at the Perth
International Airport, having flown from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
They had been
in Cambodia for a week, with a short stopover in Kuala Lumpur on their return to
appellant and Ms Baker were stopped at the airport by Australian Border
Force officers and subjected to personal examinations.
Both were suspected of
internally concealing a border‑controlled drug. They were taken to Royal
Perth Hospital, where CT
scans revealed that they each had numerous foreign
objects within their bodies.
appellant later passed six pellets, containing heroin with a total weight of
115.4 grams, a purity of 74.8 per cent and a total
pure weight of
86.3 grams. Depending upon how it was sold, the value of this heroin was
between about $4,300 and $51,000.
passed seven pellets, containing heroin with a total weight of 139.7 grams,
a purity of 68.6 per cent, a total pure weight
of 95.8 grams, and a
value of between about $5,000 and $56,000.
declined to participate in a record of interview with police.
appellant participated in a record of interview with police in which he admitted
travelling to Cambodia with Ms Baker, his partner.
He did not at that time
admit his offending.
having pleaded guilty, the appellant told the author of his pre‑sentence
report that, after a period of a couple of
years of not using illicit drugs, he
met a former associate who was involved in drug dealing. He soon relapsed into
heroin use and
became addicted. He resumed using heroin on a daily basis, and
quickly incurred a significant drug debt that he could not pay.
appellant admitted travelling to Cambodia with Ms Baker, where he collected
a quantity of heroin. He imported the heroin with
an intention of repaying a
$10,000 drug debt.
submissions on his behalf before the sentencing judge, the appellant explained
that heroin was packaged and provided to him in
submissions filed on behalf of Ms Baker, she explained that the appellant
had approached her to participate in the offending.
She said she was initially
reluctant to do so, but eventually agreed knowing that she would be assisting
the appellant to repay
his drug debt. She believed the appellant was in contact
with a third party who provided instructions, but she did not have any
with that person.
the sentencing judge observed, whilst not particularly sophisticated, the
offending involved a degree of planning and expense.
It involved travelling to
Cambodia from Perth, staying there for a week and, in the case of the appellant,
meeting up with a contact
to obtain the heroin.
the appellant and Ms Baker placed their own health and safety at risk by
ingesting the heroin. The amounts ingested by both
well exceeded the statutory
threshold for a marketable quantity of 2 grams.
appellant and Ms Baker were both users at the time of the offending.
However, their offending had a commercial purpose. In
the case of the
appellant, his intention was to pay off a drug debt of $10,000; and in the case
of Ms Baker, her intention was to
assist her partner to pay off his drug
debt. To that end, it was contemplated that, once back in Australia, the
quantities of heroin
imported by the appellant and Ms Baker would both be
supplied to the appellant's drug dealer.
the judge explained, had the offending not been interrupted, it would have
resulted in a significant quantity of heroin being
distributed into the
community of Western Australia. The potential for harm, if this had occurred,
issue arose during the course of sentencing submissions as to the quantity for
which the appellant was responsible for importing.
statement of material facts, filed in the District Court, alleged that the
appellant had ingested and imported heroin with a
pure weight of
86.3 grams, and that Ms Baker had ingested and imported heroin with a
pure weight of 95.8 grams. The prosecution's
written submissions on
sentencing were to the same effect.
during the course of oral sentencing submissions, the judge queried whether the
appellant's culpability and responsibility
extended to the total ingested by
both the appellant and Ms Baker. In the course of the exchange which
followed, the judge said
that he understood the prosecution case to be that the
appellant had recruited Ms Baker; that his role was far more serious than
hers; and that the appellant was to be sentenced on the basis that he was
responsible for the total quantity of heroin ingested and
imported by both the
appellant and Ms Baker.
prosecutor initially agreed with this description of the basis upon which the
appellant fell to be sentenced. However, upon
defence counsel submitting that
the appellant's responsibility was limited to importing the weight he ingested,
and objecting to
the suggestion that his client 'recruited' Ms Baker, the
prosecutor appear to acquiesce in this description of the prosecution case.
an opportunity to reflect and take instructions, the prosecutor informed the
Having regard to [the appellant's] conduct in arranging the import and
essentially, arranging for Ms Baker's involvement, our submission
[the appellant] is to be sentenced on the basis that he had a more serious role
in the offending, therefore we submit that
it is open for your Honour to
sentence [the appellant] on the basis that he did import the total amount of
heroin, including the
amount imported by Ms Baker.
That's because [the appellant] can be considered to have met both limbs of the
definition of import, under the Commonwealth Criminal
Code in that he, firstly,
brought the substance into Australia by concealing it in his body and he also
dealt with the substance
in connection with its importation by reason of his
conduct in arranging for Ms Baker's participation in the offending and also
the substance on his own body.
counsel maintained the objection to this approach, but left the matter for the
judge to determine.
judge proceeded to sentence the appellant on the basis that he was criminally
responsible for importing the total quantity of
heroin ingested and imported by
both offenders. In doing so, his Honour explained that he was sentencing
the appellant 'on the basis
that you arranged for Ms Baker to assist you in
the offending and that your criminal culpability relates to the total weight of
heroin imported into Australia of 182 grams'.
judge later described the appellant as the person 'primarily involved' in the
offending, but noting that Ms Baker 'readily became
involved in the
offending to assist [the appellant] to import a significant quantity of heroin
to Australia knowing the heroin you
ingested was to be used by [the appellant]
to help pay off a significant drug debt'.
Personal circumstances
the judge noted, the appellant was 49 years of age at the date of
sentencing. He was the youngest of five children, and after
his parents
separated, his mother re‑partnered and had a further four children. The
appellant had a difficult relationship
with his stepfather, who was violent
towards him. He was forced to leave home when only 14 years of age.
appellant's mother passed away many years ago, but he has maintained a close
relationship with his elderly father. At the time
of this offending, the
appellant had been living in a caravan at his father's property.
appellant had been in a relationship with Ms Baker for three years at
the date of sentencing. He has two daughters, who were
aged 29 and 9
at the date of sentencing, from previous relationships and has maintained
regular contact with both. His older daughter
has two children of her own and
was pregnant with her third.
appellant left school when he left home, at the age of 14. He had been
using amphetamines since the age of 13, and commenced
using heroin
when 21. Since then he has been a regular user of heroin, albeit ceasing
his use several times for varying periods.
his credit, the appellant has been largely employed since leaving school. At
the time of his offending, he was in the process
of establishing his own
on observations the appellant made to the writer of his pre‑sentence
report, the judge accepted that the appellant had
shown some remorse for his
offending, and some insight into the potential impact on members of the
community from the distribution
of heroin. In a letter to the judge, the
appellant also expressed regret, and apologised, for his offending and the harm
have caused the community. He said that his judgment had been clouded by
his drug addiction, which had led to him making choices
which he now recognised
were harmful and irresponsible.
appellant has an extensive criminal history, much of which appears to have been
related to his abuse of illicit drugs. As a
juvenile, he was convicted of
various offences, including drug‑related offending, stealing and burglary.
As an adult, he was
first convicted of cultivating and possessing cannabis in
1994, when he was 19 years of age. Since then, he has been convicted of
number of offences, including stealing, fraud, assaulting a public officer,
drug‑related offences, and a number of road traffic
appellant had previously been sentenced to various community‑based
dispositions, including suspended terms of imprisonment.
He had been sentenced
to some short periods of imprisonment for road traffic offences. Significantly,
but not expressly mentioned
by the judge, the appellant had also been sentenced
to a term of 2 years' imprisonment for an offence of attempting to
manufacture
a prohibited drug.
was also 49 years of age at the time of sentencing. She had a
20‑year‑old son with whom she was close. Her
parents were in a
stable marriage, and she had the benefit of a close and supportive family.
leaving school, Ms Baker was employed in various jobs, but had been
unemployed for an extended period of time prior to sentencing.
was the victim of a sexual assault when she was in her early twenties. Like the
appellant, she had a long‑standing
addiction to illicit drugs.
had been suffering mental health difficulties for a long period prior to being
sentenced. She expressed a commitment to
addressing her mental health, which it
was suggested might assist her to avoid relapsing into drug use. She expressed
remorse for
her offending, and some insight into the seriousness of her
offending and its harmful effects.
the appellant, Ms Baker also had a significant criminal history, involving
her being sentenced to various community‑based
dispositions, including
suspended sentences. She did not, however, have any previous convictions for
manufacturing or selling drugs.
Sentencing remarks
arriving at sentences for the appellant and Ms Baker, the judge accepted
that they had both entered pleas of guilty at an early
opportunity, which had
facilitated the administration of justice and were to be recognised in the
sentence to be imposed. They had
each shown some remorse and insight, and had
expressed a determination to address their long‑term drug use.
judge considered that personal deterrence, and protection of the community, were
important considerations in relation to both
the appellant and Ms Baker.
The need for general deterrence limited the judge's ability to attach weight to
their mitigating personal
circumstances.
judge concluded that nothing less than immediate terms of imprisonment would
meet the relevant sentencing objectives.
the case of the appellant, the judge imposed a head sentence of imprisonment for
7 years and 4 months, with a non‑parole
period of 4 years and
the case of Ms Baker, the judge imposed a head sentence of 4 years'
imprisonment, with a non‑parole period of 2 years and
appeal, the prosecution conceded Ground 1; that the judge erred in
sentencing the appellant on the basis that he was responsible
for importing the
total weight of pure heroin ingested by both offenders (that is, the
86.3 grams ingested by the appellant and the
95.8 grams ingested by
concession was properly made.
circumstances where the appellant was arraigned and pleaded guilty to an
allegation that he imported 86.3 grams of heroin, he
ought to have been
sentenced on that same factual basis.
and in any event, if the appellant was to be sentenced on a basis which included
some level of responsibility for the heroin
ingested by his partner,
Ms Baker, this needed to be proved. The appellant's then counsel did not
concede this responsibility, and
no evidence or material was before the judge
which would have justified this conclusion. Although the judge was entitled to
on the basis that Ms Baker became involved at the appellant's
suggestion, and that the appellant had the lead role in organising
offending, there not a sufficient basis for the judge to conclude beyond a
reasonable doubt that the appellant was responsible
for importing the
95.8 grams ingested by Ms Baker.
circumstances where it was not the way the case was presented or run at first
instance, it is neither necessary nor appropriate
for this court to consider
whether there might have been a proper factual and legal basis for convicting
the appellant of importing
this additional quantity.
established error in the sentencing process, it is also not necessary to
consider the appellant's complaint, through Ground
2, that his sentence
involved a misapplication of the parity principle. That said, this principle
must inform the process of resentencing
resentencing the appellant, it is appropriate to have regard to the
circumstances of the appellant's offending, and his personal
circumstances, as
set out above.
appellant's offending was serious, and called for a significant measure of
general deterrence. Significant sentences of imprisonment
for this type of
offending are necessary to deter others from like offending in an effort to
protect the general community from the
danger presented by the importation of
illicit substances such as heroin.
assessing the seriousness of the appellant's offending, it is appropriate to
take into account the commercial aspect of his offending.
Whilst ultimately
grounded in an addiction which he was not able to fund, it was the appellant's
decision to involve himself in
the importation for which he has been convicted.
He made the arrangements necessary to travel to Cambodia and collect the heroin.
His offending was motivated by a desire to address his own drug-related
appellant's level of involvement in, and motivation for, his importation offence
may be contrasted with the lesser and different
involvement and motivation of
his partner Ms Baker. She fell to be sentenced for her otherwise similar
offending on the basis that
she became involved, at the appellant's suggestion,
in an undertaking organised by the appellant, and was motivated by a desire to
address a debt which he owed.
the appellant's history of offending, including drug‑related offending, a
significant measure of personal deterrence
was also warranted. The appellant is
to be given credit for pleading guilty, and it is encouraging that he expressed
some remorse
and insight, and a commitment to addressing his long‑term
difficulties with addiction to illicit substances. Further, as outlined
appellant's counsel in oral submissions, the appellant has taken some steps
towards rehabilitation whilst in prison, and intends
to undertake a Pathways
Program (intended to assist him to address his difficulties with substance
abuse, amongst other things) once
that becomes available to him. He has also
continued to enjoy the support of his family, particularly his eldest daughter.
of that said, the appellant's long‑standing history of offending and
addiction suggest that his prospects of successful rehabilitation
are at best
regard to all of the circumstances relevant to the appellant and his offending,
it is appropriate that he be sentenced to
imprisonment for a period of
5 years and 6 months. Given his modest prospects of rehabilitation, I
would fix a non‑parole
period of 3 years and 6 months.
am satisfied that this sentence adequately reflects the parity principle.
Whilst the appellant's sentence is heavier than that
imposed upon his
co‑offender, the difference appropriately reflects his higher level of
involvement in the importation of which
he was convicted, as well as his
previous conviction for a serious drug offence.
the reasons set out, I would allow the appellant's appeal, set aside the
sentence impose at first instance, and resentence the
appellant to a sentence of
imprisonment for 5 years and 6 months, with a non‑parole period
of 3 years and 6 months. Both the
head sentence and non‑parole period are
to be back‑dated to 14 February 2024, to reflect the time already
spent in custody.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
5 NOVEMBER 2025
Primary court ts 29/10/2024, 51 ‑ 52.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter