URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/155.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SHIRE OF PEPPERMINT GROVE -v- MCCOMISH [2025] WASCA 155 (29 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF PEPPERMINT GROVE -v- MCCOMISH
[2025] WASCA 155
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACV 2 of 2025
OF PEPPERMINT GROVE
CLAIRE LEEUWIN MCCOMISH
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
GDA 2 OF 2024
law – Local government schemes – Model provisions – Deemed
provisions – Inconsistency – Additional
requirements –
Inconsistency – Delegated legislation – Local government schemes
– Model provisions – Deemed
Legislation:
& Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
& Development Act 2005
Residential
Design Codes
Peppermint Grove Local Planning Scheme
Representation:
K de Kerloy SC & C A
G R Donaldson
Solicitors:
Lemonis & Tantiprasut
referred to in decision:
OF THE COURT
Introduction
and overview
respondent wishes to build a single residential house on a block of land located
in the Shire of Peppermint Grove
). That block is not in a
heritage‑protected place. The land is zoned R12.5 for the purposes of
the Residential Design Codes,
contained in State Planning Policy 7.3
). The proposed house
complies with all of the 'deemed‑to‑comply' requirements of the
land is subject to planning controls contained in the
Shire of Peppermint Grove Local Planning
Scheme No 4
). The R‑Codes are
to be read as part of Scheme 4, subject to any modification of the
R‑Codes made by
R‑Codes do not prescribe any maximum plot ratio for residential
development in the Shire. However, Scheme 4 provides that
the maximum plot
ratio for residential land zoned R12.5 shall be 0.5, unless otherwise
determined by the
As the R‑Codes do not say anything about maximum plot ratio, this
requirement is not an express modification of the R‑Codes.
additional requirement introduced by Scheme 4.
house which the respondent wishes to build has a plot ratio which is, on any
view, greater than 0.5. The respondent says it is
0.66, and the Shire
says that it
Shire says that before the respondent may build the proposed house, she requires
development approval, together with a determination
that the proposed
development may exceed the maximum plot ratio to satisfy the requirement in
respondent says that she does not need to obtain development approval to erect
the house. That is because Scheme 4 contains a
'deemed provision' derived
from Schedule 2 of the
Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
LPS Regulations
cl 61(1) and item 6 of the Table in that clause. That deemed provision
provides, in effect, that no development approval
is required to erect a single
house on a lot where the R‑Codes apply, the works are not on a
heritage‑protected place
and the works comply with the prescribed
requirements of the R‑Codes, which are contained in
'deemed‑to‑comply
provisions of the R‑Codes'.
respondent says that the 'deemed provision' overrides the express requirements
of Scheme 4, due to
Planning and Development Act 2005
). Section 257B(3)
If a deemed provision that has effect as part of a local planning scheme is
inconsistent with another provision of the scheme, the
deemed provision prevails
and the other provision is to the extent of the inconsistency of no
was urged upon the court that the present dispute crystallises an important
issue of general application: can a local government
prescribe additional
matters in a Scheme upon which the grant or withholding of an approval to
proceed with a proposed development
may depend, where the development fully
complies with 'deemed‑to‑comply' provisions of the R‑Codes
made by the
State Planning Commission?
resolution of that issue ultimately depends upon whether the 'deemed provision'
in cl 61(1) (and item 6 of the Table) is relevantly
'inconsistent'
with cl 32 of Scheme 4, which provides for development standards 'in
addition to those set out in the R‑Codes'.
In that context, it is
significant that cl 32 of Scheme 4 is based upon a 'model provision'
of local planning schemes that is prescribed
by the LPS Regulations.
the reasons that follow, in our view, there is no inconsistency between the two
provisions. On its proper construction, no development
approval is required for
proposed works where item 6 of the Table in cl 61(1) of the 'deemed
provisions' applies and the proposed
works comply with the
'deemed‑to‑comply' provisions of the R‑Codes,
as modified or supplemented by the provisions
of Scheme 4
. In this case, cl 32 of Scheme 4 supplements the
R-Codes by prescribing an additional site requirement for land zoned R12.5,
that the maximum plot ratio shall be 0.5, unless otherwise determined by
the Shire. Hence, as the respondent's proposed works have
a plot ratio of more
than 0.5, it was necessary for her to apply for development approval to obtain a
separate determination to allow
a greater maximum plot ratio and to permit the
works to proceed.
appeal must be allowed.
Statutory basis of a scheme
of the PD Act makes extensive provision for the preparation and effect of
local planning schemes.
PD Act nevertheless contemplates that regulations may provide for 'model'
or 'deemed' provisions of planning schemes generally.
In that regard,
s 256(1) of the PD Act provides that the Governor may, on the
recommendation of the relevant Minister, make regulations
prescribing provisions
that deal with carrying out the general objects of local planning schemes or any
matter set out in Schedule
sets out a variety of topics which are commonly found in planning schemes. These
include subdivision of land, reconstruction
of the scheme area, preservation and
conservation of places and objects of significance, roads and community
infrastructure, zoning,
land management controls, development standards and
controls, acquisition and purchase of land, powers of entry and inspection and
agreements between a Shire and landowner.
the regulations made under s 256(1) otherwise provide, provisions
prescribed under s 256(1) apply to all local planning schemes
(s 256(4)). The regulations must designate each provision prescribed under
s 256(1) as a 'model provision', to which s 257A applies,
'deemed' provision, to which s 257B applies (s 256(5)). Both types of
provisions are contained within a scheme, but a model
provision may be varied or
excluded by the Minister when approving a scheme under
PD Act therefore contemplates standard provisions which will be
incorporated into all local government planning schemes. This
is confirmed by
s 73, which prescribes the contents of a scheme. Section 73(1)
provides that a local planning scheme is to define
the area to which the scheme
is to apply and to specify the local government responsible for enforcing and
administering the scheme.
Section 73(2A) provides that a local planning
scheme may supplement provisions prescribed under s 256, and deal with any
circumstances or contingencies for which adequate provisions are not
prescribed under s 256.
effect, apart from prescribing the scheme area and the responsible local
government, s 73 assumes that a local planning scheme
will contain all of
the standard provisions prescribed by the regulations, and that only provisions
which may be described as supplementary,
and which deal with any special
circumstances or contingencies in the area, may be particularly incorporated
into a local planning
Regulation 10
of the LPS Regulations is consistent with this analysis. Regulation 10(1)
provides that the provisions in Schedules
1 and 2 of the LPS
Regulations are prescribed for the purposes of s 256 of the PD Act.
Schedule 1 of the LPS Regulations contains
prescribed model provisions
(reg 10(2)). Schedule 2 of the LPS Regulations contains prescribed
deemed provisions (reg 10(4)).
Regulation 10(2)
provides that:
The provisions in Schedule 1 are model provisions, being provisions to
which section 257A of the Act applies.
Note for this subregulation:
Under section 257A of the Act model provisions prescribed by
regulations that are in force at the time a local planning scheme is
prepared or
adopted, and that apply to the scheme, are to be included in the scheme unless
the Minister otherwise approves.
Regulation 10(4)
of the LPS Regulations provides that the provisions of Schedule 2,
including cl 61(1):
are deemed provisions, being provisions to which section 257B of the Act
applies, and are applicable to all local planning schemes,
whether or not they
are incorporated into the local planning scheme text.
Notes for this subregulation:
section 257B of the Act deemed provisions, as amended from time to time,
have effect and may be enforced as part of each local
planning scheme to which
they apply, whether they are prescribed before or after the scheme comes into
a deemed provision is inconsistent with another provision of a local planning
scheme to which the deemed provision applies, the
deemed provision prevails and
the other provision, to the extent of the inconsistency, is of no effect.
Regulation 10(6)
then provides that the provisions of a local planning scheme that supplement the
provisions set out in Schedules
1 and 2, or vary provisions set out in
Schedule 1, are to be set out in the manner and form required by the
Minister or an authorised
person. The note to reg 10(6) refers to
s 73(2A) as the basis of the power to make supplementary
provisions.
text of Scheme 4 reproduces the 'model provisions' prescribed by
Schedule 1 of the LPS Regulations, as varied and which have
excluded. The text of Scheme 4 does not reproduce the 'deemed provisions'
contained in Schedule 2 of the LPS Regulations.
However, these are taken to
be part of Scheme 4 due to s 256(4) of the
local planning scheme, when approved by the Minister and published in the
Gazette, has full force and effect as if it were enacted
by the PD Act
(s 87(4)). Hence, Scheme 4 has statutory effect.
Clause 25(1)
of Scheme 4 provides:
The R‑Codes, modified as set out in clause 26, are to be read as part
of this Scheme.
Significantly,
cl 25 of Scheme 4 is a 'model provision' prescribed by the LPS
Regulations.
of Scheme 4 provides for modification of 'deemed‑to‑comply'
requirements in the R‑Codes concerned with
building height, setbacks and
battleaxe lot subdivision. Clause 26 of Scheme 4 is also based on a
'model provision' which expressly
contemplates the insertion of 'exclusions or
variations to the R‑Codes'.
Clause 32(1)
of Scheme 4 provides that Table 5, which appears in this
sets out requirements relating to development that are additional to those set
out in the R‑Codes, activity centre plans, local
development plans or
State or local planning policies.
cl 32(1) of Scheme 4 is a 'model provision' prescribed by the LPS
Regulations.
1 of Table 5 relates to 'Residential' land. It specifies that the requirement
for development of this land is as follows:
For R10, R12.5, R15 and R20 Coded areas the maximum plot ratio shall be 0.5
unless otherwise determined by the local government.
32(2), which appears after Table 5, and is a 'model provision', provides:
To the extent that a requirement referred to in subclause (1) is inconsistent
with a requirement in the R‑Codes, an activity
centre plan, a local
development plan or a State or local planning policy the requirement referred to
in subclause (1) prevails.
we have said, the prescription of additional site and development requirements
in cl 32 of Scheme 4 follows the form of the 'model
provisions'
contained in Schedule 1 of the LPS Regulations. Hence, the regulations
specifically contemplate that 'model provisions'
may include additional site and
development requirements.
statutory basis for including these additional requirements appears to have been
that such requirements may be included due to
s 73(2A) of the PD Act
and reg 10(6) of the LPS Regulations, because they should be regarded as
supplementary provisions or provisions
which deal with special circumstances or
contingencies for which adequate provisions are not prescribed under
to the text of Scheme 4 is headed 'Supplemental Provisions to the Deemed
Provisions'. Schedule A then reads as
These provisions are to be read in conjunction with the deemed provisions
(Schedule 2) contained in the
Planning and
Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
Clause 61(1)(k) the erection or installation of a sign of a class specified in
Schedule 2 – exempted advertisements unless
the sign is to be erected or
installed –
(i) on a place included on a heritage list prepared in accordance with this
(ii) on land located within an area designated under this Scheme as a heritage
also appears to represent the exercise of the power to make supplementary
provisions under s 73(2A) of the PD Act and
reg 10(6) of the LPS
Regulations.
explained, Scheme 4 is also deemed to include the 'deemed provisions' set out in
Schedule 2 of the LPS Regulations.
60 of Schedule 2 provides that:
A person must not commence or carry out any works on, or use, land in the Scheme
area unless –
(a) the person has obtained the development approval of the local government
under Part 8; or
(b) development approval is not required for the development under
Clause 61(1)
provides that development approval is not required for works if the conditions
for that class of works specified in
the Table in that clause are satisfied. The
conditions which must be satisfied for the erection of a single house on a lot
are specified
in item 6. These are:
(a) The R‑Codes apply to the works.
(b) The works comply with the deemed-to-comply provisions of the
(c) The works are not located in a heritage-protected
the present case:
(a) in relation to condition (a) – cl 25(1) of
Scheme 4 provides that the R‑Codes, modified as set out in
to be read as part of Scheme 4;
(b) in relation to condition (b) – it is agreed that 'the proposed
single house is compliant with the applicable deemed‑to‑comply
requirements contained in the R‑Codes (as modified by clause 26),
including lot boundary setbacks, building height, visual
The 'deemed‑to‑comply' provisions of the R‑Codes are defined
within the R‑Codes
themselves;
(c) in relation to condition (c) – it is accepted that the land in
this case is not located in a heritage‑protected
The R-Codes
R‑Codes in this case are the 2021 R‑Codes. They were prepared under
s 26 of the PD Act by the Western Australian
Planning Commission. They
contain detailed technical provisions about many planning matters, concerning
the construction of different
dwellings and multiple dwellings) in areas with different zoning
requirements.
purpose of the 2021 R‑Codes is to provide a comprehensive basis for the
control of residential development throughout Western
objectives of the 2021 R‑Codes for residential development are the
(a) to provide residential development of an appropriate design for the intended
residential purpose, density, context of place and
scheme objectives;
(b) to encourage design consideration of the social, environmental and economic
opportunities possible from new housing and an appropriate
response to local
amenity and place;
(c) to encourage design which considers and respects heritage and local culture;
(d) to facilitate residential development which offers future residents the
opportunities for better living choices and
affordability.
objectives for the planning governance and development process
(a) to encourage design which is responsive to site, size and geometry of the
development site;
(b) to allow variety and diversity as appropriate where it can be demonstrated
this better reflects context or scheme objectives;
(c) to ensure clear scope for scheme objectives to influence the assessment of
proposals; and
(d) to ensure certainty in timely assessment and determination of proposals
applied consistently across State and local
government.
R‑Codes specify various development requirements which differ according to
dwelling type and zoning. Each essential prescribed
requirement is described as
a 'deemed‑to‑comply requirement'. They address matters such as
setbacks, open space, common
boundaries and a variety of other technical
matters. They do not contain any requirement about a maximum plot ratio.
for the present case, the R‑Codes provide that, for land zoned R12.5,
there is a general requirement that open space
should be a minimum of 55%
the R‑Codes do not provide for a maximum plot ratio for a site
zoned R12.5. Nor can this be implied from the requirement
that open space
should be a minimum of 55% of the site. The R‑Codes effectively
provide that a plot ratio is the ratio of the
aggregate area of all floors of a
building to the total land area of a
With a multi‑storey building, the aggregate floor area of all floors is
used to determine the plot ratio for the site.
is also significant to refer to what the R‑Codes themselves say about
whether it is sufficient to comply with the 'deemed‑to‑comply
provisions'. Clause 2.2 addresses the topic of 'Single house approval'.
Clause 2.2.1 provides that:
A proposal for a single house that meets the deemed‑to‑comply
provisions of R‑Codes Volume 1 does not require development
unless otherwise required by the scheme or
. (emphasis
words emphasised in this passage show that the R‑Codes themselves
contemplate that it may not be sufficient to comply with
deemed‑to‑comply provisions, if the relevant local government scheme
imposes an additional requirement.
The timing context
particular piece of context which may be relevant to understanding the statutory
scheme described above needs to be highlighted.
standard provisions of a scheme, which are incorporated into the contents of
Scheme 4 by virtue of Schedule 1 and Schedule 2
Regulations, are prescribed by the LPS Regulations. They were drafted and
included in the LPS Regulations before being
incorporated into Scheme 4
(and before being incorporated into many other schemes).
Consequently,
at the point when the LPS Regulations were prepared, it was impossible to know
whether Scheme 4 would in fact contain
supplementary provisions validly
made pursuant to s 73(2A) and reg 10(6). It would also be impossible
to know whether the R‑Codes
would be modified for the purposes of
Scheme 4 pursuant to cl 25 and cl 26 of the standard provisions
contained in Schedule 1.
that the R‑Codes apply to land, and that this land is not in a
heritage‑protected place, the significance of
the timing point is this:
when item 6 of cl 61 of Schedule 2 was prepared, it would be
impossible to know whether a scheme would
prescribe additional conditions for
obtaining a development approval for the erection of a house, apart from those
conditions contained
in the R‑Codes. Nevertheless, what was clear when
item 6 of cl 61 of Schedule 2 of the LPS Regulations was prepared
the LPS Regulations expressly contemplated (in 'model provisions'
cl 26 and cl 32), that the requirements of the R‑Codes might
modified or added to.
follows that there is a question whether, at the time they were prepared,
cl 61(1) and item 6 of the Table were intended to operate
incorporated into a particular scheme) to remove the requirement of a landowner
obtaining a development approval for erection
of a house where only the
conditions contained in the R‑Codes were satisfied, even if additional
conditions for obtaining development
approval had been added to the particular
question lies at the heart of the present case. On the one hand, the respondent
argues that the intention behind item 6 of cl
61 of Schedule 2 is
to provide a sure and certain route to erecting a house if the R‑Codes
prescribed by the Western Australian
Planning Commission are satisfied, and to
prevent a local scheme introducing further requirements in addition to a
development approval.
On the other hand, the Shire points out that there would
be no purpose in permitting modifications to, and supplementations of, a
particular scheme if further conditions could not be imposed for erecting a
residential dwelling.
Consideration
starting point is that the whole of the scheme is to be regarded as enacted by
the PD Act (s 87(4)). That includes the model
and deemed provisions
incorporated into the scheme text. It also includes the R‑Codes
themselves, which are regarded to be
part of the
next point is that the prescription of the maximum plot ratio by cl 32(1)
and Table 5 of Scheme 4 does not prescribe anything
inconsistent with
the R‑Codes. That is because the R‑Codes do not specify a maximum
plot ratio. The prescription of a
maximum plot ratio is properly regarded as
supplementing the model and deemed provisions in Schedules 1 and 2 of
the LPS Regulations.
it has not been suggested that it would be outside the power of supplementing
the standard provisions of a scheme, contained
in s 73(2A) of the
PD Act and reg 10(6) of the LPS Regulations, to specify a maximum plot
ratio. The respondent's only point is that
specifying a maximum plot ratio is
necessarily inconsistent with the operation of cl 61(1) and item 6 of
the Table, and therefore
can never have effect due to s 257B(3) (at least
where the proposed development complies with the deemed‑to‑comply
of the R‑Codes).
the terms of s 257B(3) operate as a provision which provides for
paramountcy of one provision over another where there
is inconsistency between
the provisions. It does not provide any principle of construction to assist in
determining whether inconsistency
the prescription of a maximum plot ratio by Scheme 4 does not involve
direct and necessary inconsistency between a supplementary
provision and a
deemed provision.
a situation where cl 32 of Scheme 4 does not prescribe a maximum plot
ratio but Scheme 4 provides that a landowner has to
apply for a development
approval, and the Shire has a discretion to grant or withhold that approval,
even where a proposed development
satisfies all of the
deemed‑to‑comply requirements in the R‑Codes, where the land
is not in a heritage‑protected
this assumed case, there would be a direct and necessary inconsistency between
Scheme 4 and the operation of item 6 of the Table
in cl 61(1).
This necessary inconsistency would be resolved by s 257B(3) giving
paramountcy to the operation of item 6 of the Table
item 6 of the Table in cl 61(1) have (at the least) a narrower purpose
than preventing a local government from prescribing
additional and supplementary
requirements other than those in the R‑Codes.
may also be illustrated by the example given in respect of the last point. That
example demonstrates that where all of the essential
deemed‑to‑comply requirements of the R‑Codes are satisfied,
and there are no other prescribed requirements in a
scheme, item 6 of the
Table in cl 61 operates to remove the need for a landowner to bear the
administrative burden of making an application
for a development approval and
these provisions also operate to remove the risk of an adverse exercise of
discretion.
discloses that item 6 of the Table in cl 61 at least has a purpose of
ensuring that a single house may be erected where it complies
with all of the
deemed‑to‑comply requirements of the R‑Codes
there are no other additional
requirements of a scheme which may need to be satisfied. That purpose is
narrower than a purpose of
preventing a local government from prescribing
additional requirements which need to be satisfied for a development approval to
granted, apart from compliance with the deemed-to-comply requirements of the
that narrower purpose is consistent with the terms of standard provisions and
with the R‑Codes themselves. As explained,
cl 32 of the model
provisions in Schedule 1 of the LPS Regulations specifically contemplate
additional requirements applicable to
land within the scheme area. Further,
cl 2.2.1 of the R‑Codes contemplates that a local government may
prescribe additional
requirements for a development approval apart from
requiring compliance with the deemed‑to‑comply requirements of the
that the 'model provisions' and the 'deemed provisions' are contained in the
same legislation (i.e. the LPS Regulations) it
would be an unusual
construction (to say the least) for item 6 of the Table in cl 61 to be
construed so as to denude cl 32 of much
of its operation (i.e. in all
cases in which the deemed-to-comply requirements of the R‑Codes are
difficulty is made even more clear in relation to the operation of cl 25
and cl 26 of the 'model provisions', which expressly
contemplate
modifications to the deemed‑to‑comply requirements of the
R‑Codes. The effect of the respondent's construction
of item 6 of the
Table in cl 61 would be that such modifications could never operate (save
perhaps in a heritage‑protected
place). The respondent did not seek to
avoid such an inconvenient construction. Indeed, she embraced it, submitting
that cl 26 of
the model provisions were 'invalid' or of no effect.
the timing context referred to previously makes it unlikely that cl 61 and
item 6 of its Table would have the purpose of
absolutely preventing a local
government from prescribing additional requirements which have to be satisfied
in order to obtain a
development approval. Had that been the purpose, the power
to make supplementary scheme provisions contained in s 73(2A) of the PD
and reg 10(6) of the LPS Regulations would have been limited to prevent
supplementation of the effect of a deemed provision in
Schedule 2.
together, all of these considerations mean that cl 61, and item 6 of
its Table, were not intended to have the purpose ascribed
to it by the
respondent. That is, the purpose was not to prevent modification of the
R‑Codes pursuant to cl 26 of the model
provisions, and not to negate
any supplementary provision made pursuant to cl 32 of the model provisions,
which require a landowner
to obtain an additional approval from the Shire. In
other words, condition (b) of item 6 of the Table in cl 61 of Schedule 2 of
deemed provisions should be construed as referring to the R‑Codes,
as validly modified or supplemented by the
provisions of Scheme 4
(including additional development
requirements in cl 32).
has a consequence for the test of 'inconsistency' in s 257B(3). Provisions
are only 'inconsistent' with a deemed provision if
there is a necessary or
direct inconsistency in the narrower sense. There is no inconsistency simply by
prescribing an additional
requirement within the power to add a requirement to a
local scheme contained in s 73(2A) of the PD Act and reg 10 of
the LPS Regulations.
Another way of expressing this is to say that it was not
intended that where there was compliance with the R‑Codes, without
to modifications and supplementations in accordance with cl 26 and
cl 32 of Schedule 1 of the model provisions, this would
'cover the field'
and no other approvals apart from under the R‑Codes would be required.
means that cl 61, and item 6 of the accompanying Table, should not be
construed as being inconsistent with an additional requirement
imposed pursuant
to a provision of a scheme based upon the model provision contained in
cl 32 of Schedule 1. On its proper construction,
item 6 of the Table
in cl 61(1) of the 'deemed provisions' only applies where the proposed
works comply with the 'deemed‑to‑comply'
provisions of the
R‑Codes, as validly modified pursuant to cl 26 of Schedule 1 of the
model provisions or as supplemented pursuant
to cl 32 of Schedule 1 of the
model provisions.
approach to construing item 6 of the Table in cl 61 of Schedule 2 of the
LPS Regulations, and the corresponding approach to
the test of 'inconsistency'
contained in s 257B(3), is in line with the approach of the High Court in
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of
Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and Beech‑Jones JJ
Statutory construction is the process of attributing meaning to statutory text.
The construction of a statutory provision begins
and ends with the statutory
text understood in context and in light of the statutory purpose – being
what the provision is
designed to achieve in fact – insofar as that
purpose is discernible from the statutory text and context.
particular, the process of construction outlined above takes into account the
fact that the model and deemed provisions contained
in the Schedules to the LPS
Regulations, and the R-Codes, are all to be construed harmoniously as part of
one statutory scheme.
effect of the reasoning set out above is that a provision of the scheme
supplementing the R‑Codes by prescribing a maximum
plot ratio is valid. It
was not the intention of the planning framework to prevent a local government
prescribing supplementary provisions
which might require the local government to
make a decision about whether to grant or withhold a development approval. As
the respondent's
proposed works did not comply with the additional development
requirements in the present case, item 6 of the Table in cl 61(1) did
not apply and the respondent required development approval. The appeal should be
court was informed that the respondent has been issued with a building licence
which has a condition in it which makes its operation
subject to the decision of
the court in this case. Consequently, the court understands that the decision to
allow this appeal will
itself have the effect of preventing building by the
respondent taking place, and that it is unnecessary to make any further orders
to further submissions, the respondent should pay the costs of the appeal and of
the proceedings below. However, the court
will hear the parties about this, if
certify that the preceding paragraphs comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Chief
Justice Quinlan
28 OCTOBER 2025
Scheme 4 cl
Scheme 4 cl 32(1) and Table 5 item
McComish and Shire of
Peppermint Grove
[2023] WASAT 121
See s 257A and s 257B.
See also LPS Regulations s 8(1)(c) and cl 7(1)(a) of
Schedule 1.
Blue Appeal Book 168 [16], Statement of Issues and Agreed Facts,
20 September
See R‑Codes, p 48 Appendix 1, definition of
'deemed‑to‑comply'.
R-Codes cl 1.2.
R‑Codes, p 53. See also cl 5.1.4 which incorporates
See R‑Codes, p 50 (definition of 'Plot
Clause 2.3 has been deleted from the 2021
Scheme 4 cl
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (221 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter