URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
J [2023] WACIC 2 (6 January 2023)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION 2003
[2023] WACIC 2
DELIVERED :
6 JANUARY 2023
FILE NO/S :
CIC 2197 of 2022
Child sexual abuse - Proved offence - Alleged
offence - Assessment of damages - Extension of time - Maximum for related
Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Patrick J Cannon Coburn & Associates
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
(1994) 11 WAR 481
[2018] WADC 126
[2020] WADC 152
[2021] WACIC 4
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC 25
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC 93
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA 104
[2020] WACIC 7
[2010] WADC 6
Lawrence v Province Leader of the Oceania Province of the Congregation of the
Christian Brothers
[2020] WADC 27
M v J and J v J (Unreported WASC, Library No 920598,
19 November 1992)
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
, 331 - 332
Munsell v The Assessor of Criminal Injuries Compensation (Unreported,
WADC, Library No D970275, 12 September 1997) 3
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
[2017] WADC 92
(1984) 4 SR (WA) 219
[2014] WADC 92
[2016] WADC 74
[2011] WADC 10
RJE v Bandy (Unreported WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974)
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC 14
S v Neumann
(1995) 14 WAR 452
[2020] WADC 161
SL (by her next friend NL)
[2014] WADC 178
[2011] WADC 187
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
[2011] WADC 40
Winiarczyk v Tsirigotis
[2011] WASCA 97
for Decision
application dated 3 August 2022 the applicant, "J", made a claim
for compensation for injuries she suffered as a consequence of
offences between
16 April 2002 and 16 April 2003 by the offender "CGB", who was a friend of the
applicant's parents, and which were
described in the application form as "sexual
assault". The applicant was born on 16 April 1993 and was aged between
nine and 10
years when the offences were committed and was aged
28 years when her solicitors lodged the application.
On 17 November 2022 I made
an award of compensation in favour of
the applicant which the applicant accepted. On 17 November 2022 the
applicant requested reasons
for my decision which I provide
Evidence provided
application was supported by a letter requesting an extension of time for late
lodgement, a statement of events/victim impact
statement dated 27 July
2022, a timeline prepared by the applicant, a bundle of documents in relation to
the prosecution of the offender
obtained from the Department of Public
Prosecutions, a report from Ms Maryanne Stewart, Consultant Psychologist
dated 13 April 2022
and an invoice for Ms Stewart's report. Upon
request, the applicant also provided her school reports from both primary and
school and her resume.
reviewing the materials provided with the application, I requested clarification
from the applicant in relation to possible
alleged offences and received a
further statement from the applicant plus photographs which contained images of
the applicant at
events referred to in the statement and other photographs taken
by the alleged offender. The photographs include images of the applicant
skimpy clothing better suited to an adult woman and/or the applicant posing in a
sexualised manner and a number of photographs
have been taken at an angle to
look up the applicant's skirt or the legs of her shorts.
The circumstances giving rise to the offences/alleged offences
applicant resided with her parents in a town in the Kimberley region of Western
Australia. "CGB" was a friend of the applicant's
parent's and for a period of
time resided in a double decker bus which was parked in the applicant's parent's
back yard. Between
January 1998 and December 1999, when the applicant was aged
five or six years old, she would regularly visit "CGB" and recalls he
discussions with her which she described as "inappropriate", would take photos
of her which exposed her underwear and
would have her sit upon his lap and then
"accidentally" have his chair fall over whist she was sitting on his lap so she
up lying on top of him. I have been provided with photographs of the
applicant which were taken by "CGB", and which show her underwear.
The offender
was not charged for this conduct. "CGB" later moved to another location and the
applicant was allowed on occasion to
visit him alone. The applicant's father
passed away when she was seven years old, and she described her relationship
as filling some of the void her father's death had caused.
the applicant was aged nine years old, and "CGB" was aged 57 years old, she
visited him at his market stall. He took her to
his rural property, where he
directed the applicant to sit on his lap whilst he was seated in a computer
chair. After a brief period
of time "CGB" directed the applicant to remove her
boardshorts and underwear before returning to an away facing seated position on
his lap. "CGB" then used his hand to rub the applicant's vagina, causing her
physical discomfort. "CGB" attempted to have the applicant
touch his penis
through his clothes but was unsuccessful due to her away facing position. He
then showed the applicant a number
of photographs of himself engaging in naked
adult group sex. The applicant was very uncomfortable and persuaded the
offender to
drive her home. On 16 November 2021 "CGB" was convicted in the
District Court at Perth of 2 counts of indecent dealing with a child
13 years for his conduct on this occasion which occurred on an unknown date
between 16 April 2002 and 16 April 2003. I am satisfied
proved offences as
of the Act were constituted.
the applicant was aged about nine or 10 years, between about January 2002
and December 2003, she would visit "CGB" at his market
stall. On one
occasion "CGB" bought the applicant a coin purse and asked to take photographs
of her holding the coin purse, requesting
she "pose 'sexy'". I was provided
with a copy of this photograph. The applicant recalled "CGB" taking numerous
additional photographs
of her, noting in some photographs he did not use the
camera's flash and so could not see up her skirt and so used the flash in the
next photograph. I was provided with copies of two of these photographs. The
offender was not charged in relation to these offences.
the applicant's 11
birthday on 16 April 2004,
"CGB" took her for a flight on his microlite glider. "CGB" insisted the
applicant change into something
"sexy" before he would take her on the glider,
which she did. The applicant's mother was present before take-off and the
was only alone with "CGB" whilst on the flight, and when he landed on
the beach to take photographs of her on the glider. The applicant
"CGB" placing his hand on her upper thigh during the flight and also taking
"upskirt" photographs of her on the glider and
afterwards when in the hangar.
Copies of these photographs were provided. The offender was not charged for
this conduct.
provides an award of compensation for an alleged offence can be made if an
Assessor is satisfied the claimed injury and any claimed
loss occurred as a
consequence of an alleged offence. An alleged offence is defined in
of the Act.
of the Act provides 'satisfied' means
'satisfied on the balance of probabilities'. It must therefore, be more
probable than not
the alleged offending
applicant who claims compensation under the Act where no conviction has been
entered bears the burden of proving the
considered the applicant's statements and having viewed the relevant
photographs, I was satisfied the conduct of "CGB" surrounding
the taking of the
photographs and in touching the applicant as outlined above comprised alleged
offences of indecent dealing with
a child under the age of 13 years which
occurred on a date unknown between 1 January 1998 and 31 December
1999, on a date unknown
between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2003
and on or about 16 April 2004, pursuant to
of the Act. I
amended the award pursuant to
section 19(1)
of the Act to include these alleged
Medical evidence
her report dated 13 April 2022 Ms Maryanne Stewart, consultant
psychologist reported the applicant had consulted with her on 39
between November 2015 until the date of the report. The applicant
presented with symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), general
anxiety, depression and stress. Ms Stewart attributed the applicant's PTSD
symptoms predominantly to the sexual
abuse she experienced as a child.
Ms Stewart reported the applicant suffers from low mood, diminished
interest and pleasure in daily
activities, weight loss, fatigue, low self-worth,
difficulty concentrating, irritability and excessive worrying. The applicant
experiences
recurrent, involuntary and intrusive distressing memories of
traumatic events and associated nightmares, dissociative reactions (including
flashbacks) and distress at cues of the distressing events. She noted the
applicant is hypervigilant, has strong avoidance tendencies
that impact her day
to day functioning and an eating disorder which has required hospitalisation.
She reported the applicant has
trust issues with her family, partner and friends
which cause isolation, impact her decision making and ability to attain life
Ms Stewart further reported the applicant's eating disorder and
hypersomnia mean she has little energy, is often unwell, does not
concentration required to do basic household duties and she struggles to care
for her children. Her anxiety has prevented
her from obtaining her driver's
licence, causing transportation difficulties and adding to her social
Other evidence
her statement dated 27 July 2022 the applicant described the incidents
caused her to have nightmares and wet the bed. She described
maintaining friendships when at school and an inability to fit in with her peers
or concentrate whilst at school. The
applicant lacked motivation. This,
combined with her difficulties with her peers, caused her to leave school in
year 11. Between
2010 and 2012 the applicant was involved in a domestic
violence relationship before she entered into a relationship with her current
partner, who is also the father of her two children. The applicant completed a
Certificate II and a Certificate III in Horticulture
in 2014. She gave birth to
her first child in March 2016 and her second child in October 2018.
Whilst pregnant she suffered from
severe depression. She also reported
experiencing issues with housing, having difficulty in finding affordable
housing and then
with maintaining the property to an acceptable standard due to
her depression and concentration difficulties. She began working
part-time in
horticulture with her partner in late 2020 and was able to cope with this as she
reported to her partner and didn't
suffer from the usual anxiety she experienced
when attempting work. Additional concerns arose in her relationship with
the fidelity of her partner and with finances and her statement
indicated these matters caused her a level of anxiety and distress.
applicant described being hypervigilant with her children, being concerned about
them being looked after by others and described
having a panic attack when her
daughter first went to school. The applicant experienced a tonic clonic seizure
on 15 December 2021
and a subsequent milder seizure on 24 December
2021 which she attributes to her poor diet. I was not provided with any medical
as to the occurrence of or cause of the seizures. The applicant has
had to modify her diet after the seizures and described difficulty
managing this
given her previous dietary issues which caused a restriction to her food intake
by way of both quantity and food choices.
The applicant described ongoing
nightmares which cause disturbed sleep and fatigue.
applicant's school reports indicate a declining performance between primary
school and high school. Reports were only provided
for the period from 2005 to
2009. The reports for primary school noted a responsible and conscientious
student who was confident,
responsible with a positive attitude. The reports
for 2008 and 2009 described a lack of motivation and sporadic work rate.
applicant's curriculum vitae indicated she was self-employed between April to
September 2020 as a horticulturist. No evidence
was provided of the
applicant's earnings, if any, whilst running this business. The applicant was
then employed as a production
nursery hand between September to
November 2020, working a maximum of three days per week. This employment
came to an end when fidelity
issues arose with the applicant's partner and she
separated from him for a period of time.
find as a result of the incidents the applicant sustained a psychological injury
comprising post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety
and depression. The
applicant has experienced symptoms including:
(a) Repeated,
disturbing and unwanted memories and nightmares of the incidents;
(b) Distress and upset on being reminded of the incidents;
(c) Irritability;
(d) Excessive worry and hypervigilance;
(e) Impeded concentration;
(f) Sleep disturbance;
(g) Fatigue;
(h) The development of an eating disorder, with weight loss;
(i) Low self-worth;
(j) Reduced confidence; and
(k) Lack of trust in relationships.
Extension of time
offences occurred on unknown dates between about 16 April 2002 and
16 April 2004. Pursuant to
section 9(1)
of the Act the application
should have been brought by 16 April 2007. By
section 9(2)
Act, a compensation application may be brought after three years if
the assessor thinks it is just to do so. The burden is
on an applicant for
compensation to explain to the satisfaction of the court the reasons for the
delay in bringing the
application.
applicant provided a letter dated 27 July 2022 which identified she was a
minor when the offences were committed and when the
limitation period expired.
The applicant also explained the incidents were not reported to police until she
was 18 years old (in
2012), but the police investigation took some time,
with the offender having re-located overseas and changed his name to avoid
extradition.
The prosecution of the offender was completed in
November 2021. Subsequent to the sentencing the applicant, who lives in
Queensland,
then had to locate a solicitor who could assist her in bringing this
application.
Herron DCJ set out the factors may be relevant to the exercise of the
court’s discretion under
as including:
history of and background to the proposed application;
(b) the length of the delay;
(c) the reasons for the delay;
(d) the nature of the proposed application;
(e) the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of an extension
of time, including the extent of any prejudice to the
respondent;
(f) the prospects of the compensation application succeeding; and
(g) whether injustice will be suffered if an extension of time is
determining whether it was just to grant an extension of time for the applicant
to bring her application pursuant to
section 9(2)
of the Act, I noted the
application arose from childhood sexual abuse and the delay was considerable,
being approximately 15 years
after the expiry of the limitation period. If
the extension was not so granted, then the applicant would be denied
compensation.
That on its own does not justify the granting of an extension of
time to make her
application
However, given the convictions of "CGB", the prospects of proceeding to an award
on a compensation application brought within time
would have been high. I
considered additional reasons to exercise my discretion in the applicant's
favour where she was a minor
both when the offences occurred and when the
limitation period expired and she brought the application less than
12 months after
the prosecution of the offender was finalised. As a
result, I considered it just to grant the applicant an extension of time within
which to bring her application.
Method of assessment
of the Act sets out the general powers of an assessor. It provides 'on
application in respect of injury suffered by a victim as
a consequence of the
commission of an offence, an assessor may award such compensation that the
assessor is satisfied is just for
the injury and for any loss also suffered'.
of the Act, 'satisfied' means 'satisfied on the balance of
probabilities'.
the last offence occurred after 1 January 2004, the maximum amount of
compensation payable for a single offence is
The applicant was the victim of multiple unrelated offences by one offender and
accordingly she is entitled to an amount not exceeding
twice the maximum of a
single offence
namely $150,000. The maximum in the Act under
section 31(1)
The correct approach to adopt in assessing the amount of compensation under the
Act is to apply the ordinary tortious principles
for assessment of damages,
subject to the limitations imposed by the definitions of 'injury' and 'loss' in
the Act, and to the jurisdictional
limit of the
of damages for loss and injury suffered by a young child at the commencement of
her schooling and life is a complex task.
Sweeney DCJ
The recognised and well documented long term effects of child abuse,
particularly chronic child abuse by a family member however
are such that it
would be quite impossible for this court to attempt to disentangle the long term
effects of any offending behaviour
from any possible long term effects from
other childhood factors and the vagrancies of life generally, even if it were
appropriate
Assessment of the applicant's claim
Assessment of non-economic loss
of the Act a victim who suffers injury as a
consequence of the commission of a proved offence may apply for compensation for
injury and any loss suffered. 'Injury' is defined in
Act as 'bodily harm, mental and nervous shock, or pregnancy'.
amount of damages for non-economic loss must be fair and reasonable compensation
for the injuries received by the applicant and
the disabilities caused, having
regard to current general ideas of fairness and
moderation.
amount must be proportionate to the particular situation of the
injuries I have found the applicant to suffer are set out in paragraph 12
I conducted a review of District Court decisions of general damages awards in
Criminal Injuries Compensation matters, noting the
range varied from $15,000 for
a single incident of indecent
$125,000 for two separate incidents which included sexual
penetration
also considered the decision of
Lawrence v Province Leader of the Oceania
Province of the Congregation of the Christian
in which Herron DCJ described the nature and extent of the sexual abuse as
being in the range of the most severe types of sexual
decisions in relation to offences of child sexual abuse include:
involved multiple counts of indecent dealing over approximately 15 months. "E"
suffered from post traumatic stress disorder, anxiety
and an eating disorder.
Injuries were assessed at $130,000.
involved a single incident comprising sexual penetration (penis/vagina) of the
applicant who was then eight years old applicant by
a 14-year-old friend of
her brother. The applicant was noted by the consultant psychiatrist who
reviewed her to have been "emotionally
traumatised" by the offences and was
diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder. Judge Sharp considered the
appropriate amount
for general damages exceeded the jurisdictional limit of
involved two incidents comprising an unlawful sexual assault and unlawful
indecent dealing with a person under the age of 16 years.
No diagnosis was
provided of the applicant's condition but on his statement, it was accepted the
trauma suffered by the applicant
comprised mental and nervous shock for the
purpose of the definition of injury under the Act. Judge Sharpe considered the
appropriate
amount for general damages exceeded the jurisdictional limit of
$100,000 and awarded compensation in that amount.
applicant has sustained a psychological injury which impacts upon her personal
relationships, and her ability to engage in employment.
symptoms include intrusive flashbacks, nightmares and disturbed sleep, lack
of trust, lack of confidence, lack of self-worth,
an eating disorder,
hypervigilance and impaired concentration. I accepted the applicant's injury
has a significant and ongoing impact
on her quality of life. I took into
account the applicant experienced additional trauma in her life including a
domestic violence
relationship, severe depression whilst pregnant, and ongoing
stressors in her relationship with her partner, with finances and with
health, some of which may be attributable to the consequences of her
psychological injury. In all of the circumstances of this
case I considered an
appropriate award of general damages for the injuries suffered by the applicant
to be $150,000.
Future Treatment expenses
under the Act includes 'expenses that are likely to be reasonably incurred by or
on behalf of the victim for treatment that
the victim is likely to need as a
direct consequence of the injury suffered by the
Ms Stewart,
consultant psychologist, commented the applicant will require further long-term,
regular therapy to support her to gain
a decent quality of life. However, she
did not provide an estimate of the applicant's future treatment requirements. I
applicant had attended Ms Stewart for 39 sessions to date, of
which 33 sessions were between February 2020 and April 2022. I
an amount of $5,000 for future psychological
Report fees
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that arise in obtaining any
report from a health professional or counsellor
in relation to the injury
suffered by the
applicant incurred the cost of obtaining the medical report from Ms Stewart
in the amount $198.00. I allowed this amount.
Assessment of loss of earning capacity
applicant is entitled to compensation for 'loss of earnings as a direct
consequence of the injuries' she
earnings includes loss of earning
applicant was a child when the incidents occurred. Her school reports
immediately after the offending showed no apparent difficulties.
However, her
high school reports were characterised by a lack of motivation, concentration
and effort. Ms Maryanne Stewart, consultant
psychologist
I believe [the applicant]'s history of childhood sexual abuse has significantly
impacted her education, and past, current and future
employment capabilities.
Due to [the applicant]'s mental health difficulties she ended her schooling in
Grade 11, finding it difficult
to concentrate on her study and interact with
peers. Other attempts at study, such as Certificate in Childcare were also
due to an inability to focus. [The applicant] managed to attain a
Certificate 2 and 3 in Horticulture in 2014. Ongoing financial
transport and accommodation difficulties, poor social support, physical health
issues and low self-worth means it is difficult
for [the applicant] to maintain
her career in horticulture and selling plants, which is her
reaching adulthood, the applicant has only maintained paid employment for a
total period of two to three months, whilst she
was able to work under the
supervision of her partner. I accept there has been an impact on the
applicant's earning capacity and
allowed the amount of
Summary of the assessment
assessed the applicant's claim
Non pecuniary loss
Loss of earning capacity
Future treatment expenses
Report fees
I am bound by the jurisdictional maximum of $150,000 which applied to this
matter and accordingly on 17 November 2022 I
made an award in favour of the
applicant in the amount of $150,000. I did not withhold any monies for future
treatment pursuant
section 48(1)
of the Act as my assessment for
injuries and other losses greatly exceeded the jurisdictional maximum.
I made the compensation award, I considered it appropriate to prohibit any
publication pursuant to
section 64(a)
of the Act which is likely to lead to
the identification of the applicant due to the nature of the offences. I hereby
extend that
order to these reasons.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
6 JANUARY 2023
[2016] WADC
(1984) 4 SR (WA) 219
(1995) 12 SR (WA)
, 331 - 332;
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC 93
[2017] WADC 92
Munsell v The Assessor of Criminal Injuries
Compensation
(Unreported, WADC, Library No D970275, 12 September
(Greaves C).
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC
[2014] WADC 92
(1995) 14 WAR 452
, 463. (Murray J);
[2011] WADC 187.
[21] (Bowden DCJ);
Underwood v
[2018] WADC 13.
[19] (Gething DCJ)
(Unreported WASC, Library No 920598, 19 November
1992).) (Scott J);
RJE v Bandy
(Unreported
WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974.) 3 (Burt J);
[2011] WADC 10.
(Braddock DCJ);
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC
[12] (Stone
[2011] WADC
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
(Barwick CJ, Kitto & Menzies JJ);
[2009] WASCA 104
[107] (Newnes JA with whom Pullin
& Miller JJA agreed);
Winiarczyk v
[2011] WASCA 97
[71] (Judgment of the
[2020] WACIC 7
[2018] WADC
(by her next friend NL
[2014] WADC
Lawrence v Province Leader of the Oceania Province of the Congregation of
the Christian Brothers
[2020] WADC
[2021] WACIC
[2020] WADC
[2020] WADC
s6(2)(a)(ii).
The Act, s6(2)
(1994) 11 WAR 481
[2010] WADC 6
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter