URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Owners of Peninsula Village One - Strata Plan 12961 and Boucher & Anor [2004] WASTR 56 (11 October 2004)
CORAM : MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
DATE OF ORDER : 11 OCTOBER 2004
FILE NUMBER : ST/2004-000077
STRATA PLAN NUMBER : 12961
PARTIES: THE OWNERS OF PENINSULA VILLAGE ONE – STRATA PLAN 12961
LIONEL BOUCHER AND JOELINE VERGEER
Catchwords:
Real property – Strata titles – common property – structures
– authorisation
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act 1985
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
Hamilton v. Thompson, District Court Appeal 154 of 1998
Cases(s) also cited:
PRINCIPAL ORDER
1 Approvals required for structural additions to common
2 The Applicant is “The Owners of Peninsula One – Strata Plan
Strata Plan and relevant
3 Strata Plan 12961 (“the Strata Plan”) was registered on 30 July
1985 pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1985
continues to be the relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
5 The parcel comprises 63 multi-level residential lots in a complex known as
“Peninsula Village One”, at the corner
of Peninsula Road and Wall
Street Maylands.
6 The Strata Plan shows the address for serving notices on the Strata Company
is 40 Peninsula Road Maylands
7 When the Strata Plan was registered, the by-laws of the Strata Company were,
in accordance with
(as it was then worded),
the “standard”
by-laws in Sch 1. At that time Sch 1 was divided into
and II. There were
16 by-laws in
8 At that time Sch 2 contained a set of by-laws headed “Optional
Additional By-laws” which a Strata Company could adopt.
9 The Strata Plan records, in notification D108556 changes to those by-laws on
12 September 1985. Those amendments included the
addition of a new Sch 1
by-law 17, in the following terms:-
“ A proprietor shall not
(a) Store or leave or allow to be stored or left any article or thing in the
common property unless with the consent in writing of
the Council first had and
obtained PROVIDED HOWEVER that this restriction so far as it refers to the
disposal of garbage shall be
regulated exclusively by By-Law 12 contained in the
Second Schedule, which by-law is hereby adopted as a by-law of the strata
(b) “Erect or permit to be erected or to remain any fixture or fitting of
any kind whatsoever external to any part of a lot
or the common property, except
a blind or blinds of such nature size and design as the Council may from time to
time approve”
11 At the same time, the Strata Company recorded the adoption of a new Sch 1,
by-law 18 which includes:-
“(a) the Strata Company shall grant to the proprietor for the time being
of each lot comprised in the Strata Plan upon the
conditions and other
stipulations set forth in paragraph (b) of this By-Law the right to exclusive
use and enjoyment of those portions
of the common property more particularly
delineated on the Strata Plan and marked and shown thereon as for the use of
(b) the right to exclusive use and enjoyment mentioned in paragraph (a) of this
By-Law shall be granted upon and subject to the terms
and conditions
(i) The Proprietor for the time being of each lot comprised in The Strata Plan
shall at all times properly and adequately water,
tend or cultivate the lawns
and gardens of the portion or portions of the common property set aside for the
Proprietor’s exclusive
use and enjoyment and maintain and keep the same in
a clean and tidy condition...”
was amended by the Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995 which came
into effect on 14 April 1996. That section, as amended,
provided that
by-laws set out in Schs 1 and 2 would be deemed to be the by-laws of every
strata company, while reserving to every
strata company
the right to amend,
repeal or add to those by-laws.
13 Notification G883708, noted on the Strata Plan on 24 August 1998, records
the repeal of Sch 2, by-law 12(c) and the adoption
of a new Sch 2, by-law 15,
relating to the keeping of animals and a new Sch 2, by-law 16, relating to the
use of common property.
Order sought
14 The Strata Company has sought an order under section 83(1) in the following
“ Within thirty (30) days of the date of this Order, the registered
proprietor of Lot 63 on Strata Plan 12961 is to remove
the structure in the
nature of a patio or pergola affixed to the common property wall surrounding Lot
63 and located in the portion
of the common property allocated with exclusive
use of that Lot”
15 Lot 63, which is owned by Lionel Andre Olivier Boucher and Joeline Vergeer,
is at the northern end of the parcel. It comprises
a ground floor portion of
and a first floor portion of 48m
. The location page,
of the Strata Plan shows, outlined in broken lines, three small portions of
common property adjacent to Lot 63.
Each of those portions has “63”
inscribed on it but they are not parts of Lot 63. They appear to be areas of the
referred to in the Strata Company’s Sch 1, Part 1, by-law 18 that was
adopted in 1985 and which is referred to above.
16 Although the Strata Plan contains a notation that
“Areas & Carports for use exclusively with lots as
17 that notation does not create or establish any exclusive use rights. Any
rights that exist over those areas are derived entirely
from Sch 1, by-law
Applicant's submissions
18 The Applicant advises that, on 30 April 2003, the proprietors of Lot 63
applied to the Strata Company for approval
“...erect two freestanding gazeboes (one in the front courtyard and one in
the rear)...”
19 On 15 May 2003, the Strata Company’s managing agents wrote to the
proprietors of Lot 63 advising that their request had
been refused.
20 On 25 August 2003, the Strata Company’s managing agents wrote to the
proprietors of Lot 63 again, confirming that:
“permission was not granted for the gazebos requested in your
correspondence dated 30 April
21 On 2 September 2003, the managing agents wrote, to the proprietors of Lot 63
advising them that the Strata Company’s Council
of Owners has resolved
that the proprietors of Lot 63 were required to remove, within 14 days,
“...the structure which has been built to
22 On 9 October 2003, the managing agents wrote to the proprietors of Lot 63
once again, requesting the removal of the structure
within 7 days.
23 The structure has still not been removed
24 The Strata Company contends that the structure in question has been
constructed in breach of Sch 1 by-laws 17 and 18, as it was
erected without the
approval of the Strata Company or of its Council of Owners and in direct
defiance of a refusal to approve and
that it has been erected with second hand
materials in a untradesman-like manner.
25 The Strata Company submits that
“the offending structure is an eyesore erected in a visibly conspicuous
location to the detriment to the scheme
26 and that
“the strata company is open to potential claims to damage to property or
injury to people if the structure was to collapse
or components of the structure
should fly off in windy conditions”
27 The Strata Company has also referred to the effect the structure might have
on the Strata Company’s insurance cover should
anyone be injured by
Lot boundaries and exclusive use
28 Pursuant to ss 3(1) and (2), each lot and each part lot within the scheme is
a cubic space having as its boundaries the upper
surface of the floor, the inner
surfaces of the perimeter walls and the under surface of the ceilings of the
parts of the buildings
where they are respectively situated. Everything else,
including the perimeter walls, ceilings, roofs and surrounding land, and the
space above the buildings and the external land, is common property.
29 Section 42(8) provides, in part, (although the full wording of the section
should be referred to) that
“...a strata company may, with the consent in writing of the proprietor of
a lot, pursuant to a resolution without dissent
(or unanimous resolution, in a
case of a two-lot scheme) make, under this subsection only and not otherwise, a
by-law in respect
of that lot conferring on that proprietor the exclusive use
and enjoyment of, or special privileges in respect of, the common property
any part of it upon such terms and conditions... as may be specified in the
30 When Notification D108556 was recorded on the Strata Plan, s 42(8),
required such a resolution to be a unanimous resolution,
but was otherwise in
the same terms as quoted above.
31 When the resolution adopting the by-law amendments and additions contained
in Notification D108556 was passed on 21 August 1985,
all of the lots were owned
by Tranby Developments Pty Ltd (“Tranby”). The Minutes of the
relevant first meeting of the
Strata Company record that the Secretary and the
Manager of Tranby represented that company at that meeting, but there is no
of the appointment of a proxy by that company.
32 The Minutes of that meeting also record
“... it was resolved to accept short notice of the
33 In the definition of “unanimous resolution”, there is a
requirement that the resolution be passed
“...at a duly convened general meeting of the strata company at which all
persons entitled to exercise the powers of voting...
vote personally or by
34 In 1985, Sch 1, Part 1 by-law 10(5) specified that not less than 7 days
notice of every general meeting had to be given. There
was no provision for
“short notice”
35 Accordingly, it is likely that the Notification was invalid because of the
failure to comply with the procedural requirements,
but I have not been asked to
make any orders in that regard.
Responses to
application
36 The proprietors of 3 Lots have supported the application. Their comments
include the following:-
“the structure is visible from the road and it is not aesthetically
enhancing the “look”and“style”
of the whole
“the structure does not look to be a quality safe structure erected by a
professional tradesman ”
“allowing this structure to exist will also set precedent for other owners
to erect unapproved structures in the future”
“the structure as a whole is unsightly”
“the structure is clearly made out of salvaged materials, is visually
unsightly and possible unsound structurally. The timber
used is not painted in
some places”
37 Mr Boucher, one of the respondents, has opposed the application on the
grounds, amongst others, that the refusal to give approval
did not include any
reasons for a refusal
38 He claims that in other parts of the common property there are
“shade sales, a blue umbrella and ... a freestanding
39 He submits that:
“we have a young family who needs extra privacy as our Lot is located on
the pedestrian path side of wall street, and extra
shade as our children use
the both the front and rear yards often. Our Lot experiences a lot of the sun
throughout the year... I
am open for discussion and willing to compromise this
situation and also fully aware that is up to the Referee’s
discretion...”
Considerations
40 Section 35(1) requires the Strata Company to control and manage the common
property for the benefit of all proprietors.
41 I have serious doubts about the validity of the “exclusive use”
by-law referred to above but even if the exclusive
use by-law is valid, there is
nothing in that by-law which grants any right, expressly or impliedly, to make
any structural improvements
or additions to any area covered by the by-law. The
Strata Company’s own powers to carry out works within common property are
limited by s35. It cannot adopt a by-law which would allow those statutory
limitations to be ignored.
42 While I have no reason to doubt existence of the problems raised by Mr
Boucher and while appreciating his wish to provide shaded
areas for his
children, I consider myself bound by a decision on the District Court of Western
Australia in the case of
Robert Keith Hamilton v. Gerard Thompson
43 In that case, Mr Thompson, as the proprietor of a lot in a strata-titled
caravan park, wrote to his Strata Company’s Council
of Owners for
permission to erect a covered patio, for health reasons, but the application was
44 However, despite the refusal, Mr Thompson proceeded to construct the patio
and pergola.
45 On the application of Mr. Thompson, I made an Order allowing the pergola to
remain, on a temporary basis, subject to specific
conditions relating to Mr
Thompson’s medical condition which he claimed necessitated the need for
the pergola. The Strata Company
appealed any decision to the District Court.
The Court reversed my decision and ordered the removal of the pergola. Judge
in that case, concluded that she was
“...satisfied that the erection of the pergola has undermined the
corporate governance in the park...”
46 Her Honour considered construction of the pergola created significant
material disadvantages to the other lot proprietors who
had purchased their lots
on the understanding that their proprietary interests would be protected by the
uniform enforcement of the
Act and the by laws.
48 In the circumstances, on the basis of the Strata Company’s submission
and the District Court’s decision referred
to above, I have no alternative
but to order the removal of the structure of the subject of this application,
although I am prepared
to allow a period of time for the removal.
49 The time I have allowed may also provide an opportunity for the
Respondents to discuss some form of compromise with the Strata
Company, if the
Strata Company is prepared to enter into such a discussion.
50 The other aspect that may need to be taken into account is Mr
Boucher’s assertions about installations made within the
exclusive use
areas allocated to other lot proprietors. All proprietors should be treated on
an equal basis, unless there are special
circumstances that necessitate a
variation from that principle.
51 My Order is that
November 2004, “The Owners of Village One – Strata
Plan 12961” has given its approval to the retention of the structures
installed on the common property adjacent to Lot 63 on Strata Plan 12961 by the
proprietors of the said Lot 63, those proprietors
must, by not later than
November 2004, at their risk and cost in all respects, dismantle
and remove from the common property adjacent to the said Lot 63,
structures, making good any damage caused to the common property by the
installation or removal of those structures”
DATED 11 OCTOBER 2004
_________________________________
R J KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (71.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter