URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2008/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KS [2008] WASAT 29 (11 February 2008)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2008] WASAT 29
JUSTICE M L BARKER (PRESIDENT)
DETERMINED ON THE DOCUMENTS
DELIVERED :
11 FEBRUARY 2008
FILE NO/S :
GAA 1251 of 2007
GAA 1252 of 2007
Represented Person
Catchwords:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Enduring power of attorney - Application for intervention under
s 109(1)(a)
s 109(1)(b)
where donor deceased - Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction to
make orders where donor is deceased - Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction
orders where donor is capable
Legislation:
Administration Act 1903
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1990
Inheritance (Family
and Dependants Provision) Act 1972
Power of Attorney Act 1998
(Qld), s 88
Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
(NZ), s 107(2)
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Determination that Tribunal has jurisdiction to make orders
for intervention in enduring power of attorney where donor has
Determination that Tribunal has jurisdiction to make orders for
intervention in enduring power of attorney where donor is capable
Representation:
Represented Person : N/A
Applicant : Mr P Wyatt
Donee : Mr CP Stokes
Solicitors:
Represented Person : N/A
Applicant : Haynes Robinson
Donee : Chris Stokes & Associates
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE
Summary of Tribunal's decision
1 The son of a donor of an enduring power of
attorney applied to the Tribunal for orders for accounts of transactions
allegedly undertaken
by the donee under the power. The donor died in 2006, and
it had not been established that he lacked legal capacity at any stage
his lifetime.
2 The Tribunal initially established to deal with the application referred
two questions of law to the President for determination:
whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make orders intervening in an enduring power of
attorney where the donor has died; and
whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make orders intervening in an enduring power of
attorney where the donor has retained legal
President determined both questions in the affirmative. The matter was remitted
to the Tribunal as originally constituted
for determination of the initial
application.
4 Two questions have been referred to the President
of the State Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal) pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) for determination,
the Tribunal have jurisdiction to make orders under
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) (GA Act) for intervention
in an enduring power of attorney where the donor has died?
the Tribunal have jurisdiction to make orders under s 109 of the GA Act for
intervention in an enduring power of attorney where
the donor is
Factual Background
5 KS executed an enduring power of attorney in 2004
by which he appointed his son-in-law GC the donee. KS died in October 2006.
6 Probate of KS's will was granted to KS's executors on
26 February 2007.
7 The applicant GS, who is KS's son, initiated proceedings in the Supreme
Court of Western Australia under the
Inheritance (Family and Dependants
Provision) Act 1972
(WA) and also challenged the administration of his
father's will. He asserts that the schedule of assets submitted for probate did
not properly reflect the value of the estate prior to his father's death.
8 In proceedings in this Tribunal the applicant seeks orders under
s 109 of the GA Act for the filing and audit of accounts for
transactions
allegedly undertaken by GC as donee under the enduring power of
attorney during the lifetime of KS.
9 In response the donee says KS maintained legal capacity until the time of
his death and that he, as donee, has not acted under
the enduring power of
attorney at any time. However, this factual claim is challenged by the
applicant who asserts that GC acted
under the enduring power of attorney to
transfer property of KS on 25 March 2006, prior to KS's death.
Enduring power of attorney
10 The ability to make an enduring power of attorney
is now a common feature of statutory law in all Australian states and
territories.
11 The ability for a person to make a general power of attorney by deed has
long been available under the general law. A general
power of attorney is
typically used in commercial transactions to give a person specific authority in
financial matters. A general
power of attorney does not usually facilitate the
donee of the power of attorney making personal or health decisions. Moreover,
general power of attorney ceases to operate when the donor loses legal
12 To this end, typically, an enduring power of attorney, which is created
by statute, builds on the general power of attorney by
authorising the
continuance of a power of attorney in the event that the donor of the power
loses the legal capacity themselves to
make decisions.
13 Accordingly, an enduring power of attorney is a particular sort of power
of attorney recognised and regulated by statute by reference
to a general power
of attorney. While the relevant statutes in the various Australian
to consider closely the terms
of each statute to understand how it operates in the particular jurisdiction in
question. In Western
Australia, enduring powers of attorney are recognised and
regulated by the provisions of the GA Act.
14 Section 102 of the GA Act defines an enduring power of attorney
as a power of attorney created under s 104 or recognised by the
Administrative Tribunal under s 104A(2). The latter definition means the
Tribunal can recognise an enduring power of attorney
made outside Western
15 Section 104 of the GA Act specifies how an enduring power of
attorney is created, including the requirements that:
substantially in the form of Form 1 in Sch 3;
the donor must
declare that the power will continue in force notwithstanding subsequent legal
incapacity or will be in force only
during any period when a declaration by the
Tribunal under s 106, that the donor does not have legal capacity, is in
effective unless witnessed by two persons authorised by law to take
declarations; and
the donee has
accepted the power substantially in the form of Form 2 in Sch
16 Section 105 of the GA Act makes it clear that
notwithstanding any rule of law to the contrary, or anything in the GA Act, an
power of attorney that is in force is not affected by the subsequent
legal incapacity of the donor of the power.
17 Section 107 of the GA Act specifies the obligations of a donee,
to exercise the
power of attorney with reasonable diligence to protect the interests of the
donor and, if they fail to do so, to be
liable to the donor for any loss
occasioned by the failure;
to keep and
preserve accurate records and accounts of all deals and transactions made under
s 109(2), not to renounce the power during any period of legal incapacity
of the donor; and
if the donee
becomes bankrupt, to report that bankruptcy to the Tribunal.
18 Section 108 of the GA Act recognises that the Tribunal may make
a statutory administration order in respect of a person's estate
notwithstanding
the existence of an enduring power of attorney, and provides:
Where it makes an administration order or an order under
section 65 or 66 in respect of the estate of the donor of an enduring power
(a) created under section 104, the State
Administrative Tribunal may revoke or vary the power; or
(b) recognized by the State Administrative Tribunal under section 104A(2),
the Tribunal may revoke that recognition.
Despite subsection (1), where the State Administrative
Tribunal makes an order referred to in that subsection and the continued
of an enduring power of attorney would be inconsistent with the
functions of the administrator or person acting under section 65
(a) in the case of an enduring power of
attorney created under section 104, shall revoke the power or vary it to remove
the inconsistency;
(b) in the case of an enduring power of attorney recognized by the Tribunal
under section 104A(2), shall revoke that recognition.
Subject to subsection (1), where an administrator of the
estate or of part of the estate of the donor of an enduring power of attorney
appointed -
(a) the donee of the power is
accountable to the administrator as if the administrator were the donor of the
(b) the administrator has the same power to vary or revoke the power as the
donor would have if he were of full legal capacity.
In relation to an enduring power of attorney recognized
by the State Administrative Tribunal under section 104A(2) -
(a) the operation of subsection (2)(a) is limited
to the donor's estate within Western Australia; and
(b) subsection (2)(b) does not apply but the administrator may apply to the
Tribunal to revoke recognition of the enduring power of
Section 41(1) and (3) apply, with all necessary changes,
to an application under subsection (3)(b) as if it were an application for
administration order."
19 Section 109 of the
GA Act sets out the power of the Tribunal otherwise to intervene in
relation to an enduring power of attorney
on application in the following
circumstances:
A person who has, in the opinion of the State
Administrative Tribunal, a proper interest in the matter may apply to the
Tribunal for
(a) requiring the donee of
an enduring power of attorney to file with the Tribunal and serve on the
applicant a copy of all records
and accounts kept by the donee of dealings and
transactions made by him in connection with the power;
(b) requiring such records and accounts to be audited by an auditor appointed
by the Tribunal and requiring a copy of the report of
the auditor to be
furnished to the Tribunal and the applicant for the order; or
(c) revoking or varying the terms of an enduring power of attorney,
appointing a substitute donee of the power or confirming that
a person appointed
to be the substitute donee of the power has become the donee.
The donee of an enduring power of attorney may apply to
the State Administrative Tribunal -
order referred to in subsection (1)(c); or
(b) for directions as to matters connected with the exercise of the power or
the construction of its terms.
The State Administrative Tribunal may, upon an
application under this section or upon receiving a report of a donee's
bankruptcy under
section 107(1)(d) -
(a) make an
order referred to in subsection (1) or (2); or
(b) make such other order as to the exercise of the power or the construction
of its terms as the Tribunal thinks fit.
An order under this section may be made subject to such
terms and conditions as the State Administrative Tribunal thinks
In relation to an enduring power of attorney
recognized by the State Administrative Tribunal under section 104A, an order
section is limited to the donor's estate within Western
Australia."
Question 1: Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to make orders under s 109
of the GA Act for intervention where the donor has died?
20 There is no doubt that the donee of an enduring
power of attorney is unable to exercise the powers created by an enduring power
of attorney once the donor has died.
21 The whole purpose of an enduring power of attorney is to permit a person
to act on behalf of the donor during the donor's lifetime,
even where they lose
legal capacity.
22 This intent may be drawn from a reading of the whole of Pt 9 of the
GA Act. It also flows from the clear wording of Form 1 'Enduring
Attorney' set out in Sch 3 of the GA Act. Clause 2 of Form 1 is in these
"I authorise my attorney to do on my behalf anything that I can lawfully do by
an attorney."
Once a person has passed away they cannot do
anything and so no other person can do anything on their behalf.
23 Once the donor of the power of attorney dies it is necessary for either
an executor or a trustee appointed by the will of the
deceased, if there is a
will, to seek probate of the will and to act lawfully in accordance with the
terms of the will; or, if there
is no will, for a person to apply for letters of
administration under the
Administration Act 1903
(WA) to act in relation
to the estate of the deceased.
24 The position is the same where the donor of a general power of attorney
25 While the donor of an enduring power of attorney is alive, and the
enduring power of attorney is operational, the donee must meet
the obligations
specified in s 107 of the GA Act. Those obligations include that set
out in s 107(1)(b) of the GA Act, to keep and
preserve accurate
records and accounts of all dealings and transactions made under the power.
26 The Parliament has given the Tribunal a general supervisory jurisdiction
in respect of enduring powers of attorney. As noted
earlier, under
s 108(1) of the GA Act, the Tribunal can revoke or vary the enduring
power of attorney if it decides to grant an administration
order in respect of a
person's estate.
27 Under s 109(1)(a) and s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act, amongst
other things, the Tribunal, on the application of a person who has a
interest in the matter, can order the donee of the enduring power of attorney to
file with the Tribunal and serve on the applicant
a copy of all records and
accounts kept by the donee of dealings and transactions made by him in
connection with the power; and require
such records and accounts to be audited.
28 The first question that arises for determination in the current
proceedings in the Tribunal is whether, once a donor has died,
the Tribunal can
make an order of the kind contemplated by s 109(1)(a) and s 109(1)(b)
of the GA Act.
29 There is nothing in Pt 9 of the GA Act, or elsewhere, that
expressly says that the Tribunal loses the power to make an order under
s 109(1)(a) or s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act if the donor of the
enduring power of attorney has died.
30 Indeed, in my view, it would be surprising if there were such an express
power because the Tribunal would then lose the responsibility
of properly
supervising the earlier conduct of a donee under a power of attorney that
occurred during the lifetime of the donor.
31 I can see no reason why, in an appropriate case, the Tribunal should not
be able to make an order of the kind contemplated by
s 109(1)(a) or
s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act, on an application made by a person, with a
proper interest in a matter, following the death
of a donor.
32 In that regard, I do not consider that the reference in s 109(1)(a)
to the power of the Tribunal to make an order in respect of
"the donee of an
enduring power of attorney" is confined to the donee of an enduring power of
attorney which is still operative at
the date of the making of the order. It
seems to me that, having regard to the context in which these words appear in
s 109(1)(a)
and having regard to the general intent of the Parliament that
may be drawn from Pt 9 of the GA Act concerning the Tribunal's
supervisory
role, in respect of the conduct of donees under enduring powers of
attorney, the reference includes a person who, at any material
time during the
lifetime of a donor, completed any transactions under an enduring power of
attorney. In other words, I do not consider
that the relevant words in
s 109(1)(a) should be read as if the words "which is still operative"
appeared after the words "the donee
of an enduring power of attorney".
33 I consider this to be so even though it is clear that the power of the
Tribunal to make other orders contemplated by s 109 would
be redundant
following the death of a donor. For example, there would be no legal efficacy
in any order purporting to revoke or
vary the terms of an enduring power of
attorney or to appoint a substitute donee of the power, under s 109(1)(c),
where the donor
is deceased. Similarly, if the donee has passed away the
Tribunal would lack the power to make directions as to matters connected
exercise of the power on the application of a donee under s 109(2).
34 However, in my view, even though the donor of an enduring power of
attorney may have passed away, there may, in appropriate circumstances,
proper reason established to justify the making of an order requiring the donee
of an enduring power of attorney to account
for his or her actions under the
enduring power of attorney during the earlier lifetime of the donor, under
s 109(1)(a) or s 109(1)(b)
of the GA Act.
35 Any such order made could only require the relevant accounting or audit
and would not have any other remedial effect.
36 In these circumstances, I see no good reason why the operation of
s 109(1)(a) and s 109(1)(b) should be limited to an application
during the lifetime of the donor of an enduring power of attorney.
37 In my opinion, it is open to the Tribunal, in appropriate circumstances,
to make an order under s 109(1)(a) or s 109(1)(b) of
the GA Act,
notwithstanding that at the time of consideration of the application by the
Tribunal, the donor of the enduring power
of attorney in question is
Question 2: Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to make orders under s 109
of the GA Act for intervention in an enduring power of
attorney where the donor
is capable?
38 As noted earlier, an enduring power of attorney
for the purposes of Pt 9 of the GA Act is one created under s 104
or recognised
by the Tribunal under s 104A(2).
39 In essence, leaving aside recognition of enduring powers of attorney made
outside the state, an enduring power of attorney is
one which is created by an
instrument that is substantially in the form of Form 1 in Sch 3, as in this
40 The requirement of s 104 and the Form 1 'Enduring Power of Attorney'
is that the donor must declare that the power of attorney:
will continue in force notwithstanding their subsequent
legal incapacity; or
will be in force only during any
period when a declaration by the Tribunal under s 106 that the donor does
not have legal capacity
is in force. (see cl 4 of Form 1 of Sch 3 and s
41 Accordingly, if the first option is
adopted, as here, then the enduring power of attorney when made will immediately
operate and
continue in force even if the donor suffers legal incapacity.
42 It goes without saying of course that if a donor retains legal capacity
they may at any time decide to terminate the enduring
power of attorney just as
they may terminate a general power of attorney under the general law. Nothing
in the GA Act says that
once made an enduring power of attorney cannot be
revoked by the donor.
43 However, as also noted earlier, the GA Act contains provisions which
enable the Tribunal to revoke or vary an enduring power of
attorney under
s 108 upon making an administration order, or to intervene under
s 109. Ordinarily it may be expected that the Tribunal
would only exercise
these powers if a question relating to the legal incapacity of the donor
44 Obviously, the s 108 powers can only be exercised if the Tribunal
decides to make an administration order in respect of a donor's
administration order can only be made if a donor generally speaking has lost
legal capacity.
45 The question now raised, however, is raised in the context of s 109.
In this particular case, the question asked is asked on the
basis that the donor
did not lack legal capacity at any relevant time prior to his death. In those
circumstances, does the Tribunal
have jurisdiction to make an order under
s 109(1)(a) or s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act, if at the time of
relevant transactions the donor,
with full capacity, could have queried any
transactions of their own accord?
46 In my view, while the statutory provisions dealing with enduring powers
of attorney appear in the GA Act, an Act which is largely
to do with the
protection of vulnerable people, that is to say, people who lack capacity to
make decisions, I see no particular reason
why the operation of s 109 of
the GA Act should be so limited in relation to an enduring power of
47 In my view, Parliament has recognised through s 109 that the
Tribunal should exercise a general supervisory jurisdiction in respect
conduct of donees of enduring powers of attorney, if circumstances require it.
48 Accordingly, I see no good reason why the Tribunal should be deprived of
the jurisdiction to make an order under s 109(1)(a) or
s 109(1)(b) of
the GA Act, just because the donor of the power at relevant times prior to their
death retained legal capacity.
49 Just because a donor of a power retains legal capacity does not
necessarily mean that the donor is aware of all of the conduct
of a donee under
an enduring power of attorney. Therefore, should the circumstances require it,
the Tribunal may consider making
accounting orders against a donee, even at the
instance of a donor with full legal capacity.
50 In this regard, it should be noted that there is nothing in the usual
Form 1 'Enduring Power of Attorney' or in the general law
concerning general
powers of attorney that immunises a donee against usual forms of action. A
power of attorney is recognised as
a formal agency relationship:
[1985] NZCA 112
[1986] 1 NZLR 294
at 299. The donor may grant the donee a
general power to do any act, or may confine the donee's authority by only
allowing authority
to do certain acts. Where the donor grants a general power
to act, the donee may do any act the donor could, excluding any act which
requires personal skill or discretion which is imposed on the donor personally:
R v Burchill and Salway; Ex parte Kretschmar
[1947] S R Qld 249 at 253.
51 These general principles pertaining to a general power of attorney are
equally applicable, in my view, to a statutory enduring
power of attorney. As
noted earlier, by statute the Parliament has simply recognised that a general
power of attorney may endure
the loss of legal capacity of a donor, which would
otherwise terminate the operation of a general power of attorney under the
52 It has long been recognised that a power of attorney, however widely
expressed, will not authorise the donee to prefer their own
interests over the
donor. For example, in
Tobin v Broadbent
[1947] HCA 46
(1947) 75 CLR 378
401, Dixon J stated:
"Prima facie, a power, however widely its general words may be expressed, should
not be construed as authorizing the attorney to
deal with the property of his
principal for the attorney's own benefit. Something more specific and quite
unambiguous is needed to
justify such an interpretation".
also Latham CJ at 390 ­ 391 and Starke J at 398. See also
[1991] 1 NZLR 597
53 Where a donee abuses the authority given by the donor in the power of
attorney, by preferring their own interests, the courts
will usually hold the
donor to the transaction where it was within the donee's ostensible authority
and the third party had no actual
or constructive knowledge of the donee's abuse
of authority. See generally
Hambro v Burnand
[1904] 2 KB 10
Bryant, Powis & Bryant Ltd v La
Banque du Peuple
[1893] AC 170
54 Nonetheless, even where the donor is bound by the transaction in such
circumstances, the donee will remain accountable to the
donor for the abuse of
55 There is also a suggestion that, even if the donee has acted outside the
authority and for their own purposes, the transaction
may be seen as ratified by
the donor unless the donor acts reasonably quickly to repudiate the action as
soon as it is discovered:
Scots Church Adelaide Inc v Fead
56 So far as an enduring power of attorney is concerned, it has been
suggested that the fiduciary duty to prefer the principal's
interest should be
tempered where "the donee may be in a familial relationship to the donor and may
also require support": B Collier
and S Lindsay,
Powers of Attorney in
Australia and New Zealand
(Sydney, 1992) at 142. This situation has been
recognised at least in New Zealand where s 107(2),
Protection of Personal and
Property Rights Act 1988
, and in Queensland where s 88,
Attorney Act 1998
, provide that a donee of a power of attorney may give
relatives gifts or donate to charities. This provision does not appear to
been replicated in other Australian legislation.
57 This account of circumstances in which a donee may be found liable or
accountable to a donor under a general power of attorney,
which is equally
applicable to the conduct of a donee under an enduring power of attorney, serves
to emphasise that, just because
a donor may retain full legal capacity at all
material times while a donee acts under a power of attorney does not mean that,
appropriate circumstances, a donee may not be considered liable to a donor at
law or in equity.
58 Accordingly, in my view, there may well be circumstances during the
lifetime of a donor in which a person with a proper interest
(including the
donor themself) might make an application to the Tribunal for orders pursuant to
s 109(1)(a) or s 109(1)(b) of the
59 Equally, I can see no reason why, following the death of a donor who
retained legal capacity throughout their lifetime, a person
with a proper
interest in the matter may not apply for orders under s 109(1)(a) and
s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act and the Tribunal may
make such orders, if
the circumstances require it.
Answer to questions
60 In these circumstances the answers to the
questions referred to the President of the State Administrative Tribunal are as
I certify that this and the preceding [60] paragraphs comprise the
reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
___________________________________
JUSTICE M L BARKER, PRESIDENT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter