URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ravenscroft and Thw Oenrs of St Andrews Lifestyle Village - Strata Plan 42129 [2004] WASTR 55 (8 October 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
RAVENSCROFT and THW OENRS OF ST ANDREWS LIFESTYLE VILLAGE -
STRATA PLAN 42129
[2004] WASTR 55
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
8 OCTOBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 88 of 2004
BRENDA MAI RAVENSCROFT
THW OENRS OF ST ANDREWS LIFESTYLE VILLAGE - STRATA PLAN 42129
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - management costs -
validity of meetings
Legislation:
Representation:
Applicant : In person
Respondent : In person
Solicitors:
Applicant : In person
Respondent : In person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – INTERIM
2 Control and management of common property in a mixed residential and resort
3 The Applicant is Brenda Mai Ravenscroft as the proprietor of Lot 13 on Strata
Plan 42129 ("the Strata Plan").
Strata Plan and
relevant Act
4 The Strata Plan was registered on 9 August 2002 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1985
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
5 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
6 The parcel is a 17-lot development known as "St. Andrews Lifestyle Village".
It is situated at 56 St Andrews Drive Yanchep.
7 The lots are contained in several buildings. Each lot includes an internal
residential portion and some external areas.
8 Lots 1 to 14 inclusive and Lot 17 are on the ground floor.
9 The principal portions of Lots 15 and 16 are on the first floor of the
building which contains Lots 12, 13 and 14.
10 There is a considerable amount of common property including car parks,
garden areas, a recreation room and swimming
Lot boundaries
11 The ground floor page of the Strata Plan contains the following
endorsements:
"Strata of the pt lots external to the buildings extends between 3.0 metres
below and 3.0 metres above the upper surface level of
the ground floor of the
building on Lot 1, unless covered.
The boundaries of the lots or parts of the lots which are buildings shown on the
Strata Plan are the inner surfaces of the walls,
the upper surfaces of the floor
and the under surface of the ceiling as provided by
section 3(2)(a)
Strata Titles Act 1985
12 The first floor page of the Strata Plan has the same endorsement as the
second of the endorsements referred to above but, in
place of the first of those
endorsements, has an endorsement in the following
"The strata boundaries of the balconies are from the upper surface level of the
balcony slab and 2.4m above unless
Orders sought
13 The Applicant has sought Interim Orders and Principal Orders.
Interim Orders
14 The Applicant has sought Interim Orders under
in the following
"1. Interim Orders to stop further meetings – as
from today 23.7.04. Strata levies should be fixed at $374.71 amounts originally
agreed at AGM 2002 – this should apply from Dec 2003.
2. Decisions made by current manager, Mr Gary Carlton, chairperson, Mr John
Bloomfield and council members, also management are "frozen"
until Strata Titles
Referee orders given".
Principal Orders sought
15 The Applicant has sought Principal Orders under
(1)(a) and (b) in the following terms:
corporate manager should manage in the best interests of "all" owners.
2. That easements made with owners dissenting should be revoked.
3. Council of Owners cannot make decisions and/or commitments on behalf of
"all owners" and commercial business to be agreed in writing,
by each owner.
4. Monies – plus interest and other expenses to be repaid to owners.
Not contracted to manager".
16 The Applicant also sought an Order that any costs be paid by Mr G Carlton
and/or Mr J Bloomfield but, except in two particular
cases, neither of which is
applicable in the present instance,
prohibits me from making an Order
for the payment of costs.
17 When the Strata Plan was registered, its by-laws were set out in Management
Statement I199501 which was registered contemporaneously
with the Strata
18 Notification I286550, recorded on the Strata Plan on 5 November contains
amendments to the by-laws and Application I482121, recorded
on the Strata Plan
on 15 May 2003, refers to further changes to the by-laws.
provides that, in the absence of any recorded amendment,
repeal or replacement of the "standard" by-laws in Sch 1 and 2 those by-laws
will apply to every Strata Company, the Management Statement records
"(a) the addition of new Sch 1 by-laws 16 to 40 inclusive
(b) the repeal of Sch 2 by-laws 1, 7(b) and 12(c) and
(c) the addition of new Sch 2 by-laws 16 to 24 inclusive".
20 Notification I286550 records the adoption of a new Sch 1 by-law 41 which is
expressed to grant exclusive use and special privileges
over part of the common
property, in favour of the proprietor of Lot 17.
21 Notification I482121 records the adoption of a new Sch 1 by-law 42 granting
further exclusive use rights over part of the common
property, again in favour
of the proprietor of Lot 17.
22 The Strata Company's Sch 1 by-laws include
"Schedule 1:
16. THEME OF DEVELOPMENT
(1) The strata company will endeavour to maintain the appearance and
demeanour of a strata scheme that is residential and is in keeping
with a resort
(2) Whilst it is intended that the operation of the premises overall is to be
a residential resort as described above, it also will
integrate with and
continue in part as a short stay holiday accommodation venue.
17. EMPLOYMENT OF CARETAKER
The strata company shall employ the services of an onsite caretaker ("The
Caretaker") for the purposes of managing the common property
and other duties as
may be required from time to time, and the strata company may enter into an
agreement with The Caretaker for
these and other management purposes. In the
event The Caretaker resigns before the completion of his or her contract expires
strata company shall within 14 days appoint a new Caretaker under the terms
of The Caretaker's agreement. It is intended that The
Caretaker will be the
proprietor of lot 17 and reside in the scheme and be responsible for the orderly
running of the strata scheme
as set out in by-laws 16, 20 and 31 hereof, further
provided in a separate caretaker agreement entered into between the Strata
and the caretaker.
30. SWIMMING POOL,
GYMNASIUM AND RESIDENTS LOUNGE
(3) The enclosed area containing the swimming pool, gymnasium and residents
lounge ("the Recreation Area") are intended for the sole
use of occupiers of
lots 1 to 17 (inclusive) and their registered guests. The Caretaker is to be
notified of any additional visitors
who may be invited by a proprietor or
registered guest to use the Recreation Area".
(7) A person must not:
(l) use the Recreational Area for the private use of any one or more
individuals to the exclusion of the authorised users...
31. SHORT TERM LEASING OF LOTS AND CARETAKERS OBLIGATIONS
(1) The proprietor of a lot may allow his lot to be leased out on a short
term basis as a holiday unit on a daily, weekly or monthly
rental basis through
the central on-site management which will be conducted by The Caretaker under
agreements from the proprietor,
with such business operation being conducted
from lot 17. The Caretaker will operate the short term accommodation as an RAC
rated venue and is to continue to ensure that all items of cleanliness and
mode of operation is in full conformity with this authority's
requirements to
ensure the preservation of this HHHH standard and he/she is to do everything
possible to ensure and protect the proprietor's
individual commercial values and
letability of their lot or lots so leased.
(2) The Caretaker will ensure at all times that this mode of operation does
not intrude upon the peaceful tenure and quiet enjoyment
of the proprietors who
permanently reside in the strata scheme and will ensure that the operation of
both modes of accommodation
are conducted in peaceful harmony, in a
complimentary (sic) manner and with the theme of a quiet exclusive resort style
residential
(3) The Caretaker is to ensure that the provisions of conduct of persons and
the strict adherence to house rules and the strata company
by-laws is achieved
for the benefit of all proprietors, residents and guests living therein and are
to be adhered to and obeyed at
all times to ensure an harmonious, residential
living environment. It is incumbent upon The Caretaker as the business operator
ensure that the harmonious co-habitation of all residents is protected at all
(4) The rental of a lot by a proprietor through The Caretaker for short stay
rental purposes is to be conducted under separate agreements
entered into
between The Caretaker and the proprietor, which agreements will also be subject
to compliance with these by-laws and
the stated objectives, which also provide
for the fulfilment of and compliance with the house rules and by-laws set out
32. LONG TERM LEASING
Prior to the leasing of a lot the proprietor shall before the commencement date
of such lease:
(a) Inform the strata company of the
name of the proprietor's property manager for the lot (if any) and the name of
the lessee. This
information shall be recorded on the strata company roll;
(b) provide the lessee with a copy of the strata company by-laws;
(c) provide to the strata company a copy of an executed and stamped lease and
ensure that such lease states that any non-compliance
with the by-laws of the
strata company shall be a default under the terms of such lease;
(d) include a copy of the house rules as an annexure to the lease and obtain
the lessee's acceptance and acknowledgement by his/her
signature thereto of
these conditions and to the incorporation of such as a condition of the lease
agreement and their specific acknowledgement
of clause (c) above".
Applicant's submissions
23 The Applicant has advised that she is 72 years old and that she purchased
her Lot 13 because advertisements for the sale of lots
on the Strata Plan
referred to the lots as "Ideal retirement units". There was a swimming pool,
spa, gymnasium and games room, as
well as the parcel being close to a golf
course. She states:
"The sales person, Mr Kenneth Eather, who had handled the promotion and selling
of the units had encouraged a couple, Mr & Mrs
Coles, to buy unit 14 and the
adjoining shop (previously the office and reception area). They were accepted as
the caretakers and
asked the owners to sign individual contracts for them to
manage the holiday rentals – the units had previously been used for
purpose. At the first AGM it was agreed that the strata title levies should be
$374.71c per quarter each unit part of which
would be held in a reserve fund
In the Letting Contracts it was agreed the manager should take 12% commission
from the letting fees – plus caretaker's payment.
During the first year of
this arrangement various and varying amounts were taken out of the owners
accounts for cleaning, advertising
and running expense – in addition to
those already being paid, Some units were let more often and for longer periods
than others
– which meant they were getting a better return than others
although all owners were paying the same costs. Some owners, who,
like myself,
had bought them for our own use were persuaded to sell their units to new owners
who only wanted them as investment
24 Although the Applicant was initially a member of the Council of Owners, a
new council was elected at the second Annual General
Meeting. A Mr John
Bloomfield was elected as Chairperson.
25 The Applicant advises that, following the second AGM, levies were almost
doubled, monies were paid to join the "Best Western"
accommodation and resort
group, gymnasium equipment and other common property items were disposed of and
the gymnasium converted
to a reception room. There was also a grant
"...an easement to give part of the land of common ownership to the manager".
26 She advises that the role of manager and caretaker have subsequently been
combined into one position, committing the Strata Company
to pay to the manager
more than $33 000 a year plus commission on letting fees.
27 She considers that this means that she has been charged for the operation of
a commercial business when her lot is occupied by
her as her own residence and
is not involved in the letting arrangements and that these arrangements prevent
residents such as herself
from having use of the common property.
28 She claims that
"The Council of Owners ... is acting as a committee for the commercial venture
for some of the owners at the expense and control
of the property which legally
belongs to ALL the owners ... Also to prevent people being able to take control
and force people out
of their homes. Five people have sold their units in the
past 12 months and another lady has her property for sale, because of the
we've been treated ...It is the intention of the committee and management to get
the complex, as a whole, to become a commercial
property ...Apart from the fact
I wish to have this property as my retirement home in a district where I am very
involved in the
local community... even if I wanted to move ...I would now be
unable to buy another property".
29 She contends that the commercial activities involve the use of parts of the
common property, of which she is a co-owner, to the
exclusion of her and other
resident owners and that
"the monies made from the use of these rooms and the equipment is apparently
going to the Manager".
30 She advises that her written requests to the Strata Company for an
explanation have gone unanswered and that
"proposals made at meetings last year were changed in the copies of the
31 The Applicant states that others present at the meetings can confirm
Considerations
32 The Applicant has raised a number of significant issues which indicate that
a close examination of the conduct of the strata
scheme is warranted.
33 However, I am reluctant to make an order "to stop further meetings", either
of the Council of Owners or of the members of the
Strata Company, as there may
be valid reasons for such meetings to be held.
34 I have insufficient information upon which to comment on the amount of
35 It also appears to me that the second of the Interim Orders sought is too
non-specific.
36 In these circumstances, I propose to dismiss the application for the Interim
Orders but will invite the Strata Company and the
lot proprietors to make
submissions in relation to the Principal Orders sought. I will deal with those
requested orders as soon as
possible after the expiration of the date by which
those submissions must be made.
37 My Order is that
The application for Interim Orders be
DATED 19 August 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter