URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/221.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miller v Shire of Busselton [2004] WATPAT 221 (13 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 211 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 221
Heard: 22 November 2004
Decision: 13 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
DARREN MILLER
SHIRE OF BUSSELTON
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Development refusal – Relocation of building envelope to higher
elevation – Impact of future development – Effect
on landscape and
scenic quality - Rural Residential zoning
Cases referred to
Appearances
Mr V Butterly (Agent) appeared for the Appellant
Mr A Bell (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This is an appeal against the refusal by the Shire of Busselton
”) to grant planning approval for the proposed
relocation of a building envelope at Lot 65 Sainsbury Loop, Injidup
subject land
2. The subject land has an area of 9,608m
. The eastern boundary of
59 metres has frontage to Sainsbury Loop. The western boundary of 80.04
metres abuts Lot 41.
The subject
and rises from about RL 89 at the
north-east corner to about RL 108 at the south-west corner.
3. The subject land, 38 other lots of similar size and Lot 41 were first
approved in 2001 as a rural residential subdivision. Lot
82.87 hectare lot about 1,380 metres long and 100 metres wide created
at the western edge of the subdivision to form
is termed a “strategic
fire break”. Beyond Lot 41 to the west is the Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge.
Virtually all the
in this rural residential subdivision have a full cover
of remnant vegetation including undergrowth, bushes and some trees up
metres to 10 metres tall.
4. Each lot in this subdivision has a designated building envelope. That on the
subject land is a rectangle with a 25 metre
parallel to and set
back about 25 metres from Sainsbury Loop. It has a depth of 40 metres
set back a minimum of
13.4 metres from
but not parallel to the southern
boundary. The envelope is between RL 92 and RL 97.
5. Proposed is the relocation of the building envelope toward the rear of the
lot to between RL 98 and RL 104. The new
envelope would
still be 1000m
in area but the shape would become a trapezoid about
40 metres by 33.5 metres on the two longest boundaries. It would
15 metres from and parallel to the southern boundary and
20 metres from and parallel to the western boundary.
Planning framework
6. The subject land is zoned Rural Residential under Shire of Busselton Town
Planning Scheme No.20 (“
7. The Western Australian Planning Commission approved the subdivision of which
the subject land is part on 18 May 2001 (WAPC Ref:
00275E-CK02 dated 10 March 2003 showing a building envelope on each lot was
prepared in accordance with conditions
of that approval.
8. Condition 22 of the subdivision approval required that a fire management plan
be prepared and implemented and condition 23 required
that what became Lot 41 be
set aside as a strategic firebreak.
9. Clause 85(5)(a) of TPS20 provides that “Dwellings and outbuildings must
be located within any building envelope ... .”
10. Clause 13 of TPS20 specifies matters to be given consideration in
determining an application for building consent. Relevant
in clause 13(1)
“ (c) the effect of that development on the landscape or scenic quality of
the locality; ...
(h) the relationship of that development to development on adjoining land or on
other land in the locality; ...
(q) the existing and likely future amenity of the
neighbourhood.”
11. Clause 85(13) of TPS20 provides that future residential development on the
subject land not exceed a height of 7.5 metres.
12. Table 1 of TPS20 sets out objectives and policies and these
“(ii) to ensure that development maintains the
rural character of the locality, maintains a high level of residential amenity
and minimises disturbance to the landscape through construction of buildings and
structures, clearing, earthworks and access roads.”
13. The subject land is also identified as being within a “Landscape Value
Area” in TPS20. Sub-clauses 27(2) and (3)
“ (2) The Council shall not grant consent to the clearing of land or any
other development on land identified on the Scheme
Maps as being within a
Landscape Value Area, unless it has
considered –
(a) whether the
development will be compatible with the maintenance and enhancement, as far as
is practicable, of the existing rural
and scenic character of the locality.
(c) disturbance to the natural environment, including –
(i) visual effects of clearing for development;
(ii) maintenance of rural character;
(iii) habitat disturbance.
(3) The Council shall not consent to the carrying out of development on land
within the Landscape Value Area or on land on or near
any ridgelines where, in
the opinion of Council, that development is likely to substantially detract from
the visual amenity of the
area, having regard to the cumulative visual effect of
the development related to other development that may be anticipated in the
locality and in the area
generally.”
14. Wyadup Road on the northern boundary of the subdivision is identified as a
“Travel Route Corridor within Natural Landscape
Significance” under
Statement of Planning Policy No. 6.1: Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge Policy.
Under this policy development
should be screened from a travel route corridor
(Policy PS 3.4 refers).
15. The subject land is burdened by restrictive covenants between the
“Developer for itself and its successors in title”
Respondent under
section 129BA
Transfer of Land Act 1893
Without reproducing the document restrictions can be summarised as
(a) not clear vegetation except within a building envelope and for the purposes
of vehicular access approved by the Council;
(b) not erect any building or other structure (including any fence or tank)
outside the boundaries of the building envelope;
(c) establish AHD of ground level in the building envelope and not build more
than 7.5 metres above this AHD.
16. The Respondent refused the application because it considered the relocated
building envelope would result in development not
consistent with the objectives
of the zone as set out in TPS20. It stated:
“The proposed
building envelope relocation moves development into a more visible area of the
lot which will detract from the
rural character of the locality and the
residential amenity of adjoining lots. Furthermore, the proposed building
envelope relocation
is not considered to enable the retention of increased
vegetation for the lot.”
17. The Respondent also said that the application does not reflect the
“orderly and proper planning of the locality”.
particular:
“The application is not consistent with the
original planning objective for identifying building envelopes for the lots
Sainsbury Loop. Consistent with the development guide plan for this area,
building envelopes were originally located to ensure that
disturbance to the
landscape and existing vegetation was minimised, and that eventual built
development would not be evident from
prominent building corridors located
throughout the locality. For the reasons mentioned above, the proposed building
envelope relocation
is not consistent with the original development guide plan
objectives for the area.”
Appellant’s position
18. Mr Vern Butterly, Planning Consultant, appeared as a witness for the
Appellant. Mr Butterly said the Respondent was not correct
in its assertion
that a dwelling in the relocated building envelope would be viewed from the
roads external to the site. From his
investigations, the only place from where
there was any potential for viewing a house on the relocated building envelope
was on Wyadup
Road at the crest travelling west just before the intersection
with Clairault Road.
19. To illustrate his point Mr Butterly produced cross sections of the
topography from this viewing point to the subject land and
beyond. He produced
photographs to show that the house being constructed on nearby Lot 63 was
visible among the trees and used
cross sections to illustrate how this view
related to the topography.
20. Mr Butterly placed a 7.5 metre high pole with a marker at the top at what
would be the high point of the relocated building envelope.
He used photographs
to show that the marker was not visible from Wyadup Road. Using the
cross-sections its was Mr Butterly’s
submission that only the top of the
pole and the marker would be above a ridge in the foreground but are obscured by
vegetation on
the ridge and by the taller vegetation on the subject land and
nearby lots. This vegetation is to remain because of the controls
objectives in TPS20, policy and the restrictive covenants.
21. Mr Butterly asserted that there would only be glimpses if any view at all of
the proposed low impact dwelling with a roof profile
below 7.5 metres, even
though the relocated building envelope had been shifted from the lowest part of
the lot. There would not
be any detrimental impact on the local and scenic
amenity of the area consistent with the main controls in place to preserve this
22. Mr Butterly pointed out that relocating the building envelope would place it
closer to the strategic firebreak on Lot 41.
would provide the
occupants with an opportunity to exit from the rear of the lot and provide a
closer alternative for fire tenders
to protect the dwelling.
23. Mr Butterly was of the opinion that there was less vegetation to be cleared
at the site of the relocated building envelope.
24. Adjoining neighbours were written to and the owner of Lot 66 replied
not objecting to the relocation of the building envelope.
No reply was received
from the owner of Lot 64.
25. The Appellant was seeking to relocate the building envelope because it would
provide some outlook, to the north-north west, from
what would become his home
without having an adverse impact on the neighbours or the
Respondent’s position
26. Mr Aaron Bell, planning officer for the Respondent, appeared as a witness.
Mr Bell said that the building envelopes for the
subject land and neighbouring
lots were identified at the subdivision stage after extensive consideration of
the characteristics
of the surrounding land, topography and vegetation. Building
envelopes were located at the 20 metre minimum setback from the front
to control the height of future development above the AHD and thereby reduce the
impact on the landscape, environment and
amenity of the locality. He stressed
that significant in locating of the building envelopes was the need to preserve
the adjacent
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge as a feature.
27. Mr Bell said any development on the proposed relocated building envelope
would protrude very near to or above the height of the
Leeuwin-Naturaliste Ridge. It would therefore impact on the landscape and
scenic quality of the locality.
28. Mr Bell submitted that extensive clearing in building envelopes for fire
protection and for internal access had made several
houses being built on
Sainsbury Loop highly visible from the road and overlooking properties. In his
opinion approval of the proposal
would make the necessary clearing for future
development more prominent over a wider area increasing the adverse impact.
29. It was Mr Bell’s submission that the proposed envelope relocation
would establish an undesirable precedent for adjoining
and nearby lot owners who
might also want a greater glimpse of views. Development which was then to occur
would cumulatively add
to the visual impact in conflict with the objectives of
TPS20 and policies and therefore be inconsistent with the orderly and proper
planning of the locality.
30. A view was conducted in the company of the agents for both the Appellant and
the Respondent. The subject land, development on
neighbouring lots and the wider
locality were viewed from Wyadup Road, from Sainsbury Loop and from the
strategic firebreak on Lot
31. The parties agreed that the intent of the policies and TPS20 was not that
any new house be completely concealed from view from
all vantage points. The
intent was, rather, that any development has as little impact as possible to
maintain the landscape qualities
of the locality. Mr Butterly pointed out that,
in this regard, the Respondent would have control of clearing, building height
materials when determining a subsequent development application for a house
on the subject land.
32. From Wyadup Road the upper section of the house on Lot 63 and glimpses of
other houses could be seen. As stated above, it was
Mr Butterly’s
submission that his analysis has demonstrated that any house on the subject land
in the relocated envelope is
unlikely to be seen from Wyadup Road.
33. Mr Bell raised as an issue the slashing of vegetation required in the
strategic fire break and how this might make more visible
from Wyadup Road any
development in the relocated envelope. Examination of the Fire Management Plan
reveals at 5.2.1(b).1 that the
strategic fire break of Lot 41 is to be parkland
cleared and undergrowth kept cleared by periodic slashing. To note, however, is
that under the plan every effort is to be made to retain the trees, with a
minimum crown separation distance of 10 metres.
34. The view toward the subject land from Wyadup Road is over about 800 metres
along the length of the part of the firebreak and
parts of the neighbouring
lots. With the trees to remain in place and the undulating topography I am
inclined to the Appellant’s
submission that the clearing required by the
fire management plan will not increase greatly the potential visibility of any
built on the subject land.
35. The site visit revealed vegetation is dense on the lots. Noted, however, was
that the clearing required for fire purposes and
vehicle access made houses,
sheds and tanks being built in designated building envelopes at the 20 metre
minimum front set back quite
visible from Sainsbury Loop. The remnant vegetation
that remained provided minimal screening. There appeared to be some basis for
the Appellant’s assertion that the more vegetation that was left between
the building and the road the less would be the overlooking
of the neighbours
across the road, particularly in relation to the subject land.
36. The relocated building envelope will be at about the same contour as
envelopes on the lots to the south. It would be higher
than the envelopes on
the lots to the north, but the increase in separation and the density of the
vegetation is likely to result
in only the rooftop of any house on neighbouring
Lot 66 being overlooked. The Appellant will get marginally better views to the
toward the ocean and horizon from the relocated envelope.
37. A 7.5 metre high house on the relocated envelope, if it could be seen from
due east might appear to be at or above the height
of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste
Ridge behind. The only available view to the subject land, however, is south
from Wyadup Road and the
view from this location and the contour plans provided
show that any house would be about 10 metres to 20 metres below the ridge
38. Mr Bell outlined the process he believed was gone through to select the
building envelope on each lot in the subdivision. He
was not party to that
process, but there is no reason to doubt that the building envelopes were all
selected with the objectives
of TPS20 and the policies in mind.
39. It does not follow, however, that the sites chosen for the building
envelopes were the only ones that would satisfy TPS20 and
the policies. Other
sites on a lot might also meet the criteria.
40. With the relocation of a building envelope, it is necessary that it not be
simply a matter of accepting the owner’s preference.
It is also necessary
that it be determine whether the purpose under TPS20 and the policy of having
building envelopes in the first
place is not compromised.
41. Mr Butterly produced an analysis of what impact relocating the building
envelope might have. This included the use of a site
marker, an indicator of
possible building height, cross sections of the topography, photographs and
contour information. Also examined
were the potential impact on neighbouring
lots, impact of houses being built nearby, variations in vegetation cover and
the potential
for impact on views from nearby and travel route corridors.
42. From the evidence presented, it can be concluded that a house built within
the proposed relocated building envelope could be,
in this instance, consistent
with the TPS20 and policy objectives of preserving the landscape qualities and
rural character of the
locality and the amenity of the neighbourhood.
43. I have therefore decided to uphold the appeal and approve the proposed
relocation of the building envelope. This approval is
subject to the owner and
the Respondent agreeing on, and identifying on the subject land, the location of
the boundaries of the relocated
building envelope and the alignment of the
internal vehicle access. If the parties cannot agree they are at liberty to
apply to the
Tribunal to have the matter resolved.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter