URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2010/91.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EW [2010] WASAT 91 (30 June 2010)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2010] WASAT 91
MR J MANSVELD (MEMBER)
MS F CHILD (MEMBER)
MS J STANTON (SENIOR SESSIONAL MEMBER)
DELIVERED :
30 JUNE 2010
FILE NO/S :
GAA 2111 of 2009
BETWEEN : EW
Represented person
Catchwords:
Enduring power of attorney - Tribunal has a general
supervisory jurisdiction over the conduct of attorneys - Jurisdiction extends
deceased and capable donors - 'In connection with the power' of wide import -
Discretion to order that an audit be conducted of
the attorney's transactions -
Discretion to be exercised when satisfied something requires an inquiry - The
scope of the inquiry
is to be determined by the expected utility to be derived
from it - Order made for an audit to be conducted
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Corporation Act 2001
Guardianship and Administration
s 107(1)(b)
s 107(1)(c)
s 109(1)(a)
s 109(1)(b)
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
The application is successful
Representation:
Represented person : Mr R Biddulph
Solicitors:
Represented person : Biddulph & Turley
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Butler v St John of God Health Care Inc
[2008] WASCA 174
Claremont Petroleum NL v Cummings and Another No SAG 44
[1992] FCA 446
(1992) 110 ALR 239
Hall v Poolman
[2009] NSWCA 64
[2008] WASAT 29
Leslie v Hennessy
[2001] FCA 371
Macchia v Nilant
[2001] FCA 7
McCully v Whangamata Marina Society Inc and Anor
[2006] NZCA 209
(11 August 2006)
Onus v Alcoa Australia
[1981] HCA 50
(1981) 149 CLR 27
Re Alafaci; Registrar in Bankruptcy v Hardwick
(1976) 9 ALR 262
Re SS; Ex parte RA
[2008] WASAT 218
Taciak v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[1995] FCA 1481
(1995) 131 ALR 319
Turner v Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy (unreported
[1999] FCA 1817
27 November 1998)
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE
1 In 1999, a woman gave her granddaughter authority to operate her bank
account. In 2004, she made an enduring power of attorney
appointing her
granddaughter as her attorney. The enduring power of attorney was not subject
to any conditions or restrictions.
2 The woman died in 2008 and her estate was distributed according to her
will: 50% to her daughter, and the balance equally between
her three sons.
3 One of her sons later questioned the value of the woman's estate and
applied to the Tribunal for an audit of the dealings and transactions
by the granddaughter as the woman's attorney.
4 The son said that there were numerous transactions on the bank account
that were not for the woman and alleged that the granddaughter
had made most of
the transactions for her own benefit.
5 The granddaughter said that the transactions she made on the woman's bank
account were made using the bank authority and that the
enduring power of
attorney was used only to sell the woman's property and to release funds to pay
for the woman's entry into an aged
care facility. She also said that the woman
had continued to make her own transactions and had given access to her bank
to her daughter.
6 The granddaughter said that contrary to her frugal ways the woman had
decided to assist her daughter financially and to do as much
as she was able to
do in the last years of her life. The son disputed that the woman had changed
in this way.
7 In an earlier decision of the Tribunal it had been decided that the
legislation governing enduring powers of attorney had given
the Tribunal a
general supervisory jurisdiction over the conduct of attorneys. This
if the donor of the enduring
power of attorney had died or if the donor was or had been of legal
8 The Tribunal decided that an audit should be conducted on certain dealings
and transactions undertaken by the granddaughter as
attorney. It decided that
the enduring power of attorney included the authority to operate any bank
9 The Tribunal did not accept the granddaughter's argument that the bank
authority covered the bank transactions. It decided that
the provisions of the
legislation should be given a broad interpretation, in particular that the
phrase 'in connection with the power'
had a wide meaning which included all
of the transactions undertaken by the granddaughter on the woman's bank
10 An application has been made under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
(WA) (GA Act) in
respect of the financial affairs of the late EW.
11 EW had four children, three sons and a daughter.
12 The application is made by BW (applicant), one of the sons of EW. The
applicant seeks an order requiring an audit of the records
and accounts required
to be kept by the donee of an enduring power of attorney executed by EW on
22 July 2004, around the time she
began to reside in an aged care
13 The donee of the enduring power of attorney was KE, a granddaughter of EW
(granddaughter).
14 EW died aged 88 years of age on 29 March 2008.
Relevant legislation
15 The application is made under s 109(1)(b) of
the GA Act. Section 109 relevantly provides:
(1) A person who has, in the opinion of the State Administrative Tribunal, a
proper interest in the matter may apply to the Tribunal
(a) requiring the donee of
an enduring power of attorney to file with the Tribunal and serve on the
applicant a copy of all records
and accounts kept by the donee of dealings and
transactions made by him in connection with the power;
(b) requiring such records and accounts to be audited by an auditor appointed
by the Tribunal and requiring a copy of the report of
the auditor to be
furnished to the Tribunal and the applicant for the order; or
(c) revoking or varying the terms of an enduring power of attorney,
appointing a substitute donee of the power or confirming that
a person appointed
to be the substitute donee of the power has become the donee.
(2) The donee of an enduring power of attorney may apply to the State
Administrative Tribunal ­
order referred to in subsection (1)(c); or
(b) for directions as to matters connected with the exercise of the power or
the construction of its terms.
(3) The State Administrative Tribunal may, upon an application under this
section or upon receiving a report of a donee’s bankruptcy
section 107(1)(d) ­
(a) make an
order referred to in subsection (1) or (2); or
(b) make such other order as to the exercise of the power or the construction
of its terms as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(4) An order under this section may be made subject to such terms and
conditions as the State Administrative Tribunal thinks fit.
16 The statutory obligations of a donee under
an enduring power of attorney are contained in s 107 of the GA Act
which provides:
(1) The donee of an enduring power of
(a) shall exercise his
powers as attorney with reasonable diligence to protect the interests of the
donor and, if he fails to do so,
he is liable to the donor for any loss
occasioned by the failure;
(b) shall keep and preserve accurate records and accounts of all dealings and
transactions made under the power;
(c) subject to section 109(2), may not renounce a power during any
period of legal incapacity of the donor; and
(d) shall, if the donee becomes bankrupt, report that bankruptcy to the State
Administrative Tribunal.
Penalty applicable to paragraph (b): $2 000.
17 In a decision which considered the scope of
s 109(1)(a) and s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act, Barker J as the
then President of the Tribunal,
decided that Parliament has given the Tribunal a
general supervisory jurisdiction in respect of the conduct of donees of enduring
powers of attorney
[2008] WASAT 29
18 He found that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is enlivened even if the
donor is deceased or has legal capacity, given that an
attorney (donee) remains
accountable to the donor for the dealings and transactions undertaken in
connection with the power conferred
by the enduring power of attorney:
at [31] ­ [37]
and [47] ­ [59].
19 We adopt the reasoning in
Person with a proper interest
20 At the outset, s 109 of the GA Act
requires the Tribunal to form a view as to whether the applicant has a 'proper
interest' in
the matter. The GA Act qualifies the range of people that may
bring an application under s 109 although the term 'proper interest'
21 There has been little judicial commentary on the meaning of 'proper
interest'. The starting point is that for the purposes of
s 109 of the
GA Act, the applicant has a proper interest in the conduct of the attorney
in the operation of the enduring power of
22 KAM Pitt QC, Chairman of the Resource Management and Planning
Appeal Tribunal of Tasmania, in considering the meaning of 'proper
interest' in
a planning context, found assistance in the meaning of 'special interest' given
by Stephen J in
Onus v Alcoa Australia
[1981] HCA 50
(1981) 149 CLR 27.
23 Stephen J said:
The distinction between this case and the
case is not to be found in
any ready rule of thumb, capable of mechanical application; the criterion of
'special interest' supplies
no such rule. As the law now stands it seems rather
to involve in each case a curial assessment of the importance of the concern
which plaintiff has with particular subject matter and the closeness of that
plaintiff's relationship to that subject matter. (cited
R Browne obo
M Guy B Heckinger and GM Robb v Tasman Council, T Cromer, Cowley
Builders Pty Ltd & In-Seon Pty Ltd
[1996] TASRMPAT 167
(18 July 1996) at
24 A recent decision of the
Court of Appeal of New Zealand concerned the meaning of 'genuine
or proper interest' under r 66(9) of
the High Court rules (NZ) in a
situation where a member of Parliament made a request to search a Court file
containing documents
relating to a civil litigation reviewing a decision of the
Minister for Conservation
McCully v Whangamata Marina Society
Inc and Anor
[2006] NZCA 209
(11 August 2006)
25 In the judgment of the Court delivered by Hammond J, reference
was made to a number of High Court (NZ) cases where the term 'genuine
proper interest' had been considered. For the purposes of the application
before the Tribunal, it is instructive to cite the
... the words 'genuine and proper' (which are not defined in the rules) must
have their ordinary meaning, of 'authentic or bona fide'.
The requisite
interest has connotations of 'appropriateness, relevant appropriateness in the
circumstances.' (Anderson J in
Currie v YMCA of Hamilton
(1989) 2 PRNZ 343 (HC)
at par [30])
... genuine interest means a real, true and solidly based interest whereas
proper interest involves an interest which is lawful,
respectable, and worthy
(Williamson J in
Fourth Estate Periodicals Ltd
(1989) 3 PRNZ 189
26 In finding in favour of the appellant, the
Court concluded that, although not conclusive, a number of categories had been
established
in the authorities to determine 'genuine or proper interest'. Such
an interest could exist where there was a recognised legal basis
interest; where there may be a public interest and where a person is embroiled
in 'collateral court proceedings'. The appellant
was found to have a 'real
interest' by virtue of his position as a member of Parliament and because his
interest was not 'frivolous
or vexatious or merely prurient'
at para [43] and [46]).
27 Although ultimately to be decided on a case by case basis, the above
authorities provide some guidance on how the words 'proper
interest' may be
interpreted for the purposes of s 109 of the GA Act. Given the
Tribunal's general supervisory role in the conduct
of enduring powers of
attorney, it is our view that the qualification intended by 'proper interest'
should not be restrictively applied.
28 The applicant is the son of the late donor and a beneficiary under her
will. He alleges that a significant amount of money was
misappropriated during
the period the enduring power of attorney was in force from its execution on
22 July 2004 to the death of
EW on 29 March 2008. We are
satisfied that the application is not 'frivolous or vexatious or merely
prurient' and that the applicant's
interest is established as a 'proper
interest' by virtue of his relationship to the donor, his interest in her estate
and, because
of the allegations made, a public interest in ensuring that
attorneys under enduring powers of attorney fulfil their obligations.
The agreed facts
29 It is common ground that EW did not suffer from
a mental or cognitive impairment prior to her death. She was however,
impaired such that she resided in a nursing home and relied upon
people to do things for her from time to time.
30 It is also agreed that EW granted the granddaughter documented authority
to operate on her bank account and executed an enduring
power of attorney in
favour of the granddaughter on 22 July 2004.
The bank authority
31 On 22 March 1999, by way of a bank
'Notice of Authority', EW authorised the granddaughter to operate her account(s)
with the bank
(bank authority). The bank authority was to operate
severally such that EW and the granddaughter could act on the account
separately.
The authority gave the granddaughter wide powers in respect to the
relationship EW had with her bank; relevantly the granddaughter
was able to draw
cheques, overdraw the accounts to the extent authorised by the bank and make
periodical payments.
The enduring power of attorney
32 On 22 July 2004, EW executed an
enduring power of attorney (EPA) solely in favour of the granddaughter. The
document is before
the Tribunal and it was not subject to any conditions or
restrictions. It authorised the granddaughter to do on behalf of EW anything
that she could lawfully do by an attorney. The EPA was to continue in force
notwithstanding EW's subsequent legal incapacity.
The will of EW
33 The granddaughter was appointed the executor of
the estate of EW in a will dated 11 May 2004. As noted, EW died on
29 March 2008.
In June 2008, at the time of its distribution,
the estate of EW was valued at $111,095.76. After some specific bequests, it
distributed, according to the will, 50% to MB (daughter) and the balance
equally between the three sons of EW, of whom the applicant
The applicant's evidence and submissions
34 The applicant alleges that EW's estate, over the
period in which the granddaughter exercised authority (either the bank authority
or the EPA), was misappropriated of approximately $100,000.
35 The applicant states that in June 2008, when he received his share
of the distribution of EW's estate, he questioned the size
of the estate and
asked the daughter whether she was aware of any unusual transactions. The
applicant states that the daughter said
that she was not aware of such payments
apart from some financial assistance that EW gave her when she was ill.
36 The applicant identifies bank transactions which he classifies in the
following way: cheque payments, internet online banking,
cash withdrawals
(automatic teller machine), withdrawals by EFTPOS (point of sale transactions)
and branch staff assisted transactions.
37 The applicant alleges that many of the transactions made on the bank
account were not made for the benefit of EW. He put it this
way in a letter
dated 22 September 2009 to the granddaughter's solicitor:
I would like to take this opportunity to give you my estimate of the quantum of
the shortfall that I believe arises from inappropriate
transactions on my
mother's bank account during her stay at the [aged care hostel]. Immediately
following the payment of $115 000
to the [aged care hostel] my mother's bank
account had a balance of $109,080.52. Interest on this amount, at a
conservative rate
of 5% per annum, amounts to $5,454 or $105 per week. As all
of my mother's day to day needs were met by [the aged care hostel] she
have to cater for her other needs. The amount she retained from her pension,
plus interest on the principal, would have
easily covered her expenses. My
contention is that approximately $109,080.52, or more, should have been in my
mother's account when
she passed away. The amount was $21,477.48. It is obvious
to me that my mother's bank account has been used by [the granddaughter]
own benefit, without the approval or knowledge of my
38 The applicant submits that the transactions could not
have been approved by EW given the high volume and the type of transactions
and because the bank statements were readdressed to the granddaughter from June
or July 2004 which he says meant that EW did
not see them. The applicant
submits that this is why the bank statements were redirected.
39 The applicant states that according to the daughter, she had only limited
access to the bank account of EW so that most of the
transactions must have been
made by the granddaughter. He submits that, in any case, the granddaughter
would have been aware of
any transactions made by the daughter given that she
received the bank statements each month.
40 The transactions which the applicant says require explanation are cheque
payments from December 2005 to February 2008 totalling
$11,779.26;
internet online banking from January 2004 to March 2008 totalling
$28,440.24; cash withdrawals from January 2004 to March
totalling $49,040.00; EFTPOS withdrawals from December 2003 to
March 2008 $41,605.85 and branch staff assisted transactions
May 2004 to July 2007 (excluding the $115,500.00 paid to the aged care
hostel) totalling $2,858.64.
41 In respect to the cheque payments, the initial position of the applicant
is that he had no details of these transactions. Whilst
much detail has been
provided by the granddaughter (see the evidence of the granddaughter below) the
applicant has residual concerns
relating to payments in 2004 and 2006
of $5,000 both of which are reported by the granddaughter as being a gift to the
daughter of
EW to assist in the purchase of a motor vehicle. The applicant says
that EW did not assist the daughter with the purchase of two
motor vehicles.
The applicant also questions a payment of $814.44. allegedly made in
March 2007 to the aged care hostel but about
which the hostel has no
record. Finally the applicant questions a payment to St John's Ambulance
when he says that EW was entitled
to free ambulance services.
42 In respect to the internet online banking the applicant alleges that the
granddaughter is unable to account for withdrawals of
many transactions of between $100 to $1,000. He further submits that
the daughter said in her evidence that
she did not have access to online banking
(see the daughter's evidence below) and therefore the granddaughter must have
unexplained transactions.
43 In respect to the cash withdrawals (automatic teller machines) and EFTPOS
transactions, the applicant states that they number
in excess of 500 but that
the granddaughter has indentified only six of those having been made by
44 A list of the cash withdrawals shows that one in July 2005 was made
in Margaret River in the south west of the State and another
October 2006 was made in New South Wales. Many of the
transactions took place in the suburbs of Leeming, Armadale and Bull Creek.
The aged care hostel in which EW lived is in Hamilton Hill. The list of
EFTPOS transactions shows many to have been made in retail
outlets such as
Coles, Target, K­Mart and Woolworths. Purchases were made at service
stations and in Kalgoorlie, Busselton,
Mt Barker and Denmark in the
south west of the State. Purchases were made at liquor outlets.
45 The applicant submits that the enduring power of attorney executed by EW
is a superior instrument to the bank authority and was
the authority used by the
granddaughter to undertake all transactions subsequent to its execution. He
disputes the contention of
the granddaughter that the EPA was executed for the
sole purpose of disposing of EW's property. He submits that the effort involved
in arranging for the EPA would have been no less than that required for EW to
sign the sale documents for her property. The applicant
submits that the
granddaughter intended to use the EPA to give her full control of the financial
affairs of EW.
46 The applicant states that EW was a very hardworking and frugal person
throughout her life. He does not believe that she would
have allowed her
finances to have been eroded to the extent that they were in the last four or
five years of her life. He says that
he did not begrudge EW helping the
daughter when she was ill but that the daughter had made a recovery by the time
the EPA was executed
47 The applicant states that EW had a close relationship with all her
children; he would visit her from Sydney at least twice a year
and make weekly
telephone contact; the son, DW visited weekly and the other son, MW, would visit
when farming commitments allowed
and was also in regular telephone contact with
EW. The applicant disputes that the daughter visited EW daily. He says he
speak to EW on the telephone and she would mention the long time since she
had last seen the daughter.
The evidence and submissions of the granddaughter
48 In response to the applicant's allegations, the
granddaughter makes four main points: firstly that the EPA was used only to sell
EW's property so as to release funds to enable EW to pay for her entry into the
aged care facility; secondly that the bank authority
was used for all the bank
transactions; thirdly that EW directed and approved the transactions that were
made and in particular that
she wanted to assist her daughter financially; and
lastly that the daughter also had access to EW's bank account.
49 The granddaughter states that when EW could no longer live in her home
because of her increased care needs, she moved temporarily
into a nursing home
to await further permanent placement into an appropriate aged care facility. It
was understood that her property
would need to be sold and to that end the
social work staff at the nursing home arranged for EW to execute an enduring
power of attorney.
The staff organised the relevant witnesses and the
granddaughter subsequently signed the acceptance.
50 The granddaughter says that EW '... just didn't want to worry about
having the hassle of signing papers...she was capable but
she didn't want to'.
T:[8], [25.11.09]. Using the authority of the EPA, the granddaughter
signed the offer and acceptance for the
sale of the property and, it would
appear, the transfer of land to effect settlement. The net proceeds of sale,
$208,011.83, were
deposited in the bank account of EW on
29 September 2004. The granddaughter states that the EPA was never
lodged with EW's bank
because the bank authority was already in place.
51 With regard to the bank authority, the granddaughter says that it was
used for transactions prior to the EPA and subsequent transactions
made on that authority. The EPA did not affect the operation of the bank
authority which had been made earlier and had
not been revoked. The
granddaughter states that EW had not lost capacity and the EPA had not been
presented to the bank as an instrument
of authority that the bank should
52 The granddaughter submits that EW and the daughter enjoyed a close
relationship and that the daughter was EW's constant companion
for the final
10 years of her life, visiting her every day. (EW is said to have moved to
Western Australia in 1998 after the death
of her husband principally
to be with the daughter). The daughter was diagnosed with cancer in 2002
for which she underwent surgery
and radiation treatment. At the time, EW
suggested that the daughter sell her property and live with her. The daughter
had declined
but accepted EW's offer to pay her monthly bills, including
mortgage payments.
53 The granddaughter accepts that EW may have been cautious with her
finances in earlier years but submits that she was intent on
assisting the
daughter financially during her lifetime. She used to help the daughter with
her day to day expenses. The granddaughter
contends that this view is supported
by the provisions of the will of EW in which she gave fifty per cent of her
estate to the daughter
and the balance between her three sons. The
granddaughter adds that EW used to refer to the aged care facility as 'God's
room' and that she had decided to enjoy what time she had left.
54 The granddaughter further contends that EW had little contact with her
sons in the last ten years of her life.
55 The granddaughter states that the bank statements were redirected to her
her sons, to have
knowledge about her financial affairs. (The granddaughter states that EW told
her that she had once caught one
of her sons going through her papers). The
bank statements were redirected when EW was still living at home but before the
of the EPA. Once EW moved into the aged care facility, her bills were
also sent to the granddaughter's address. The granddaughter
says that she would
show the bank statements to EW each month and that EW was fully aware of each
transaction.
56 The granddaughter accepts that she made the cheque payments identified by
the applicant. In respect to the cheque payments which
remain of concern, the
granddaughter states that the payment of $5,000 in August 2006 was made to
a motor vehicle dealership and
was for the daughter's vehicle; the payment of
$5,000 on 15 July 2004 was made by EW quite separately to that for the
motor vehicle
and was made prior to the execution of the EPA. The payment in
March 2007 for $814.44 and represented as having been made to the
facility, the granddaughter agrees is incorrect. She says the cheque butt was
blank and she presumed what the payment
was for. At the time of the hearing she
had sought further details from the bank. The granddaughter accepts that the
St John Ambulance for membership fees was unnecessary but
says she was busy with her young family and would generally accept the
that she received as being correct.
57 The granddaughter states that in respect of the internet online banking
transactions, one payment on 13 August 2008 for $500 was
benefit. She identifies a number of payments that she says were for the benefit
of the daughter including payments for rates
and taxes, telephone, credit cards
and payment to a health fund. She states that the daughter had access to EW's
bank account through
the internet.
58 In respect to the cash withdrawals (automatic teller machines) the
granddaughter states that four withdrawals from the bank's
Perth office
totalling $380 were made by her. She states that only two EFTPOS transactions
were made by her, one for a liquor store
transaction in December 2005 for
$52.99 and the other in May 2007 to a retailer of auto parts and supplies
for $92.82. As regards
the locations at which the cash withdrawals were made,
the granddaughter says that she lived for a time in Armadale and this might
explain some of the withdrawals from that location. She states that EW and her
daughter would have visited her from time to time
and they all would have gone
shopping in Armadale.
59 The granddaughter states that the branch staff assisted transactions were
made at the request of EW.
60 The granddaughter states that EW had ongoing access to her bank account
through a 'keycard' operable by using a 'pin' number.
The daughter also had
access to the account with the consent of EW.
61 In identifying the bank transactions undertaken by her on behalf of EW,
the granddaughter states that she cannot account for the
other transactions she
says must have been carried out by EW herself when she was with the daughter or
by the daughter with EW's
consent. The daughter took EW on shopping trips and
more extended trips, including Margaret River and Denmark in the
of the State. The daughter would use her motor vehicle on these
trips and EW would pay for the fuel costs.
Other evidence
62 The daughter gave evidence by telephone at a
directions hearing held on 15 September 2009 at which she said she had
(but not often) access to the bank account of EW. When asked whether
she had access rights to the account she responded 'I don't
think so; no I
didn't'. At the directions hearing the daughter also said that she did not have
online access to EW's bank account.
63 The daughter, who at the time was travelling around Australia, was not
called by either party to give evidence at the hearing
25 November 2009. Counsel for the granddaughter said:
There was an issue that arose, and if you recall [the daughter] attended this
meeting by telephone link­up. I've since spoken
to her about that. What
was asked of her on the phone was...'Did you ever use the Internet online
banking?' Her answer was, "No,
I didn't." But I've since spoken to her about
that and she said that what happened was she was on her mobile phone somewhere
New South Wales, there was a conversation going on in this room
between those of us who were present. We'd had a general discussion
Internet, the fact that there needed to be a password or something along those
There was a question put before that as to whether [EW] operated the banking
account herself or knew about those transactions. [The
daughter] understood that
she was being asked whether she operated that Internet banking account without
[EW] being aware of what
the transaction was for, and she answered, "No, I
didn’t." [The daughter] has told me she did operate that account but she
didn't ­ there's nothing written down when she's used it; whereas
when [the granddaughter] has used it she invariably has written
down exactly
what that transaction is for .... That's just a really unfortunate - just to
corroborate [the daughter's] version, in
my letter that I wrote to the
applicant's solicitors back in June - so before any of these events - I did
specify there that [the
daughter] also had access to that Internet online
banking account...T:[14], [25.11.09].
64 In a statutory
declaration by MJ, a son of EW, he states that in a telephone conversation with
EW in 2006 she expressed a concern
that the daughter was requesting money
whilst overseas. EW is reported to have said that she was not going to advance
to the daughter. MJ goes on to state that in his experience EW would
not give away or lend her money indiscriminately.
65 DW, another son of EW states in a written submission that he visited EW
on a weekly basis from the time she entered the aged care
facility. He recounts
that on one particular visit in the latter half of 2006, EW was very upset
because she did not have enough
cash to attend a craft fair. On contacting the
daughter he was told that the granddaughter kept EW's 'keycard' in a locked
The daughter is reported to have added that EW was being 'silly' and that
she was always difficult when the daughter went away.
66 AW, daughter­in­law of EW, states in a written statement that
on two occasions in 2005 EW telephoned her at work expressing
have been distressed that she did not know what
was happening with her money and
that her bank account balance should have been larger than that shown on the
bank statement. AW
says that she did not pursue the matter, other than to
suggest to EW that she speak with the granddaughter, because she knew that
trusted the granddaughter implicitly. In the second contact, shortly
thereafter, EW said that her daughter had telephoned her
from overseas asking
her to forward funds of $5,000 to cover the cost of motor vehicle repairs to a
hire car company after being
involved in an accident. EW is reported to have
told AW that she would not provide those funds.
In connection with the power
67 Counsel for the granddaughter submits that the
extent to which an order requiring records and accounts to be audited might say
anything useful, depends in part on what transactions are found to be caught
within the authority of the EPA. We accept that submission.
68 An enduring power of attorney is a creature of statute. Its reference is
to a general power of attorney with an additional feature
that provides for the
continuance of the power of attorney subsequent to the donor losing legal
capacity to make decisions for themselves
para [11] ­ [13]. In addition to the common law
obligations, s 107 of the GA Act sets out the statutory obligations of
attorney which are to exercise the power of attorney with reasonable
diligence to protect the interests of the donor, and if he or
she fails to do
so, be liable to the donor for any loss or occasional failure; to keep and
preserve accurate records and accounts
of all dealings and transactions made
under the power; not to renounce a power during any period of legal incapacity
of the donor;
and if he or she becomes bankrupt, to report that bankruptcy to
the Tribunal.
69 It is argued by the granddaughter that the EPA was only used for the sale
of EW's property and that it was executed for that purpose
alone. All the bank
transactions undertaken by the granddaughter are said to have been made under
the bank authority given by EW
some years earlier and never revoked.
70 In summary, the case for the granddaughter rests on the following
foundation: the status of the bank authority relative to the
EPA and a narrow
reading of the words 'in connection with' when considered against the impugned
bank transactions.
71 We accept that the bank authority which is in the nature of an agency
between EW as principal and the granddaughter as agent was
not revoked at any
time by EW. We accept also that the EPA was not lodged with EW's bank.
72 It is common ground that EW remained capable of making her own decisions
until the time of her death; the applicant says only
that EW's funds were
misappropriated without her knowledge.
73 There are no restrictions or conditions on the EPA executed by EW which
might give voice to her intent that the EPA was made for
one transaction only,
that being the sale of her property. On its face the EPA gives the
granddaughter authority to do anything
that EW could lawfully do as an attorney.
This is an authority which is wider than a bank authority; the former is with
at large whereas the latter is confined to a direction to EW's bank
that it should accept the authority of the granddaughter to operate
account on certain transactions. As Barker J said in
at para [50]:
... The donor may grant the donee a general power to do any act, or may confine
the donee’s authority by only allowing authority
to do certain acts.
Where the donor grants a general power to act, the donee may do any act the
donor could, excluding any act which
requires personal skill or discretion which
is imposed on the donor personally:
R v Burchill and Salway;
Ex parte Kretschmar
[1947] S R Qld 249
74 The fact that an attorney would usually act only
at the direction of a capable donor does not diminish the authority of the
75 We find that when EW executed the EPA on 22 July 2004, the
authority she gave to the granddaughter included the authority to operate
bank account. This was the case whatever the understanding of EW and the
granddaughter at the time; the fact is that EW gave
the granddaughter authority
to do any act she could do herself subject to the exclusion stated in
76 The question that follows in respect to the application before us is what
transactions were actually captured by the EPA, or in
the words of the
GA Act, what were the '... dealings and transactions made by [the attorney]
in connection with the power' (s 109(1)(a)).
77 Counsel for the granddaughter submits that in their ordinary meaning the
words 'in connection with' infer a causal relationship
between one thing and
another. The only direct casual relationship that is said to exist in respect
to the EPA is that specifically
related to the sale of EW's property (the
signing of the contract of sale and transfer document and the collection of the
sale proceeds).
In submitting the need for a casual relationship counsel for
the granddaughter seeks to distinguish the reasoning in
Butler v St John of God Health Care Inc
[2008] WASCA 174
) discussed in
SS; Ex parte
[2008] WASAT 218
concerned the scope of the terms of a deed of
release some of which were referenced 'in connection with' certain claims or
Newnes AJA held at [37] and [38] that the meaning of
'in connection with' (and 'in respect of'; 'arising out of') depend on their
particular context but that in their ordinary meaning each of the expressions is
of wide connotation. The words 'in connection with'
suggest a relationship but
one that is not necessarily causal in nature.
79 Counsel for the granddaughter submits that the wide meaning given in
may be necessary in commercial matters, for example,
to prevent a party attempting to circumvent the terms of a deed, but that a
approach might be called for in the statutory context. We agree that
the statutory context is critical (the 'particular context')
however, with
respect, we do not agree that this necessarily implies a narrow reading.
80 Wilcox J put it this way in
Claremont Petroleum
NL v Cummings and Another
[1992] FCA 446
(1992) 110 ALR 239
Petroleum NL
) at 280 (His Honour's reasoning supported in
the later decision of
The phrase 'in connection with' is one of wide import, as I had occasion to
observe in a different context in
Our Town FM
Pty Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1987] FCA 301
[1987] FCA 301
The words 'in connection with' ... do not necessarily require a casual
relationship between the two things: see
Commissioner for
Superannuation v Miller
[1985] FCA 445
(1985) 8 FCR 153
, [160], [163];
[1985] FCA 445
They may be used to described [sic] a relationship with a contemplated
future event: see
Koppen v Commissioner for Community
(1986) ALR 215
Johnson v Johnson
[1952] P47 at 50-1. In the latter
case the United Kingdom Court of Appeal applied a decision of the
British Columbia Court of Appeal:
Re Nanaimo Community
[1945] 3 DLR 225
, in which the question was
whether a particular court, which was given 'jurisdiction to hear and determine
all questions that may
arise in connection with any assessment made under this
Act', had jurisdiction to deal with a matter which preceded the issue of
assessment. The trial judge held that it did, that the phrase 'in connection
with' covered matters leading up to, or which might
lead up to an assessment.
He said: ...
One of the very generally accepted meanings of 'connection' is 'relation'
between things one of which is bound up with or involved
in another; or again
'having to do with'. The words include matters occurring prior to as well as
subsequent to or consequent upon
so long as they are related to the principle
thing. The phrase 'having to do with' perhaps gives as good a suggestion of the
as could be had. This statement was upheld on
81 We adopt the reasoning in
Claremont Petroleum NL
broad reading of 'in connection with' is consistent with the general supervisory
role of the Tribunal in the conduct of attorneys
of enduring powers of attorney
and can include a temporal relationship between the execution of an enduring
power of attorney and
the subsequent transactions made on behalf of the donor by
the attorney.
82 We are reinforced in our view by the authorities that have deliberated on
how the statutory context might be determined when considering
phrases which
broaden the scope of a particular provision.
Taciak v Commissioner of Australian
Federal Police
[1995] FCA 1481
(1995) 131 ALR 319
, the words "connected
with" were considered in the context of the use of lawfully obtained intercept
material (s 5 of the
Telecommunications
Interception)
(Cth). Sackville J found that words 'connected
with' expanded the scope of the definition of which it is a part:
... 'permitted purpose' ... a purpose connected with ... an investigation of, or
an inquiry into ...
84 but not to the extent where it would
render redundant other provisions specifically authorising the use of intercept
information.
He said at 328:
The question remains in a particular case what kind of relationship will suffice
to establish the connection contemplated by the
statute. This requires, to use
the language in
, at FCR 289, a 'value judgment about the
range of the Act'.
The value judgment required is more likely to depend on the statutory context
than on dictionary definitions.
85 The 'value judgment' referred
to by Sackville J as it applies to s 109 of the GA Act is clearly
at [47]. To reiterate:
In my view, Parliament has recognised through s 109 that the Tribunal
should exercise a general supervisory jurisdiction in respect
of the conduct of
donees of enduring powers of attorney, if circumstances require it.
86 In our view, the role given to the Tribunal by
Parliament would be undermined were it narrowly interpreted in the way suggested
by counsel for the granddaughter. Once an enduring power of attorney is
executed in an unrestricted way then the dealings and transactions
made for the
donor by the person in whose favour the authority is given, are made 'in
connection with the power' and must come within
the supervisory ambit of the
Tribunal by way of s 109 of the GA Act.
87 In the case of EW this has the affect of capturing all of the
transactions undertaken by the granddaughter for EW from the date
execution of the EPA on 22 July 2004 to EW's death, given that the EPA
was not revoked and our finding that the EPA included
the authority to operate
the bank account of EW.
88 A further question must be considered: does the authority conferred on an
attorney by an unrestricted enduring power of attorney
capture any other
transactions made in respect of the donor's estate? If other transactions are
captured then they too must fall
within the scope of the words 'in connection
with' so as to potentially enliven the Tribunal's general supervisory role under
of the GA Act.
89 It seems to us that the answer to this question depends fundamentally on
the capacity of the donor during the operation of the
enduring power of
attorney. If the donor becomes incapable at a time after the execution of an
enduring power of attorney then the
attorney, if unrestricted in his or her
authority, assumes full control over the donor's financial affairs. This view
is supported
by the statutory obligation of an attorney not to renounce the
power during a period of incapacity of the donor (s 107(1)(c) of the
GA Act). All other authorities such as those that are in the nature of
general powers of attorney cease to operate
at [11]). The point at which full control is taken
will need to be determined on a case by case basis; for example, when does an
attorney take control after the donor has been diagnosed with a progressive
condition such as dementia?
90 In the case of a donor who does not lose capacity during the operation of
an enduring power of attorney, the control (and responsibility)
of an attorney
must be less than full control because the donor remains capable of undertaking
transactions in his or her own right
and of conferring authority on other
persons to act on his or her behalf. The supervisory role of the Tribunal
cannot extend to
transactions or dealings made by the capable donor or,
generally speaking, by a person other than the attorney. Section 109 of
GA Act is enlivened only in respect to dealings and transactions
made by the attorney
in connection with the power.
91 We would accept that the transactions made by a delegate of an attorney
would be made 'in connection with the power'. Any delegation
is subject to the
rule against delegation which states that an agent (such as an attorney) may not
delegate his or her authority
to act on behalf of his or her principal except
with the express or implied authority of the principal.
(S Fisher 'Agency Law'
Butterworths
[5.1.3] ­ [5.2.1].
92 In the case before us the question of delegation was not put by the
applicant and we are satisfied that there is no evidence to
indicate that EW
gave such authority to the granddaughter, for instance to allow the daughter to
act as the granddaughter's sub­agent.
93 We conclude therefore that the dealings and transactions captured by the
application are the ones made by the granddaughter from
the date of execution of
the EPA on 22 July 2004 until the death of EW on
29 March 2008.
How should the Tribunal exercise its discretion under s 109(1)(b)?
94 The Tribunal should exercise its supervisory
authority (the discretion to require records and accounts to be filed and
'... if circumstances require it' (
When would that be? It is clearly not sufficient that an order be made simply
upon the making of an application by a
person with a proper interest. To do so
would obviate the discretion available to the Tribunal. An enduring power of
attorney is
an essentially private agreement between the donor and donee, and
the transactions undertaken pursuant to that agreement should not
be scrutinised
unless there is reason to do so. That said, the threshold for making an order
under s 109 of the GA Act should not
be set so high as to compromise
the general supervisory role given to the Tribunal in the conduct of attorneys.
This is particularly
so as attorneys are required to keep and preserve accurate
records and accounts of the dealings and transactions made by them
107(1)(b) of the GA Act).
95 We have found some assistance in our response to this question in the
judicial consideration given to the supervision of trustees
and liquidators.
Macchia v Nilant
[2001] FCA 7
(12 January 2001) (
French J (as His Honour then was), considered the circumstances in
which an inquiry into the conduct of a trustee might take place
Bankruptcy Act 1966
. Of interest in comparing the scope
as against s 109 of the GA Act, is the finding that
s 179 does not provide a statutory mechanism for pursuing claims for
[44], (this too is not a remedy available under the GA Act; an
order under s 109 can only require the relevant accounting or audit
does not have any other remedial effect (
97 In the decision not to hold an inquiry into the conduct of the trustee,
French J referred to
Re Alafaci; Registrar in
Bankruptcy v Hardwick
(1976) 9 ALR 262
Turner v Official Trustee in
(unreported
[1999] FCA 1817
27 November 1998) (
), the reasoning of the latter
he applied to his decision.
98 What is first required is a consideration of whether on the grounds and
facts before it, a case has been made for an inquiry (
at 268). This
involves a broad discretion to decide whether there are sufficient grounds to
make an inquiry appropriate (
at 173). French J goes on to say
S 179 operates in aid of the Court's supervision of trustees who are its
officers. That operation, however, is subject to restraint
against undue
interference and to discretionary considerations including the practical benefit
likely to be derived from the conduct
of any inquiry ... the discretion to
determine the utility of an inquiry and its likely outcomes
99 Observing the similarity between the law governing the
supervision of liquidators (
Corporation Act 2001
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Cth)) and in so doing referring
to the decision in
the New South Wales Court of
Hall v Poolman
[2009] NSWCA 64
(31 March 2009)
) cited with approval the decision of the Full Court of
the Federal Court in
Leslie v Hennessy
[2001] FCA 371.
Quoting at [58] from the judgment of Ryan,
Dowsett and Hely JJ at [6]:
[6]...[W]e believe that both Young J [in
Burns Philp Investments
case] and Drummond J were describing something less formal
prima facie
case according to some evidential burden of proof.
Their Honours both meant only that
an applicant must show a sufficient
basis for making an order, that there is something which requires inquiry.
The Court then has a discretion which it must exercise. Many factors will be
relevant to that exercise. They include the strength
and nature of the
allegations, any answers offered by the liquidator, other available remedies,
the stage to which the liquidation
has progressed, the likely amounts of money
involved, the availability of funds to pay for any inquiry, the likely benefit
derived from it and the legitimate ‘interest’ of the applicant
in the outcome. (Emphasis added)
100 The context of the
decision as to whether to conduct an inquiry into the conduct of a liquidator
was stated by the Court in
at [61] to be derived
from the 'statutory supervisory jurisdiction in respect of liquidators of all
101 Using the language of the authorities as a guide and with reference to
the general supervisory role of the Tribunal in respect
of the conduct of donees
of enduring powers of attorney, is there in the case before us something which
requires an inquiry, and
is there a sufficient basis for making an order for an
audit of the records and accounts kept by the granddaughter of dealings and
transactions made by her as attorney for EW?
102 The applicant alleges that the granddaughter, whilst the attorney for
EW, misappropriated her estate of a substantial sum of
money. The granddaughter
has provided an explanation for most of the transactions she says she made and
submits that she cannot
be held responsible for the transactions allegedly made
by EW or the daughter. In response to the granddaughter the applicant says
the transactions she has ascribed to others (or at least the majority of those
transactions) were made by her for her own benefit.
103 The matter before us is therefore not simply one where there is an
agreed set of dealings and transactions undertaken by the
granddaughter as
attorney for EW, and which is subject to the exercise of the Tribunal's
discretion under s 109(1)(b) of the GA Act.
The transactions
themselves are not agreed.
104 There is a problem with the daughter's evidence. She attended a
directions hearing but not the final hearing even though the
granddaughter had
indicated at the directions hearing that she would be called to give evidence.
The problem is that although we
accept that the daughter made transactions on
the bank account of EW we cannot, with any degree of certainty, determine the
of activity.
105 This uncertainty has had an impact on our ultimate determination of the
application.
106 We are satisfied that many of the transactions identified by the
applicant, particularly those EFTPOS (point of sale) transactions,
expenditure which on its face do not appear be the type of purchases made for
the needs of a person in a nursing home. We also
find that there is
expenditure, for example at liquor outlets, which would raise a reasonable
suspicion (at least a suspicion demanding
further inquiry) that it was not made
107 The granddaughter's explanation is that EW went against her frugal
nature to enjoy what time she had left and to provide for
the daughter's needs.
EW considered her residency in the nursing home to be the end point of her life
('God's waiting room') and
her actions were consistent with her earlier support
for the daughter who cared for her intensely whilst in the nursing home. The
granddaughter submits that the will of EW, which was executed only two months
before the EPA, supports the special relationship EW
had with the daughter.
108 The applicant disputes the existence of a special relationship and says
that all of the children had a close relationship with
EW when she went into the
nursing home. He does not accept that that it was in EW's nature to change her
frugal ways. This view
is supported by what the other siblings and the
daughter­in­law say about EW's expressed concerns at the financial
of the daughter.
109 We accept that the applicant is genuine in the concerns he has raised in
his application. We query the time taken to make the
application to the
Tribunal (the estate of EW was distributed in June 2008) and also the
extent of the concerns reported to have
been expressed by EW. She is said to
have made discrete statements about the state of her finances and the demands of
her daughter
in 2005 and 2006. If, as the applicant states, the
children (not just the daughter) were in regular contact with EW, and if she
concerned for her finances, it would not have been unreasonable to have expected
her to voice her anxiety more often, or for
the sons or daughter in law to have
done more about the concerns she did express.
110 We accept that the explanation of the granddaughter is not inherently
implausible; however as with the applicant, we are concerned
by the volume and
understanding on the granddaughter's part
of the responsibility of an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney. We note for example her evidence that an
internet transaction
of $500 was made for her benefit, potentially a breach
of the 'self-dealing' rule which is the duty of an agent not to place themselves
in a position where their duty conflicts with their interests (S Fisher
at [7.4.1]). We make no finding on this matter (the rule
can be relaxed if
the donor consents to the transaction, for example), but simply say that it
underscores the profound duties (both
statutory and common law duties) that a
person accepts when agreeing to become an attorney.
111 We are, on balance, satisfied that there is enough in the volume and
nature of transactions undertaken on the bank account of
EW such that there is
'something which requires inquiry'. The allegation of misappropriation by the
applicant is serious and warrants
an investigation, despite the period of time
between the distribution of the estate of EW and the making of the application
112 Importantly there will be funds available to pay for the inquiry as the
applicant has undertaken to pay for the audit.
113 The scope of the audit is to be determined by the expected utility to be
derived from it (
114 A benefit of the audit will be the determination, to the extent
possible, of the transactions undertaken by the granddaughter
and so to settle a
question raised by the application and not resolved at the hearing. The audit
will also, to the extent possible,
determine what supporting documentation
exists for those transactions as is required to be kept by the granddaughter as
(s 107(1)(b) of the GA Act).
115 The audit and the report of the auditor will be the only remedial effect
of the application (
116 We have decided that the audit should include the sale of EW's property
and the following transactions on her bank (deeming)
account; the cheque
payments, the internet online banking, the EFTPOS transactions and the bank
assisted transactions. We have not
included the cash withdrawals as we do not
consider they can be ascribed to any particular person given they are transacted
anonymously.
The only information able to be obtained for the cash transactions
are the locations where the transactions occurred. This is already
available on
the bank statements and nothing further would be gained by an audit
(verification process) of those transactions.
117 The orders we make are as follows:
records and accounts of the dealings and transactions made by the attorney under
an enduring power of attorney executed by [EW]
on 22 July 2004, will
be the subject of an audit by an auditor appointed by the Tribunal.
applicant will give to the Tribunal, within 28 days from the date of this
order, the name of the proposed auditor together with
the written confirmation
of the proposed appointee setting out the scope of the audit set by the
Tribunal, and the agreement with
the proposed appointee that the costs of the
audit will be met by the applicant. The proposed appointee will be required to
auditor registered with the relevant accounting body and any
relevant State or Commonwealth agency or licensing body.
Tribunal will, within seven days of receiving notification of the proposed
auditor, notify the attorney and the attorney will
have seven days to respond to
the proposed appointment.
Tribunal will, within a further 14 days, notify the applicant and the
attorney whether the auditor has been accepted by the Tribunal.
If the proposed
auditor is not acceptable to the Tribunal, the applicant will be required to
recommence the process described in
audit will commence as soon as possible after the appointment of the auditor and
the auditor will provide the Tribunal with an
estimate of the time the audit
will take within 14 days of their appointment.
the completion of the audit the auditor will furnish a report of the audit to
the Tribunal, the applicant and the attorney.
Scope of audit
period to be covered by the audit is from the 22 July 2004 (date of
execution of the enduring power of attorney) to the 29 March
date of death of [EW]).
audit is to identify, to the extent possible, the dealings and transactions made
by the attorney and to verify, to the extent
possible, those dealings and
transactions with supporting documents including, but not limited to, contracts,
bank records, invoices
and statements.
audit is to be conducted in the following areas of the financial affairs
(a) The sale of [EW]'s property, including the offer
and acceptance, transfer of land and settlement;
(b) The bank account of [EW] with Westpac for the transactions identified by
the applicant as cheque payments; internet online banking;
EFTPOS and branch
staff assisted transactions.
matter is otherwise adjourned.
I certify that this and the preceding [117] paragraphs comprise the
reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
___________________________________
MR J MANSVELD, MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter