URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/158.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NLW -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 158 (31 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 158
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 84 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND XXXX of XXXX
law - Appeal against sentence - Drug offences - Appellant convicted on her pleas
of guilty of two counts of possession of
a prohibited drug with intent to sell
or supply - Whether individual sentences imposed were manifestly excessive -
Whether total
effective sentence infringed first limb of totality
Legislation:
of Drugs Act 1981
s 34(1)(aa)
to appeal granted on grounds 1 and
Leave to appeal refused on ground
Representation:
Solicitors:
The Defence
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
is an appeal against sentence which was heard by this court on an urgent basis.
24 June 2025, the appellant was convicted on her pleas of guilty of two
counts of possession of a prohibited drug with intent
to sell or supply to
another, contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
). Count 1 concerned a
quantity of 14.6 g of MDMA, with a purity that varied between 79% and 81%.
Count 2 concerned a quantity of
5.21 g of cocaine, of which
2.18 g was of 71% purity.
appellant was sentenced by Egan DCJ to 2 years' immediate imprisonment
on count 1, and 6 months' immediate imprisonment on count
His Honour ordered that the sentences be served cumulatively. Thus, the
total effective sentence was 2 years 6 months' immediate
imprisonment.
The appellant was made eligible for parole, and the sentence was backdated to
commence on 23 June 2025.
appellant relies on three grounds of appeal, all of which allege implied, and
not express, error. Grounds 1 and 2 allege that
the individual
sentences on counts 1 and 2, respectively, are manifestly excessive.
Ground 3 alleges that the total effective sentence
infringes the first limb
of the totality principle. It is common ground that ground 3 is
determinative of the appeal.
at first instance, the appellant submitted that she should be sentenced to a
suspended imprisonment order, in the proceedings
before this court, she does not
contend that the learned sentencing judge erred in ordering terms of immediate
imprisonment. Before
this court, counsel for the appellant made clear that the
appeal was against the length, not the type, of sentence that was
we would give leave to appeal on grounds 1 and 3, we would dismiss the
appeal. Our reasons for these conclusions are as
executed a search warrant at the appellant's home address.
the walk‑in wardrobe area of the appellant's bedroom, officers discovered
a blue container which contained three clipseal
bags of MDMA and five clipseal
bags of cocaine, the subject of the charges.
located in the blue container were unused clipseal bags of various sizes,
digital scales, and empty capsules.
appellant's mobile telephone was seized and reviewed. The officers found
multiple messages relating to the sale of MDMA and
cocaine, including one in
which the appellant indicated she could sell an ounce of MDMA, and some which
referred to the profit the
appellant could make with respect to that prospective
deal. The appellant's mobile telephone had installed on it encrypted
applications
of the kind frequently used by those involved in the sale of
prohibited drugs.
appellant participated in an audio‑visual record of interview at the
scene, during which she said she bought drugs in bulk
and gave them to friends
on nights out. Effectively, she denied selling drugs for money, but said that
she sometimes received drinks
in return for them.
the appellant was asked about the messages found on her mobile telephone
apparently referring to the sale of drugs, she declined
to comment.
regard to the messages found on the appellant's mobile telephone, the sentencing
judge found that the appellant had been involved
in the sale or supply of
prohibited drugs since
October 2023.
His Honour also found that the appellant would have sold at least some of
the drugs the subject of each of counts 1 and 2. He categorised
appellant as being 'a low‑level user‑dealer', and found that the
offending sat 'on the low range of seriousness for
offending of this nature but
at the upper end of that
The appellant's personal circumstances
the time of the offending, the appellant was 46 years old. She was
47 years old when sentenced.
appellant was born, brought up, and educated in England. After finishing high
school, she enrolled in university but did not
finish her degree in sports and
exercise science. She was a talented gymnast and represented her country in
trampolining.
appellant has had a consistent and productive work history, both in England,
overseas, and in Australia. She immigrated to Australia
appellant and her ex‑husband were together for 17 years. They have
two young children. They separated about 18 months
before the offending.
The appellant and her ex‑husband are on good terms. Since the appellant's
incarceration, the children
have been in their father's care.
appellant enjoys good physical health, but has some mental health issues. The
sentencing judge was provided with reports from
the appellant's treating
psychologist and psychiatrist. The appellant suffers from depression, and has
been diagnosed with attention‑deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Those
conditions were not causative of the offending. She has had difficulties
sleeping since she was a
appellant's prohibited drug use commenced after her marriage broke down. She
used cocaine and MDMA recreationally. Since her
arrest, she has not used
prohibited drugs. The sentencing judge was provided with a bundle of drug test
analysis results, which
indicated that she had remained drug free.
appellant has no prior criminal convictions.
sentencing judge was provided with a number of character references which spoke
highly of her, and, particularly, of her dedication
and love for her children.
The learned sentencing judge also received a letter from the appellant in which
she expressed, among
other things, her remorse, her intention not to offend in
the future, and her concern for her children in the event she was sentenced
term of immediate imprisonment.
The sentencing remarks
his sentencing remarks, his Honour accurately set out the facts of the
offending, the appellant's personal circumstances, her
efforts towards her
rehabilitation, and the contents of the expert reports. He also referred to the
sentencing principles applicable
to offences of the kind committed by the
appellant. We have set out these principles at [
characterising the seriousness of the offending, his Honour took into
(a) The weight of the prohibited drugs the subject of each count, which he said
was not insignificant.
(b) That there was a commercial aspect to the offending. His Honour noted
that the appellant's counsel accepted that 'there was
an element of selling' in
respect of the offending.
(c) The purity of the MDMA the subject of count 1, which gave rise to the
potential for serious harm to be caused within the community.
(d) That the offending was not one‑off or fleeting in nature, nor an
aberration in her behaviour.
(e) The offending involved two different prohibited
learned sentencing judge identified the following mitigating
(a) The appellant's pleas of guilty, which were entered at the earliest
reasonable opportunity. His Honour gave a discount, under
Sentencing Act 1995
(WA), of 25%
for her pleas of guilty.
(b) The steps the appellant had taken towards her rehabilitation.
His Honour said that he would take into account 'to the fullest
possible' her rehabilitation.
(c) The appellant was genuinely remorseful for her offending.
(d) The appellant was a person of prior good
Honour also found that the appellant was at a low risk of reoffending. As to
the effect that imprisonment would have on the
appellant's children, he found
that they would suffer hardship if the appellant was sentenced to a term of
immediate imprisonment,
but the hardship that would be caused was not
exceptional. His Honour found that the impact of her imprisonment upon the
appellant's
children was not out of the ordinary.
not expressly referred to in the sentencing remarks, his Honour also
reduced the sentence having regard to another matter,
the nature of which is set
out in a confidential addendum to these reasons and which, in the interests of
justice, will be the subject
of a suppression order.
Honour considered, but rejected, the submission put on behalf of the appellant
that he should impose a term of suspended, or
conditionally suspended,
imprisonment upon the appellant. His Honour found (correctly) that
suspended imprisonment was not appropriate,
having regard to the seriousness of
the offences and the need to provide general deterrence, notwithstanding the
mitigating factors
in the case.
Relevant legal principles
following legal principles are well established.
imposition of a sentence involves the exercise of a discretion. This court can
only intervene if the appellant demonstrates
express or implied error. Implied
error arises where, although it is not possible to discover the exact nature of
the error, the
end result is so unreasonable or plainly unjust that the court
must conclude that a substantial wrong has occurred. It follows that
cannot intervene simply because it would have exercised the sentencing
discretion differently. In the case of implied
error, the appellant must
demonstrate that the outcome was one that was not open to the sentencing judge
in the proper exercise of
his or her discretion.
first limb of the totality principle requires that the total effective sentence
imposed on an offender who has committed multiple
offences must bear a proper
relationship to the overall criminality involved in all of the offences, viewed
in their entirety, and
after having regard to all relevant circumstances,
including those referable to the offender personally (including, for example,
the desirability of accommodating any wish to rehabilitate) and the total
effective sentences imposed in comparable
major sentencing considerations for offences of dealing or trafficking in
dangerous drugs of addiction, of which MDMA and cocaine
are examples, are
general and personal deterrence. The weight of the drugs in question is not,
generally, the chief factor to be
taken into account in fixing a sentence, but
it is a matter of importance. Other matters to be taken into account include
and level of the offender's participation in drug dealing or
trafficking within a particular organisation, or generally; and whether
sentences were committed for commercial gain. The degree of purity is often
regarded as significant. Matters personal to an
offender will almost always be
subsidiary considerations, but they are not completely
irrelevant.
The appellant's submissions
focus of the appellant's oral submissions was on ground 3.
appellant submitted that, having regard to the combined weight of the mitigating
circumstances available to the appellant, in
particular, her pleas of guilty,
and the matter referred to at [
above, a 'mercifully shorter' period of imprisonment should have
for the appellant emphasised the appellant's favourable antecedents and
prospects of rehabilitation. He also highlighted
the appellant's low risk of
reoffending. While he conceded that the circumstances of the appellant's
children were not exceptional,
he submitted that their separation from her, and
the angst that this caused the appellant, made her time in prison more
for the appellant also emphasised that the offending involved relatively small
quantities of MDMA and cocaine, and that the
appellant was found by the
sentencing judge to be a low‑level user/dealer.
it was accepted that the appellant's offending involved an element of
commerciality, counsel for the appellant submitted that
the degree to which she
was motivated by an intention to make a profit was diminished because she would
have used some of the drugs
herself, or supplied them to her friends, or, on
occasions, exchanged drugs for drinks and tickets to events such as music
for the appellant also submitted that, having regard to the 25% discount given
to the appellant for her pleas of guilty under
Sentencing Act
, and for the matter
referred to at [
] above, the
starting point for the individual sentences that were imposed was too great
having regard to all of the relevant circumstances,
which indicated error.
appellant referred the court to a number of cases said to be comparable in
respect of MDMA offences, being
IIO v The State of Western
Turner v The State of
State of Western Australia v
Kirkup v The State of
Franklin v The State
appellant also referred to a number of cases concerning sentences imposed for
offences involving relatively small quantities
of cocaine, being
Gallagher v The State of
Bees v The State of
Barton v The State of
Disposition
maximum penalty for each of the offences committed by the appellant is
25 years' imprisonment or a fine of $100,000, or
the appellant's offending was by no means as serious as some other cases that
have come before this court, and the appellant
is fairly characterised as a
low‑level user/dealer, what the appellant did involved substantial
criminality, as borne out by
the aggravating factors described in [
Significantly,
there was a commercial aspect to the offending. Even though some of the drugs
may have been for the appellant's personal
use, given to friends, or exchanged
for drinks and tickets, the appellant was also engaged in selling drugs for
money. Furthermore,
the offences were committed in the context of the appellant
engaging in the sale of prohibited drugs over a period of approximately
nine months. As his Honour found, the offences were not isolated and
they were not an aberration.
the appellant had mental health issues, they were not causative of the
offending, and there is nothing to show that her ability
to appreciate the
wrongfulness of her criminal conduct was compromised.
the quantities of MDMA and cocaine the appellant possessed were not
insignificant. The fact that the appellant possessed
two different drugs with
intent to sell or supply justified some accumulation of the sentences.
user/dealers, such as the appellant, are an indispensable link in the drug
distribution chain. The ultimate consumers
of prohibited drugs usually obtain
them from dealers such as the appellant. The criminality of those dealers is
ordinarily not as
great as that of those further up the hierarchy, but their
role is, nevertheless, vital and must be deterred.
of the need for general deterrence in this case, the appellant's personal
circumstances provide less mitigation, although
they are by no means
irrelevant.
appellant's offending is significantly mitigated by her pleas of guilty. The
other mitigating factors identified by the sentencing
judge, including the
appellant's prior good character, genuine remorse, her good prospects of
rehabilitation, and the matter referred
] above, are, in combination, also
significant. However, it is not unusual, in cases such as this, to see this
combination of factors.
have read and had regard to the authorities cited by the appellant. It is
unnecessary to describe the facts and circumstances
of those cases, or analyse
them at any length. Much of the appellant's analysis emphasises the quantity of
the prohibited drugs,
which is important but not the only factor to be
considered. Also, as pointed out by the respondent, some of the cases have
precedential value, given that this court refused leave to appeal.
the end, the comparable cases do not clearly point to the individual sentences,
or, indeed, the total effective sentence, being
aspect of the appellant's submissions was to impugn the individual sentences
and, thus, the total effective sentence by reference
to the notional 'starting
point'; that is, the sentence that would have been imposed had there been no
mitigating factors. It is
difficult to 'reverse‑engineer' an individual
sentence in cases such as the present, where specific discounts have not been
applied to all mitigating factors. More fundamentally, given that the grounds
of appeal allege implied error, that is, that the
end result is so unreasonable
or plainly unjust that an error must be implied, such an approach is often
unproductive.
regard to all of the relevant facts and circumstances, including the mitigating
factors, we would characterise the individual
sentence on count 1 and the
total effective sentence as being towards the higher end of the appropriate
discretionary range. Had
we been sentencing the appellant at first instance, we
may have imposed a slightly lower sentence for count 1 and a slightly lower
total effective sentence. However, we cannot conclude that the individual
sentences or the total effective sentence were outside
an appropriate
discretionary range. Implied error has not been established. Neither of the
individual sentences, nor the total
effective sentence, is unreasonable or
plainly unjust. The grounds of appeal have not been made out. This court's
to intervene and resentence the appellant has not been enlivened.
The appeal must be dismissed.
21 October 2025, the appellant filed an application to adduce additional
evidence in the appeal in the event that the grounds
of appeal were made out and
this court resentenced her. As the grounds of appeal have not been made out,
the application to adduce
additional evidence must be dismissed.
orders that we would make are as
application to adduce additional evidence filed 21 October 2025 is
to appeal on grounds 1 and 3 is granted.
to appeal on ground 2 is refused.
appeal is dismissed.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Mazza
31 OCTOBER 2025
Ng v The State of Western
[2025] WASCA 121
IIO v The State of Western
Turner v The State of
Western Australia
The State of Western
Australia v Egeland
[2018] WASCA 228
(2019) 276 A Crim
Kirkup v The State of
Western Australia
Franklin v The State of
Western Australia
Gallagher v The State of
Western Australia
Bees v The State of
Western Australia
Barton v The State of
Western Australia
s 34(1)(aa).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter