URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/153.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NXD -v- OFFICE OF PUBLIC ADVOCATE [2025] WASCA 153 (22 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- OFFICE OF PUBLIC ADVOCATE
[2025] WASCA 153
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACV 61 of 2025
OF PUBLIC ADVOCATE
OF PUBLIC TRUSTEE
GENERAL (WA)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- OFFICE OF PUBLIC ADVOCATE
[2025] WASC 269
GDA 5 of 2025
Guardianship
and administration - Appeal from an order of a judge of the General Division of
the Supreme Court dismissing an appeal
from orders of the State Administrative
Tribunal appointing the Public Advocate to be the plenary administrator of the
appellant's
estate and appointing the Public Trustee to be the limited guardian
of the appellant - Whether any of the appellant's grounds of
appeal to the Court
of Appeal have any reasonable prospect of succeeding - Turns on own
Legislation:
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1990
Supreme Court
of Western Australia Act 1935
Application to adduce
additional evidence
Representation:
No appearance
No appearance
R C Panetta
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
Public Trustee
State Solicitor's
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
the conclusion of the hearing in this appeal on 22 October 2025, we made orders
dismissing the appeal and an application to adduce
additional evidence made in
the appeal. We said that we would publish our reasons for making those orders
later. These are our
reasons for making the
appellant has been the subject of different guardianship and administration
orders made under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
) since March 2021. On
6 March 2025, a panel of three members of the State Administrative Tribunal
) set aside previous such
orders and made orders under the Act appointing the Public Trustee to be
the plenary administrator of the
appellant's estate and the Public Advocate to
be the limited guardian of the appellant
Tribunal orders
). The appellant
appealed from the Tribunal orders to a judge of the General Division of
this court on various grounds (expressed
as raising errors of law) pursuant to
s 19(a) of the Act. On 4 July 2025, the primary judge refused leave
and dismissed the appeal
to the General Division
primary orders
). His Honour
published written reasons for making the primary orders:
NXD v Office of Public
[2025] WASC 269
history of the matter, the proceedings in the Tribunal and the Tribunal's
reasons for decision, as well as the appellant's grounds
of appeal against the
Tribunal orders, are set out in detail in the primary reasons.
appellant now appeals from the primary orders to this court under
Supreme Court Act 1935
(WA) on 11 grounds of appeal. By application in an appeal filed on
21 August 2025 (
Application
appellant also seeks leave to adduce her affidavit sworn on 8 August 2025
as additional evidence in the appeal to this court.
convened, pursuant to a Registrar's Notice to Attend, on 22 October 2025 to
(a) whether the appeal to this court should be dismissed on the basis that none
of the grounds of appeal has a reasonable prospect
of succeeding;
(b) whether any of the grounds of appeal should be struck out on the basis that
they do not have a reasonable prospect of succeeding;
Application.
the following reasons, the appeal to this court should be dismissed on the basis
that none of the grounds of appeal has a reasonable
prospect of succeeding. The
Application should be dismissed because there is no utility in admitting the
proposed additional evidence
in this appeal.
Statutory context
Tribunal's power to make a guardianship order is conferred by s 43(1) of
the Act, and depends, among other things, on its satisfaction
that a person over
the age of 18 needs a guardian because the person
(a) incapable of looking after his or her own health and safety;
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his or
her person; or
(c) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of his or her own
health and safety or for the protection of
Tribunal's power to appoint an administrator is conferred by s 64(1) of the
Act and depends, among other things, on its satisfaction
(a) is unable, by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in
respect of matters relating to all or any part of
his or her estate; and
(b) is in need of an administrator of his or her
7 of the Act provides for the review of guardianship and administration orders.
On review, s 90(1) of the Act provides for
the Tribunal, 'as it considers
necessary in the best interests of the represented person' to confirm, revoke or
vary the guardianship
or administration order.
the circumstances of the present case, s 19(a) of the Act provides for an
appeal from a determination of the Tribunal to a single
judge of the Supreme
Court. A 'determination' is defined in s 3(1) of the Act to include the
making of an order under s 43 or s
64, and the making of an order on a
review. Leave to appeal is required which, under s 22 of the Act, can only
be granted if it
is shown to the judge's satisfaction that there is a prima
facie case justifying an appeal on one or more of the grounds specified
s 21 of the Act. The permissible grounds of appeal identified in s 21
of the Act are:
(a) that the State Administrative Tribunal -
(i) made an error of law or fact, or of both law and fact; or
(ii) acted without or in excess of
or did both of those
(b) that there is some other reason that is sufficient to justify a review of
determination.
s 28 of the Act, unless otherwise ordered, the Tribunal's determination
continues to have effect pending the determination
of the application for leave
to appeal and the appeal. Section 29 of the Act provides for the appeal to
be determined on the material
that was before the Tribunal and such further
evidence as the court thinks fit to receive. The court's powers on appeal are
out in s 30 of the Act and include the power to confirm, vary or set
aside the Tribunal's determination.
Act does not provide for a further appeal to the Court of Appeal from the single
judge's determination of an application for
leave to appeal or an appeal under
the Act. However, there is nothing in the Act which excludes the right of
appeal to this court
from orders of a judge of this court conferred by
Supreme Court
. While s 18A(3) of the Act provides there is no appeal from a
determination of the Tribunal other than as provided for under pt
div 3 of the Act, that says nothing about the availability of an appeal
from orders made by a judge of this court under the
Does the appellant require a next friend to commence
this appeal?
Tribunal's orders appoint the Public Trustee to be the plenary
administrator of the appellant's estate. Section 71(2) of the
authorises a plenary administrator to perform in relation to the appellant's
estate any function that she could herself perform
if she were of full legal
capacity. This authority would appear to comprehend the Public Trustee
commencing, conducting or settling
proceedings relating to the appellant's
estate on behalf of the appellant. As such, at least while the guardianship
order remains
in force, the appellant is a 'represented person' and therefore a
'person under a disability' as those terms are defined in
Rules of the
Supreme Court 1971
O 70 r 2(1) of the Rules, except as provided by O 70 r 2(4),
a person under a disability cannot bring any proceedings except
by the person's
next friend. Order 70 r 2(4), which provides for a judge to permit an
infant to sue without a next friend when satisfied
that it is proper to do so,
has no application in the present case.
we noted in
if a next friend is not appointed when one is required, then the proceedings
will be irregular, and a step or decision taken in the
proceedings will be
liable to be set aside under O 2 r 1 of the Rules for that
provisions create a conundrum for a represented person seeking to challenge the
making of a guardianship or administration
order on appeal to the Supreme Court.
At least prima facie, in many cases the represented person will only be able to
next friend who is represented by a solicitor. The represented
person may dispute the making of the order which brings about the
requirement
for him or her to bring proceedings by a next friend but be unable to do so if
the guardian or administrator does not
agree. Further, a guardian or
administrator may be regarded as having a conflict of duty and interest in
relation to a decision
continues the appointment.
Scates v State
Administrative
EM Heenan J resolved this conundrum, at least at the stage of the
application for leave to appeal, by characterising the disputed
question of
whether the person was under a disability as the subject matter of the appeal.
His Honour held that the challenged decision
that the appellant was a
person under a disability should not be treated as a basis for obliging the
person to appear by a next friend
in the appeal against the challenged decision.
The primary judge applied this approach in the present
approach does not seem entirely satisfactory in a case where the status of an
appellant as a 'person under a disability' is
established by a guardianship or
administration order which has not been set aside. This may be an area where
amendment to the Rules
is required to clarify that a represented person can
challenge a guardianship or administration order on appeal without the
appointment
of a next friend.
preferable approach to that adopted in
construe the reference to 'proceedings' in O 70 r 2 of the Rules
as implicitly excluding proceedings in which the making
of an order appointing a
guardian or administrator under the Act is challenged. That implication might
be drawn to avoid the Rules
being construed as providing for the appeal against
a guardianship or administration order provided for by the Act to be restricted
by the very order which is the subject of the
it is not necessary for us to attempt to resolve the conundrum in the present
case. The absence of a next friend does not
make the current appeal a nullity.
The Public Trustee and Public Advocate have not sought to participate in
the appeal, and there
is no application to have the appeal proceedings or any
step in them set aside under O 2 r 1 of the Rules. Nor in the
circumstances
is it appropriate for the court to do so of its own motion. The
preferable course in the present case is to proceed to determine
whether any of
the appellant's grounds of appeal has a reasonable prospect of
succeeding.
The nature of the hearing
Registrar's Notice to Attend invoked r 43(2)(f) and r 43(2)(g)(i) of
Supreme Court (Court of Appeal)
. Those rules confirm the court's
(f) to strike out any ground of appeal that does not have a reasonable prospect
of succeeding or does not comply with these rules
or any order made under
(g) to dismiss the appeal if:
(i) none of the grounds of appeal has a reasonable prospect of
succeeding[.]
purpose of these rules is to weed out unmeritorious
rules are directed to grounds of appeal that do not have a 'reasonable prospect
of succeeding'. In that
ground of appeal has a reasonable prospect of succeeding if it has a rational
and logical prospect of succeeding, ie it would not
be irrational, fanciful
or absurd to envisage the ground succeeding. The ground must have a 'real
prospect' of
the court is to strike out a ground as not having a reasonable prospect of
succeeding, or is to dismiss an appeal on the basis
that none of the grounds has
a reasonable prospect of succeeding, the court must be positively satisfied that
the ground, or all
of the grounds, lacks or lack a rational and logical prospect
succeeding.
ground of appeal does not have a reasonable prospect of succeeding simply
because, standing alone, it might be upheld. The ground
must allege material
error. A ground of appeal will only have a reasonable prospect of succeeding
where, if upheld, the ground -
either by itself or in combination with other
grounds that have a rational and logical prospect of succeeding - would result
primary court's judgment or order being
Ground 1: characterisation of General Division
grounds of appeal
1 of the appellant's appeal to this court contends that the primary judge erred
in law by finding, at [147] of the primary
reasons, that her grounds of appeal
to the General Division alleged an error of law in relation to findings of
fact made by the Tribunal.
In explaining how such an error of law might arise,
the primary judge quoted from the decision of this court in
Medical Board of Australia
Arunkalaivanan
including that:
[T]here may be no evidence to support the finding of fact, ie the finding of
fact may not be open on the evidence[.]
appellant's grounds of appeal are set out at [156] of the primary reasons.
There is not any arguable error in the primary judge's
characterisation of those
the ground of appeal nor the submissions in support of ground 1 coherently
articulate any material error in the above passage
of the primary reasons. The
appellant's submissions in support of ground 1 of the appeal to this court
refer to oral submissions
she made to the primary judge about her ability to
budget in the purchase of bedding, in which she commented, 'That's how good I
at budgeting.' The appellant's written submissions to this court contend that,
'It is categorically recognised that no person
with a mental disability can
budget'. She says that her oral submissions below should have led the primary
judge to find she did
not have a mental disability. These submissions do not
relate to the ground of appeal to this court or provide any proper basis
concluding that the primary judge erred in the characterisation of her grounds
of appeal to the General Division.
these reasons, ground 1 of the appeal to this court has no reasonable prospect
of succeeding.
Ground 2: additional evidence in the appeal to the
General Division
2 of the appellant's appeal to this court contends that the primary judge erred
in law in not admitting the appellant's affidavit
sworn 18 June 2025 as
additional evidence in the appeal to the General Division.
primary judge did not, as the appellant's ground suggests, refuse to admit the
appellant's affidavit as additional evidence in
the appeal to the
General Division. His Honour dealt with the affidavit in the
The only parts of the [appellant's] Affidavit that seemed to bear any relevance
to the proposed grounds of appeal seemed to do no
more than repeat what [the
appellant] has previously said to the [Tribunal]. Given that these matters were
already addressed in
evidence, the affidavit added nothing to the evidence
already before me.
Most of the affidavit bore no apparent relevancy to the proposed grounds of
appeal. This apparently irrelevant material included
a number of serious and
scandalous allegations.
As I have mentioned, s 22(3) of the [Act] provides that I may inform myself
in such manner as I think fit in determining an application
for leave to appeal.
I have considered the [appellant's] Affidavit for the limited purpose of
considering whether or not to grant leave. Having done
so, I do not consider
that the contents of that affidavit meaningfully assist the determination of
whether or not leave should be
in the appellant's submissions to this court provides any proper basis for
doubting the correctness of the primary judge's
characterisation of the
appellant's affidavit sworn 18 June 2025. Her submissions in this court
focus on allegations of negligence
by various medical practitioners and the
alleged incompetence of a member of the Tribunal. Those submissions tend to
reinforce the
primary judge's conclusion as to the irrelevance of the contents
of the affidavit to a determination of whether the errors of law
alleged in the
grounds of appeal to the General Division established a prima facie case
justifying an appeal. Ground 2 of the appeal
to this court has no
reasonable prospect of succeeding.
Ground 3: characterising appellant's submissions
3 of the appellant's appeal to this court contends that the primary judge erred
in finding that neither her oral nor written
submissions in the appeal to the
General Division addressed her grounds of appeal to the
General Division in a meaningful way.
error was allegedly made at [157] of the primary reasons, where the primary
judge observed:
Neither the oral submissions that [the appellant] made during the appeal, nor
the Appellant's Written Submissions, addressed her
grounds of appeal in any
meaningful way. They failed to identify the nature of the error of law that it
was said vitiated the findings
of fact made by the [Tribunal]. It was therefore
necessary for me to endeavour to construe the grounds of appeal on the available
ground of appeal can go nowhere by itself, as it would not establish that the
primary judge erred in the manner in which his
Honour actually dealt with
the grounds of appeal to the General Division. In any event, nothing in
the appellant's submissions to
this court provides a basis for doubting the
correctness of the primary judge's observation about the appellant's
submissions. The
passages of her oral and written submissions identified in the
particulars to the ground of appeal to this court do not appear to
relate to her
grounds of appeal to the General Division. Ground 3 of the appeal to
this court has no reasonable prospect of
succeeding.
Grounds 4 - 9: evidentiary errors by primary
4 - 9 of the appeal to this court allege that the primary judge made
various errors. Ground 4 contends that the primary
judge erred by not
giving significant weight to a medical report.
Grounds 5 ‑ 8 contend that the primary judge erred in
certain medical evidence and not accepting other medical evidence.
Ground 9 contends that the primary judge erred in confirming
reports of a medical practitioner should not be accepted over evidence of a
delegate of the appellant's guardian.
grounds of appeal are misconceived as the primary judge did not himself make any
relevant factual findings. Rather, the primary
judge dealt with the appellant's
grounds of appeal to the General Division which alleged errors of law in
certain factual findings
made by the Tribunal. Further, nothing in
grounds 4 ‑ 9 of the appeal to this court or the
submissions advanced in support
of those grounds provides any proper basis for
doubting the correctness of the trial judge's conclusion that the appellant's
of appeal in the General Division, challenging the Tribunal's
factual findings, did not establish a prima facie case justifying an
those grounds. Grounds 4 ‑ 9 of the appeal to this court
have no reasonable prospect of succeeding.
note that the primary judge dealt with the grounds of appeal to the
General Division, which alleged errors of law in making factual
on their express terms. Given the scope of permissible grounds of appeal under
s 21(a)(i) of the Act, it would also have
been open to the appellant to
have alleged an error of fact. However, the grounds of appeal and submissions
to this court do not
establish any realistic possibility that the primary
judge's decision could have been different if the appellant had been invited
amend her grounds of appeal in the General Division to allege errors of
fact or errors of both law and fact, rather than simply
errors of law, by the
Tribunal. In these circumstances, there was no material error in the primary
judge's approach of dealing with
the self-represented appellant's grounds, on
their express terms, as alleging errors of law.
Ground 10: photographic evidence
10 of the appeal to this court contends that the primary judge erred in law in
not finding that a delegate of her guardian
'acted towards the appellant with
serious misconduct after the [Tribunal was] provided with photographic evidence
to prove serious
misconduct occurred'. This ground relates to ground 9 of
the appeal to the General Division, which contended that the Tribunal erred
in law by accepting the delegate's evidence knowing he had engaged in misconduct
towards the appellant in supervising her home care
by a service provider 'making
her enormously overweight, a wheelchair based invalid and incontinent having
[to] wear adult
Ground 9 of the appeal to the General Division alleged that this was
despite the Tribunal members observing photographic evidence
of the appellant
which proved that her claim of misconduct was true and had occurred.
primary judge noted that the transcript of the Tribunal proceedings indicated
that the appellant had showed the Tribunal a photograph,
but did not submit to
the Tribunal that the photograph established that the delegate engaged in
misconduct while supervising her
care, or that such misconduct should mean that
his evidence should not be
The primary judge
[The appellant] did not produce a copy of the photograph on the appeal, address
what was in the photograph, or address how it established
that [the delegate]
engaged in misconduct. Nor did she explain why a finding that he engaged in
such misconduct should result in
his evidence being rejected.
Absent being provided with the photograph or any proper explanation of its
relevance, it is not apparent to me that the [Tribunal]
made an error of law by
failing to take the photograph into account at all, or that the [Tribunal's]
acceptance of [the delegate's]
evidence was illogical or
irrational.
arguable error of law was involved in the primary judge's failure to act on
photographic evidence not produced to his Honour,
particularly in the
absence of any coherent explanation of how that evidence might lead to the
finding sought. Ground 10 of the
appeal to this court has no reasonable
prospect of succeeding.
Ground 11: alleged misconduct by
Public Trustee
11 of the appeal to this court contends that the primary judge erred in law in
not finding that the Public Trustee engaged
in serious misconduct towards
11, 12 and 13 of the grounds of appeal to the General Division alleged
error by the Tribunal in failing to find that the
Public Trustee engaged in
serious misconduct against the appellant. The misconduct alleged in
ground 11 concerned an allegation
that the Public Trustee withheld
funds from the appellant as a form of punishment, which was rejected by the
Tribunal as baseless.
Ground 12 alleged misconduct by the
Public Trustee's failure to investigate a criminal injuries compensation
claim. Ground 13 contended
that the Public Trustee failed to
investigate an alleged fraud involving the appellant's late mother's estate and
the theft of inheritance
Essentially,
the primary judge rejected these grounds of appeal on the basis that there was
no evidence before the Tribunal to establish
the allegations.
this court, the appellant's written submissions focus on an allegation that a
former holder of the office of Attorney General
was 'ultimately responsible for
what happened to her'.
in the appellant's grounds or submissions to this court point to any proper
evidentiary basis for any of the findings of
serious misconduct by the
Public Trustee which the appellant contends the Tribunal and primary judge
should have made. Ground 11
of the appeal to this court has no reasonable
prospect of succeeding.
Application to adduce additional evidence in the
appellant seeks leave to adduce an affidavit sworn by her on 8 August 2025
as additional evidence in the appeal to this court.
The affidavit contains a
series of scandalous assertions that various people have engaged in misconduct
and have been guilty of
negligence. The affidavit does not contain evidence
capable of establishing the serious allegations made in the affidavit. Its
contents do not affect our conclusion that none of the appellant's grounds of
appeal to this court have any reasonable prospect of
succeeding. In the
circumstances, there is no utility in admitting the affidavit as additional
evidence in the appeal.
the above reasons, none of the appellant's grounds of appeal has a reasonable
prospect of succeeding, and there is no utility
in admitting the appellant's
affidavit sworn 8 August 2025 as additional evidence in the appeal. We
therefore made the following
orders at the conclusion of the hearing on
appellant's application in an appeal filed on 21 August 2025 is
appeal is dismissed.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
22 OCTOBER 2025
[2025] WASCA
Scates v State
Administrative Tribunal
[2011] WASC 319
especially at [19].
Primary reasons [256] - [258].
A similar approach was adopted, albeit in a very different statutory context, in
Shaw v Attorney General
[2006] WASCA 231
[8] - [17].
In de Braekt v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 220
Samuels v The State of
Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 193
(2005) 30 WAR 473
In de Braekt
Westpac Banking Corporation
[2024] WASCA 157
Medical Board of Australia
v Arunkalaivanan
[2023] WASCA 117
Primary reasons
[152] - [155].
Primary reasons
Primary reasons
[225] - [226].
Primary reasons [227] - [228].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (264 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter