URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/301.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ajah Obang Abuy -v- Town of Port Hedland [2025] WAIRC 301; (15 May 2025)
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
APPLICATION
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R
MONDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2025,
TUESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2025
DELIVERED :
THURSDAY, 15 MAY 2025
U 73 OF 2024
AJAH OBANG ABUY
TOWN OF PORT HEDLAND
Law (WA) - Unfair dismissal - Dismissal for reasons related to performance -
Whether performance concerns were justified
- Whether improvement action was
justified - Whether performance improved - Whether performance improvement
process was unfair or
unreasonable - Procedural fairness - Was the termination
outcome predetermined - Whether manner of termination unfair - Finding that
termination was not harsh, oppressive or unfair - Application dismissed
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Application
Representation:
A Abuy (in person)
H Millar (of counsel)
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
BHP Coal Pty Ltd v Schmidt
[2016] FWCFB 72
Farkas v Abacus Calculators
(WA) Pty Ltd
[2005] WAIRC 02267
Finlay v Commissioner of Police
[2022] WASC 272
Gibson v Bosmac Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 222
(1995) 60 IR 1
Gilmore v Cecil Bros & Ors
(1996) 76 WAIG 1184
Kerton v Bandaberry Pty Ltd t/a Mandurah Holden
[2004] WAIRC 11731
(2004) 84 WAIG 2652
Laws v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 93 ALR
Shire of Esperance v Mouritz (
1991) 71 WAIG 891
The Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union of Employees, West
Australian Branch v Public Transport Authority of Western Australia
WAIRC 00344:
(2013) 93 WAIG 618
The Undercliffe Nursing Home v The Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union
of Australia, Hospital Service and Miscellaneous WA Branch
(1985) 65 WAIG
for Decision
of Port Hedland employed Ms Ajah Abuy as a Graduate Community Safety
Officer in March 2023. On 2 August 2024 the Town terminated
employment for performance reasons.
Abuy claims the termination was harsh, oppressive or unfair and referred this
matter to the Western Australian Industrial Relations
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Abuy’s grounds supporting her claim are extensive but broadly follow three
themes. First, she says that there was no valid
reason for the termination
because her performance was at all times satisfactory or better than
satisfactory. Second, she says the
performance management process which led to
the termination of her employment was procedurally unfair. Third, she says the
of the termination itself was harsh and unfair.
Town denies that the termination was unfair. It maintains that its concerns
legitimate, that it provided
Ms Abuy with ample opportunities to improve her performance with a fair
performance management process,
but Ms Abuy failed to acknowledge there was any
need for improvement, and did not utilise the opportunities she was given to
is no dispute that the Commission has jurisdiction to determine Ms Abuy’s
claim under s 29(1)(c) of the IR Act as Ms Abuy
was the Town’s
employee, the Town dismissed her, her application was made within time, and none
of the exclusions in s 29AA
of the IR Act apply.
Relevant principles
test for determining whether a dismissal is unfair is well settled. The question
is whether the employer has abused its right
to dismiss as outlined by the
Industrial Appeal Court in
Undercliffe Nursing Home v The
Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of Australia
Service and Miscellaneous WA Branch
(1985) 65 WAIG 385
Undercliffe Nursing Home
Abuy has the onus of establishing that the dismissal was, in all the
circumstances, unfair.
Commission’s core task is to decide whether the right of the employer to
terminate the employment has been exercised so
harshly or oppressively or
unfairly against the applicant as to amount to an abuse of the right. A
dismissal for a valid reason within
the meaning of the IR Act may still be
unfair if, for example, it is effected in a manner which is unfair. However,
terminating an
employment contract in a manner which is procedurally irregular
may not of itself mean the dismissal is unfair: See
Shire of Esperance v
(1991) 71 WAIG 891
at 895 where Kennedy J observed that unfair
procedures adopted by an employer when dismissing an employee are only one
element that
needs to be considered when determining whether a dismissal was
harsh or unjust.
following background facts are uncontentious and are drawn from the
witnesses’ unchallenged evidence and the documents before
Commission.
the relevant times, the
Town of Port Hedland
Industrial Agreement
applied to the Town and Ms Abuy.
Abuy’s position of
Community Safety Officer was classified
as a Level 4 position for the purpose of the Industrial Agreement.
purpose of the Graduate role was to identify, address and monitor issues of
community safety and crime prevention, and assist
to plan, develop and support a
range of programs, projects and initiatives in the local community, in
partnership with stakeholders,
to proactively address local community safety
needs: Exhibit
Abuy’s contract of employment specified that her ordinary hours of work
were an average of 38 hours per week, determined
by her manager.
Abuy reported to the position of Community Safety
. From on or
core purpose of the Advisor role was to identify, address and monitor issues of
community safety and crime prevention and to plan,
develop and support a range
of programs, projects and initiatives in the local community to proactively
address local community safety
fulfil this purpose, the Advisor was required to, amongst other things:
(a) Develop, coordinate and implement the Town’s Community
Safety Plan and other initiatives to improve community safety and
improve public
perception across the wider community.
(b) Pursue and manage key stakeholder partnership agreements in relation to
community safety.
(c) Provide leadership and executive support to community safety governance
groups and other relevant community working groups.
Advisor position was a level 7, reporting in turn to the Manager Youth and
Community Development, who was at all relevant times,
Ms Anna Savill.
Town has a Leave Management Internal Operating Procedure (
Leave Management
) and a Discipline Internal Operating Procedure (
Timeline of events relevant to Ms Abuy’s performance
following chronology of the key events relevant to Ms Abuy’s performance
are also uncontentious and drawn from the witnesses’
unchallenged evidence
and the documents before the Commission.
to, and on 12 October 2023, Ms Savill reminded Ms Abuy that her agreed hours of
work were 9:00am to 5:30pm with a 1-hour lunch
break or 9:00am to 5:00pm with a
30 min lunch break: Ex R5.
Subsequently,
on 23 October 2023, Ms Abuy was observed arriving to work late. Ms Savill raised
this issue in an email to Ms Abuy on
23 October 2023.
1 February 2024 Ms Abuy and Ms Savill met to discuss Ms Abuy’s employment
and future. On 8 February 2024 Ms Savill sent Ms
Abuy an email summarising their
discussion: Ex R9. The summary says, amongst other
We also had a discussion around behaviours that are being displayed and how
these may be interpreted as disrespectful or dismissive.
Please remember that it is imperative that you participate in team activities
and communicate with staff in a positive manner.
I have attached the Code of Conduct (particularly Above and Below the Line
Behaviours, page 41, also attached below) for you to reflect
on how your
comments or behaviours need to improve to meet the expectation within the
organisation.
I will put some time aside for us to discuss this further with Sasha.
Abuy responded to the email:
Just to let you know, I do not wish to
remain in this position and am actively seeking other roles. I intend to keep
you updated on
this matter.
on 8 February 2024 Ms Gubbins sent Ms Abuy an email following a ‘brief
chat’ between them that morning. It referred
to Ms Abuy’s late
attendance at work that morning, and their agreement that Ms Abuy would text Ms
Gubbins if she was going
to be more than 10 minutes late in arriving. It also
referred to a previous discussion about the requirement to take a lunch break
within 5 hours of starting work. Ms Abuy had indicated she was taking her lunch
break at 3:30pm. Ms Gubbins directed Ms Abuy to make
sure she takes her breaks
no later than 2:00pm: Ex A45 and Ex R11.
Abuy considered this email showed she was being unnecessarily scrutinised and
micromanaged.
Abuy’s email responding to Ms Gubbins said:
Lastly, as previously explained on multiple instances, there is reasoning for
my preference in breaktime and although I understand
your concern, I completely
disagree as our workflow is not disrupted nor am I negatively impacted in any
way. I really do not appreciate
you trying to micromanage my break times and
constantly enforcing new rules; in this instance, I will continue to do what
me to achieve maximum productivity. I am trying my best to be civil,
transparent and compliant but you are only making it difficult
for me with all
of the unnecessary scrutiny and extreme control.
Friday 16 February 2024 Ms Abuy commenced annual leave with no advance notice to
the Town. At 11:06am on that day, Ms Abuy Microsoft
messaged Ms
Gubbins to say, ‘there is some stuff going on in Perth at the
moment’. She had planned to visit Perth over
the weekend and return on
Monday, but it looked like she would need to ‘stay longer’. She
foreshadowed making an annual
leave application for Ms Gubbins to approve. She
stated that she hoped to be back in Port Hedland within the next fortnight but
keep you updated’: Ex R6.
Abuy returned to work on 5 March 2024.
10 April 2024 Ms Abuy attended a meeting with Ms Gubbins and Robyn Fox, the
Town’s Human Resources Business Partner. Ms Abuy’s
performance was
discussed, and a letter outlining areas of concern and performance expectations
was given to Ms Abuy (
Letter of Expectations
to the Letter of Expectations, Ms Abuy’s progress was to be evaluated over
a four-week period commencing on 15 April
2024 with weekly catch-up meetings to
check-in meetings occurred during the four-week period. The meeting of 17 April
2024 was attended by Ms Abuy and Ms Gubbins.
Ms Savill also attended meetings on
6 May 2024 and 10 May 2024.
13 May 2024 Ms Abuy commenced a period of personal leave, indicating she would
need a week off. She remained off work until Friday
24 May 2024.
27 May 2024, Ms Fox and the Town’s Acting Director Community Services,
Louise Gee, met with Ms Abuy to advise her that the
Town required her to undergo
a fitness for work assessment before she could return to work. She was directed
to remain away from
work, on full pay, in the meantime: Ex A30.
28 May 2024 Ms Abuy attended an appointment with a psychologist for the purpose
of the Town’s fitness for work assessment.
A report was produced dated 29
2024: Ex A11.
Abuy returned to work on 4 June 2024.
10 June 2024 Ms Gubbins advised Ms Abuy that a Performance Improvement Process
(PIP process)
was going to be implemented.
12 June 2024 Ms Gubbins and Ms Ciara Dillon met with Ms Abuy to discuss the PIP
process. Ms Dillon had replaced Ms Fox as the Human
Resources Business Partner.
Town produced a draft Performance Improvement Plan (
draft PIP plan detailed areas of concern relating to Ms Abuy’s
performance, under the headings ‘Following reasonable
directions’,
‘Reliability’, ‘Communication and Collaboration’, and
‘Town of Port Hedland Core
PIP plan laid out improvement goals in each of these four areas and established
a six-week PIP process period, excluding leave
periods. During this time, Ms
Abuy was expected to make progress on the PIP plan, while providing an
opportunity to demonstrate improvement
and commitment: Ex A6.
1 July 2024 Ms Abuy took 4 days’ personal leave.
Gubbins and Ms Dillon conducted PIP review and progress update meetings with Ms
Abuy on 20 June 2024, 27 June 2024, 8 July 2024,
11 July 2024, 17 July 2024 and
25 July 2024.
Final PIP review and progress update meeting occurred on 1 August 2024. It was
attended by Mark Dacombe, Director Community Services
and Domenica Marvelli,
Acting Principal Human Resources Operations. They advised Ms Abuy that she had
not improved sufficiently in
her performance against expectations and that the
Town was considering terminating the employment.
Abuy was escorted from the Town’s premises on 1 August 2024.
2 August 2024 the Town confirmed the termination of Ms Abuy’s employment
in a letter to her.
Abuy described how she came to be employed by the Town of Port Hedland and her
relocation from Perth to Port Hedland to commence
in the Graduate role. She
described the Graduate role as being part of the community safety team, a team
of two people, both reporting
to the Manager of Youth and Community Development.
The Manager was Anna Savill, for the duration of Ms Abuy’s
employment.
Abuy’s work involved administrative support for local networks,
functioning as the secretary for working groups across family
and domestic
violence, road safety, wellbeing and suicide. She was also responsible for the
dissemination and presentation of data
on crime and its prevention, developing
crime prevention projects, and processing home safety and security rebates.
Abuy thought that prior to January 2024 she was doing very well in her role, as
she had received good feedback. She described herself
as thriving in the first
ten months. She gave examples of her involvement in planning a baby shower for a
previous line leader, and
being captain of the social netball team, which she
also helped to coordinate and manage.
by early February 2024 Ms Abuy was struggling with the amount of oversight she
was being subjected to under Ms Gubbins’
supervision. She conveyed to Ms
Savill that the amount of visibility Ms Gubbins was expecting was
16 February 2024 Ms Abuy commenced a period of unplanned annual leave with short
notice. During this period, Ms Gubbins attempted
to contact Ms Abuy by
telephone. Ms Abuy felt this contact was ‘an extra burden that was just
suddenly being placed on me’:
Ms Abuy returned from leave, on or about 4 March 2024, the interpersonal
conflict between her and Ms Gubbins increased. Ms Abuy
provided examples of
exchanges she had with Ms Gubbins which she perceived to be unreasonable on Ms
Gubbins’ part, leaving
her feeling that she was being treated as
‘beneath’ Ms Gubbins, rather than as an equal: TS21.
22 March 2024 Ms Abuy met with Ms Carryl Price in the Town’s Human
Resources team, to find out what she could do to escalate
her concerns about the
way she was being treated: TS22.
the Letter of Expectation was presented to Ms Abuy on 10 April 2024, she did not
understand why expectations were being imposed
on her about when she took her
lunch breaks, when this had not previously been an issue with other supervisors.
She challenged the
reasonableness of the directions given to her about her lunch
breaks. She didn’t understand the criticisms of her communications
being ‘overly formal’, when they could also be characterised as
‘professional’: TS24.
Abuy gave evidence about the meetings that followed the Letter of Expectations,
explaining the context of matters that were discussed
Abuy stated that on her return to work after the May to June personal leave, she
met with Ms Gee, who was then the Human Resources
Director, to discuss why she
had taken personal leave, and the stress and other impacts of the work
environment on her. The outcome
of the meeting was that she was expected to
‘kind of jump straight back into everything without any accommodations or
addressing what led to me even needing all of that time off’:
a further meeting the following day, Ms Gee confirmed to Ms Abuy that the reason
no adjustments had been made, was because none
were recommended by the fitness
for work assessment. This surprised Ms Abuy, although she had not at that stage
seen the fitness
for work assessment: TS31, TS32.
Abuy formed the view that the Town did not act on recommendations made in the
fitness for work assessment. However, the only recommendations
the fitness for
work assessment contained, were:
(a) that Ms Abuy could safely
(b) that conversations about the Letter of Expectations commence on the first
day Ms Abuy was to return to work, with active listening,
paraphrasing, empathy
and validation to Ms Abuy’s interpretations.
response to a question as to whether there was anything else the Town could do
to support Ms Abuy to work safely, the psychologist
suggested appointments with
the psychologist and provision of a mentor.
Town therefore did implement the report’s recommendations (a) and (b).
Abuy detailed how the PIP process started, that she had 24 hours’ notice
to arrange a support person, and her attempts to
arrange a support person for
the PIP meeting of 12 June 2024, which was delayed by a day because of Ms
Gubbins’ absence from
work. She did not have a support person at the
meeting because her preferred support person, Ms Price, told her that she was
the 12 June 2024 meeting, Ms Gubbins and Ms Dillon wanted Ms Abuy to sign the
PIP plan so that it could take effect from the following
day. Ms Abuy asked for
time to give feedback on it. She was, then, allowed several days to review the
PIP plan: TS36.
PIP process period commenced on 17 June 2024. Ms Abuy met with Ms Dillon and Ms
Gubbins on that day to provide her feedback on
the document. After some minor
amendments were made, she signed and returned it, even though not all of her
concerns were addressed
and not all changes she wanted were adopted.
it was agreed that the PIP review and progress update meetings would occur each
Thursday morning. Ms Abuy received emails
recapping what was discussed at each
of these meetings, although she noted that the emails ‘did not utilise the
official document’:
Abuy did not dispute that she was reluctant to participate in the PIP review and
progress update meetings. She explained that this
was due to her feeling that
‘the conversations were being manipulated or certain things were being
omitted’ from the
recap emails and there was a lack of transparency. She
said she did not feel it was safe for her to ‘partake in verbal
with Ms Gubbins. She did not explain why it was unsafe to
participate in the meetings or why there was a lack of transparency: TS54.
examples of matters that were omitted from the recap emails were relatively
trivial and few. At a general level, she agreed the
recap emails were accurate
summaries of the meetings. She agreed that the key points recorded in the
summaries were discussed and
key messages from Ms Gubbins were relayed. She did
not agree with those messages.
asked to describe how she was performing against the expectations during the PIP
period, Ms Abuy said that she was regularly
updating the ‘teams
board,’ was ensuring her calendar was up to date and complete, and was
ensuring her lunch breaks
were taken at the times allocated: TS40. She said
these were the things she was actively or consciously doing to achieve the
expectations.
Many of the other expectations were things she naturally did
within the role, subconsciously and without conscious effort. However,
she considered she was meeting expectations and had demonstrated that she
Abuy gave evidence about the final PIP review meeting with Mr Dacombe and Ms
Marvelli on 1 August 2024. She said it was only a
brief meeting that lasted
around 10 minutes. She was told that the PIP process outcome was that she had
not met expectations and
so the Town was considering termination of her
employment. She was presented with a Deed of Settlement for her to consider as
alternative. She was asked to leave the premises and go home following the
meeting, although she had not yet been given notice of
the termination of her
employment. She was required to pack up her desk in the presence of Ms Marvelli
and other employees. She was
then escorted outside by Ms Marvelli. The process
made her feel ashamed and embarrassed.
Abuy did not agree to the Deed of Settlement and did not sign it.
was terminated with immediate effect, and that
she would be paid 2 weeks’
pay in lieu of notice: Ex A1.
described the termination as resulting in her feeling both financial and housing
insecurity, as she and her partner were living
in Town supplied accommodation
which she was required to then vacate. The termination compounded her feelings
of stress and anxiety,
and impacted on her sleep patterns.
late August 2024 Ms Abuy commenced a new full-time role with the Department of
Justice, having secured this employment within a
couple of weeks of the
termination. She had applied for that position while the PIP process was on
foot. Her income in the Department
of Justice role varies, but is around the
same as she was earning with the Town.
Sasha Gubbins
Gubbins said that when she initially started in the role of Advisor in January
2024, Ms Abuy was welcoming and friendly, but this
changed quite quickly in the
coming weeks, so that, by February 2024 the working relationship and their
communications had become
‘quite strained’: TS169.
Gubbins maintained a document to summarise and track her supervision of Ms Abuy:
Gubbins noted that, as a team of two people, she and Ms Abuy needed to work
closely together. Their workstations were within a
metre from one another. She
described the Graduate role as supporting the Advisor, where the Advisor made
overall decisions on what
projects to do and how to implement the community
safety plan, and the Graduate executing those projects. And yet the amount of
communication
between them was ‘relatively limited’: TS169.
Gubbins developed concerns about Ms Abuy’s communications, frequent
lateness in arriving to work, practices around taking
lunch breaks, and not
following her directions. She gave examples of how these concerns had arisen in
Position Description for the Graduate role requires the incumbent to possess
‘solid communication and interpersonal skills
with the ability to work
collaboratively with a wide range of stakeholders’: Ex A43. Ms Gubbins
explained this was essential
because collaboration is at the heart of almost all
of what the community safety team does. It is rare for community safety to work
on a project independently. Almost all projects are in collaboration with other
internal business units, such as youth development
or parks and gardens, or
external stakeholders in the community, such as family and domestic violence
service providers.
Gubbins formed the view that Ms Abuy was not really interested in the work that
the community safety team was doing and was not
being cooperative. This view was
informed by Ms Abuy’s comments to her, such as suggesting that she would
be away for certain
meetings, was intending to leave the job, or considered
important projects to be ‘nothing’: TS175.
Gubbins gave her account of meetings with Ms Abuy during the Letter of
Expectation process, and the PIP process, confirming the
accuracy of various
documents summarising what was discussed in those meetings.
cross-examination, Ms Gubbins agreed that there was a breakdown in the working
relationship between her and Ms Abuy. She also agreed
that there were times when
she felt personally attacked by Ms Abuy. But she did not agree that
interpersonal conflicts contributed
to her perception of Ms Abuy’s
performance. She said that she tried hard to remain objective, and recognised
that when Ms Abuy
applied herself, she was highly competent. She also relied on
other people within the organisation, including Human Resources personnel,
make their assessments and verify hers. Ultimately, as Ms Abuy’s line
leader, she felt it was her responsibility to manage
performance.
Ciara Dillon
Dillon has been a Human Resources business partner at the Town since March 2024.
At around the time she commenced in the role,
she was made aware that Ms Abuy
had been stood down from work for the purpose of a fitness for work assessment
and that there had
been a Letter of Expectation process commenced but she was
not directly involved in either of those matters.
Dillon’s involvement with Ms Abuy really only commenced with the PIP
process, starting from early June 2024.
Dillon described the PIP process as being driven by the performance counselling
paragraphs of the Discipline Procedure.
Dillon said that the initial draft of the PIP plan was prepared by Ms Gubbins
with input from Ms Savill and Ms Fox. She took the
draft to the PIP
implementation meeting of 12 June 2024 with an understanding that changes could
still be made, once feedback from
Ms Abuy had been received.
Dillon could not recall Ms Abuy providing specific feedback during the 12 June
2024 meeting itself, but she responded to it in
writing over the weekend, and
during a further meeting on 17 June 2024. She recalled Ms Abuy had raised
concerns about how her performance
would be measured. Ms Dillon said that she
and Ms Gubbins worked though the PIP plan’s improvement goals with Ms
Abuy, point
by point, and in detail.
Dillon maintained notes of the PIP check-in meetings, and gave evidence as to
her recollection of Ms Abuy’s conduct and contributions
to those meetings.
She noted that there was a final informal check-in meeting on 25 July 2024 at
which Ms Gubbins told Ms Abuy that
her progress was not tracking well, that the
outcome of the PIP process would be communicated at a final meeting of 1 August
and that the outcome may include termination.
Dillon also recalled meeting with Ms Abuy after the PIP check-in meeting on 25
July 2024, at Ms Abuy’s request, during which
Ms Abuy asked for
information about the Town’s grievance process. Ms Dillon asked Ms Abuy
whether she had details that she
wanted to provide about a grievance and if she
would like to raise a grievance, but Ms Abuy declined to provide any specific
Ms Dillon was therefore unaware of what grievance Ms Abuy had in mind
or who it concerned. Ms Abuy said that if she was to make a
grievance she would
email it through.
or about 31 July 2024 Ms Dillon compiled her observations about the history of
Ms Abuy’s performance and the PIP process
into a report with a
recommendation for termination.
Mark Dacombe
Dacombe is currently the Town’s CEO. He commenced in the role of Interim
Director of Community Services for the Town on 10
June 2024. Soon after he
started, he was made aware that a PIP process had been implemented for Ms Abuy.
His involvement, however,
was limited to receiving Ms Dillon’s report and
recommendation for termination at the end of the PIP process.
Dacombe said he considered the recommendation carefully, and discussed it with
Ms Savill, Ms Dillon, and Ms Marvelli. He was satisfied
the recommendation
should be followed.
that end, he and Ms Marvelli met with Ms Abuy on 1 August 2024 to inform Ms Abuy
that the PIP had not resulted in ‘significant
progress towards
improvement’: TS203. He told Ms Abuy that it was his view that they had
reached a point where termination
was appropriate. He explained that Ms Abuy
would receive two weeks’ pay in lieu of notice and any accrued leave
entitlements.
A Deed of Settlement was discussed as an alternative to this
said there was also discussion about Ms Abuy’s tenancy in the Town’s
residential property. He said the usual position
was to allow two weeks for the
property to be vacated, but that the Town was willing to extend this to four
weeks if Ms Abuy entered
into the Deed of Settlement.
to Mr Dacombe, Ms Abuy did not provide any substantive response to the proposal
that the employment be terminated, although
she had the opportunity to do so.
How should Ms Abuy’s performance have been assessed?
fundamental platform of Ms Abuy’s case is her argument that the
Town’s performance criteria were not proper indications
performance. Ms Abuy asserts that her performance could only be assessed by
reference to ‘assignment completion’
and nothing else. She says this
is the effect of the Industrial Agreement’s classification system for a
level 4 employee. If
this is right, then the Town did not have a valid
performance justification for termination.
41 of the Industrial Agreement sets out classifications for the purpose of the
Town’s salary system. Clause 41 is prefaced:
Classification contained within this Agreement consists of entry level
skill-based ‘Levels’ defined according to the
following skill
descriptors and in [sic] read in conjunction with the Town’s relevant
salary system....
Positions will be classified in accordance with the level definitions
provided for in this Agreement. Job descriptions shall be used
as the primary
source of classifying positions. The position shall be evaluated and considered
against the classification definitions....
Level 4 classification is described as:
Level 4 covers an Employee
undertaking duties and responsibilities in excess of Level 3 and is the entry
level for a technical and
a trades Employee.
At this level employees work under general direction in the application of
procedures, methods and guidelines which are well established.
Employees will be
responsible for managing and planning their own work
General features of this level involve solving problems of limited difficulty
using knowledge, judgement and work organisational skills
acquired through
qualifications and/or previous work experience. Assistance is available from
senior employees. Employees may be
required to oversee and/or guide the work of
a limited number of lower classified employees.
Training and Experience
Upon appointment:
Qualifications or relevant experience in accordance with the requirements of
work in this level which may be acquired through:
A trade certificate or diploma or certificate IV or equivalent;
Certificate III and subsequent relevant experience leading to the development
of areas of specialisation through a depth of skills’)
completion of
accredited/industry-based training courses equivalent to a Certificate IV
(non-trade); and/or
an equivalent knowledge gained through any other combination of education,
training and/or experience
a variety of tasks which require a sound working knowledge of relevant trade,
technical or administrative practices, including
limited creative or planning or
design functions, and require an awareness of the relevant theoretical or policy
Knowledge is applied to recurring circumstances, at a level of complexity
equivalent to using a range of computer software applications
to assist with job
assignments, to setting up, using and demonstrating a range of standard
procedures, equipment use and/or experiments
or to applying skills equivalent to
a trade qualification.
May involve the application of specialist skills, e.g. producing documents
involving complex layouts, instrument calibration or maintenance,
or guidance to
others in the use of a limited range of equipment. May also include the
operations of tools, plant machinery and/or
equipment in accordance with the
requirements of the position. Performance of trades and nontrade tasks
incidental to the work.
and Problem Solving
Solve standard problems within an
established framework or body of knowledge by
Applying a range of procedures and work methods,
Being proficient in and interpreting a set of relatively straightforward
rules, guidelines, manuals or technical procedures, and
Selecting from a range and combination of possible responses, based on some
understanding of the principles or policies underlying
established procedures,
practices or systems.
Will use operational experience to monitor and contribute to local procedures
and systems.
Supervision
and Independence
General direction.
Direction is provided on the assignments to be undertaken, with the occupant
determining the appropriate use of established methods
and sequences, where
choices are made which require some understanding of a well-defined policy
framework or recourse to technical
knowledge. Assistance is available from more
senior staff.
May be responsible for supervising others performing a range of tasks within
a single work unit, providing on the job training and
assistance to others,
directing staff and/or providing contributions to assignments or projects.
May undertake standalone work appropriate to this level.
Organisational
Relationships and Impact
An Employee at this level requires
effective communication skills to enable them to communicate with clients, other
Employees and
members of the public and in the resolution of routine and usual
Apply a sound knowledge of the impact of the activities undertaken on other
related functions or sections. Provide advice or assistance
based on some depth
of knowledge in own area. Assist others by providing information about
procedures, rules or techniques, and by
having an appropriate understanding of
procedures and selecting between work methods and sequences. Where complexities
arise, suggest
solutions and or seek guidance on changes to procedures,
schedules or routines from senior staff.
level 4 classification description refers to ‘general direction’
This is defined as:
Direction is provided on the assignments to be
undertaken, with the occupant determining the appropriate use of established
and sequences. There is some scope to determine an approach in the
absence of established procedures or detailed instruction, but
guidance is
Performance is checked by assignment completion.
(emphasis added)
is contrasted with classifications requiring ‘close supervision’
where ‘work is frequently checked’,
routine supervision where
‘checking is selective rather than constant’ and ‘broad
direction where ‘Performance
will be measured against objectives’.
It would appear that for higher classifications involving ‘broad
direction’,
work is not checked by a supervisor, but rather, performance
. For lower classifications, supervision involves some degree
Abuy’s contention that the effect of the description of level 4
supervision is to limit the way performance for her role
is measured is wrong.
Clause 41 is about how to classify positions, based on the positions’
requirements. It does not deal
with performance in positions. The definition of
‘general direction’ reflects the level or degree of supervision
in a role for the purpose of correctly classifying the role. It does
not dictate either the process of, nor the criteria for, performance
assessment.
reference in the definition to ‘checking’, particularly contrasted
with ‘measuring’ is a description of
the degree of oversight a
supervisor of the level exercises, not an indication of how performance in the
role is measured, let alone
what the measurements of performance are.
Abuy’s construction is narrow, pedantic, ignores the relevant industrial
and textual context and is out of touch with industrial
suggest that an employee whose classification involves ‘general
direction’ can only have their performance assessed
by reference to
‘assignment completion’ is nonsensical. If that were true, an
employee must be assessed as performing
satisfactorily if they complete an
assignment, even if the completed assignment is of poor quality, or was
completed in an unsafe
manner, was completed late, or was completed by deceitful
means. Indeed, on Ms Abuy’s construction of the Industrial Agreement,
Town would be unable to intervene or act in the event any employee was
persistently late to work or absent or dilatory in completing
punctuality and timeliness are not part of the classification descriptions.
no merit to the suggestion that the Industrial Agreement should be read in this
way. Accordingly, the way in which Ms
Abuy went about fulfilling her role
responsibilities was not immune from her supervisor’s or the Town’s
Abuy also, incidentally, submitted that this provision of the Industrial
Agreement ‘stipulates that it is up to the occupant
to decide how and what
sequence they will complete these assignments’: Applicant’s Written
Closing Submissions [19].
That is not what the Industrial Agreement says. The
occupant decides in what sequence the established methods are deployed for an
assignment, not in what sequence assignments are to be commenced or completed.
This is another instance of Ms Abuy selectively and
narrowly construing the
Industrial Agreement.
Abuy was confident that her reading of the Industrial Agreement was correct. Her
misconceived views about these matters might have
fed into the way she went
performance concerns.
Did Ms Abuy’s performance justify improvement action?
Reliability
Abuy submitted that rigid attendance rules were only applicable to employees who
work according to rosters or in special circumstances.
Those working in
non-rostered roles, such as herself, were not subject to such restrictions and
generally worked business hours.
She did not produce any evidence to establish
this assertion was consistent with the custom and practice at the Town. Nor did
provide a cogent argument as to why attendance rules did not apply to
Abuy produced copies of her time sheets for the period 27 September 2023 to 7
2023: Ex A15.
These time sheets pre-date Ms Gubbins’ commencement
in the role of Advisor. They show that while Ms Abuy was recording an average
at least 38 hours per week prior to 7 November 2023, her start and finish times
were variable. The earliest start time was 8:00
a.m. but the latest start time
was 12:30pm. She was finishing work from 4:10pm to 8:30pm. Breaks were generally
taken at or after
2:00pm. This was at a time when Ms Abuy was required to
commence work at 9:00am.
Abuy suggested that until Ms Gubbins commenced as her line leader, her previous
line leaders and managers did not scrutinise her
start and finish times, or
break times. She said ‘[p]rior to Sasha Gubbins commencing her tenure, I
was never subject to such
stern break-time regulations or stringent work hour
conditions – instead, I was afforded the freedom to independently manage
my work schedule’: Applicant’s Written Closing Submissions [139].
reject this assertion. On 12 October 2023, that is, during the period covered by
the time sheets discussed above and several months
prior to Ms Gubbins
commencing in the role of Ms Abuy’s line leader, Ms Savill emailed Ms Abuy
As discussed, there are a few areas that I would like to
reiterate the importance of developing as part of your professional
have been a few instances in which you have arrived late to work, at times,
without communication. As discussed, your agreed
hours of work will be 9am to
5:30pm (1hr lunch break) or 9am to 5pm (30min lunch break). We understand that
emergencies happen, but
it's important that you notify us if you're going to be
late and try to minimise such instances. If there is any deviation from these
hours, please ensure that you inform your line leader at your earliest
opportunity. It is our responsibilities as employees that
we manage our fitness
for work and this includes ensuring we get enough rest and are well prepared for
use of Outlook is our preferred method of managing our time and also ensuring
that there is visibility within our teams on where
staff are. Please ensure that
you are scheduling lunch breaks and meetings in outlook and ensure that your
line leader has access
to your calendar for these purposes.
is critical to our success as a team and is one of our organisation core values.
It's important that we communicate effectively,
support each other, and
collaborate. We're here to work together and help each other succeed and
sometimes this means that we look
to engage outside of a transactional task. If
you have any concerns, feedback, or need assistance with tasks, please don't
to reach out.
23 October 2023, Ms Savill emailed Ms Abuy in clear terms (Ex
It was noticed that you were not in at work this morning until
As discussed, and as mentioned below, if there is ANY deviation from your
normal hours of work, this must be communicated to your
line leader.
Please ensure that you adhere to this expectation moving forward.
Gubbins’ evidence was that Ms Abuy would often attend work noticeably
late, arriving 20 or 30 minutes late. Further, Ms Gubbins
would not always
receive communication from Ms Abuy about her lateness, so that Ms Gubbins did
not know Ms Abuy’s whereabouts.
She noted that Ms Abuy was skipping lunch
breaks and then leaving work early or taking lunch breaks at late or odd times.
was concerned that there was a risk Ms Abuy was not completing her
contracted average of 38 hours per week.
Gubbins’ evidence in this regard was not challenged. Ms Abuy did not
attempt to demonstrate that she was consistently or
mostly punctual in her
attendance at work. She did test how Ms Gubbins assessed her punctuality, by
putting to Ms Gubbins that there
were occasions when Ms Gubbins was not herself
at her desk, and was unable to verify whether Ms Abuy had arrived on time. Ms
conceded that was the case, but said ‘for the most part I was
around...I was there with a sufficient amount of time to get
an idea of what was
going on’ (TS189). This does not mean, as Ms Abuy submits, that Ms
Gubbins’ concerns were based on
mere speculation and assumptions.
Ms Gubbins had concerns, and that they were justified, is corroborated by the
documents in evidence. For example:
(a) On 8 February 2024 Ms
Gubbins notes in an email to Ms Abuy (Ex R11):
When you were running late yesterday you texted me to let me know, which was
very appreciated. However, I didn’t hear anything
this morning and you
weren’t at your desk until 9:20. Confirming our agreement that you will
text me if you are going to be
any more than 10 minutes late arriving in the
morning. Even if you will be less than 10 minutes late, a courtesy text is
(b) On 18 March 2024 at 3:05pm there is a Teams message from Ms Gubbins
asking Ms Abuy ‘where are you?’ to which the response
returned from my break outside...’: Ex R6.
(c) On 5 April 2024 at 3:55pm there is a Teams message from Ms Gubbins asking
Ms Abuy ‘Where are you? Pre-start is happening:’
(d) Ms Gubbins’ file note of 17 April 2024 records that the previous
week, Ms Abuy had taken two days’ leave without discussing
Gubbins in advance, and had arrived to work 10-15 minutes late on Monday 15
April, with no explanation provided: Ex R16.
overall picture is that Ms Abuy’s work attendance was inconsistent over a
period of time leading to 15 April 2024. It was
a matter that was repeatedly
raised with her, yet she appeared to take no heed of what was expected and
required of her, consistent
with her unwarranted pretentions of having
unfettered autonomy and flexibility.
Town acted reasonably in seeking performance improvement in this
Following reasonable directions
Abuy submitted that the ‘following reasonable directions’ target was
not a fair or valid improvement area because it
lacked objective standards,
ignored critical contextual factors, included vague and subjective expectations,
and placed a burden
on her to manage and resolve barriers to compliance.
cross-examination, Ms Gubbins described her concern about this aspect of Ms
Abuy’s performance (TS184):
I would say for the most part,
Ajah, you did follow directions where you agreed with those directions. The
issue arose where there
were instances if you didn’t agree with the
directions that you were provided with. That’s when I would generally find
that those directions they either wouldn’t be followed, or we’d
spend quite some time going backwards and forwards about
whether or not those
directions were to be followed.
example of a direction that Ms Gubbins gave Ms Abuy prior to 15 April 2024 was
for her to take her lunch break no later than 2:00pm
(see email dated 8 February
2024: Ex R11).
But on 20 March 2024, Ms Gubbins had reason to counsel Ms Abuy at
a meeting which was scheduled for 3:00pm because Ms Abuy had not
yet taken her
lunch break at the time the meeting took place. Ms Gubbins had to reiterate her
instruction that lunch breaks should
be taken between 12:00pm and 2:00pm, with
any break outside that time to be entered in her calendar: Ex R14.
17 April 2024, Ms Gubbins recorded that Ms Abuy was not including her lunch
breaks and time away from her desk in her calendar.
Further, Ms Gubbins recorded
that Ms Abuy told her in a meeting on 17 April 2024 that she would only follow
reasonable directions
given to her and she did not believe this was a reasonable
sentiment was repeated by Ms Abuy in her evidence. She said she viewed the
direction as unreasonable and so one which she did
not need to comply with. In
cross-examination she said that the directions were not lawful directions,
because there was nothing
in her contract or in policy or anything legally
binding on her to fulfil those directions. She elaborated that ‘there was
never any justification or further context about why those things were suddenly
being put in place’: TS90.
her Written Closing Submissions, Ms Abuy submitted that ‘[t]he requirement
to take lunch between 12:00pm and 2:00pm every
day was overly rigid, inconducive
to my productivity, and failed to consider operational needs, workload demands,
preferences, or
reasonable flexibility’. She saw the direction as an
‘unnecessary level of control’ that was inconsistent with
position classification [137]-[138].
relevant requirements had been in place at least since Ms Savill’s email
of 12 October 2023, referred to above. That email
also provided clear and
coherent justification for the directions.
any event, if Ms Abuy’s position is that a direction is only reasonable
and need only be complied with if a justification
for it is given, she is wrong.
Justice Allanson described employees’ duty to obey reasonable directions
by their employer in
Finlay v Commissioner of
[2022] WASC 272
(citations omitted):
fundamental term implied by law into all employment contracts that employees are
contractually obliged to follow the lawful
and reasonable directions of their
employer. At common law, an employee's obligation of obedience is to lawful
commands - commands
which involve no illegality, which fall within the scope of
the contract of service, and are reasonable. Reasonableness is not a
requirement, but is the standard or test by which the common law determines
whether an order is lawful. Reasonableness is
not determined in a vacuum, but
rather by reference to 'the nature of the employment, the established usages
affecting it, the common
practices which exist and the general provisions of the
instrument, in this case an award, governing the relationship...'.
direction was plainly a lawful and reasonable direction in this sense. The
Industrial Agreement obliged the Town to afford employees
an unpaid meal break
of at least thirty minutes for shifts greater than five hours: cl 11.6. A meal
break could be delayed only in
‘unforeseen circumstances’ in which
case the break must be taken ‘as soon as practicable.’ Although cl
does not expressly state the time that the meal break is to be taken, the
Town’s obligations under cl 11.6 could only be fulfilled
if a meal break
is ordinarily taken within or at five hours from the shift commencement.
circumstance where Ms Abuy had demonstrated a history of failing to take a meal
break as cl 11.6 required, it was reasonable for
the Town to give her express
directions to do so, and for the Town to require her to diarise those breaks so
that her compliance
with the direction could be monitored. In this context, I
reject Ms Abuy’s criticism that the expectation she follow reasonable
direction lacked objective standards, included vague and subjective
expectations, or placed any unreasonable burden on her. Her duty
to obey the
directions was fundamental, and the expectations that were set out were clear
and readily achievable.
there may be other examples of directions that Ms Gubbins was concerned were not
being followed by Ms Abuy, this single example
is sufficient for me to be
satisfied that the Town was justified in seeking improvement in Ms Abuy’s
performance in this area.
Respectful communications
Abuy audaciously submitted that the Town did not provide evidence that she was
failing to meet expectations about her communications
before they were imposed
as performance measures. It provided ample evidence. It is telling that Ms Abuy
did not consider the evidence
reflected on her performance in this area.
are just two examples of communications between Ms Gubbins and Ms Abuy (shown in
blue) the Town relied on. They speak for themselves.
Town was looking for improvement in the way that Ms Abuy interacted with other
people, and in particular, her line leader. It
wanted Ms Abuy to become less
adversarial in her communications and more collaborative. The way Ms Abuy
interacted with stakeholders
reflected on the Town’s reputation. The way
she interacted with colleagues had the potential to impact on the effectiveness
and productivity of her team, as well as the morale and wellbeing of team
members. The Town was justified in seeking improvement
in Ms Abuy’s
performance in this area.
Did Ms Abuy’s performance improve sufficiently?
PIP process commenced on 17 June 2024 and ended on 1 August 2024.
Abuy submits that she met the expectations of the PIP plan, and therefore
termination was not an appropriate proceeding action.
Her evidence was that
throughout the PIP process, she documented her progress in a spreadsheet, which
she tendered as Exhibit A14.
She conceded however, that this spreadsheet was not
shared with the Town during PIP meetings, or at any other time.
Abuy quantified the precise number of instances where her spreadsheet showed she
had followed reasonable directions, and met expectations
around communications
and collaboration, met the Town’s Core Values, and met deadlines for
community safety deliverables.
Town does not take issue with the fact that Ms Abuy sometimes met its
performance expectations before and during the PIP process.
What the PIP process
was designed to achieve was improvement in performance, resulting in such
expectations being consistently achieved.
real question, therefore, is whether there were times when Ms Abuy failed to
meet the Town’s reasonable performance expectations.
selective tally does not assist her in this regard.
Gubbins’s evidence was that Ms Abuy’s punctuality and attendance in
the office did improve after 17 June 2024. She
provided Ms Abuy with feedback on
other areas where she felt Ms Abuy was doing well. For example, her feedback at
the 20 June 2024
check-in mostly reported that things were going well in
relation to following reasonable directions, reliability, and communication
collaboration, although Ms Gubbins had identified a couple of instances of
miscommunication or potential for improved communications:
from 11 July 2024, Ms Gubbins’ view was that still more needed to be done
by Ms Abuy to demonstrate a commitment to
follow all reasonable directions, that
improvement was still needed in relation to communications about work hour
variations and
private appointments, and significant improvement was needed in
relation to communication and collaboration.
is not necessary for me to consider every instance where Ms Abuy is alleged to
have underperformed. There are at least three clear
examples of failures which,
on their own, justified the Town’s decision. These three examples are not
necessarily the only
ones that demonstrate Ms Abuy’s performance remained
unsatisfactory.
first relates to the way Ms Abuy dealt with a dispute with Ms Gubbins in
relation to a leave request. The Town’s Leave Management
relevantly provides:
1. Employees shall be entitled to leave
consistent with the provisions of the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(WA), National Employment Standards (for Parental Leave only), Town’s
Industrial Agreement, their contract of employment and
the Local Government
(Long Service Leave) Regulations (WA).
2.3.5 Employees are entitled to use personal leave when they are absent:
2.3.5.a due to personal illness or injury affecting the employee; or
2.3.5.b to provide care or support to a member of the employees family or
household because of illness or injury affecting the
2.3.5.c due to an unexpected emergency affecting the employee or a
member of the employees’ family or household.
2.3.6 Employees shall be required to provide a medical certificate from a
registered medical practitioner; or other supporting
documentation that would
satisfy a reasonable person in the following situations:
2.3.4.c Where an employee claims a day off as personal leave on an ordinary
working day either immediately before or after a weekend,
public holiday, annual
leave, or rostered day off;
2.3.7 Acceptable forms of evidence include:
2.3.7.a A medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner; or
2.3.7.b Childcare or school exclusion letter; or
2.3.7.c Statutory declaration
Abuy made a request to take one day of personal leave for Friday 21 June 2024.
She specified in the leave request that the reason
for the application was
‘appointment.’
application was supported by a statutory declaration (Ex R23) that just
‘I required one day (7.6 hours) of personal leave
absence on Friday 21 June 2024 due to attending an appointment’
statutory declaration provided no details of where the appointment was, the
nature of the appointment or the purpose of the appointment,
such that it
qualified for the grant of 7.6 hours of personal leave. It could have been an
appointment for a manicure, which of course
would not meet the conditions for
personal leave. It could have been a GP appointment of 15 or 30 minutes, which
would not meet the
conditions for 7.6 hours’ personal leave.
Gubbins, reasonably, advised Ms Abuy that the statutory declaration did not
provide sufficient support for personal leave. Her
email to Ms Abuy
‘We’re looking for something that confirms that
the reason you were taking leave meets the criteria for personal
Gubbins asked Ms Abuy to provide evidence to substantiate the reasons for
applying for the personal leave that matched the criteria,
namely personal
illness or injury, to provide care or support to a family member because of
illness or injury affecting the family
member, or an unexpected emergency
affecting the employee or a family member.
Abuy did not accept Ms Gubbins’ decision. She insisted ‘statutory
declarations are an admissible form of evidence for
personal leave’,
quoting clause 2.3.7 of the Leave Management Procedure and completely missing or
ignoring Ms Gubbins’
point that the statutory declaration did not link the
leave request to a reason that meets the criteria for personal leave.
Abuy did state in her email ‘I have utilised my Personal Leave entitlement
due to personal illness’ but the Leave Management
Procedure does not list
an email as an acceptable form of evidence for the purpose of taking personal
Ms Gubbins explaining clearly and logically why the statutory declaration did
not provide appropriate information to confirm
the leave was classified as
personal leave, Ms Abuy remained staunch, brazenly alleging that it was Ms
Gubbins who had misinterpreted
the requirements. This is her email to Ms Gubbins
of 26 June 2024 (Ex R24):
Thank you for the elaboration, however, there is no confusion on my part.
To clarify to you, I did not state whether it was or was not specifically a
medical appointment that I was required to attend, nor
am I obligated to provide
sufficient details on the reason for leave being taken
it is requested in addition to the supplied evidence.
Furthermore, HR have already reiterated that a valid Statutory Declaration
can be submitted as a permissible support document that
serves as alternative to
a medical certificate; therefore, it is sufficient evidence to satisfy Clause
24.3 which you have evidently
misinterpreted.
The following resource contains valuable information that may help increase
your understanding of this:
https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/talking-to-your-employer-aboutillness#:~:text=Your%20employer%20has%20the%20right%20to%20ask%20you,of%20your%20illness%20or%20injury.
If you need any further explanation or confirmation, please don’t
hesitate to contact HR!
(original emphasis)
26 June 2024 Ms Abuy was notified by an automated message generated by the
Town’s payroll software that Ms Gubbins had approved
her leave request. I
do not know why the leave request was approved. Ms Abuy had still not provided
evidence that would satisfy a
reasonable person of her entitlement to take
personal leave. And yet, Ms Abuy sent the following passive-aggressive and
communication by email to Ms Gubbins (Ex R23):
approving my request. Glad to see your adherence to this organisational policy
that is in fact legislation as well.
I believe an apology would be appropriate and greatly appreciated in this
situation to acknowledge your error, and to ensure we can
move forward
positively.
Abuy maintained throughout the PIP process that her communications to Ms Gubbins
were appropriate, and that Ms Gubbins should apologise
or admit she made an
Abuy may have thought she was right, but she was clearly in the wrong here. Her
communications made no allowance for the fact that
she might have been wrong, or
that there might be some grey area. Her communications were adversarial and made
no room for working
though a solution. They were disrespectful and hurtful. This
was precisely the type of interaction which the Town was endeavouring,
PIP process, to avoid. It was an opportunity for Ms Abuy to demonstrate that she
had improved in her approach to communicating
and relating. She missed it by a
this instance occurred relatively early in the PIP process, Ms Abuy maintained
her position that her communications were satisfactory
until the end of the PIP
process. When the matter was raised with her during the PIP process, her written
response was ‘[c]ould
you please clearly identify and articulate your
concerns regarding the tone of my communication in this matter, providing
references to support your claims?’: Ex R25.
second example of a failure to demonstrate sufficient improvement was in the
area of following reasonable directions. At a PIP
check-in meeting on 27 June
2024, Ms Abuy was directed to remove training from her calendar if she was not
intending to attend it.
This direction was confirmed in an email dated 1 July
2024 summarising the meeting outcomes.
Abuy responded to this direction by email on 6 July 2024 (Ex R25):
As mentioned in the meeting, I am the primary user of my calendar,
and it is customised to suit my personal workflow and productivity
requirements.
Therefore, I am unable to prioritise your individual preferences in this matter,
although I appreciate your proposed
suggestion. To reiterate again, the
management of my calendar is based on my own consumption needs which are
essential for achieving
and maximising my efficiency.
Abuy maintained at the hearing of these proceedings that the direction was
unreasonable. In cross-examination (TS107) she said
this was because:
[I]t’s overstepping to ask someone to operate their calendar
in a different way, just because you’re confused by it. I
think that just
impedes on boundaries. I guess, my response is well articulated enough, that I
think my point is conveyed
direction was given to Ms Abuy in circumstances where Ms Gubbins’ had
ongoing concerns about Ms Abuy’s reliability
and availability. Ms Gubbins
had, for several months, been trying to find ways to ensure she had adequate
oversight of Ms Abuy’s
whereabouts and activities, and had better
communication from Ms Abuy about these matters. Her direction, which sought to
the calendar accurately recorded Ms Abuy’s activities and
whereabouts, was not unreasonable in this context. The Town was justified
concluding that this was an instance of Ms Abuy failing to meet the expectation
that she follow reasonable directions.
Abuy again pushed back against a direction Ms Gubbins gave her in communications
exchanged with Ms Gubbins on 18 July 2024 via
technically Ms Abuy agreed to comply with the direction, her response made it
clear that she considered the direction unreasonable.
In doing so, she mistook
the direction, which was not to take a break at 10:00am but rather, to try to
take a break in advance when
other commitments might interfere with the usual
break time. Further, rather than explain why she was unable to take a break in
on the particular occasion, or seek to clarify what Ms Gubbins intended,
she turned the exchange into a personal criticism of Ms
third example of Ms Abuy’s lack of progress in meeting expectations was Ms
Abuy’s conduct in the PIP meetings themselves.
Ms Gubbins alerted Ms Abuy
to the fact that the PIP check-in meetings were an ‘opportunity for you to
demonstrate your collaboration
and communication skills’: Ex A34.
Dillon made notes of the 8 July 2024 PIP check-in meeting: Ex R26. They record
that Ms Abuy’s responses were limited and
she displayed a lack of
willingness to engage. Ms Dillon’s evidence was that she observed, over a
number of the PIP check-in
meetings, that Ms Abuy would bring in her computer
and would type away ‘quite intensely’ but when questions were asked
she either would not respond or her responses would be in one word. If she
responded it would often be something like ‘I would
prefer to respond in
writing’ or ‘please just send me the question in writing and
I’ll respond in writing’:
Abuy was ten minutes late in arriving at the 17 July 2024 check-in meeting at
8:40am, without providing an apology: Ex R32.
Dillon’s notes of Ms Abuy’s conduct in the 25 July 2024 PIP check-in
meeting (Ex R34) records:
Ajah was typing notes and looking down for
the entirety of the meeting. She very rarely looked up to make eye contact and
little to no response for most questions asked. Ajah had no
contribution to add in how she was achieving the targets.
Gubbins’ summary of the same meeting (Ex R35) was consistent with Ms
Dillon’s evidence.
Abuy did not challenge this evidence. She argued that her silence in the PIP
check-in meetings should not be taken to be evidence
of not engaging in the
process. However, Ms Abuy was on notice that the manner in which she
communicated and interacted was being
gauged in these meetings. At the 8 July
2024 PIP check-in Ms Abuy said she considered the meeting was not a productive
use of time.
She was right, in the sense that to demonstrate she was meeting
performance expectations she had to communicate her understanding
of what was
required of her, of where she was failing to meet those expectations, and what
she would do to improve. She did not do
any of those things.
the conclusion of the 25 July 2024 PIP check-in (Ex R36), Ms Gubbins concluded
There remains development needed in communication when
discussing directions or suggestions
Overall, I feel there has been a decrease in communication this week, and
progress in communication and collaboration is not where
it needs to be.
is not for me to assume the role of Ms Abuy’s manager in considering
whether the dismissal is or is not unfair:
The Australian Rail, Tram and
Bus Industry Union of Employees, West Australian Branch v Public Transport
Authority of Western Australia
[2013] WAIRC 00344:
(2013) 93 WAIG 618
20. Ms Abuy must demonstrate that the Town’s dismissal was unfair, for
present purposes, by showing that her performance
had improved so as to meet the
Town’s reasonable expectations, such that there was no valid reason for
her dismissal. She has
not done so.
Was the performance improvement process unfair?
Abuy has failed to demonstrate that there was not a valid reason for her
dismissal. I must therefore now consider her grounds that
relate to the process
of the dismissal.
denial of procedural fairness is but one factor in determining whether a
dismissal is harsh, oppressive or unfair:
Shire of Esperance v
. A denial of procedural fairness on its own will not necessarily
mean that dismissal is unfair. The test in the unfair dismissal
application is
ultimately whether the Town has abused its right to dismiss as outlined by the
Industrial Appeal Court in
Undercliffe Nursing Home
made attempts prior to the hearing of this matter to pin down exactly what Ms
Abuy’s case was in relation to her allegations
of procedural deficiencies.
At the commencement of the hearing, I listed ten grounds which I had gleaned
from Ms Abuy’s written
submissions filed prior to the hearing. Ms Abuy
agreed my list was an accurate statement of her grounds, and she added one
Abuy’s written closing submissions occasionally deviated from the 11
grounds articulated at the commencement of the hearing.
To ensure fairness to
the Town, I have only considered the 11 grounds that were raised at the
commencement of the hearing. Any which
Ms Abuy tacked on after the conclusion of
the hearing should not be able to be pursued, because the Town had no
opportunity to answer
them by evidence at the hearing.
Was the PIP process unfair because it was not preceded by performance coaching
and performance counselling?
Abuy says she was denied the benefit of performance coaching and performance
counselling as set out in the Discipline Procedure,
before the PIP
asserts that the Letter of Expectation process was neither performance coaching
nor performance counselling for the purpose of
the Discipline Procedure. It was
not performance coaching because:
(a) The Discipline Procedure
requires that the manager provide the relevant feedback and coaching.
(b) The relevant manager was Ms Savill.
(c) Ms Gubbins, and not Ms Savill, conducted the initial discussions about
the Letter of Expectation and authored the Letter of Expectation.
(d) The Letter of Expectation did not expressly refer to performance feedback
and coaching
(e) The PIP plan however described the 10 April 2024 meeting about the
Letter of Expectation as our ‘performance counselling
Abuy says the Letter of Expectation could not be performance counselling either.
The reason is unclear but it is inconsequential
as the Town does not rely on the
Letter of Expectation process as constituting performance counselling for the
purpose of the Discipline
do not agree that the word ‘Manager’ under the Discipline Procedure
can only mean Ms Savill. The Discipline Procedure
does not define who is a
‘Manager.’ But there are 2 reasons why I reject Ms Abuy’s
narrow reading of the Discipline
Procedure. First, paragraph 4.0(a) of the
Discipline Procedure says:
Where termination of employment is being
considered, the following steps must be actioned:
Manager with their People & Culture Representative will review information
collected from the investigation, including the
employee's response concerning
the allegations (e.g. performance history). The Manager and People & Culture
will then provide
a recommendation to the appropriate Manager/ Director. A
decision to terminate an employee must be endorsed by the CEO.
clearly contemplates at least two levels of management, and two managers
involved in different stages of the Discipline Procedure:
‘Manager’ who conducts the performance counselling, and the
‘appropriate Manager’ to whom that first
manager reports. The word
‘appropriate’ allows for flexibility in how the Discipline Procedure
applies, so that those
who are most appropriate to be involved in the various
stages, can be.
the Discipline Procedure should be interpreted in a way that best fits its
purpose, which is to ensure employees are informed
of performance expectations
and standards of behaviour, and for the Town to assist employees to improve
their performance. This purpose
is achieved through the requirement to provide
employees with ‘feedback’ about their performance. The individuals
placed to give feedback, discuss performance and provide assistance to
improve performance, is the employee’s immediate supervisor
leader, whether or not their title is ‘Manager’.
Abuy made no argument as to why the narrow meaning of ‘Manager’
should be preferred.
if I am wrong, it does not assist Ms Abuy. Because if Ms Savill is the relevant
Manager under the Discipline Procedure, then
there has still been compliant
in October 2023. Additionally,
Ms Savill was involved in the Letter of
Expectation process meetings of 6 and 10 May 2024: TS25, TS27.
fact that the PIP plan referred to the 10 April 2024 meeting as performance
counselling is of no consequence either. Performance
counselling is one of any
of a number of descriptions that could have been given to the 10 April 2024
meeting. It could have been
described as a ‘performance discussion’,
or simply a ‘meeting.’ The use of the phrase ‘performance
counselling’ in the PIP plan does not operate as a legal conclusion either
that the 10 April 2024 meeting was performance counselling
for the purpose of
the Discipline Procedure (which Ms Abuy denied, in any event), or that the PIP
process was not performance counselling
for the purpose of the Discipline
Procedure. The Discipline Procedure does not preclude performance being managed
in ways that are
in addition to the steps the Discipline Procedure requires.
can be no question that Ms Abuy was given ample feedback about her performance,
and areas of concern about her performance,
before the PIP process was
instigated. Much of this is recorded at paragraphs [19]-[23], [28]-[30] and
[105]-[106] above commencing
with the meetings Ms Savill had with Ms Abuy in
October 2023, summarised in her email of 12 October
2023: Ex R5.
exhibits R7, R11, R14 and R15.
Abuy’s arguments are matters of form not substance. Even if there were
departures from the strict letter of the Discipline
Procedure, and I do not
accept that there was, it is difficult to see how such departures would render
the PIP process unfair to
Ms Abuy, or render the dismissal itself
Was the PIP process unfair because Ms Savill was not present for performance
counselling?
part of Ms Abuy’s claim falls away because of my previous finding that Ms
Savill was not the only ‘Manager’
for the purpose of the Discipline
Procedure. It also falls away because, as I understand her position, Ms Abuy
only considered Ms
Savill’s involvement was necessary for the Letter of
Expectation process: TS93. Ms Savill was involved in the process because
attended two of the meetings at which the Letter of Expectation outcomes were
Was Ms Abuy denied the opportunity to bring her preferred support person to the
12 June 2024 PIP implementation meeting? If so, did
this render the dismissal
I understand her argument, Ms Abuy does not say that the Town expressly refused
to allow her to have a support person attend the
PIP implementation meeting on
12 June 2024. Rather, her concern is that she wanted Ms Price to attend as her
support person, and
Ms Price was prevented from being her support person.
Abuy points out that because of her isolation in Port Hedland, her options for
having a support person were limited so that, when
she could not bring Ms Price,
this effectively meant that she was left without a support person. She also says
the short notice of
the meeting limited her ability to find a support
if the Town had refused to allow Ms Price to attend as a support person, Ms Abuy
did not lead any evidence which would allow
me to conclude that this practically
meant she could not have any support person. She led no evidence that she
approached any other
work or non-work colleague. While Port Hedland may be
isolated, it is not unpopulated. It is an obvious fact that the Town had
other than those in the Human Resources team.
Dillon’s uncontested evidence is that when the meeting commenced, she
asked Ms Abuy if she wanted to postpone the meeting
so that she had time to find
a support person. Ms Abuy refused this offer and said she was ‘happy to
proceed’:TS98.
facts do not establish any unfairness to Ms Abuy.
Was Ms Abuy denied the opportunity to give feedback on the PIP plan? If so, did
this render the dismissal unfair?
Abuy complains that when the PIP plan was first introduced to her on 12 June
2024, she was not consulted on its terms.
is uncontroversial that the draft PIP plan was prepared without Ms Abuy’s
input. There’s nothing unusual or unexpected
Dillon’s notes of the 12 June 2024 meeting were in evidence. They record
that Ms Gubbins sought feedback from Ms Abuy several
times during the meeting
itself: Ex R20. Ms Abuy did not dispute the accuracy of the notes in this
regard: TS97. Ms Abuy’s
evidence was that at the 12 June 2024 meeting to
discuss the draft PIP plan she gave some limited feedback, asked for more time
give further feedback, and that request was agreed to: TS36.
Dillon received written feedback from Ms Abuy over the weekend following the 12
June 2024 meeting. That feedback resulted in minor
modifications in the PIP
plan’s format (measurements were numbered), an added requirement that Ms
Abuy lead team meetings fortnightly
(item 3), and a change of the required
arrival time from 9:00am to 8:30am (item 2.1).
on Ms Abuy’s own evidence she raised all of her concerns at the meeting of
17 June 2024: TS50.
Abuy submitted that ‘[b]y disregarding my feedback and refusing to make
adjustments, the PIP became a one-sided tool that
did not allow for meaningful
dialogue or constructive input’: Applicant’s Written Closing
Submissions [58].
Town did not require Ms Abuy’s agreement to the PIP plan. Its refusal to
make the adjustments Ms Abuy requested does not
mean her feedback was
disregarded. It means the Town did not agree to make the requested adjustments.
This is not unfair. The purpose
of the PIP plan is stated on the form
The purpose of this Performance Improvement Plan is to
define areas of concern and gaps in work performance. It will reiterate the
Town of Port Hedland’s and the Line Leaders expectation’s
an employee and provide an opportunity to demonstrate improvement and
commitment.
(emphasis added)
do not agree that the finalised PIP plan ‘did not allow for meaningful
dialogue or constructive input’. The plan envisaged
regular check-in
meetings throughout the PIP process, during which dialogue and input was given
by Ms Gubbins and sought from Ms
Abuy’s real beef is not that she was not consulted in relation to the PIP
plan’s content. Rather, her grievance is
that her suggested changes were
agreed to. Ms Abuy would say any plan short of one that acceded
to all of her demands was unfair to her.
Were the PIP plan expectations unreasonable?
Abuy argued that the Town’s performance expectations were unreasonable
(a) Her employment contract designated a 38 hour work week
and the Industrial Agreement permits flexible start times within the 7:00am
9:00am operational period.
(b) Rigid attendance rules were only applicable to employees who work
according to rosters or in special circumstances.
(c) The requirement to take lunch between 12:00pm to 2:00pm was overly
rigid, inconducive to her productivity and failed to consider
operational needs,
workload demands and her own preferences. It did not provide reasonable
flexibility and involved an unnecessary
level of control.
(d) She had not previously been subjected to these expectations
(e) These expectations contradict ‘workplace norms’ that allow
employees to use their own discretion.
(f) The PIP plan made no allowance for the fact that Ms Abuy considered Ms
Gubbins’ directions to sometimes be unreasonable.
(g) The expectation that Ms Abuy communicate with Ms Gubbins
‘proactively and respectfully’ was unrealistic in light
history of interpersonal conflict and considerations of Ms Abuy’s
psychological safety.
(h) The expectations were about work style, attitude and personality rather
than actual performance in the role.
have already dealt with some of these themes under the heading ‘Did Ms
Abuy’s performance justify improvement action’
not to repeat what I have already said.
Abuy’s employment contract specified that her ordinary hours of work were
an average of 38 hours per week, with start and
finish times for the purpose of
working ordinary hours ‘determined by your manager to fulfil the
operational requirements of
the organisation’. The contract refers to
‘rostered hours’ which ‘may vary, at the discretion of your
to meet the Town’s operational requirements’: Ex A2.
is so obvious that it hardly needs be said that to perform satisfactorily, Ms
Abuy had to meet her contractual obligations. Accordingly,
it was reasonable for
the Town to require her to meet performance criteria around reliability and work
attendance.
Abuy did not establish by evidence that the Town’s attendance requirements
were only applicable to employees working on rosters
or in special
circumstances, or contrary to ‘work norms’. Nor did she establish
that the requirement to take lunch breaks
within a specified two hour window
adversely impacted on productivity or operational needs.
the extent that Ms Abuy suggests that the Industrial Agreement permits flexible
start times within 7:00am to 9:00am, her understanding
of the Industrial
Agreement is misconceived. The Industrial Agreement specifies a span of hours
during which ordinary hours can be
worked. This does not give an individual
employee flexibility to determine their own start and finish times within the
span of ordinary
position description for the Graduate Community Safety Officer role indicates
the role reports to the Advisor and sets out 13
accountabilities of the role,
including ‘[o]ngoing compliance with the relevant.... policies, procedures
and work instructions’.
Several of the accountabilities are described in
terms of ‘assisting’ and it is implicit that the role was to assist
the Advisor, and be subject to the direction and supervision of the Advisor. The
Graduate reports to the Advisor because the Advisor
has authority. Unless the
Advisor has authority to give the Graduate directions, and specify what is
required of the Graduate, there
can be no substantive reporting by the Graduate
to the Advisor.
Accordingly,
it was reasonable for the Town to require Ms Abuy to meet performance criteria
around following reasonable directions
given to her by the Advisor. The Town did
not require Ms Abuy to comply with unreasonable directions. That Ms Abuy would
be required to discern for herself whether a direction was reasonable
or not is neither unusual nor unfair. It is the day to day
reality for all
employees. If Ms Abuy refuses to follow a direction because she considers it to
be unreasonable, she bears some risk.
But Ms Abuy has not established that any
of the directions given to her were unreasonable.
accepting the offer of employment, Ms Abuy agreed to abide by the Town’s
policies and internal operating procedures. Clause
34 of the Industrial
Agreement also requires employees to abide by the Town’s policies. It was
reasonable for the Town to require
Ms Abuy to meet performance criteria about
communicating respectfully and complying with the Town’s Code of Conduct.
any event, Ms Abuy did not demonstrate why the interpersonal conflict between
her and Ms Gubbins precluded her from being able
to communicate proactively and
respectfully.
Were the Town’s performance expectations as expressed in the PIP plan
Abuy submits that:
(a) The PIP plan did not define what constituted
‘reasonable directions’.
(b) The PIP plan did not clearly define what was meant by ‘regular
(c) The PIP plan’s required hours of work conflicted with Ms
Abuy’s contracted hours of work.
(d) The PIP plan did not provide objective criteria for assessing
communications as being ‘appropriate’ and
‘collaborative’.
(e) Performance measures were not based on objective measurable behaviours.
(f) Goals were not measurable and measurements were not tangible or
quantifiable.
is unnecessary to consider all of Ms Abuy’s points, because the Town
accepts that Ms Abuy met some of the performance expectations
set out in the PIP
plan. The question is whether the way the PIP plan was worded could be said to
have contributed to Ms Abuy’s
failure to meet the Town’s reasonable
expectations.
PIP plan itself should not be viewed in isolation. It should be viewed in the
context of the many discussions and communications
with Ms Abuy about her
performance prior to the PIP process, as well as the discussions that were
occurring at the time of its implementation.
relation to the ‘reasonable directions’ expectations, the PIP plan
explained that:
All employees have an obligation under our Code of
Conduct and as part of the employment relationship, to follow any reasonable
given to them by someone with authority to give such direction. It is
also important that. if there are barriers that may prevent
a direction from
being followed, team members communicate this and make their best efforts to
find a solution, to make it possible
to follow the direction.
Respectful feedback is welcome. discussed through the right channels. Final
direction on task allocation and priorities is set by
the line leader, as they
have the overview of expected deliverables & timeframes.
PIP plan also provided three examples of past instances where Ms Abuy had failed
to follow the reasonable directions given to
cannot see anything more the Town could have done to make the expectation clear.
This was not a case of Ms Abuy being unable to
understand the expectation.
Rather, Ms Abuy formed her own view that particular directions were not
reasonable.
PIP plan provided a ‘recap’ of previous observations that had been
made about Ms Abuy’s performance, including
Regular, respectful and positive communication is crucial
to foster a collaborative team environment which facilitates producing the
quality work possible.
led to the inclusion of a goal of ‘improved communication and
collaboration with your Line Leader to achieve Community
Safety outcomes’.
One of six measurements of this goal was:
3.4 You are initiating
discussion outside of team meetings to keep your line leader informed and
regularly updated on team projects
and daily work and consult on next steps.
expectation was discussed at a number of PIP meetings, where Ms Gubbins informed
Ms Abuy when she had provided timely updates,
and occasions when she could have
done more by reference to recent actual events. In this context, nothing about
the way this goal
was to be measured resulted in any unfairness to Ms Abuy.
PIP plan contained a measure of improved communication by reference to:
You are choosing a communication method and tone that is
collaborative and an appropriate level of formality in the circumstances,
consideration to the way in which communication may be interpreted
this expectation was discussed at a number of PIP meetings where Ms Gubbins
provided Ms Abuy examples of where communications
could be improved: Ex R22, Ex
R25. The way the PIP articulated the goal was not unfair when Ms Abuy was given
significant guidance
they could be improved.
of the PIP plan’s measurements were not quantifiable. However, the nature
of some performance issues was such that it was
entirely appropriate that they
be measured in a qualitative way rather than a quantitative way. Qualitative
assessments are a valid
basis to assess performance.
accept that some of the PIP plan’s measurements involved subjective
assessments and value judgments of Ms Abuy’s performance.
This is neither
unreasonable nor unfair.
Was Ms Abuy denied the opportunity to be heard during the PIP process?
Abuy did not present any evidence that would lead me to a conclusion that she
was denied a fair opportunity to be heard during
the PIP process. To the
contrary, her evidence was that she did share examples of her progress during
PIP check-in meetings, by reference
to her progress monitor.
Gubbins’ and Ms Dillon’s evidence was to the effect that they went
to great efforts to draw out Ms Abuy and have her
engage with the process, but
that she did not engage, preferring all communications to be in writing. The
written PIP check-in meeting
summaries paint the same picture, and were
themselves further opportunities for Ms Abuy to provide her comments and
of Ms Abuy’s complaint was that the Town did not consistently utilise a
pro-forma PIP review and progress update template
document during the PIP
process. She did not make out a case that the Town was obliged to use such a
document, or that the failure
to use the document contravened the Discipline
Procedure. The Discipline Procedure makes no reference to such a document.
Was the process unfair because mediation was not offered or implemented
the start of the hearing of this case, Ms Abuy’s argument was that the
process was unfair because she was not offered mediation.
evidence easily established that mediation was suggested to Ms Abuy repeatedly.
Ms Abuy conceded that mediation was ‘continuously
being offered’. Ms
Abuy said she never ‘outrightly declined the entire process and said I
would never, ever do it’:
TS98. But each time when it was offered, she did
not want to take it up. She said that if she changed her mind about it she would
be ‘well within my rights’: TS99.
light of this evidence, Ms Abuy adapted her case, so that in closing submissions
she only relied on the Town’s failure to
mediation or
follow up ‘when the offer was accepted.’
: Applicant’s
Witten Closing Submissions [9] (emphasis added).
first vague and equivocal suggestion that mediation had been accepted was when
Ms Abuy said in cross-examination (TS99):
There’s a meeting,
ah – ah – there’s an email, where I had articulated several
questions about mediation.
And I said I would love to proceed, um – or um
not exactly worded in that way, but I said or indicated that I was wanting to
proceed, um, with the mediation. So we were in discussions.
in her evidence she clarified that she met with Ms Dillon on 25 July 2024. The
Town’s counsel asked:
And did you, in that meeting with
Ciara, agree to mediation?
Ah, in that meeting with Ciara, she wasn’t able to answer my
questions about mediation
Did you agree to doing mediation in that meeting with Ciara on 25 July?
Did you ever indicate, during the course of your employment, that you
positively wanted to – were saying "Yes" to mediation?
Did you ever do
Yes. I recall sending an email to Ciara [Dillon] around the 31st, um –
I believe it was around 31 July, with a list of questions
around mediation, and
saying I was wanting to proceed.
Abuy later agreed there might have been an email sent to someone other than Ms
Dillon. She did not, in any event, produce any such
cross-examination, Ms Dillon said she did not recall mediation being raised
during the 25 July 2024 conversation with Ms Abuy:
TS158. I accept her
evidence in this regard as preferable to Ms Abuy’s shifting story. Ms Abuy
consistently declined mediation
at all times until 25 July 2024. No plausible
reason was advanced by her as to why she would suddenly backflip on this issue.
ground must fail simply because the evidence does not show that the offer of
mediation was ever accepted by Ms Abuy.
Was the process unfair because check-in meetings were inconsistent?
Abuy noted that at the commencement of the PIP process, weekly check-in meetings
were scheduled to occur at 9:00am every Thursday
throughout the duration of the
PIP process.
it transpired there was seven check-in meetings, on 20 June 2024, 27 June 2024,
8 July 2024, 11 July 2024, 17 July 2024, 25 July
2024, and 1 August 2024.
Abuy was on personal leave for some days during the PIP process. One meeting
date was changed to accommodate Ms Dillon’s
availability. As a result, the
working days between meetings varied from 3 to 5 days.
Abuy has not established why this meeting schedule was unfair to her, or what
the Town ought to have done differently, or how doing
it differently would have
changed the outcome of the PIP process. This complaint is pedantry. If anything,
the fact that Ms Abuy
presses it reveals her obstinance.
Was the process unfair because the review period was not long enough?
it was first formalised, the PIP plan was expressed as having a commencement
date of 17 June 2024 and an end date of 26 July
PIP plan also stated under the heading ‘Timeline for Improvement,
Consequences & Expectations’:
Effective immediately, you
are placed on a six-week PIP (excluding leave periods). During this time, you
will be expected to make
regular progress on the plan outlined above. Failure to
meet these expectations, or any display of serious misconduct may result
further disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
Furthermore, failure to maintain performance expectations
after the completion
of the PIP may result in additional disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
end date of the PIP process was later extended to 2 August 2024, as a
consequence of Ms Abuy taking leave.
first part of Ms Abuy’s complaint is that the first day of the PIP period,
17 June 2024, could not be counted, because she
had not signed the PIP plan
until the end of that day. She was, however, provided the PIP plan on 12 June
2024 so there is no reason
why she ought not to have understood her performance
from 17 June 2024 was going to be assessed.
part of Ms Abuy’s complaint was that she had 7 days off work on leave
after the PIP process commenced, so that there
was two days less than a full six
weeks from 17 June to 2 August.
Abuy also submitted that the PIP process was scheduled to conclude on 2 August
2024, but the outcome was communicated on 1 August
2024. Further, the evidence
was that Ms Dillon had recommended termination on 31 July 2024, before the end
of the PIP process, and
the CEO had approved that recommendation on 31 July
2024: Ex R37.
accept that the duration of the PIP could impact on Ms Abuy’s ability to
achieve expectations when it came to deadlines for
project deliverables.
However, the Town’s reasons for finding Ms Abuy’s performance had
not improved were not to do with
the project deliverables. As Ms Abuy herself
concedes, there were no deadlines for the Community Safety deliverables area in
final week of the PIP process: Applicant’s Written Closing Submissions
Abuy did not establish that a difference of two or three days in the context of
the lengthy history of performance feedback and
counselling, would have meant
that her performance would have been assessed any differently. She did not
demonstrate that a full
30 working days was necessary for her to demonstrate
improvement in her performance. It was sufficiently clear by 25 July 2024 that
Ms Abuy’s performance had not met expectations, and Ms Abuy was not going
to be able to demonstrate sufficient improvement
to hold on to her job. That is
primarily because she had not ever recognised that her performance was
Did the Town fail to have sufficient regard to Ms Abuy’s grievances about
interpersonal conflicts as a mitigating circumstance?
Abuy submitted that the PIP plan and its execution failed to acknowledge,
consider, and address significant interpersonal conflict
issues that had a
direct impact on her ability to perform her role and participate in the process.
She said this was a mitigating
factor in the sense of it creating
‘barriers in me being able to meet the expectation[s]’: TS13.
first question is, what did the Town know about the ‘significant
interpersonal conflict issues’? The Town could only
acknowledge or take
into account matters of which it was actually aware.
her evidence, Ms Abuy referred vaguely to having raised with Human Resources
concerns and disclosures about interpersonal conflict
(TS52) and having
disclosed that she did not feel safe in Ms Gubbins’ presence: TS109. Her
evidence about this was curtailed
by me because Ms Abuy’s outline of
witness evidence had not given notice that evidence of this type would be led by
than meetings with Human Resources on 5 July 2024 and 25 July 2024
concerning unfair treatment and micromanagement. But even in relation
dates, Ms Abuy gave no evidence of having made specific complaints or
disclosures about interpersonal conflict or its impacts
Abuy did not suggest to Ms Dillon that there was any instance where Ms Abuy
disclosed such matters directly to Ms Dillon: TS157,
TS158. However, Ms
Dillon’s evidence was that at the time she took over as the Human
Resources business partner involved in
Ms Abuy’s PIP process, she was made
aware at a basic level of some concerns regarding the breakdown in relationship
Ms Abuy and Ms Gubbins but she had no specific details or examples:
Dillon’s report to the Town’s CEO recommending Ms Abuy’s
termination contains a summary of the history of Human
interactions with Ms Abuy. It notes that during Ms Abuy’s period of
unplanned leave in May 2024, Ms Abuy ‘raised
concerns about psychological
safety and distress’. The report indicates that the concerns were raised
by Ms Abuy to Ms Fox
in the course of a 50-minute phone call, referring to
‘bullying and feelings of being unsafe, trauma and distress’.
led to the Town standing Ms Abuy down on full pay pending a fitness for work
assessment.
fitness for work assessment was conducted by Hedland Psychologists, and resulted
in a report dated 29 May 2024. It stated:
In your opinion, can you
confirm whether Ms Abuy is safe to return to her role as Graduate Community
Safety Officer from 29 May
2024? Yes/ No
Response: Yes
If yes, in your opinion, are there any reasonable adjustments that the Town
can make, to support Ms Abuy's to work safely in her role?
Response: Ms Abuy reports feeling unsupported, vulnerable and targeted by
the immediate Manager of the Business Unit, Anna. Reflecting
the expectations by
Anna are somewhat “excessive". Subsequently Ms Abuy appears open to
discussions of alternatives i.e. (a)
temporary secondment to another area (b)
more flexible work locations (c) consistency in instructions and expectations
when interacting
Ms Abuy reports and presents ready for returning to work.
Ms Abuy indicated the recent receipt of a letter of expectation in
relation to her work performance which was interpreted by Ms Abuy
“excessive”. The “expectations" reflected more micromanaging
i.e. a request was made for Ms Abuy to a closer
social bond with Sasha, which Ms
Abuy regards as inappropriate as she is at work. Additional comments noted was
Anna was often dismissive
of Ms Abuy.
I would recommend the conversations to commence on the first day Ms Abuy
returns to work - to minimise psychosocial impacts.
Upon the initial appointments there was no psychological diagnosis, no
family history of mental illness. The assessment completed
at the time reflected
minimal stress, anxiety and depression. However tensions/frustrations were noted
when discussions were held
around interpersonal
relationships/communication/behaviours with other team work colleagues.
In your opinion, does Ms Abuy need further medical advice or assessment for
a return to work?
Response: No
the report demonstrates that Ms Abuy had disclosed concerns about Ms
Savill’s treatment of her, it does not support her
allegation that she
disclosed interpersonal conflict with Ms Gubbins as a source of her feelings of
being bullied or unsafe.
on 14 July 2024 Ms Abuy did copy Ms Dillon into an email (Ex R28) in which she
indicated that she wanted to report Ms Gubbins’:
behaviour that violates the organisational Code of Conduct and contravenes the
guidelines of ‘above and below the line
behaviours’...I would
greatly appreciate your guidance on whom I should approach to address these
concerns, including other
related issues involving this individual that I need
to escalate further.
Abuy’s evidence was that on 25 July 2024, she spoke to Ms Dillon further
with a view to lodging a grievance. Ms Dillon denied
that there was any specific
detail provided to her as to the substance of Ms Abuy’s grievance. She
said what was discussed
during the meeting was the grievance process itself,
including the fact that it would be independent of the PIP process. Ms Dillon
also alerted Ms Abuy to the fact that a grievance had been lodged against Ms
the basis of this evidence, I find that the Town was aware that Ms Abuy was
aggrieved by Ms Gubbins’ treatment of her, and
that her relationship with
Ms Gubbins had broken down. The evidence does not substantiate that the Town was
aware or ought to have
known that the relationship issues were such that the
workplace was unsafe for Ms Abuy. In fact, the fitness for work assessment
indicated that Ms Abuy could work safely.
does this mean for the PIP process?
Abuy maintains that she was performing satisfactorily in her role. She
consistently maintained that she was justified in not following
directions because they were unreasonable, and that her communications were
appropriate. It is difficult to see where
this factor fits in the face of these
assertions. She was not really saying that the conflict mitigated her conduct in
of being a barrier to being able to meet expectations.
is certainly possible that the interpersonal conflict clouded Ms Abuy’s
judgment, when she was deciding whether Ms Gubbins’
directions were
reasonable and when she was communicating with Ms Gubbins. But this was not Ms
Abuy’s case. She does not accept
her conduct was deficient.
light of this, there was no room for the Town to treat the interpersonal
conflict as a mitigating factor. In order for the Town
to treat this as a
mitigating factor, Ms Abuy needed to first accept that her performance was
substandard.
Abuy’s other concern was that this context meant that Ms Gubbins was in a
position of conflict of interest, and was unable
to be impartial in her role in
the PIP process and in assessing Ms Abuy’s performance. The PIP process
was, in this sense,
tainted and could never amount to a fair and supportive
process while there were unresolved interpersonal conflicts.
Ms Abuy is raising in this respect is an allegation of bias, which was not how
the case was put at the commencement.
Abuy’s concern in this regard is understandable. But at the end of the
day, she has not shown that the Town’s conclusions
were objectively unreasonable. Ms Gubbins may well have been deep in conflict
with Ms Abuy, but her conclusions
nevertheless justified.
Town, and Ms Gubbins, were not oblivious to the fact that Ms Gubbins was
managing Ms Abuy’s performance when that very thing
was fuelling Ms
Abuy’s grievances. It was for this reason that Ms Gubbins involved Ms
Dillon in the PIP process, and supplied
her observations to others within the
organisation (TS192). Ms Dillon’s involvement tempered Ms Gubbins’
lack of neutrality,
by ensuring that if Ms Dillon considered any part of the
process to be unreasonable, unfair or not objectively justified, Ms Dillon
advise Ms Gubbins accordingly.
Was the manner of termination unfair?
manner of the dismissal may render it unfair even without constituting a denial
of procedural fairness:
Gilmore v Cecil Bros & Ors
Abuy argues that the termination of her employment was unfair
(a) The outcome was predetermined; and
(b) The manner of the termination was excessive and harsh in its execution
and consequences.
Was the outcome predetermined?
concept of a decision being predetermined usually invokes the concept of bias.
However, when Ms Abuy says that the termination
decision was
‘predetermined’ she is just pointing out that the decision was made
before the final PIP check-in meeting
of 1 August 2024.
accept that the decision to terminate was made on 31 July 2024 when the CEO
signed Ms Dillon’s recommendation for termination.
is not enough to merely point to the timing of the decision to terminate as
evidence that the decision is unfair. A termination
will be unfair as being
‘predetermined’ if it is firmly established that the Town’s
mind was so prejudiced in favour
of a conclusion already formed that it would
not alter that conclusion, regardless of information presented to it:
Laws v Australian Broadcasting
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 93 ALR 435
at 458. A termination might be
unfair as being ‘predetermined’ if the employer has gone through the
motions, without
maintaining an open mind. This does not require an employer to
not have leanings or inclinations as to the likely sanction:
BHP Coal Pty
Ltd v Schmidt
[2016] FWCFB 72
the present context, this means that Ms Abuy must show the Town decided to
terminate her employment either without giving her an
opportunity to respond to
the proposed reasons for termination, in this case, performance concerns, or
without genuinely considering
her response.
is clear that Ms Abuy was on notice that the Town would consider terminating her
employment if performance concerns were not satisfactorily
addressed during the
PIP process. As I have already observed, the PIP plan itself, which was provided
to Ms Abuy on 12 June 2024,
indicated that failure to meet expectations could
result in the termination of her employment. The PIP process was the opportunity
for Ms Abuy to respond to those performance concerns.
the commencement of the PIP check-in meeting of 25 July 2024, Ms Abuy was told
that it was the final meeting ‘before the
last meeting next week’.
Ms Abuy was told that she was not tracking well, and that the outcome of the
process would be communicated
at the final meeting the following Thursday. She
was also told that if there was to be a considerable change across the next
this would be taken into consideration in the final decision: Ex R35; Ex
Abuy is recorded as making ‘minimal contributions’ to the discussion
of 25 July 2024. Her response was considered as
part of the recommendation for
termination.
Abuy’s submissions focused on the 1 August 2024 meeting at which she was
advised that the Town was ‘considering’
terminating her employment:
TS41. Her evidence was to the effect that although Mr Dacombe and Ms Marvelli
indicated that termination
was being considered, it was presented as a fait
accompli, with no opportunity for her to respond or demonstrate why termination
was inappropriate. Given the discussion of 25 July 2024, that would have needed
to involve Ms Abuy demonstrating considerable change
in her performance since 25
Dacombe’s evidence was that when he met with Ms Abuy on 1 August 2024, an
opportunity was given to her to respond to the
proposal to terminate her
employment part way through the meeting, but she provided no substantive
response. He was not cross-examined
she was given such opportunity to respond.
prefer Ms Abuy’s version over Mr Dacombe’s. Ms Abuy’s version,
that is, that she had no opportunity to respond
to the proposed termination at
the 1 August 2024 meeting is consistent with:
recommendation which said that ‘the expected outcome’ of the 1
August 2024 meeting was that the requirements
of the PIP plan have not been met,
and that the Town will be progressing with termination.
(b) The recommendation to approve the termination was not expressed as being
subject to or conditional on the outcome of the 1 August
2024 meeting.
(c) The recommendation for termination was signed by the CEO before the 1
August 2024 meeting occurred.
(d) The letter of termination does not refer to Ms Abuy’s response or
lack of response to the proposed termination of her employment,
but did refer to
Ms Abuy’s lack of response in the 25 July 2024 meeting.
(e) The letter of termination says, ‘during yesterday’s meeting
we advised you that due to you not meeting the agreed
improvement goals, the
decision has been made in accordance with the Town’s Discipline Procedure,
to terminate your employment
immediately’.
(f) There was no evidence that the Town assessed Ms Abuy’s performance
in the final week, or made any finding as to whether
it had or had not
decision to terminate was made one day before the formal conclusion of the PIP
process. It was made without Ms Abuy having an
opportunity to demonstrate
‘considerable improvement’ in her performance in the final week of
her employment.
In matters of this kind, the practical realities of the workplace need to be
considered and a commonsense approach to the application
of the statutory
provisions should be adopted:
Gibson v Bosmac Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 222
(1995) 60 IR
Farkas v Abacus Calculators (WA) Pty Ltd
WAIRC 02267
(2005) WAIG 3134
. The IR Act’s requirement that the
Commission must act in accordance with the substantial merits of the case, means
employer is not to be held to standards of perfection in its processes.
What is required is that their process be reasonable in the
circumstances,
providing the employee with fair notice of the performance concerns, and a fair
opportunity to address those concerns.
As Commissioner Kenner (as he then was)
Kerton v Bandaberry Pty Ltd t/a
Mandurah Holden
[2004] WAIRC 11731
(2004) 84 WAIG 2652
It is also the case, that a dismissal may be held to be
harsh, oppressive or unfair, on the basis that it is either substantively
procedurally unfair:
Bostik (Australia) Pty Ltd v. Gorgevsk
(1992) 41 IR 452.
er, it is important to recognise that all of
the circumstances must be taken into account, and in the case of misconduct, the
of the conduct must be balanced against any suggested failure to afford
procedural fairness:
Byrne and Frew v. Australian Airlines Ltd
Shire of Esperance per Nicholson J at 899; Bostik per Gray J at 466.
For example, if it can be established that given the gravity of the conduct
complained of, affording procedural fairness would not
have altered the outcome
in any event, then such a failure will not of itself, render a dismissal harsh,
oppressive or unfair. Moreover,
to conclude that procedural fairness alone may
render a dismissal unfair, without considering the substantive performance or
issues surrounding the dismissal of an employee, and their gravity,
would be to ignore the requirements of s 26(1)(a) of the Act,
requiring the
Commission in the exercise of its jurisdiction, to have regard to the
substantial merits of the case. In each case,
it is a matter of judgement in the
exercise of a discretion as to the weight to be apportioned to substantive and
procedural factors.
Town’s slightly premature decision to terminate the employment does not
mean that the decision was unfair to Ms Abuy. The
practical reality is that Ms
Abuy was not engaging in the PIP process. The practical reality is that even if
the final week of the
PIP process had been assessed, no significant change would
have been demonstrated.
is clear on all the evidence that Ms Abuy was simply not trying to demonstrate
improvement in meeting the Town’s expectations.
Had the Town deferred its
decision and conducted further assessment of Ms Abuy’s performance on 1 or
2 August 2024, it would
not have altered the outcome.
Unfair termination process
Abuy found the events of 1 and 2 August 2024 distressing
(a) The termination of her employment meant that she would
need to vacate the home she leased from the Town, which was dependent on
continued employment. In this regard, Mr Dacombe confirmed in his evidence that
while the Town was willing to give Ms Abuy a
4 week notice period, that was
conditional on her signing a Deed of Settlement and Release.
(b) The meeting with Mr Dacombe and Ms Marvelli of 1 August 2024 was brief
and cursory, lasting only around 10 minutes.
(c) Following the meeting, Ms Abuy’s work equipment was taken from her,
she had to pack up her desk and she was escorted from
the premises in view of
other staff.
(d) She was removed from the premises on 1 August 2024 before being notified
of the termination (which happened on 2 August 2024).
(e) These actions were consistent with being dismissed for misconduct and
were not aligned with termination for performance reasons.
This caused her to
feel humiliated, ashamed and embarrassed.
(f) On 2 August 2024 at about 2:15pm she received an email from Ms Marvelli
erroneously referring to ‘misconduct’ as well
‘performance.’ This created confusion as she had not yet been
provided with the official termination letter but had
been put on notice that a
grievance had been lodged against her.
(g) The manner of termination was likely to cause reputational harm in a
small town such as Port Hedland.
is no doubt the case that the matters set out above have had some adverse
impacts on Ms Abuy. However, they do not render the termination
employment unfair in light of the facts that:
(a) The Town had given
Ms Abuy ample warning that her ongoing employment was at risk.
(b) The Town had a valid reason related to her performance to terminate her
employment.
(c) The Town had engaged in lengthy processes to enable Ms Abuy to avoid that
consequence.
also note that Ms Abuy secured alternative employment commencing a couple of
weeks after the termination took effect. The alternative
employment came about
as a result of an application she made during the PIP process. Ms Abuy was paid
two weeks’ pay in lieu
of notice. This suggests that Ms Abuy was prepared
for her employment with the Town to end, if not by the Town terminating her
employment,
then by her resignation. It also shows that any reputational damage
has not been such as to prevent Ms Abuy from securing alternative
Conclusion and disposition
Abuy has not established that the termination of her employment was harsh,
oppressive or unfair. Her application will be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.57 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter