URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/161.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BRAISSE -v- THE KING [2025] WASCA 161 (6 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE KING
[2025] WASCA 161
SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACR 41 of 2025
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND 2040 of 2022
law - Appeal against sentence - Commonwealth offences - Conspiracy - Money
laundering - Manifest excess - Express error -
Non‑parole period - Parity
principle - Parity principle applies to non‑parole period
Legislation:
(Cth), s 11.5(1), s
resentenced
Representation:
R G Wilson & N
Solicitors:
Sklarz Lawyers
Director Of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
referred to in decision(s):
of Contents
agree with Sweeney JA that this appeal against sentence should be allowed.
I also agree with the resentencing proposed by
agree with Sweeney JA that this appeal against sentence should be allowed.
I also agree with the resentencing proposed by
Introduction
30 October 2024, the appellant was convicted on his plea of guilty of a
conspiracy to money launder, namely that between 1 September
23 May 2018, in Western Australia and elsewhere, he conspired with Fadi
Hijazi, Moonzer Hijazi and others to deal with money
in excess of
$1 million, intending that it would become an instrument of crime contrary
s 11.5(1) and s 400.3(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth). He was sentenced
on 12 March 2025 to a term of 3 years 6 months' imprisonment,
with a non‑parole period fixed at 15
months. He seeks leave to
appeal his sentence.
three named conspirators pleaded guilty to the same charge. The appellant was
the last of the three to be sentenced. Moonzer
) was sentenced first on
23 June 2023 by a different judge of the District Court to a term of
6 years' imprisonment, with a non‑parole
period of 2 years
6 months. Fadi Hijazi (
was then sentenced by the Supreme Court of Queensland on 2 August 2024 to a
term of 4 years 6 months' imprisonment, with a non‑parole
of 10 months. There was no lengthy time in custody awaiting sentence which
resulted in a longer non‑parole period being
reduced to that 10 month
period. Fadi had spent 10 days in custody on remand, which were expressly
declared to constitute time already
served on the sentence imposed.
appellant therefore received a non‑parole period 5 months longer than
that imposed on Fadi, though the learned sentencing
the appellant's role in the offending to have been 'slightly inferior' to that
of Fadi and 'inferior to a greater extent again'
The appellant appeals his non‑parole period, relying on a disparity
between it and the non‑parole period imposed on Fadi.
He also appeals
both the sentence of 3 years 6 months and the non‑parole period
in any event, submitting that both are manifestly
excessive. The question of
leave to appeal was left to be dealt with together with this appeal.
the reasons which appear below, neither the head sentence nor the
non‑parole period was manifestly excessive, but the appeal
succeeds on the
basis of the disparity between the non‑parole periods imposed on the
appellant and Fadi, resulting in a resentencing
of the appellant.
appellant abandoned several grounds of appeal and seeks leave to appeal against
his sentence on three
sentence was manifestly excessive having regard to the appellant's role in the
offence and the mitigation available to him (Ground
learned sentencing judge erred in finding that the appellant's motive in joining
the conspiracy 'was for the purpose of some financial
gain' when there was no
basis for such a finding (Ground 2(d)).
non‑parole period imposed was contrary to the parity principle in that the
learned sentencing judge imposed upon the appellant
a sentence that results in
him serving more time in actual custody than that imposed on Fadi, when the
appellant was found to have
had a slightly lesser role in the offending than
Fadi (Ground 1).
basis upon which the appellant was sentenced
appellant was sentenced on an agreed statement of material facts for sentence,
read to the court on 4 February
following which the court heard submissions from both parties as to what, if
any, inferences might be drawn from those facts. Certain
inferences contended
for by the Crown were in dispute, as to which the learned sentencing judge
correctly observed that, before he
could draw an inference against the
appellant, he must be satisfied that the inference contended for was 'the only
reasonable and
rational inference
available'.
The agreed facts, combined with the inferences drawn by the learned sentencing
judge, then formed the basis upon which the appellant
was sentenced on
12 March 2025, and were as follows.
appellant ordinarily lived in Brisbane, Queensland, and had previously been a
director of So Sweet Pty Ltd. That company employed
the offender's older
brother, Bilal Breis (
). Fadi was
a friend of the appellant and Moonzer was a close family friend.
appellant, Moonzer and Fadi were parties to an agreement to engage in a money
laundering enterprise. That enterprise involved
making arrangements for each of
the co‑conspirators and Bilal to obtain quantities of cash in various
locations in Perth, separate
those quantities of cash into amounts under
$10,000, and then travel to multiple bank branches in Perth to deposit the cash
various bank accounts in a manner contrary to the
Laundering and Counter‑Terrorism Financing Act 2006
conspiracy was effective between 1 September 2017 and 23 May 2018.
depositing cash into bank accounts in sums less than $10,000 cash, the deposits
avoided the threshold figure for the mandatory
reporting requirements placed on
banks and other financial bodies to report threshold transactions to Australian
Transaction Reports
and Analysis Centre
). Breaking up sums of money
so as to come under the threshold, in circumstances in which it would be
reasonable to conclude that
the deposits were conducted in that way for that
sole or dominant purpose, constitutes an offence. Such deposits are commonly
as 'structured' deposits, and such offences as 'structuring' offences.
ultimate purpose behind such an arrangement was asserted by the Crown and
accepted by
to be 'cuckoo smurfing', a form of money laundering which involves corrupt money
remitters, usually based overseas, taking advantage
of an innocent client who
has provided instructions to the remitter to facilitate a legitimate transfer of
money to an Australian
bank account for a legitimate purpose. Instead of
transferring the client's legitimate funds to the bank account as instructed,
the remitter enables an organised crime group to deposit its tainted money into
the bank account instead, and then the remitter diverts
the client's legitimate
funds to reimburse the organised crime group, who pay him a fee for his service.
In that way, the organised
crime group swaps tainted money for untainted money.
A similar method can be used to transfer tainted funds offshore.
to the criminal agreement entered into by the appellant, it was intended by him
that structured deposits, all of which were
less than $10,000, would be banked
in such a way as to avoid the AUSTRAC reporting
thresholds.
He did not conduct those structured deposits personally, but his
co‑conspirators and Bilal did. The learned sentencing judge
was satisfied
that the appellant understood the purpose behind such
and the scale of the
and must have known that his conduct was illegal and intended, together with his
co‑conspirators, to commit the offence of
laundering.
learned sentencing judge was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
appellant's involvement in the charged conspiracy commenced
no later than
15 September
His Honour rejected the appellant's contention that his involvement arose
during a meeting with Moonzer and Fadi around 1 ‑
appellant obtained a six‑month lease on an apartment in Maylands, Perth
for the period 15 September 2017 ‑ 15 March
Though he only stayed in the apartment for a few weeks, the appellant continued
to pay the rent. The Maylands apartment was
used as a base for Moonzer and
Bilal when they travelled to Perth and conducted structured deposits. On
22 September 2017 the appellant
texted Moonzer to tell him that he had
landed. On 27 September 2017 he sent Moonzer the address for a particular
bank branch. On
4 October 2017 he sent Moonzer locations in Perth and
then, on 6 October 2017, Moonzer made his first deposit.
found that the appellant rented that apartment from the outset to facilitate the
purposes of the
conspiracy,
rejecting his claim that he had rented the apartment because he wanted to scope
the market in Perth for a potential new sweet shop,
which idea he then
1 ‑ 3 November 2017, the appellant, Moonzer and Fadi met in
person in Sydney and discussed the making of structured
deposits in Perth.
Moonzer then travelled to Perth and the appellant knew the purpose of that
Fadi also flew to Perth, his flight paid for on the appellant's credit card, and
the appellant knew the purpose of that
Moonzer and Fadi subsequently met in Perth on 6 November 2017.
His Honour found that the appellant paid Moonzer a total of $5,850
period 7 November to 20 December
varying times while the conspiracy was on foot, the appellant had regular
telephone contact with Moonzer, Fadi and Bilal. The
sentencing judge accepted
that, given the family or social connection between the offenders, the frequency
of contact was not conclusive
evidence that each contact was related to the
conspiracy,
but observed that there were some occasions ‑ including the
exchange between the appellant and Moonzer in late September 2017
referred to at
[15] above ‑ where the coincidence in time between the contact
and a depositing of cash was such as to enable
an inference to be drawn against
the appellant that he had been discussing the
His Honour did not infer against the appellant that he had at
times been aware of the deposits
or around early December 2017, the appellant met with Fadi and Bilal and
discussed the structured deposits and the need for Bilal
to fly to Perth, after
which the appellant and/or Fadi made those arrangements, and Bilal's flight was
paid for by the
That was the second of two meetings which his Honour found the appellant
had attended.
in Perth, Bilal made structured deposits together with Moonzer. The Crown
did not assert that the appellant had directed Bilal
to make those deposits but,
rather, that he had attended meetings where the making of structured deposits
was discussed, and then
those structured deposits had subsequently
The appellant likewise discussed the structured deposits with Moonzer and was
aware of Moonzer's travel to Perth to make structured
deposits, which Moonzer
then did. The appellant likewise discussed the structured deposits with Fadi,
paid for Fadi's travel to
Perth to make those structured deposits, and was aware
that those structured deposits would be made.
the overall operation in which the co‑conspirators were involved included
structured deposits of around $1.8 million,
the figure attributed to the
conspiracy to which the appellant was a party, which concerned deposits in Perth
$1.489 million.
appellant was in Lebanon during the period 11 December
2017 ‑ 26 February 2018.
and Moonzer travelled regularly to Perth and made structured deposits. It is
unnecessary to detail the dates of the various
way of example as to how the structured deposits occurred, around
10 December 2017 Bilal flew to Perth from Brisbane, the flight
paid for by
Fadi. On arrival he was picked up by Moonzer and stayed at the Maylands
apartment with him. Moonzer would receive a
text message and then produce a
stack of cash from inside the apartment. On one occasion, Moonzer left the
apartment and returned
with $400,000 in cash, vacuum packed into stacks of
$10,000. The stacks had coloured notes on them providing bank account details.
Moonzer sometimes got text messages with account details. Bilal and Moonzer
then made the deposits as instructed at the various
bank branches. Moonzer kept
a record of the deposits in a notebook and sent a photograph of each deposit
receipt to an unknown person.
discussions with the appellant and Moonzer in Sydney in early November 2017,
Fadi also made trips to Perth, making structured
deposits (with others)
totalling more than $1 million over the two
9 or 10 January 2018, while in Lebanon, the appellant paid Bilal
$1,000 to travel to Perth to clean up the Maylands apartment,
which Bilal
His Honour was satisfied that the appellant paid his brother to travel from
Brisbane to Perth to clean the apartment (when a local
cleaner could have been
engaged) because the appellant did not want others to be aware of his connection
was arrested on 4 January 2018 in Perth, while attempting to make further
deposits at a bank. He was found in possession
of $104,290 in cash. A search
warrant at the Maylands apartment was executed. Police found $364,400 in cash,
as well as deposit
receipts for amounts of less than $10,000 and Post‑it
Notes bearing bank account details and monetary amounts. His notebook
records of deposits made was also found.
was arrested on 23 May 2018 at his home in Brisbane. Fadi was arrested on
23 May 2018 in Melbourne. The appellant was arrested
on 12 March 2019
in Brisbane.
the Crown characterised the appellant as 'the most senior person within the
conspiracy' based upon the frequency of contact
between him and the others and
the fact that he did
structured deposits and travelled less than his co‑conspirators, the
learned sentencing judge declined to draw that
inference against
His Honour found that the appellant had not been shown to have recruited
others, unlike Fadi, or instructed others as to their role,
and had not been
responsible for the physical movement of the
His Honour observed that Wilson J, in sentencing Fadi, had found no
indication that Fadi had any position of responsibility or planning
money laundering enterprise, and that, save for some planning demonstrated by
the fact of discussions at meetings between
the two, the same could be said of
noted that the appellant's involvement was over three to four months, compared
to Fadi's eight months and Moonzer's 'prolonged'
involvement,
and noted that the appellant's involvement was also confined to the enterprise
as it played out in Western
There was also no evidence linking the appellant to the use of the encrypted
mobile phone application used by the
The appellant was also overseas from 11 December
2017 ‑ 26 February 2018.
balance', his Honour found the appellant's role to be 'slightly inferior to
that of Fadi, and inferior to a greater extent again
than that of
but greater than that of Bilal. 'Nonetheless', his Honour observed that
the appellant 'played a pivotal and active role in the success
conspiracy'.
should be noted that there were some differences in the factual basis for
sentencing presented to other judges concerning the
appellant's role. This is
not unusual. Where co‑offenders appear before different judges, usually
only counsel for the offender
being sentenced will be present to protect his or
her client's interests. Further, the standard of proof differs between those
adverse to the offender and those facts favourable to him, and the parties
may have discussed and negotiated the facts to be presented
to the court.
Findings made in one sentencing proceeding involving one offender are not
binding upon a different judge sentencing
a different
this court has been made privy to the facts for sentencing in relation to other
offenders, the appellant's role in the offending
and the sentence imposed has
been assessed by this court on the factual basis which was before the learned
sentencing judge and the
findings made by his Honour, and not on the basis
of any facts asserted against the appellant in the sentencing of others.
appellant's personal circumstances and matters in mitigation
offender was 44 years old at the time he was sentenced and aged
between 36 and 37 years old at the time of the offending. He
before the court as a first offender. His Honour referred to the
appellant's prior good character as a mitigating factor to
which Fadi was not
to his involvement in the conspiracy, the appellant had worked as a small
business owner in the confectionary business. His
Honour took into account
a character reference from the imam of the appellant's mosque in Logan,
Queensland,
who considered the appellant to be honest, hard‑working, pious,
compassionate, devoted to his family and giving of his time
in assisting the
mosque and the local community centre.
had the benefit of a psychological report dated 31 January 2025 prepared by
Ms Clare Fercher‑Barrett, consultant
psychologist, who spoke of the
appellant's childhood in Lebanon, which was difficult and unstable. The report
also spoke of his
work ethic. The report noted that the appellant had three
children from his first marriage, the youngest being 16 years old, and
three children aged 5, 3 and 1 from his current marriage, the
5‑year‑old child having a disability affecting her hearing
speech. At the time of sentencing, the appellant was separated from his wife.
psychological report informed his Honour that the appellant suffered severe
and chronic back pain which had required surgery,
which then precipitated the
development of complex regional pain syndrome. The chronic pain affected his
general wellbeing and ability
to concentrate, and triggered migraines.
Medication did not fully alleviate the pain. His Honour accepted that the
offending was
out of character, and that a contributing factor underlying the
offending was poor judgment occurring within the context of chronic
psychological report spoke of the appellant's significant regret for having
assisted his co‑conspirators and Bilal. That
was based, however, upon a
factual assertion which was quite contrary to the plea, namely that the
co‑offenders had taken advantage
of the accused's generosity, and he was
not aware that they were engaging in unlawful conduct until after the offending
came to light.
In those circumstances, the appellant's asserted regret could
not have been regarded as any true statement of remorse. His Honour
justifiably found that the appellant had not expressed any contrition or remorse
and that none could be
considered the plea of guilty was of significant utility to the prosecution.
The plea of guilty entered on 30 October
2024 avoided the need for the
40‑day trial due to commence on 18 March 2025 and was conceded by the
prosecutor to have been
at the first opportunity after the Crown had
particularised the offending. His Honour allowed a discount for the plea
of 20% off the head
took into account in mitigation the delay in the prosecution. Delay is not of
itself mitigating if the delay is reasonable
and arises from complexities of the
investigation itself, or the normal operation of the criminal justice system, or
is attributable
to the offender's own
obstruction.
Although the appellant was arrested in March 2019, he was not committed to
the District Court for trial until four years later in
March 2023, and
there was no suggestion from the Crown that the delay was attributable to
the appellant. His Honour accepted that,
following the committal,
the Crown and the appellant's counsel had constructively conferred about
the matter throughout 2024 until
the plea was
Nevertheless, the learned sentencing judge considered the overall delay to be
'extraordinary'
'unconscionable'.
may also allow for the emergence of some other mitigating
The psychological report described the appellant as suffering from severe
depression and anxiety with a high level of personal distress
in the context of
the current matter, with suicidal ideation. His Honour referred to
observations made by Wilson J in the sentencing
of Fadi to the effect that
the delay of years had had a hugely punishing consequence, given Fadi's
development of a major depressive
disorder. The learned sentencing judge said
of the appellant, 'The same, in my view, essentially applies to
His Honour accepted that delay operated as a significant mitigatory factor
in the sentencing of the appellant, 'just as it did in
also took into account that the appellant had been subject to onerous bail
conditions for the entire period of the proceedings
and that the appellant had a
90‑year‑old father in Lebanon who, because of those bail conditions,
the appellant had not
been able to visit since his
His Honour took into account the hardship on the appellant's family in the
event of his imprisonment and, in particular, the 5‑year‑old
daughter, who would be separated from her father for that period of
basis upon which Fadi was sentenced
was sentenced by Wilson J on an agreed statement of material facts, which
referred to the same agreement entered into by Fadi,
Moonzer and the appellant
between 1 September 2017 and 23 May 2018. Those facts included
matters which were not mentioned in the
agreed facts presented against the
appellant, such as Fadi's involvement in the acts of his
Zachariah (
), and his former
cousin‑in‑law, David Mina
), and Fadi's involvement in
deposits outside of Western Australia. Moonzer received little mention in the
facts presented against
introduced Zac and Mina to the money laundering enterprise to assist with
structured deposits in both Perth and Melbourne.
On various occasions, he
received large sums of cash and distributed it to Zac and Mina on instructions
from others for the purpose
of the structured deposits and, on occasions, he
accompanied Mina or Zac in making those deposits. Between 10 October 2017
May 2018, Fadi, Zac and Mina collectively deposited at least
$1,132,967 in structured cash deposits in Perth and Melbourne.
the meeting around 1 ‑ 3 November 2017 in Sydney between
the appellant, Fadi and Moonzer (at which Zac, in Fadi's sentencing,
mentioned as present), Fadi and Zac flew to Perth, their flights having been
paid for on the appellant's credit card. After
meeting up with Moonzer in
Perth, Fadi and Zac conducted 20 deposits, totalling $129,810 in a single
returned to Melbourne, again on a flight paid for on the appellant's credit
card. On 4 December 2017 in Melbourne, Fadi, Zac
and Mina made structured
deposits at banks, totalling $99,000. The next day, Fadi and Zac flew to
Brisbane and, four days later,
returned to Melbourne, the appellant's email
address being used on both flight bookings.
appellant flew to Lebanon on 11 December 2017. The following day, Fadi
travelled to Lebanon from Melbourne and met the appellant,
while Zac and Mina
continued to make structured deposits. Fadi returned to Melbourne on
28 December 2017. On New Year's Day 2018,
Fadi, Zac and Mina flew to
Perth, and followed instructions given to Fadi on his phone as to the collection
and bundling of cash.
Over 2 and 3 January 2018, the three
collectively made 95 structured deposits totalling $527,817.
was arrested on 3 January 2018 in Perth, while attempting to make deposits
at a bank. He was in possession of $43,675. Mina
and Fadi were nearby in a
vehicle, and fled the scene. Fadi later gave the remainder of the cash they
were supposed to deposit to
an unknown person. On 4 January 2018, Moonzer
was arrested in Perth while attempting to make deposits at a bank. That
Fadi and Mina flew back to Melbourne a day early.
Notwithstanding
the arrests of others, in February 2018 Fadi and Mina discussed making
further structured deposits. Fadi gave Mina
instructions as to how to collect
the cash and report the sum back to him. On Fadi's instructions, Mina deposited
$300,000 in March ‑ May 2018 in
Melbourne. In early May, Fadi brought $1.2 million cash to Mina's house in
two supermarket
cooler bags. In mid‑May, on Fadi's instructions, Mina
collected $400,000 and reported the sum back to Fadi.
22 May 2018, acting on Fadi's instructions, Mina collected some $725,000
and reported the sum to Fadi, who subsequently provided
the account details to
deposit the money. Mina began bundling the cash and was counting it when police
arrived at his Melbourne
$2,166,400 cash in the air‑conditioning vent. He was arrested and, the
Fadi was arrested in Melbourne.
evening, the appellant (who had returned to Australia) attempted to call Fadi
via WhatsApp. The appellant purchased a ticket
on the next outgoing flight to
Lebanon. He was subsequently arrested following his return to Australia
sometime later (12 March
found that, for a period of eight months, Fadi was part of a 'well organised and
sophisticated money laundering
in which he had played a 'crucial role' and that the scale of the operation must
have been apparent to
His offending involved making structured deposits personally and travelling
interstate, as well as moving the money and recruiting
and instructing others.
Fadi acted on instructions from others, however, and passed them on.
Her Honour found no evidence to suggest
that he was in a position of
responsibility, or had a role in planning the enterprise.
personal circumstances and matters in mitigation
was 52 years old at the time of his offending, and 59 at the time of
sentence in August 2024. While he did have some dated
prior criminal
convictions and was not a person of prior good character, the Crown
accepted that his criminal history was of little
had immigrated to Australia as a child, but had limited education and was
functionally illiterate. He had worked in fresh
produce shops from a young age,
showing a good work ethic. He played a large role in providing support for his
seven children and
four grandchildren. In 2015, two to three years prior
to his entry into the conspiracy, his brother had been accidentally crushed
death by earthmoving equipment, and so Fadi had also provided support to his
brother's wife and family. He was under financial
pressure and strain, working
long hours in a 'floundering'
found that Fadi had become 'involved in this offending against this backdrop of
difficulty'
and that he had been influenced by a trusted negative social influence who
presented him with the opportunity to become involved.
Her Honour accepted
that, at the time Fadi had engaged in the offending, he perceived the
opportunity as a solution to his 'financial
and family pressures', using any
money he did receive to pay debts, including a
found that Fadi's plea of guilty was deserving of 'full
despite the delay between his arrest in May 2018 and sentencing in
August 2024. Final charges were only laid against him in
2021, with the further delay being attributable to negotiations
between the parties and the resulting transfer of his matter to Queensland.
Her Honour found that his plea had substantial utilitarian benefit to the
prosecution in avoiding the need for a complex and lengthy
trial involving many
accepted that the delay in the proceedings had had a 'hugely and almost uniquely
punishing consequence over the course
of the last
six years',
a reference to the development by Fadi of a major depressive disorder which,
her Honour accepted, had left him 'utterly
He had avoided management of his physical and mental health for years, which the
psychologist suggested may in part have been a form
of self‑punishment
caused by feelings of guilt.
was also satisfied that Fadi was genuinely remorseful and that, while he had
known that what he was doing was illegal,
he had not appreciated the seriousness
of the matter and had expressed shame, remorse and embarrassment at his
involvement.
Her Honour accepted that he presented a low‑level risk of
reoffending.
basis upon which Moonzer was sentenced
appellant's argument in relation to parity turns upon the alleged disparity
between the non‑parole period fixed for the
appellant contrasted to the
non‑parole period fixed for Fadi. The detail of Moonzer's involvement is
therefore of less relevance
to the appellant's argument. However, as Moonzer
was mentioned multiple times in the sentencing of the appellant in both the
presented and by the learned sentencing judge in the context of parity, I
will set out the broad factual basis upon which he was
was sentenced on the basis that he was part of an enormous operation that
involved money laundering by several offenders
by means of structured deposits
in Perth, Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney. He personally conducted
218 structured deposits in Perth,
with an amount of $901,994 attributed
specifically to him in terms of traced funds. He was also found in possession
of $104,290
cash upon his arrest and a further $364,400 at the Maylands
apartment where he was staying. The learned sentencing judge, Black
found that the
amount which had
been the subject of structured deposits in furtherance of the conspiracy was
$2,135,361,
but it was understood at sentencing that the amount which had been traced
through accounts did not represent the total amount
Moonzer had also secured an apartment in Sydney to be used as a base for the
co‑conspirators operating there.
made a finding in Moonzer's favour that he was not at the top of the hierarchy
of the conspiracy because he was taking
the risk of detection by doing 'the
actual legwork', while those at the top tended to 'leave it to others to carry
out the dirty
Nevertheless, her Honour found that Moonzer was not a 'small player' and
that he had been involved in significant structured deposits
and facilitated the
use of the apartment in Sydney.
the appellant, Moonzer received a specified discount of 20% off the head
sentence for his plea of guilty which, it was accepted,
had been of significant
utility to the prosecution. Also, like the appellant, he was of prior good
found that Moonzer was lured by the large sums of money, and, while he may not
have understood at the outset the seriousness
of what he was involved in, he
must have understood that as time went
Her Honour noted that among the people who were recruited and who 'fell under'
Moonzer was a person with an intellectual disability
and some 'very young
naïve people' (not a reference to either Fadi or the appellant). Her
Honour found that Moonzer felt genuine
remorse for this and for involving
himself in the criminal
found that there had been a significant and unacceptable delay in the
prosecution,
during which time Moonzer had been on strict bail conditions, and which had
increased his anxiety. In the years following the offending,
Moonzer had
descended into methylamphetamine use and then developed schizophrenia.
Her Honour found that his time in prison would
be harder on him on account
of both his serious mental illness and the fact that his family were not in this
He had family support.
considered the need for specific deterrence to be lower in his case than usual,
but emphasised the need for general deterrence
and just punishment for the
seriousness of the conspiracy that he had involved himself in. In light of the
matters in mitigation,
her Honour imposed a non‑parole period of
2 years 6 months, which she described as 'by any measure, a very low
amount of time
when related to the head
appellant's brother, Bilal, pleaded guilty to a lesser charge which carried a
maximum penalty of only 4 years. It is accepted
that the sentence he
received is not relevant for the purposes of the appeal.
5 - manifestly excessive
principles where a sentence is said to be manifestly excessive
asserts that the sentence imposed of 3 years 6 months and the
non‑parole period of 15 months to be served is 'manifestly
having regard to the appellant's role in the offence and the mitigation
available to him.
principles in relation to an appeal against a manifestly excessive sentence were
restated in
Kabambi v The
State of Western
Sentencing is a discretionary exercise in which an appellate court can only
intervene if the appellant demonstrates either an express
or implied material
error. A complaint that a sentence is manifestly excessive asserts an implied
error on the basis that the sentence
imposed is so unreasonable or unjust that
an appellate court must conclude that a substantial wrong has occurred.
Otherwise, an
appellate court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the
sentencing judge merely because the appellate court would have
exercised its
sentencing discretion differently.
order to determine whether a sentence is manifestly excessive, the sentence
should be viewed in light of the maximum sentence
for the offence, the standards
of sentencing customarily imposed with respect to it, the place that the
criminal conduct occupies
in the scale of seriousness of crimes of that type and
the offender's personal circumstances. The standards of sentencing customarily
imposed, however, do not establish the upper or lower limits of the range of a
sound sentencing discretion but, rather, provide a
reference point for ensuring
broad consistency, bearing in mind the scope for significant variations in
relevant sentencing factors
and that there is no single correct
in relation to setting the length of a non‑parole period
is not confined to the head sentence imposed, but also complains of the
non‑parole period, which is said to be manifestly
excessive for the same
reasons as the head sentence is said to be manifestly excessive.
(Cth), a judge sentencing an
offender for a federal offence is to impose a sentence of appropriate severity
in all the circumstances
of the offence. In addition to any other matters (such
as, relevant to this appeal, the parity principle) the sentencing judge is
take into account the relevant matters listed in
, a court imposing a
sentence exceeding 3 years' imprisonment upon a person not already serving
a federal sentence must then (subject
to the discretion in
decline to do so) fix a non‑parole period. All the same considerations
and (2) apply to fixing the non‑parole
as with an appeal against the head sentence on the grounds of implied error, an
appellate court cannot substitute its own opinion
for that of the sentencing
judge merely because the appellate court would have exercised its discretion
differently in setting the
non‑parole period. This court can only
interfere in the case of express or implied material error.
general principles in relation to the setting of a non‑parole period were
set out by this court in
Stipkovich v The
The fixing of a non‑parole period is not intended solely, or even
primarily, to benefit a prisoner and assist in his rehabilitation,
although it
does confer that benefit on the
Just like the head sentence, the non‑parole period is concerned with
matters such as deterrence and protection of the community;
it is that period of
the sentence during which the prisoner cannot be released on the ground that the
punishment has served its purpose,
because the sentencing judge considers that
the crime calls for such
The non‑parole period in that way serves the interests of the
but also mitigates the punishment
weight to be attached to the factors taken into account in setting the
non‑parole period may differ, therefore, from the
weight accorded when
setting the head sentence, given the different purposes underlying each
as a matter of observation, the ratio between a minimum term and the head
sentence may typically fall within the range of
50% and 75%, with the
higher minimum tending to reflect very serious
it is an error to approach the discretion to fix the non‑parole period by
reference to a notional starting
or to adopt a norm that the minimum period to be served should represent a
particular ratio to the head
Disposition
on Ground 5
appellant submits that the sentence of 3 years 6 months and the
non‑parole period of 15 months is 'manifestly excessive'
and that it
was open to the learned sentencing judge to impose a 'lesser sentence with a
suspension of at least some term of that
sentence', or alternatively a
non‑custodial option.
talk of 'suspension' is to use the language and concepts of sentencing in
respect of State offences, but I infer that what is
sought by this ground is the
substitution of a lower head sentence coupled with a shorter non‑parole
period imposed pursuant
, or a sentence below
3 years coupled with an order for release upon the entry into a
recognisance for good behaviour for some period
of time, pursuant to
. In oral submissions,
counsel indicated that the imposition of a non‑parole period which was not
longer than that imposed
on Fadi would suffice.
appellant did not refer to any appellate sentencing decisions or suggest in
submissions that the head sentence imposed lay outside
the range of sentences
customarily imposed for such offending.
had given the learned sentencing judge a table of cases said to be appellate
decisions in the sentencing of money laundering
offences under s 400.3(1).
The same table was provided to this court. The table listed 19 cases:
R v Wing Cheong
Nguyen v The
Almada v The
Singh v The
Islam v The
Linggo v The
Huang v The
Singh v The
Betka v The
several of these cases, the offender
against sentence was refused. When this court dismisses an appeal against
sentence, the sentence imposed at first instance
does not fix the upper or lower
limit of the range. Indeed, even when this court allows an appeal against
sentence and resentences
the offender, this court's decision on the sentencing
outcome does not, of itself, fix the upper or lower limit of the
several cases did not involve offences under s 400.3(1). Others involved a
different level of offending to the current
matter, attracting sentences of
12 to 18 years with non‑parole periods of 8 years and
those cases which involved the substantive offence of money laundering and
subject to the same maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment
that applied
to the appellant's offence of conspiracy to commit money laundering, and which
involved sums of money within range of
the appellant's offending, the offender
sentence reduced on appeal to 4 years 9 months' imprisonment as part
of a sentence of 5 years 3 months, with a non‑parole
3 years 6 months for attempting to leave the country with
$1 million; the offender in
sentence reduced on appeal to 6 years' imprisonment with a non‑parole
period of 18 months for syphoning $1.38 million
from a legitimate
account and attempting to send it offshore; the offender in
his sentence increased to 5 years 6 months' imprisonment with a
non‑parole period of 3 years 4 months for laundering
$3 million for commercial gain with significant mitigation; the offender in
his sentence reduced to 6 years 3 months' imprisonment with a
non‑parole period of 4 years 8 months for laundering
and sending
offshore an amount of $1.3 million (further sums were taken into account in
sentencing); and the successful appeal in
turned on the
order for accumulation of terms but did not disturb the term of 5 years'
imprisonment for the laundering of $1.5 million.
of the cases on the table support a contention that a term of 3 years
6 months with a non‑parole period of 15 months was
outside the
range of sentences customarily imposed for offending of this kind, whether by
way of conspiracy to engage in money laundering,
or the substantive offence of
money laundering in breach of
s 400.3(1) of the
Criminal Code
. The cases support the
proposition that offending of this kind invariably attracts a term of
imprisonment of some substance, with
a non‑parole period to match.
it was in recognition of this that the appellant did not refer to sentences
imposed in other cases. Rather, the appellant's
argument was that the learned
sentencing judge 'erred in not giving proper consideration to [two] exceptional
mitigatory factors'.
These two factors were said to be the 'strong mitigating
factor' of the hardship caused to the appellant by his distance apart from
family while in prison, and the content of the psychological report which stated
that the appellant's acts were out of character
and that his involvement in the
conspiracy was partly attributable to poor judgement, occasioned by suffering
chronic physical pain.
These factors, taken together with the 'unconscionable
delay' of six years between being charged and being sentenced, the
appellant's
excellent personal antecedents and lack of criminal record, together
with the 'low level of culpability' are said to have left open
non‑custodial sanction, or a lower sentence.
appellant's assertion that the sentencing judge gave inadequate weight to two
'exceptional mitigating factors' is irrelevant
to the determination of
Ground 5. It is well established that a proposition that too little (or
too much) weight has been given
to a sentencing factor is not generally a valid
The reasons for this were explained by this court in
Gelmi v The State of
namely that, in the absence of a failure to exercise the discretion conferred on
the judge, a weighting error is merely a conclusion
that is implicit in a
finding by an appellate court that the outcome is unreasonable or plainly
unjust. Ordinarily a weighting error
is not, of itself, an independent ground
which justifies appellate attention.
any event, as to the first factor said to be exceptionally mitigating, impact on
of separation from family
is not one of the mandatory factors to be considered if relevant pursuant to
, unlike impact on the
family, and the appellant did not contend in the sentencing proceedings that
this was a mitigating factor.
an offender seeks to have the sentencing judge take a mitigating fact or
circumstance into account when passing sentence, the
offender must bring it to
the judge's attention and, if necessary, call evidence about
was no evidence put before his Honour that the appellant would not receive
visits from his children and adult family members
while in custody in this
State. Nor did the appellant seek to adduce such evidence in the appeal.
a sentencing judge may be prepared to infer from the ages of the youngest
children and the distance to be travelled that the
appellant may not receive
visits from them while in custody in this State, it is not obvious that the
appellant would receive visits
from the youngest children if he was in custody
closer to home. It is also not self-evident that older family members would not
visit the appellant in this State.
addition, that an offender will suffer hardship as a result of being imprisoned
is not usually a mitigating factor. The deterrent
effect of imprisonment lies
in the loss of liberty and the consequent loss of other
As a general rule, it is only where imprisonment would be particularly hard on
the offender when compared to the general experience
prisoners ‑ more onerous than is the norm ‑ that
some reduction in the length of the term of imprisonment may
An offender who engages in criminal activity in a jurisdiction far from their
a likely consequence
will be that contact with their family will be more limited.
second factor said to be exceptionally mitigating, namely that the appellant
became involved in the conspiracy partly on account
of poor judgment caused by
chronic pain and that his conduct was out of character, was taken into account
by the learned sentencing
judge. The submission asserts a weighting error and
does not advance the ground of appeal.
part of this ground, the appellant also submitted that he was not to be
sentenced on the basis that he was financially motivated
to join the conspiracy.
That submission asserts an express error on the part of the learned sentencing
judge in finding that the
appellant's motive for involvement in the conspiracy
was for the purpose of some financial gain (Ground 2(d)). That ground,
fails, is dealt with separately below.
suggesting that the appellant had a low level of culpability, the appellant
emphasises the limited individual acts performed by
the appellant in the
offending, contrasted to those of Fadi particularly who carried out more acts
than the appellant, in that he
bundled money, passed on instructions, conducted
deposits, attended meetings and used encrypted technology to communicate with
assessing the seriousness of the appellant's conduct, however, the learned
sentencing judge was not merely sentencing him for
those acts he personally
committed. As his Honour recognised, and as explained in
Tyler v The
it is artificial and contrary to the concept of conspiracy to dissect with
precision the physical acts of each offender and sentence
for those separate
acts alone. To focus exclusively on the acts of any individual participant is
to ignore the essential character
and seriousness of a conspiracy, namely the
agreement to participate in an organised criminal activity, intending that a
substantive
criminal offence will be
Identifying
an offender's role, if it can be identified, is a different proposition to
identifying the acts he or she committed.
His Honour did contrast the
respective roles of the conspirators in this case, expressly finding that the
appellant's role was 'slightly
inferior' to that of Fadi, and 'more inferior
again' to that of Moonzer.
a higher sentence should be imposed on the principal in the hierarchy who
organised the operation and expected to reap enormous
profit, it does not follow
that lenient sentences must be imposed on those lower down in the
hierarchy ‑ only that their sentences
should be lower than the
principal's. The offence lies in the agreement itself to commit criminal acts,
and the element of concert
makes the offence of conspiracy more serious than if
an individual acting alone planned to commit an offence, as the likelihood of
the crime occurring is increased by the involvement of multiple participants
making a commitment to each other in an organised
offence of conspiracy is not generally to be regarded as less serious than the
substantive offence the subject of the
conspiracy.
In this case, of course, the co‑conspirators also carried out many
structured deposits, fulfilling the purpose of the conspiracy
appellant had joined.
learned sentencing judge's assessment that the appellant's role was 'slightly
inferior' to that of Fadi therefore needs to be
seen within the overall context
that his Honour found the conspiracy which the appellant entered 'was
sophisticated, it was coordinated,
it was premeditated, and it was
industrious'.
The extent of the appellant's participation in the conspiracy informed, but did
not determine, his level of
culpability.
His Honour did not find that the appellant had a 'low level of
culpability'. Rather, his Honour observed that the appellant's level
culpability was lower than it had appeared 'at first
did the appellant have a low level of culpability. His Honour clearly
attributed significance to those acts carried out by the
appellant in organising
a safe house at the outset of the conspiracy to house those who would be
collecting and counting the money
and making the deposits, as well as
participating in the meetings, paying for flights and paying out money to
others. His Honour
regarded the appellant as having 'played a pivotal and
active role in the success of this
conspiracy'.
appellant conspired to commit the substantive offence of money laundering in
breach of s 400.3(1) of the
. The maximum penalty prescribed for committing, or conspiring to
that offence, was 25 years' imprisonment or (at that time) a $315,000 fine,
or both. The substantive offence was the most serious
money laundering offence
in the hierarchy contained in
pt 10.2 of the
Criminal Code
at the time of the
offending, applying where the offender had an
that the money would become
an instrument of crime and where the value of the money was at least $1,000,000.
The maximum penalty
reflects the seriousness with which Parliament regarded such
purpose of the conspiracy was self‑evidently serious. At the heart of all
organised criminal activity is a desire for
financial profit, and at the heart
of all money laundering is a desire for criminals to enjoy with impunity the
gains of their criminal activity. As his Honour noted,
referring to the decision of this court in
Tan v The State of Western
the laundering of the proceeds of criminal activity is the lifeblood of
organised crime.
Consequently,
in sentencing for money laundering offences, general deterrence is accorded
significant
parties to the conspiracy acted in an organised way, dealing with substantial
sums of money, the purpose of which was to avoid
detection by avoiding the
reporting requirements to AUSTRAC, assisting those who engage in organised
criminal activities to launder
their money.
appellant's role in the conspiracy was significant. While he did not personally
engage in making structured deposits, he arranged
a six‑month lease on an
apartment which was to serve as a base for his co‑conspirators and others
who travelled to Perth
to make structured deposits and needed accommodation.
The ability of the co‑conspirators to stay in the relative privacy of
rented accommodation, as opposed to a hotel, decreased the risk of them being
detected handling large sums of cash, hence his Honour's
description 'safe
arranging the accommodation, paying for flights, and making payments to Moonzer,
the appellant facilitated the making of more
than $1.4 million worth of
structured deposits in this State. Clearly, he was trusted within the group of
conspirators. His actions
were necessary to the overall success of the
head sentence imposed on the appellant represents 14% of the maximum penalty.
The appellant was not a young naïve offender,
or particularly vulnerable
such that he could be manipulated by others.
and the obligation to impose a sentence of a severity appropriate to the
circumstances of the offence, the need for specific and
particularly general
deterrence, the duration of the appellant's offending over a matter of three to
four months, the significant
sum of money involved in the offending, the failure
of the assertion of express error in the drawing of an inference against the
appellant that he entered into the conspiracy for the purpose of financial gain
(Ground 2(d), dealt with separately below), the lack
of any expression of
remorse and an absence of circumstances suggesting that the appellant was
particularly vulnerable apart from
being an individual in chronic pain, but then
also, against those matters, the plea of guilty and its utility to the
prosecution,
the prior good character of the appellant and the effect upon him
of the excessive delay in the prosecution in terms of his deteriorated
health, and the other matters in mitigation referred to by the learned
sentencing judge, I see no basis upon which to conclude
that anything other than
a term of imprisonment, with actual time to serve, could have been appropriate.
regard to those same factors, the sentence imposed of 3 years 6 months
was not so manifestly excessive as to imply error.
The sentence lay within the
range of a sound sentencing discretion, and was appropriate.
now to the non‑parole period set by his Honour, the 15‑month
non‑parole period imposed in this case represented
around 35% of the head
sentence of 3 years 6 months. It is difficult to see how a
non‑parole period representing slightly
over a third of the head sentence
could be regarded as so unreasonable or unjust as to manifest error. There was
no sufficient mitigation
as to indicate that a lower non‑parole period
ought to have been arrived at.
for the argument as to parity, there is no reason for this court to interfere in
the learned sentencing judge's discretion in
fixing the length of the
non‑parole period. The period fixed lay within the range of a sound
sentencing discretion. Indeed,
if the question of parity is put aside, it was
lenient. Leave to appeal on this ground is
2(d) ‑ motive of financial gain
part of the appellant's argument that the sentence imposed was manifestly
excessive, counsel submitted that the learned sentencing
judge made an express
error in finding that the appellant's motive for involvement in the conspiracy
was for the purpose of some
financial gain. Counsel sought and was granted
leave to revive a previously abandoned appeal ground to that effect.
appellant submits that the inference could not be drawn against him when the
statement of material facts presented by the Crown
was silent on the matter
and there was no evidence before his Honour that supported such a finding.
The drawing of an inference
when there is no evidence to support that inference
constitutes an error of law. Counsel also submitted that his Honour
relied on the case of
Abreu v The
when his Honour referred to the statement that 'There are no amateurs in
this type of
endeavour'.
Counsel submitted that his Honour was in any event unable to quantify the
gain, or point to any fact or circumstance that might suggest
representing the Crown at sentencing informed the learned sentencing judge
that 'the Crown cannot lead any evidence in relation
to his motive for
participating in the
conspiracy',
but agreed that the inference was open that the appellant would only have
involved himself for the prospect of financial
Given that the facts of the conspiracy were before the court and that the
inference was said to be open to his Honour, what the prosecutor
meant was that the Crown was not armed with admissions on the part of the
appellant as to his motive, or conversations by
way of text messages, or
recordings, or eyewitness evidence of conversations in which the appellant's
motive was discussed, or financial
records of unexplained wealth.
his Honour was entitled to draw such an inference against the appellant
from the facts before the court provided it was the only
inference reasonably
available on those facts, which his Honour expressly acknowledged in his
discussions with counsel. Counsel
for the appellant at sentencing did not argue
otherwise. In his plea in mitigation made on 4 February 2025, counsel
anticipated
that the learned sentencing judge would ask 'the obvious question,
what was in it for him?', before
continuing:
The extent of his benefit really is this. The first is he had someone use his
apartment. You can possibly infer, Moonzer agreed
to pay him some rent. That
wasn't actually ever done, but you can infer that that was contemplated. He
would get at least some
position at sentencing, therefore, was that an alternative
inference ‑ one more favourable to the
appellant ‑
was available on the facts, namely that the
appellant was only motivated to make some financial return on the apartment he
had innocently
committed to, but then no longer needed. Such financial gain, if
it eventuated, would be more in the way of breaking even on the
rent he had
signed up to, than hoping for financial gain from any money laundering
operation. Counsel added that the appellant was
also able to 'send his brother
by paying for a flight for him to go to Perth where he might obtain gainful
employment. Those are
the benefits to
learned sentencing judge dismissed as implausible the proposition that the
appellant had obtained the apartment for a legitimate
purpose initially in
mid‑September 2017 and only joined the conspiracy weeks afterwards.
His Honour also rejected as implausible
the suggestion that the appellant
had paid his brother Bilal $1,000 to fly across the country to clean the
Maylands apartment (when,
patently, a local cleaner could have done an adequate
job for significantly less) in order to benefit Bilal, as opposed to wanting
avoid further connecting himself to the apartment by hiring a third party.
appellant involved himself in a conspiracy, the purpose of which was to deal
with money by way of structured deposits, and those
deposits exceeded
$1 million. His Honour found him to have paid Moonzer a total sum of
$5,850 over the period 7 November ‑
20 December 2017.
The appellant rented the Maylands apartment and paid the rent for
six months so that others could use it, knowing
that they were to conduct
structured deposits. He paid for flights for co‑offenders to travel to
the other side of the country
and paid Bilal $1,000 to fly to Perth and clean
the apartment.
was ample evidence upon which his Honour was justified in drawing an
inference against the appellant that he was motivated
by the hope of financial
gain. The appellant outlaid thousands of dollars in an operation which was
entirely focused on large sums
of money. It beggars belief that he did
so ‑ as was suggested by the appellant to the
psychologist ‑ out of a generosity
of spirit and in compliance
with a cultural norm of assisting others.
complaint that the learned sentencing judge improperly relied on the decision in
in remarking
'There are no amateurs in this type of endeavour', is misconceived.
decision of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal concerning the failure
of a sentencing judge at first instance to
accord any discount for the utility
to the prosecution of a plea of guilty. The appeal was allowed. In summarising
the factors
relevant to resentencing the applicant, Campbell J observed
that the applicant had committed the offence for profit, and quoted the
sentencing judge as having accepted that there were no 'amateurs' in this field
of illegal endeavour. There was no point of principle
involved in the
quotation. It was not suggested that the sentencing judge had been in error in
that regard.
referring to the outlay of money by the appellant in this case, his Honour
[Y]ou knew that your friends and relatives were involved in a serious criminal
enterprise and you joined in that enterprise. Even
confining, as I do, the
conspiracy that you were involved in to Perth, it still involved the laundering
of more than $1.4 million.
I'm satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the only rational inference is that
your reasonably extensive involvement, as I'm satisfied
it was, was not
altruistic but was for the purposes of some financial gain. It is not possible
for me to quantify that gain. As
has been said in another context,
v The Queen
'There are no amateurs in this type of endeavour.'
is apparent that the learned sentencing judge in this case was familiar with the
decision and attracted to the quotation itself,
not as a statement of legal
principle compelling the drawing of such an inference, let alone as evidence
against the appellant, but
simply as a pithy observation on human nature with
which to round out his Honour's comments as to the inference he had drawn
the appellant on the facts before him.
his Honour inferred against the appellant, and justifiably so, was that he
had involved himself in the conspiracy for the purpose
of financial gain.
His Honour was, however, unable to quantify the gain, not in terms of what
gain was expected and not in terms
of what gain was achieved, if any. The
appellant was not sentenced on any speculative basis.
to appeal on this ground is refused.
remains, then, is the challenge to the non‑parole period on the grounds of
disparity with that imposed on Fadi.
parity principle
parity principle is founded on the common law norm of equal justice, which
requires that like cases be treated alike so that,
where all is equal between
like offenders, they should receive a like sentence. Where all is not equal
between them, however, the
law permits different sentences to be imposed,
reflecting the relevant differences between
An apparent disparity between sentences may be justified by relevant differences
between them in the role each has played in the
offending, and circumstances of
mitigation personal to them, such as age, good character and
background.
principle is not limited in its application to persons charged with the same
offence, its application being governed by consideration
of substance rather
appellate court is justified in intervening to reduce a sentence which is not in
itself manifestly excessive in order to avoid
a marked disparity with the
sentence imposed on a
co‑offender.
Unjustified disparity between sentences imposed on co‑offenders is a
ground for intervention in itself and it is not necessary
for an appellant to
establish that the sentence imposed on him was manifestly excessive in order to
succeed on a ground of
court will interfere in a case where it considers that the disparity is such as
to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance
on the part of an
The issue of parity is assessed through an objective lens, however, and does not
concern itself with whether the offender subjectively
feels a sense of
The critical question is whether disparity in the sentencing outcome is capable
of giving rise to a legitimate sense of grievance,
or to an appearance in the
mind of an objective observer that justice has not been
appellate court may intervene even where to resentence the offender may result
in a sentence which might be seen as too
but an appellate court is not obliged to reduce a co‑offender's sentence
to one which is
inadequate.
The discretion of an appellate court to reduce a sentence to a less than
adequate level does not require it to reduce the sentence
to a level which would
be an affront to the proper administration of
or so lenient as to 'shock the public
conscience'.
was common ground in the appeal that, in sentencing for a federal offence, the
parity principle applies not only to the head sentence,
which is one component
of the sentence, but to all components of it including the non‑parole
argument was raised solely by reference to the non‑parole periods imposed
on co‑offenders, and the proportion
each non‑parole period bore to
the head sentence to which it was attached, which ranged from
60% ‑ 67% of each head sentence,
as contrasted to the
non‑parole period imposed on the offender and the proportion his
non‑parole period bore to his head
sentence, being 80%.
court firstly rejected an argument that the non‑parole period was
manifestly excessive. While the court assumed that disparity
non‑parole periods alone may suffice to establish
their Honours also doubted that a mechanical comparison of the
proportionate length of the non‑parole periods alone, without
comparing the head sentences imposed, could be determinative of an argument
part of the sentence was an
That approach is consistent with the view taken in
Postiglione
The outcome in the decision was determined by the substantive differences in the
role played by the offender, as well as the relative
lack of mitigation
available to him, those differences resulting in a proportionately higher
non‑parole period being reasonably
Disposition
on ground 1
is preferable, but not always possible, for the one judge to sentence all
co‑offenders. A sentencing judge may be faced
with the task, as was the
learned sentencing judge in this case, of sentencing an offender after multiple
other co‑offenders,
or connected offenders, have been sentenced by others.
had received a non‑parole period of 2 years 6 months to serve
and then Fadi had received a non‑parole term of
10 months to serve.
His Honour noted that Fadi (the reference to Moonzer in the transcript was
an obvious slip) received a non‑parole
period that 'was only
10 months, which, by my calculations, is 18.5 per cent of the head
By contrast, while his Honour did not express this, the non‑parole
period imposed on Moonzer represented a little over 40%
of the head sentence.
Moonzer had also pleaded guilty and saved the prosecution a lengthy trial, and
the delay in the prosecution
had impacted on him as well, and indirectly brought
learned sentencing judge observed that 'there is a quite significant disparity
between the custodial portions of the sentence
to be served as between Moonzer
and Fadi' and concluded that 'unless my analysis of the material ... enables me
to say with some
precision that your role is akin to that of Moonzer rather than
Fadi or vice versa, I have two quite diametrically different sentences
achieve parity
was no non‑parole period that his Honour could impose on the
appellant which would serve to reconcile any disparity between
non‑parole periods of 10 months for Fadi and 2 years
6 months for Moonzer and the ratio between each of those non‑parole
periods and the corresponding sentences.
such a situation, it is important to be clear on the task facing a sentencing
judge in terms of the parity principle.
a sentencing judge is faced with a scenario in which two or more
co‑offenders have already been sentenced, the focus of
the sentencing
judge is not to avoid a justifiable sense of grievance on the part of any or all
of those co‑offenders, but
to apply the principles of parity so as to
avoid an unjustifiable disparity resulting in a sense of justifiable grievance
part of the offender being
the learned sentencing judge in this case found that the role played by the
appellant in the conspiracy was 'slightly inferior'
to that of Fadi's role in
the offending, that made the sentence imposed on Fadi the relevant benchmark
against which the appellant's
sentence was to be measured, allowing for any
differences between the two impacting on the length of an appropriate
is no answer to submit, as the Crown submitted, that the appellant was
sentenced on a different factual basis to Fadi and the
appellant's role in the
criminal enterprise was found to be different at Fadi's sentencing. In the
sentencing of both Fadi and Moonzer,
the appellant was presented as a person
from whom instructions had been received. But his Honour was not comparing
the role of the
appellant, as he found it to be, with the role of the appellant
as Wilson J found it to be in sentencing Fadi. His Honour was
the factual basis upon which Fadi was sentenced with the role that
his Honour found the appellant to have played.
is also no answer to submit, as the Crown submitted in written submissions,
The appellant's organisational and leadership role in the money laundering
operation elevates his level of criminal responsibility
beyond that of a
co‑offender like Moonzer who performed just the conduct (depositing cash)
in return for payment.
quoted submission is consistent with the submissions made by the Crown at
the time of the appellant's sentencing, however his
Honour did not find the
appellant to have played any leadership
His Honour was not satisfied that the appellant held any position of
responsibility,
or planning role within the organisation, nor that he had given instructions to
Fadi to pass on to
nor recruited his older brother Bilal into the
The appellant's involvement was for a shorter period than the
and there was no evidence linking him to the use of the encrypted application
found on the others' phones. His Honour concluded
that the appellant's
role was slightly lower than that of Fadi, and lower again than that of
That is the basis upon which the appellant was sentenced and against which his
sentence, including the non‑parole period, is
to be assessed. In those
circumstances, the submission quoted above is insupportable.
considered the differences between the appellant and Fadi in terms of the
respective roles played and the overall criminality
involved, and the factors in
mitigation and personal circumstances, his Honour arrived at a head
sentence for the appellant which
was 12 months less than that imposed on
logically followed that the non‑parole period, unless there was some point
of distinction which related only to, or more
to, the non‑parole period,
should also have reflected that same pattern of being lower than the
non‑parole period imposed
unless to impose a lower non‑parole term would be an affront to the proper
administration of justice or so lenient as to shock
the public conscience.
his Honour remarked on the low ratio of the non‑parole period imposed
on Fadi, the Crown did not submit ‑ not before
his Honour and not before this court ‑ that the
non‑parole period imposed on Fadi was an affront to the proper
administration
of justice, or so lenient as to shock the public conscience, or
that the imposition of an even lower non‑parole period on the
would amount to the same. It was acknowledged in oral submissions before this
court that there is line below which the
parity principle does not oblige a
sentencing court to go, but it was not submitted that the non‑parole
period imposed on Fadi
crossed that line.
a sentencing judge may attach differing weight to factors taken into account in
setting the sentence and the non‑parole
period, the only factor expressly
referred to in relation to the setting of the non‑parole period was the
delay in the prosecution,
which was evenly weighted between Fadi and the
appellant and which, on the basis of his Honour's comments, saw a sharp
in the non‑parole period imposed.
imposed the term of 3 years 6 months, his Honour
Because of the delay, in conjunction with other mitigation, I sharply reduce the
non‑parole period to one of 15 months to serve.
You will be eligible
for release from prison after 15 months.
'sharply' reducing the non‑parole period to 15 months on account of
delay, his Honour impliedly proceeded from a rather
higher figure as a
starting point. Whatever his Honour's reasoning process, however, the
disposition of this ground lies in whether
implied error is demonstrated such as
to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance, rather than whether there was
error in the
methodology applied.
his Honour applied the parity principle to the non‑parole period and
chosen to impose a non‑parole period in proportion
to the non‑parole
period imposed on Fadi, the result would have been the imposition of a
non‑parole period of 8 months,
whereas the non‑parole period
fixed was nearly double that figure and equates to just under 35% of the
mitigation afforded to Fadi was more compelling than that available to the
appellant. Wilson J was satisfied that Fadi was genuinely
remorseful and
ashamed of his conduct. By contrast, the learned sentencing judge found that
the appellant had not expressed remorse
and none could be implied.
The Crown submits that this also goes to the need for specific deterrence,
but the appellant's prior
unblemished record, as against Fadi's record, weakens
that proposition in this case.
submission made on behalf of the appellant that the learned sentencing judge did
not accept Wilson J's finding that Fadi was genuinely
remorseful was, I am
satisfied, a misinterpretation of what his Honour said. The aim of this
submission was to remove that obvious
point of distinction between Fadi and the
appellant on the issue of remorse.
had addressed various matters in mitigation which were available to the
appellant, but had observed that the appellant
had not expressed contrition or
remorse, and had effectively denied criminal liability when speaking to the
psychologist. After
completing his comments on the matters in mitigation,
his Honour then turned to address the issue of parity and, in comparing the
mitigatory factors relevant to Fadi with those present in the appellant's case,
In your case, I treat you as a person of good character prior to your
involvement in this matter, which is a mitigating factor to
which he was not
entitled. Wilson J accepted that Fadi had genuine remorse and shame. I am
not so satisfied.
in context, it is clear that his Honour meant 'I am not so satisfied
in your case
', following the pattern
of comparing the two offenders. That is consistent with his Honour's
findings. There is no reason apparent
from his Honour's sentencing remarks
why he would have been sceptical about the finding of Wilson J that Fadi
was genuinely remorseful
and ashamed, and declined to follow it. I reject that
submission. And, so, there was that point of distinction between them. The
comments made by the appellant to the psychologist indicated an unwillingness to
accept responsibility for his knowledge of and willingness
to participate in the
conspiracy, and there was no genuine expression of remorse.
also placed emphasis on Fadi's limited education and functional illiteracy, and
his family obligations in supporting many
children and grandchildren of his own
as well as his brother's family, working long hours under financial strain.
Her Honour saw
Fadi as having seen the offending as a 'viable solution' to
his 'financial and family
pressures',
with the money obtained going on debts.
made no finding that the appellant had been financially straitened at the time
of the offending. That was not said by
the appellant to have been what
motivated him to join the conspiracy. So that was another point of distinction
between them.
appellant had no criminal history, while Fadi did have some prior criminal
convictions and therefore could not be said to be
a person of prior good
character, although the Crown had accepted that his criminal history was of
little weight. Her Honour accepted
that Fadi presented a low‑level
risk of reoffending. No express finding was made about the appellant to that
effect, but then
he came before the court as a first offender.
the Crown submits that there was an absence in the appellant's case of
'sound prospects of rehabilitation', that submission
is based on the absence of
an expression of remorse and takes no account of the appellant's prior good
character, in comparison to
Fadi. The comparison comes out slightly in the
appellant's favour.
offenders had suffered the ill-effects of the substantial delay in the progress
of the prosecution. It was apparent from the
learned sentencing judge's
comments in sentencing the appellant that he considered the delay and the
resulting depression and anxiety
suffered by the appellant to be at a similar
level in terms of mitigatory value as the ill‑effects of the delay on
there was no distinction to be drawn there.
there is no 'usual' non‑parole period and the non‑parole period
imposed on the appellant, seen in isolation, is
modest and not manifestly
excessive, there is a real disconnect ‑ even allowing for the
distinguishing points between the two
‑ between a sentence
imposed on the appellant which was a year less than that imposed on Fadi and a
non‑parole period
which required the appellant to serve 5 months more
non‑parole period did not follow the same acknowledgement of the
appellant's lower level of offending which is apparent
in the head sentence and,
while a disparity of a few months would be of less significance in a longer
non‑parole period, when
the appellant received a non‑parole period
50% greater than that imposed on Fadi, the distinctions between the two, with
to the learned sentencing judge, do not explain or justify that
is established. Leave to appeal on Ground 1 is granted and the ground is
- resentencing of appellant
having succeeded, it is necessary for this court to resentence the appellant.
The court has all the materials it needs
for that purpose.
offending was serious. The appellant entered into an agreement with the
intention that others would be engaging in structured
deposits of substantial
sums of money, in total over $1 million, knowing what the purpose of that
was, and knowing the scale of the
operation in this State. He was not a
principal in the conspiracy but such offending, and the money laundering which
was its purpose,
is difficult to detect. The participants brought to justice
are often those lower in the hierarchy. Those at the top of the hierarchy
conceive the scheme and stand to make the most gain from it depend upon those
lower down, like the appellant, who are willing
to carry out the various
practical steps required to bring the purpose of the conspiracy to fruition.
deterrence is significant in such offending. Parity is also significant in this
sentencing exercise. The appellant's role
was lower than that of both Moonzer
and Fadi, but it was still significant in that he provided the funding for
flights and secured
accommodation for his co‑conspirators to come to this
State and carry out the deposits, and paid other money out as well.
The matters
in mitigation notwithstanding, only a term of imprisonment with time to serve
could be appropriate.
had regard afresh to the relevant matters contained within
and (2) of the
the findings of fact made by the learned sentencing judge and having regard to
the principle of parity and the sentence imposed
on Fadi particularly, I am
satisfied that the appellant should (again) be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of 3 years 6 months.
sentence exceeding 3 years, the court must fix a non‑parole period
having regard to the same relevant factors. Given his
Honour's findings of
fact as to the respective roles in the offending, but given also the greater
mitigation available to Fadi, I
consider the appropriate non‑parole period
to be one of 9 months.
non‑parole period of 9 months is the minimum time which the appellant
must serve before he is given the opportunity to
serve the rest of his sentence
in the community, subject to the usual conditions that he must be of good
behaviour and not commit
any offence and such other conditions as the Attorney
General may impose, any breach of which may see his parole revoked and a return
to prison to serve the balance of the sentence.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Sweeney
6 NOVEMBER 2025
ts 75 and [30] Abridged agreed statement of material facts for sentence for the
Martellotta v The
[2021] NSWCCA 168
Scook v The Queen
[2008] WASCA 114
(2008) 185 A Crim R 164
[58] ‑ [63]
[58] ‑ [63].
Kabambi v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 44
Stipkovich v The Queen
[2018] WASCA 63
[33], citing
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
Stipkovich v The
[29] ‑ [37].
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
(1990) 169 CLR 525
Power v The Queen
[1974] HCA 26
(1974) 131 CLR 623
(628 ‑ 629);
Sayed v The Queen
[2012] WASCA 17
(2012) 220 A Crim R 236
[2014] WASCA 114
(2014) 241 A Crim R 562
Sentencing of Federal Offenders in
Australia: a Guide for Practitioners
ed, July 2024)
[12] ‑ [13], [36] ‑ [45].
(2007) 174 A Crim R
R v Wing Cheong Li
[2010] NSWCCA 125
(2010) 202 A Crim R
NSWCCA 224.
Nguyen v The Queen
NSWCCA 111.
Lee v The Queen
NSWCCA 123.
Almada v The Queen
Arora v Cobern
[2015] WASC 440
; (2015) 257 A Crim R
Singh v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 163
(2016) 260 A Crim R
Islam v The Queen
NSWCCA 233.
Linggo v The Queen
Huang v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 57
(2018) 96 NSWLR
Singh v The Queen
NSWCCA 216.
Betka v The Queen
NSWCCA 191.
Ngo v The Queen
Hodges v The State of
Western Australia
[2025] WASCA 136
[74] points
Vagh v The State of
Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 17
Gelmi v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 139
Mehta v The State of
Western Australia
[2023] WASCA 24
; (2023) 305 A Crim R 455
v The Queen
(1999) 107 A Crim R 415
[32] (Heenan J).
Yat v The King
[2024] VSCA 93
[65] citing
[11] - [14]
(Ipp J); see also
v The State of Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 233
(2005) 31 WAR 1
Tyler v The Queen
[2007] NSWCCA 247
(2007) 173 A Crim R
[78] ‑ [85] (Simpson J, Spigelman CJ &
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Fabriczy
[2010] VSCA 334
(2010) 30 VR 632
[14] ‑ [23].
DPP v Fabriczy
[21] ‑ [22].
DPP v Fabriczy
Criminal Code
Tan v The State of Western
[2019] WASCA 112
[50], referred to in
The State of Western
Australia v Zhuang
[2021] WASCA 56
[158] ‑ [159].
Abreu v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 286
[23] (Campbell J, McCallum JA &
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[28] (French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
(Gibbs CJ).
(French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
(609 ‑ 610)
(Gibbs CJ).
(French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
(Gibbs CJ), (613) (Mason J), (623)
(Dawson J).
(French CJ, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
(613) (Mason
Ngo v The Queen
[2017] WASCA 3
[36] (Buss P, Mazza JA agreeing).
(613 ‑ 614)
(French CJ, Crennan & Kiefel JJ), citing
(Unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales, 17 April 1997)
[8] ‑ [11] (Simpson J, Sheller JA & Grove J
Billing v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
[2008] WASCA 11
[11] ‑ [12]
(Steytler P, McLure JA
Postiglione v The
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
, 302 (Dawson &
Gaudron JJ);
v The State of Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 78
(2019) 54 WAR 342
[178], [198] ‑ [199];
Stefani v The King
[2024] VSCA 29
[45] ‑ [47].
Postiglione
Gaudron JJ).
Akoum v The King
[2023] WASCA 102
[72] ‑ [73].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (523 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter