URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/124.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VENTURA HOME GROUP PTY LTD and WRIGHT [2025] WASAT 124 (4 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
BUILDING SERVICES (COMPLAINT RESOLUTION AND ADMINISTRATION) ACT
VENTURA HOME GROUP PTY LTD and WRIGHT [2025] WASAT 124
JUDGE F VERNON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
15 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
18 SEPTEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
4 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CC 480 of 2025
VENTURA HOME GROUP PTY LTD
JAMIE WRIGHT
First Respondent
BUILDING COMMISSIONER
Second Respondent
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Interlocutory application - Application for a
stay of the operation of a building remedy order - Application to adjourn review
proceedings
while Supreme Court proceedings are on foot
Legislation:
Building Services (Complaint Resolution and
Administration) Act 2011
State Administrative Tribunal
Application for a stay of the operation of a
building remedy order granted upon provision of an undertaking
Application
for an adjournment of the proceedings dismissed
Programming orders made
Representation:
Mr M Sims SC and Mr L Swanson
First Respondent
Second Respondent
Ms J Shaw SC
Ms J Shaw SC
Solicitors:
Hotchkin Hanly
First Respondent
Second Respondent
State Solicitor's Office
State Solicitor's Office
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
J-Corp Pty Ltd and McCutcheon [2025] WASAT 121
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
an application dated 11 July 2025, Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd
) applied for review of a Building Remedy Order
) made on 13 June 2025 under
Building Services
(Complaint Resolution and Administration) Act 2011
Services Act
) by a delegate of the Building Commissioner on 13 June
2025 in relation to a home owned by Jamie Wright (
), being BRO
O2024-1532 (
BRO requires the applicant, amongst other things, to conduct a full home re-pipe
of Typlex piping installed by the applicant
in the respondent's house.
pipes in the respondent's house have various names in the documents before me,
including Typlex, Pro-Fit, and Iplex pipes. In
these reasons I will call
them 'the pipes'.
applicant is a company in the BGC group of companies (
an application dated 18 August 2025, the applicant applied for interlocutory
orders, as follows:
(a) staying the operation of the BRO pending
further order of the Tribunal, pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
(b) adjourning the proceeding pending further order of the Tribunal, pursuant
to s 32(5) or, alternatively, s 32(7)(e) of the SAT
the applications
applications were heard at the same time as identical applications in three
other matters,
concerning a BRO in similar terms to the BRO requiring either the applicant or
another company in the BGC Group, J-Corp Pty
Ltd, to conduct a full home re-pipe
(amongst other things) of houses owned by the respondents in those proceedings.
Separate reasons
have been delivered in those matters. These reasons refer to
the reasons given in J-Corp Pty Ltd and McCutcheon &
J-Corp Pty Ltd and McCutcheon
[2025] WASAT 121 (
J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons
principal basis on which the stay was sought was to ensure that the applicant is
not required to carry out the work required
under the BRO before the proceedings
for review of the decision to make the BRO (
review proceedings
) have been
determined.
adjournment was sought to delay the review proceedings until determination of
the applicant's application in the Supreme Court,
commenced on 13 June 2025, for
judicial review of the decision of a delegate of the Building Commissioner to
make a BRO relating
to the pipes installed in a house that is not the subject of
any of the four applications before me (
Supreme Court proceedings
respondent and the intervenor opposed the application for an adjournment. The
respondent also opposed the application for a
stay. The intervenor did not
oppose the stay.
18 September 2025, I decided to make orders in the terms set out in at the
conclusion of these reasons (
), in summary,
(a) grant the application to stay the operation of the BRO until
further order of the Tribunal, upon the applicant providing the respondent
an undertaking as to damages in the form set out in the Orders;
(b) refuse the application for an adjournment of the review proceedings;
(c) program the review proceedings to a directions hearing to progress the
matter to a hearing.
18 September 2025, I said that I would produce written reasons for my decision
to make the Orders. These are those reasons.
I have incorporated paragraphs from the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons into these
reasons, references to the applicant in those
paragraphs are to be read as a
reference to the applicant in this matter and a reference to the respondents in
those paragraphs is
to be read as a reference to the respondent in this
determining the interlocutory application, I have had reference to the following
affidavits:
(a) the affidavit of Adam
Casotti sworn on 18 August 2025. Mr Casotti is a registered building
contractor and an employee of BGC
Group involved in the managing, investigating
and coordinating of BGC Group's response to plumbing failures relating to the
(b) two affidavits of Luke Swanson, each sworn on 18 August 2025. Mr Swanson
is a partner of the firm of lawyers acting for the applicant;
(c) the affidavit of the respondent sworn on 8 September 2025;
(d) the affidavit of Lilly Deluca affirmed on 11 September 2025. Ms Deluca
is a lawyer employed by the firm of lawyers acting for
the applicant; and
(e) the affidavit of Aleksandra Miller affirmed
on 12 September 2025. Ms Miller is a lawyer employed by the State Solicitor's
acting for the intervenor.
addition, I have had reference to attachments LFS 21 to LFS 35 to Mr Swanson's
affidavit sworn on 1 August 2024, filed in J-Corp
and McCutcheon, being copies
of court documents filed in the Supreme Court proceedings and proceedings in the
Federal Court of Australia,
and a copy of the
Government Gazette
published on 12 November 2024 containing the Western Australian Plumbing Failure
Policy 2024.
respondent's counsel's submissions were largely consistent with the submissions
filed by the first and second respondents in
J-Corp and McCutcheon. The
applicant's submissions applied equally across all four of the matters before
Accordingly,
the matters referred to in [14] to [29] of the reasons in J-Corp and McCutcheon
apply equally to the applications in
this matter and I incorporate what is said
in those paragraphs into these reasons.
is said in [30] to [31] applies equally to the applications in this matter and
for those reasons, in my view, the most appropriate
approach is to consider the
applications together.
light of the relevant factors in relation to both the application for a stay and
the application for an adjournment, these reasons
proceed with a consideration
of the following factors:
(a) the statutory framework;
(b) any prejudice to the applicant if a stay, or an adjournment, is not
granted, the latter of which includes consideration of the
prospects of success
in the Supreme Court Proceedings;
(c) any prejudice to the respondent if a stay, or an adjournment, is granted,
which includes consideration of the impact of delay;
(d) whether there is a serious question to be determined in the review
proceedings;
(e) the public interest;
(f) the impact of an adjournment on the Tribunal's objectives; and
(g) where the balance of convenience lies.
I say in these reasons should not be construed as findings of fact. In so far
as I express views on the relative strength of
the parties' positions on various
issues, they are not more than preliminary views, based on untested
Statutory framework
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [35] to [41], about the
statutory framework, applies equally to this matter
and I incorporate those
paragraphs into these reasons.
Prejudice to the applicant if the review proceedings are not adjourned
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [42] to [63], about the
applicant's prejudice if the review proceedings are
not adjourned, applies
equally to this matter and I incorporate those paragraphs into these reasons.
Prejudice to the applicant if the stay is not granted
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [64] and [65] applies equally to
this matter and I incorporate those paragraphs
into these reasons.
BRO requires that the applicant conduct a full re-pipe of the respondent's house
within 6 months of 13 June 2025, that is by
13 December 2025. It is not in
dispute that this goes beyond the work that the applicant has been doing and
says it will continue
Casotti says in his affidavit that BGC Group has been performing damage repair
where there have been burst pipe events, and ceiling
re-pipes, on a voluntary
basis. Mr Casotti says that the applicant has not performed a full home re-pipe
of the respondent's house,
but that a ceiling re-pipe was performed in February
2025. On his evidence, in order to complete the full re-pipe required by
BRO, the applicant must remove and replace the remaining pipes in
the laundry, kitchen, ensuite, powder room, and bathroom.
Mr Casotti's evidence, based on re-pipe work the BGC Group has undertaken on six
houses, a complete re-pipe takes 12 to 14 weeks
to complete if the occupiers
move out of their home while the work is being done, and 14 to 16 weeks if they
do not do so. Accordingly,
Mr Casotti says that there is a risk that the
complete re-pipe of the respondent's house will not be complete by 13 December
if the re-pipe work is not commenced by the middle of September 2025.
That deadline coincided with the date of the hearing before
Accordingly,
on Mr Casotti's evidence, there is a real risk that the required work would not
be completed by 13 December 2025 in
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [70] to [78] about the
applicant's prejudice if a stay is not granted applies
equally in this matter
and I incorporate those paragraphs into these
Prejudice to the respondent if the stay or adjournment are granted
Potential financial and emotional impacts of delay
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [79] about the applicant's
concession concerning the effect of delay on the
respondents applies equally in
this matter and I incorporate that paragraph into these reasons.
his affidavit of 5 September 2025, the respondent says that he bought his home
in December 2023, without being informed about
the pipe issues. He says that in
the past nearly 2 years he has suffered six burst pipes and has been told
two occurred before he
purchased the house. He says that he lives in fear of
pipes bursting.
respondent says that the water leaks have created the risk of black mould
developing in the home, which is of particular risk
to him because he has a
serious health issue. This also creates stress.
respondent says that he is self-employed. He says that each leak requires about
seven tradespeople to attend his home, and that
requires him to be at home for
many hours to let them in. He estimates that every time a pipe bursts, he
spends about 10 hours contacting
the applicant. This impacts his ability to
respondent wants to sell the house but its value has been reduced while the pipe
issue remains unresolved, even if he can find
a buyer to purchase it knowing of
the pipe issue.
is no challenge to this evidence. I accept that the respondent has suffered
adverse financial consequences as a result of
the ongoing problem of pipes
also accept that there is an emotional toll where a person has experienced
numerous burst pipes and has to live with the risk that
other pipes may burst at
any time, and with the disruption to their normal lives in a house where
building work is repeatedly being
undertaken to replace burst pipes. I accept
that there may be health risks associated with the flooding that results from a
pipe event.
I do not accept that the stay will cause the respondent hardship that cannot be
alleviated to some extent by the terms of
the stay. Whilst the history suggests
that there is a risk of a burst pipe event before a hearing, if the BRO is
stayed, that may
addition, I also find that the work that has been done to date has reduced risk
to some extent, given the replacement of a portion
of the allegedly defective
financial risks attached to delay, if not the emotional consequences, may be
alleviated to some extent by conditioning the order
for a stay on the provision
of an undertaking as to damages. As I have said, the applicant did not oppose
providing such an undertaking.
Length of the delay
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [88] to [90] about the delay if
a stay is ordered but not an adjournment, and
in [91] to [94] about the delay if
there is a stay and an adjournment, applies equally in this matter and I
incorporate those paragraphs
into these reasons.
Prospects of success in the review proceedings
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [95] to [98] about the
applicant's prospects of success in the review proceedings
applies equally in
this matter, save that the reference at [96] of those reasons to 'the applicant
and Ventura' should be read as
'the applicant and J-Corp'. With that amendment,
I incorporate those paragraphs into these reasons.
Public Interest considerations
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [99] to [102] about the public
interest considerations applies equally in this
matter, and I incorporate those
paragraphs into these reasons.
Impact on the Tribunal's objectives
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [103] to [105] about the impact
of the applications on the Tribunal's objectives
applies equally in this matter,
and I incorporate those paragraphs into these
Balance of convenience
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [106] to [107] about the balance
of relevant factors, or the balance of convenience,
applies equally in this
matter, and I incorporate those paragraphs into these
Other matters
is said in the J-Corp and McCutcheon reasons at [108] to [117] applies equally
in this matter, and I incorporate those paragraphs
the reasons referred to above, I have determined that it is desirable to order a
stay of the operation of the BRO subject to
the provision of an undertaking by
the applicant and to dismiss the application for an adjournment of the review
proceedings. I
have also decided it appropriate to make orders programming the
review proceedings to a directions hearing, as set out
orders made on 18 September 2025 were as follows:
The Tribunal
section 25(2)
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
operation of the Building Remedy Order O2024-1532 made by the Building
Commissioner against the applicant on 13 June 2025
is stayed pending further
order of the Tribunal upon the applicant making a written undertaking as to
damages in the following terms
and lodging that undertaking with the Tribunal.
Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd hereby undertakes to the Tribunal to pay
to any party restrained or affected by the Tribunal's order dated
18 September
2025 staying the operation of Building Remedy Order O2024-1532 pending further
order of the Tribunal such compensation
as the Tribunal may in its discretion
consider in the circumstances to be just, such compensation to be assessed by
the Tribunal
or in accordance with such directions as the Tribunal may make and
to be paid in such manner as the Tribunal may direct.
copy of any undertaking lodged pursuant to order 1 is to be served on the
parties have liberty to apply in relation to order 1 on giving 48 hours notice
to the Tribunal and the parties.
applicant's application dated 18 August 2025 to adjourn the proceeding is
matter is listed for a directions hearing at 10.30 am on Wednesday, 24
September 2025, at 565 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia.
4 pm on Monday, 22 September 2025, the parties must file with the Tribunal and
give to the other parties proposed orders to program
the proceeding to a final
hearing and their unavailable dates for a final hearing in November and December
2025, and January and
February 2026.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
Associate to the Deputy President Judge Vernon
4 NOVEMBER 2025
J-Corp Pty Ltd and Janice McCutcheon & Ors, CC
430 of 2025; Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd and Simon Bosnich & Ors, CC 459 of
2025; Ventura Home Group Pty Ltd and Timothy Cox & Ors, CC 462 of
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter