URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WILLIAM MUIR and FRAYSON PTY LTD trading as IN STYLE RESIDENCE (Decision 19873) [2011] WABDT 62 (21 July 2011)
DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
MR D FORRESTER Deputy Chairperson
February 2011, 11 March 2011, 30 May 2011 and 31 May 2011
ORDERS ISSUED
WRITTEN REASONS
COMPLAINT No.
MUIR Complainant and
FRAYSON PTY LTD trading as
IN STYLE RESIDENCE Respondent
Lump Sum Contract –alterations to price –
application of Home
Contracts Act
– section 12 – assessment of total sum due
REPRESENTATION
Complainants
Mr R Chappell (Representative)
Mr Paul Arns (Counsel) Mr Armand Noor
CASES REFERRED TO
THE DECISION
Liebe v Molloy (1906) 4 CLR 307
Brooking on Building
Contracts (4
Edition), para 10.7
REASONS FOR
DECISION AND ORDERS
1. BACKGROUND
On or about 23 July 2009 the Complainant/Owner, Mr
Muir entered into a contract with the Respondent/Builder for the clearing of one
side of his block at Nedlands, the construction of a wall to divide this part
from the existing residence, and sundry other variations
to the contract to do
other work. There was a question as to the papers which comprised the contract,
but generally the work progressed.
At some period down the track the Owner
became concerned at the ever-increasing cost, in particular the excess of the
costs of clearance
which had been included generally as a provisional sum of
$10,000. Eventually the Owner paid a final sum in lieu of several of the
stages of payment and brought a complaint for excess costs. The Builder
meanwhile has counterclaimed for non-payment of costs
incurred in works
completed on the site. The Owner is also claiming for costs of repairs required
to several pieces of bad workmanship
in steps and walls constructed by the
2. CONTRACT CONDITIONS
2.1 A large part of the evidence given concerned the
contract, its requirements and interpretation. The Builder, Mr Armand Noor in
his evidence filed Exhibit ‘B’ which comprised:
HIA Limited Lump
Sum Building Contract for alterations and additions (December 2001 edition).
This was signed by both parties.
Schedule signed
and dated 23 July 2009 for $210,875.50. But in evidence he referred to other
2.2 In evidence given by Mr Muir he presented as Exhibit ‘I’ the
contract documents together with a letter dated 21 May
2009. These were clipped
together beneath the title page of Frayson Pty Ltd stating “Contract
documents for Mr William Muir,
36 Dalkeith Road, Nedlands”. They
Letter dated 21
May 2009 addressed to the Owner, Mr William Muir; the General Conditions of
Contract (as per Mr Noor’s evidence).
Schedule (as per
Mr Noor’s evidence).
Addenda signed
by both parties and dated 23 July 2009.
signed and dated 23 July 2009.
signed only by the Owner but undated.
Sundry drawings
involving designs of footings to walls, slabs and footings etc drawn up by MA
Lalli & Associates – all signed
and dated 23 July
2.3 A perusal of the evidence given does not indicate that the Builder disagreed
in any way that the full documentation of the contract
was as presented by the
Owner. Nor could he do so in view of the fact that he had signed the documents
while the letter of 21 May
2009 expressly referred to the contract giving
details of the make-up of the construction cost of
$210,875.50.
3. EVIDENCE
3.1 Section 16 of the Home Building
Contracts Act
not give the Tribunal jurisdiction to order any amount to be paid exceeding
$100,000 unless the parties consent to such an order
being made. Both parties
consented to any such order should the matter arise.
3.2 Counsel for the Builder put forward a Scott Schedule showing $122,600.83 was
unpaid and that under the contract, interest was
accruing at 30% for unpaid
Mr Armand Noor
gave sworn evidence. He stated he was a B.Arch and a
registered builder and had been 30 years in the industry. He was a director of
Frayson Pty Ltd which had been trading for 19 years. He had been introduced to
Mr Muir by an architect. He had had several meetings
with Mr Muir as Owner of
the block at 36 Dalkeith Road who wished to subdivide the block and have it
prepared for sale with retaining
walls, a ramp and steps up to his house. He
produced the plans of the proposal as Exhibit ‘A’. These drawings
ready until close to signing the contract. There was no Specification
so they had created one. The contract dated 23 July 2009 consisted
Building Contract
Second Letter of
Offer dated 21 May 2009
Specification
Architectural
He stated that the paperwork was completed in his office but the actual work
on the site was done by subcontractors. He was on the
site on a daily basis. On
first visiting the site he had found it to be severely root bound with lots of
undergrowth and rubbish
which had to be cleared. It was impossible to see or
explore the items underground. It would have been necessary to scratch every
square metre to get an idea. Mr Muir regularly gave approval for them to
continue. He produced a number of photographs as Exhibit
Attached to the Scott Schedule were a number of invoices and others were
produced as Exhibits ‘D’ and
‘E’. The witness then went
through the invoices and variation orders. Up until handover they had not been
asked for details.
The excess in the costs came from what was found below ground
level. The Provisional Sum was based on surface evidence only. Changes
to the brick piers to accommodate the water meter and also to the balustrading.
Some progress claims had items, e.g. infill
panels and gates which had not been
completed because they had had the work suspended by the Owner. With the brick
paving he had
provided the Owner with a selection from which he had chosen one
sample. With the brick paving an additional 59m
had been required in
various places. The masonry walls were over and above the scope of the contract.
More soak-wells were required.
The Variation Order (VO) 161209 in the file was
not signed by Mr Muir but he was sure it had been signed. Mr Muir did not stop
work and they had been told to go ahead without being priced. He had done
this on many occasions. Fencing was another addition. The
cleaning and sealing
of the brick paving had not been completed and the sealer was in his warehouse.
The kerb deposit was a bill
by the City, but in fact Telstra had cut the
footpath. Negotiations with the City and Telstra had failed and as the Owner had
the work they should get their bond back.
As to the counterclaim by the Owner, the witness denied that the issues had
any relevance. The steps were uneven with one step only
where the RL level had
required them to ramp up one of the steps very slightly. A waterproof membrane
had been laid under the single
leaf wall and the parged wall. Penetrometer tests
showed hard ground where there was an alleged crack in the wall. Exhibit
was produced of this test. He denied the counterclaims and
agreed that the items not completed included installation of the gates,
handrails, panels, finishing the reticulation and there was a $2,000
provisional item reflected in the addenda in relation to the deck area at the
back. With reference to the addenda there was a provision
sum item for
assistance but the block required re-surveying first and this item is exhausted.
His last invoice was issued on 16 April.
He presented a letter from his
solicitors of 14 July 2010 as Exhibit ‘G’.
In cross examination, there was discussion of the letter dated 21 May 2009 as
to the amount included in the Specification. Exhibit
‘H’ was the
first quote which was unacceptable to the Owner due to the number of provisional
sum items. The witness said
they did not envisage the extent of the root-bound
soil. They had assessed the four trees to come out. They had prepared the
orders which were countersigned by the Owner. The contract prepared
was a Lump Sum Contract but the Variation Orders or the Provisional
alter the price stated. The Act was followed in sending the letter in July 2009
to the Owner. The provisional sum of
$10,000 changed because the work undertaken became more extensive. He had
visited the site once before entering into the contract.
The letter of 16
September 2009 became Exhibit ‘I’ and covered perimeter fencing. The
letters ‘NC’ represented
‘No Charge’. He signed all
variations except 18210. He had not done a Cost Plus Invoice. The City of
Nedlands licence
was based on $80,000 but they were not involved. A fence was
placed along the front of the boundary to secure the property when the
absent for a few days. It was additional work in the Owner’s interest. He
had drafted Annexure ‘B’ at
the Owner’s request.
On the second day of the hearing, the Builder was questioned on a number of
versions of VO 2909. Exhibit ‘J1’ was the
original unsigned copy of
VO 2909. Exhibit ‘J2’ is a duplicate signed copy. Exhibit
‘J3’ is a copy received
from the Builder’s solicitors during
discovery and is the same as Exhibit ‘J2’ except that
a date stamp and ‘J3’ does not. A number of
invoices were referred to and comments made on them. Invoice 4809 was for
supply of a sea container which was not taken away at the end of the contract.
Invoice 10909/A was covered in Progress Claim
No. 2. Annexure ‘B’
was drafted by the witness. Invoice 17909 for the beehive removal was paid by
the Owner as the witness
had no idea of the existence of the beehive. It was not
included in the Lump Sum – see Item 3(d) of the letter dated 21 May
The invoice dated 23 September 2009 came under the Provisional Sum. Trees
were not named in the contract as such. The Owner paid the
accounts without
protest. For increases in the Provisional Sum, clause 7(d) was referred to. All
payments were on account, the witness
had explained to the Owner what the
accounts were about and he did not ask for any backup information. However the
Builder did know
there was a deadline set by the Planning Commission.
Invoice 151009 was paid. Backup material was not provided and the Owner never
said it was paid under protest. LA Earthworks were the
subcontractors. There was
no differentiation between Lump Sum or Provisional Sum for their work. The quote
65) from LA Earthworks was not seen by him and he had not received it. The
quote was “Marked for Identification No. 1”.
Invoice 281009 was for slab and footing work which was completed. Invoice
281001A was paid. It was not under protest. Invoice 281009B
referred to the
first two items were not in the contract. The third item referred to the gas
line which was in the garden bed. The
Owner wanted it lowered. The witness did
not give him a quote but was asked to do the work. The water meter had to be
lowered because
the driveway was widened.
Invoice 71209 was paid before the roof frame was done. Invoice 141209 was
paid direct by the Owner. He was not aware of this at the
time. For Invoice
12310, the infills have not been installed nor the gate locks. Invoice 12310A
referred to the gates and fencing
which had not been installed. The bill was
sent because the Owner had asked for information on all invoices to see what his
would come to. They had completed 90% of the fencing. The final invoice at
page 22 had been rendered when Practical Completion had
been achieved although
segments of work remained to be done.
Invoice 15410 related to drilling of bore holes which were not in the
original scope of work. They were related to driving piles.
Invoice 151009
included the removal of the east fence and the beehive which were not in the
original scope of work. They had not
disturbed the northern end of the asbestos
fence with the removal of the large tree. The fence was disturbed as a result of
a variation
request (see VO 2909) which also referred to the south fence. That
work was not done or charged for. The Invoice as No.
24 of the list covered hard digging as part of the earthworks for plumbing,
which digging was an extra. The plumbing came within the
Specification.
The letter at No. 24 included the sand pad required for the storeroom. The
chicken pen was camouflaged by vines. In the photos the
pen is at page 7 and
bottom right. It had been below ground and had to be excavated out but he had to
answer to a question about
pine-logs and chicken-wire being included. The
witness said the initial site inspection had been done with the architect, Mr
and the Owner and himself present. 100m
of material was removed
from the site. There was no planking to protect the pavement and he agreed each
truck took 10m
of material. There was no rock on top of the sewer
line but they encountered rock at the rear south boundary. The hard digging was
root-bound sand. He agreed on the site visit that he saw a heavily vegetated
block and knew there would be roots underground. He
had not paid any heed to the
largest tree being a rubber tree. He saw on the inspection the mound for the
sewer and knew where it
was located and how deep it was. One subcontractor
damaged it but the bill for repair was sent to the Owners as the line was not
always exact. It arose from the VO to drive in piles as a bridge for the new
masonry wall. The account is at page 24.
Exhibit ‘K’ was a letter of 23 April 2010 from the Owner to the
Builder asking for copies of invoices. This was in response
Builder’s request for payment of outstanding monies. He did not answer as
the Owner had no right to demand these. He
had only supplied bills to assist the
Owner get his finances right. He asked for payments for work done.
There were various changes made. One was where he had to detach the front
wall from a pier to avoid damaging the wall of the house.
Fill came from below
the patio. The dry well under the patio was not mentioned in any records.
Removal and raking was part of the
provisional sum. A bougainvillea is a shrub
and not mentioned in the contract. The tree stump was at the back of the block.
The existing
concrete driveway was part of the earthworks.
The paving bricks did turn green as they were clay bricks and the salt was
rising to the surface. A VO was signed but the work was
not done, because they
had not been paid. Invoice 15410A referred to the sleeves which were additional
ones to the contract and ordered
by the Owner. They were to bridge the garden
beds at the rear and were covered by VO 161209.
Tanks with trafficable lids were installed. The tank at the front of the
property was a large one. They added three more down-pipes
so enlargement was
necessary. With Invoice 2909 they had had to use temporary fencing. The sewer
depth was 2.5 metres and it was
a metre into the block. They had no excavations
on the south boundary wall. They could have shored up the block fence but were
to take it down. The brick wall there has allegedly cracked, but he
did not know why.
With the bricks he had asked the Owner to make a selection from samples he
took to him. He referred to Exhibit ‘H’ page
1. The broken footpath
meant that the contractor was getting the rebate under the contract. He had
received the subcontractor’s
invoices and had passed on the costs as
incurred in his invoices to a total of $37,052. The Owner had paid without
protest. The removal
of the north fence entailed an actual distance of 30 metres
as it stopped short of the road as can be seen from the photos. The buried
sleepers were buried under the rubbish on the site.
In re-examination, the Builder with VO 2909 denied pasting any signature on
it. The first he had heard of the allegation was at this
hearing. He had
received an abusive telephone call after sending Invoice 23909. He had advised
that they were within the contract
time. The document marked for identification
was new to him. With Invoice 12310 the infills were not installed. The value not
to was about $16,000. Otherwise all work on the fence still needed
$2,000 of powder-coating. Invoice 15410 relates to invoices rendered
Earthworks being numbers 634, 657 and 673. He had attended the site daily and
occasionally two or three times. A VO changed
the scope of work on the eastern
and southern wall. On the eastern boundary three men were working on that wall,
and extra piles
were required. He had to re-peg the boundary as included in
Invoice 151009. The chicken pen was well camouflaged and no one had
any idea it
was there. The sealant for the pavers cost $1,720.
The Counsel then advised that Mr Jerovich was not being called as he was a
William Muir
, sworn, gave evidence. He said he was apprenticed to
the building industry and became a registered builder. Ultimately he had
finished up with Bunnings and Sandovers and had been on the Rural Industries
Council. He lived at 36 Dalkeith Road and had taken
steps to subdivide the
block. The Planning Commission had given him to 12 March 2010 to get the work
completed. He had approached
Joe Moro for a plan. He had recommended the
Builder, Mr Noor, for a plan. He had recommended the Builder (Mr Noor) for the
Mr Noor had visited the block to get measurements and levels. Exhibit 2
being a drawing of the block had been made for the City Council.
shaded in red were the areas that had to be demolished and included the concrete
driveway. When the Builder, Mr Noor, visited
the site, he had pointed out where
the sewer line was and advised of the depth, shown on the drawing as an easement
with a dotted
line. He had also pointed out the soak-well on the drawing. Also
he had pointed out the disturbed paving and the broken side steps.
The tree had
been pruned but its trunk was about a metre in diameter. The trees were the
magnolia, umbrella and also several hibiscus.
At the back a dead tree had been
covered by a vine. There was a large bougainvillea and a pergola. The henhouse
had been made by
him of pine-poles and chicken-wire with Colorbond sheeting. All
were above ground and visible. To the northeast there was a large
pepper tree
across the boundary. Although it was just in the neighbour’s property it
also had to come out and was pointed out
to the Builder.
The witness pointed to the photographs at Exhibit ‘C’. He drew
attention to page 1 with the old pepper tree; page 5 with
the vines covering the
sleepers; page 7 with the chicken pen in the southeast corner and the fence at
the right was still there.
This fence was not part of the contract. Page 8 at
the top right shows red material which was part of the gazebo and red tiles.
10 shows the pepper tree, the lattice from the gazebo and the temporary
fence. Page 11 shows the chicken pen.
He then produced Exhibits 3 and 4 being photographs of the site pre-work and
Exhibit 5 being a photo of the magnolia and umbrella
tree and an oleander on the
neighbour’s side, the roots of which would have extended onto his block.
The Builder was on site
for an hour to an hour and a half. Only one soak-well
below the patio was discussed. He had told the Builder the sewer line had to
lowered from above ground to below ground. Then he got the letter of 21 January.
Exhibit ‘H’ was not acceptable as
a quote as it contained too many
items leaving him exposed to cost escalation. He had a further meeting to firm
up various items
into a lump sum contract. He had requested that the
specification comply with the letter. On 23 July when he went into the office,
the price had been firmed up to $210,000 from $130,000 and he and the Builder
had then signed all the documents except the annexure
relating to payment of the
sums when due. He had paid the deposit. The requirement of the City Council that
all stormwater had to
be contained on site was mentioned to the Builder. The
soak-wells had been increased from two to three. The letter of 4 August 2009
relating to the sea container was accepted as Exhibit 6. However it was not
removed from site and he had to pay someone else cash
of $250 to remove it.
VO 21809 had been signed by him and he had put the writing on it. The ficus
tree on the neighbour’s property and over the boundary
had been paid for
by him as to removal costs and the work was not originally in the scope of works
as not wholly in his property.
Exhibit ‘J1’ being VO 2909 was not signed by the witness because
there were items in it which related to the south fence
which had not been done.
Also the quote was for removal of the whole east boundary fence and half only
had been performed and paid
for. Another VO (16909) dated 16 August was not
signed. It was for concrete piles to the east boundary. He only wanted half.
he had paid the surveyor direct. It was obvious that there were
He had paid an account of 17 September 2009 for demolition work even though
not completed. He had received an invoice for work to
remove the beehive but did
not pay it as it was part of the lump sum and could be seen. The account for
$41,000 for 23 December 2009
had shocked him by its size. He told the Builder he
would pay on account only on the understanding it would be reviewed at a later
date. Baits to kill rats were part of the lump sum. When asked to justify it,
the Builder had said the trees were bigger than he
thought. He never got any
review or justification for the price.
The Invoice 15009 of 15 October 2009 refers to VO 2909. He had paid it as he
wanted to keep the job moving and could review it at
a later date. Invoice
281009B related to the gas pipeline and was all part of the lump sum
The plumbing relating to the sealing and diverting of the existing water
service was all part of the lump sum. The gas meter box was
not part of the lump
sum and could be paid. Many accounts have been paid subject to review. There
were no toilets on site and he
had many people asking to use the toilet in the
house. The safety fence was needed as there was no site security. With the back
because there was no site shed, materials were stored on the veranda. He
had given the earthworks contractor a cheque for $3,000
because he could not pay
his tip fees. With Invoice 3310 to move the water meter, he had not been given a
quote prior to work taking
With invoices 13310 and 12310A, the work has not been done for these items.
Invoice 15310 relates to paving which is in the drawing
and referred to in a
letter of 21 May 2009 at page 6. Exhibit 9 being a plan of the paving coloured
yellow was produced. The Builder
objected as it was just a plan and did not
purport to be accurate. The Owner said the details were on page 7 as the second
the Specification. With pavers the Owner said the Builder had given him
a different size but said it would cost the same and he had
approved that. He
considered the bill for $6,800 was excessive. It was not the result of a VO. The
concrete apron crossover was included
in the fixed construction costs.
Invoice 15410 included concrete paths among 20 items. The asbestos fence at
the rear had been close to the sewer line and he had been
told it was mandatory
to move it. He approved and paid. This bill is a duplication. Excavation of the
sewer and gas pipework were
in the Specification as also raking the block. He
did not know what 40 cubic metres of rubbish referred to. Only tree roots were
below ground level. The soak-well was below the patio as also foundations to
walls. Four bore holes were part of the contract. Drawing
02 shows the elevation
crossing over the sewers. He knew nothing about the hole for sewerage footing
repair. Footing for the south
boundary was in the contract as it referred to
footings for the wall. Compaction to the northeast corner referred to making
to the ground after removal of tree roots. Asbestos fence, shed and chicken
pen were agreed as an extra for removal and he had paid
for this. This bill is a
duplication. Removal of gazebo is part of demolition. For the patio it was a
timber structure with an RSJ
into the brick coursing. A rock breaker was used
for roots of trees and referred to as bricks as there was no rock on the site.
crossing was shattered by trucks going over it. The removal of material item
is exaggerated. Raking of root- bound ground was in
the contract. The
bougainvillea was listed in a letter. Removal of
a tree stump was possibly the pepper tree. He had no idea what the labour
item referred to. The machine and operator were there for
weeks. He had written
to the Builder for details on a number of occasions but got no reply. There was
confusion over the soak-wells.
The plan shows two, the contract says three, but
four are now claimed which he believed was correct. There was a second bill over
stormwater drains.
Invoice 2109 involved the temporary perimeter fence. He had not paid it.
Invoice 16410 referred to bricks for the storeroom which
was included in the
contract. Invoice 18210 was not paid as work not done. Invoice 16410A referred
to the forfeited curb bond. The
witness had not broken the footpath so did not
pay the bill.
The final payment was for $45,000. He had employed a quantity surveyor,
Rawlinsons to calculate the balance due. His conclusion was
$35,000 was due but
the witness had added $10,000 to take account of practical completion. As
planning approval had gone through,
he treated the work as completed though
there was work still to be done. He had not received any final accounts.
Interest claims
had not been paid as the Builder had not completed the work nor
adjusted any of his accounts.
The problems from the work were as follows:
(a) Six bricks were lifting off the front steps.
(b) There were uneven steps to the left side of the house – one layer on
top would make it even.
(c) He could not recall the laying of a waterproof membrane.
(d) A vertical crack was in the wall behind the workshop. It went through 11
(e) The estimated cost to repair was $19,000.
(f) The balustrade shown in Exhibit ‘A2’ had not been installed, nor
was there any handrail.
(g) The Builder had not installed the gate for which he was being charged
(h) Reticulation to the garden beds shown on the plan was absent. See page 8 of
the Specification. A charge had been raised despite
being in the contract.
(i) The paving bricks had not been removed but work has been invoiced.
(j) A strata survey had not been done by the Builder, so he had to do it
(k) Some of the feet had broken off the down-pipes and some were below the
paving, causing problems with an overflowing gutter on
the north side.
(l) Eight panels had been invoiced but not installed. Interest on the cost was
being charged.
In cross-examination the Owner was asked about Exhibit ‘G’. He
said he had no trouble getting finance. He had told the
Builder he would pay the
funds owing, but denied that in April 2010 he needed finance to pay the
invoices. He declined to pay as
he needed the additional information which was
not being provided. He stated he had drafted the letter at Exhibit 10 on the
of Mr Chapple, his adviser. When asked about issuing proceedings in the
Building Disputes Tribunal only after ten days from advising
the Builder, he
thought it was about the same time.
As to the bundle of invoices, the witness stated as to 17909 that there was
no provisional sum and he did not know if a specialist
beehive man was involved.
He had paid the bill on account and never approved the VO. He had trusted the
subcontractor, Mr Richards
in relation to the clearing of the block. He had only
wanted the work finished before March. With Invoice 673 he had written a cheque
under protest to keep the job going. He had approved a brick fence for the
northern boundary. On the rear fence (eastern boundary)
because of the damage to
the fence he had agreed to put up
a brick wall. On the southern side the price put forward by the Builder had
been paid on 18 November 2009 on account, as he had then
employed a quantity
With Invoice 281009B he agreed to lower the water meter but did not recall
the discussion about the ramp. He did recall the Builder
saying he had to
replace the cover for the gas system. He did not receive a VO but an invoice. He
was happy to pay for what he had
approved but did not approve of a change of
gradient for the ramp.
He had paid the invoice on page 10 and had no issue with invoices 281009,
251109, 212009, 71209 and 141209. With Invoice 21110 the
work of the retaining
walls was complete now but then it was incomplete. The Builder did not do the
work for 3210 and no VO had been
received for 3310. With the panels he had only
asked for a quote, but did not authorise the work. With Progress Claim No. 9 for
and gates, the work had not been done. He reserved the right to complete
the work but did not want the Builder on site to do the
Invoice 12310B practical completion charge had been included in the $45,000
paid and there was no dispute as to the invoice. With
Invoice 15310 he had
agreed to a change in design but at the same price as before. Exhibit 13 was a
rogue invoice which he had not
seen before. Invoice 15410A involved soak-wells.
He denied any conversation after the contract was entered into about increasing
the soak-wells apart from asking the contractor to upgrade to three soak-wells.
He had no knowledge of a rock breaker being used
on this work.
Invoice 2909 referred to temporary fencing to make the site secure while he
was away on holiday over Christmas. The email of 20 December
(Exhibit 15) refers
to a letterbox which he had bought. Invoice 16410 refers to bricks and mortar to
finish the tops of the walls
which were to be done at the same price. There was
no VO for the work. Invoice 18210 was for cleaning and sealing of the paving but
has not been done.
VO 18210 was signed by the witness as it was for paving and the extra cost
related to an additional area above that shown in the plans
Specification. He did not give the paver any instructions who went ahead and did
it satisfactorily. He did not authorise
any work beyond the store and he did not
agree there was more to be done.
The Builder was responsible for the crossing over the kerb. He had never
agreed it was for him as the witness to pay the account.
With reference to
Exhibits ‘J1’, ‘J2’ and ‘J3’ he had only
agreed to what was reasonable for
With reference to the counterclaim and the decrease in value of the property,
he had not advertised it for sale. He had been prevented
by the caveat of the
Builder. He could not get the caveat lifted until he got a ruling from the
Tribunal. The bank interest was due
to fairly heavy borrowings to meet the
increased costs. The quantity surveyor had not sent a bill up to this time. He
had no idea
of the cost of repairing the wall crack. The cost of the steps had
been assessed by him. With the cost of completing the work he
did not want the
Builder back. All he had asked for were the details of the payments.
In re-examination he said the sale of the block was intended to pay off the
existing mortgage and the cost of the contract.
The City Council had said that all stormwater was to be contained on site and
this had been written into the contract under ‘plumbing’.
two ficus trees. The Lilly Pilly tree was located close to the gazebo and just
right of the centre of the eastern wall.
Wayne Richard Harvey
, real estate agent, gave evidence on the values
of blocks in the area. He said that the block which would have been $950,000 in
2009 was now approximately $850,000. He had seen the block from the
Paul McEvoy
, quantity surveyor, employed by Rawlinsons had made
costings of the work. He was familiar with the Housing Industry Lump Sum
and had perused Exhibit ‘I’. His report was at Exhibit 16.
He noted the contract made no mention of trees and felt it
was part of the
contract as distinct from the Provisional Sum. The tree roots have to be in the
Lump Sum Contract. He agreed he had
no legal training and not been on the site.
He made his assessment from a drawing and photographs. The Provisional Sum was
what the Builder could see. He agreed with the Tribunal that there had
to be some limitation on the amount due in excess of a Provisional
Sum but was
not aware of any limitation in the industry.
John Alexander McGinn
, forensic document examiner, stated he had
examined thousands of documents. He had been asked to examine Exhibits
and ‘J1’ and ‘J2’. The three signatures
were each of those of Mr Noor. The signature of Mr Muir was a highly
one. On Exhibit ‘J2’, there was a misalignment of the print as it is
at an angle and the marginal habits were
not consistent. He concluded that
components of the document had come from other locations by electronic means.
They could have been
taken out of an envelope.
4. CONTRACTUAL ISSUES
4.1 There was no dissension that the contract was
governed by the Housing Industry Association Limited Lump Sum Building Contract
for Alterations and Editions – Exhibit ‘B’ and Exhibit
‘I’ (part). These General Conditions contain
the following relevant
clauses or references:
(a) At the top right hand corner there is a clear indication to the
applicability of the “
(b) Clause 4(b)
“The Builder shall comply with all relevant statutes,
regulations, local laws and any lawful orders or direction made thereunder
relate to the Works and shall indemnify the Owner from and against all monies
payable thereunder and for monies payable for
thereof...”
(c) Clause 5(g)
“Unless otherwise specified in the contract documents,
digging requiring the use of pick, axe, crowbar, blasting or machinery
removal of rocks, soil, dewatering, pile and keel to sewer lines and consequent
restoration and drainage of the Site, or
other such unforeseen requirements have
not been allowed for in this Contract and shall be dealt with as a variation in
with Clause 12(b) or...”
(d) Clause 7(b)
“Within TEN (10) Working days of the Builder giving the
Owner a) notice that any of the Works described in Column ‘A’
item 7 of the Schedule have been completed, the Owner shall pay to the Builder
that portion of the Contract Price mentioned opposite
those Works in Column
‘B’ of item 7...”
(e) Clause 7(d)
“Other than in relation to the final payment, a
progress payment is an account only and the Owner has no right of
(f) Clause 7(e)
“If the Owner does not pay any amount owing to the
Builder by the due date for payment:
Owner must pay interest for the late
payment...”
(g) Clause 11(b)
“Where Provisional Sums or Prime Cost items are
included in the Contract Price...
(b) Provisional
Sums stated in Item 11(a) of the Schedule or detailed in the Contract Documents
price for materials; subcontractor charges; delivery to the Site and
installation; and
additional amount being that percentage set out in item 11 of the Schedule
applied to that price for the Builder’s supervision,
overhead and
completion of the Work the subject of a Provisional Sum ... the Builder must
provide the Owner with an itemised statement
stating the price for the work or
the items, calculated in accordance with the provisions of Clauses 11(b) and (c)
hereof, and the
Contract Price shall be adjusted accordingly and paid in
accordance with Clause 7.”
(h) Clause 12(a)
“If the Owner wishes to make any variation to the
Works and/or the Contract Documents, the Owner ... shall give the Builder
written request for such variation ... in the event that the Builder is prepared
to agree to the variation:
Builder shall prepare and give to the Owner ... a variation document setting out
the terms of and the cost to be incurred
on account of, the
(ii) the Owner ... shall sign and return the variation document to the
Builder ... shall sign and insert in the variation document the date that the
Builder signs it and forward a signed copy
to the Owner ... as soon as is
reasonably practicable thereafter and before the work to which the variation
relates is commenced;
variation shall be carried out as if it were part of the Works under the
(i) The Schedule under Clause 11 did not list any Provisional Sums but under (c)
stated that the Additional Percentage allowed was
4.2 Although as noted the parties were notified on the front page of the General
Conditions of the existence of the
, apart from the
requirements of commencing an action in this Tribunal and the need for both
parties to agree to the provisions of
Section 16, neither party at the hearing
made any mention of any other provision, particularly
‘Understatement of prime cost items etc’. This section is very
important in relation to the applicability of provisional
sums and yet was not
put to the Builder. The section reads as follows:
builder must not enter into a contract that contains an estimated amount for a
prime cost item or a provisional sum if
the amount or estimated amount is
misstated by being less than the least amount that it could reasonably cost to
supply the item
or perform the work to which the amount relates.
(2) In determining whether an amount is misstated for the purposes of
subsection (1) regard is to be had to the matters or contingencies
known (which may be set out in this contract) or ought reasonably to have been
known, to the Builder at the date of the
Two other sections are also relevant. In
Section 10(b)
“the builder is
not entitled to demand or receive from the owner any payment after the
commencement of the home building work
unless the payment is (i) a genuine
progress payment for work already performed or materials or services already
supplied; or ...”
Section 7(1)
of the Act it refers to variations and
repeats in effect the provisions already in the General Conditions.
Contract Documents
The contract documents were contained in Exhibit 1 of the Owner’s
documents and included:
A letter from
the Builder dated 21 May 2009
The General
Standard Specifications
Sundry design
details of MA Lalli & Associates
Also included were two drawings being Exhibit ‘A’ of the Builder
being plans of the site.
The letter of 21 May 2009 had been inserted into the contract in place of a
letter dated 21 January 2009 which had included numerous
amounts of work priced
as provisional sums. The Owner had objected to this initial quotation and the
Builder had then substituted
the letter of 21 May 2009 reducing the provisional
sums to a few sections of work and increasing the total amount of the contract
accordingly. From the contents of the letter of 21 January 2009 it was clear
that the Builder was in fact treating the contract as
basically a Cost Plus
Contract and not as a Lump Sum Contract. He apparently did not know of the
difference.
There were no Standard Specifications but nonetheless an Addenda to Standard
Specifications listed “Site works and Demolishing”.
described as “A Provisional Sum of $10,000 has been made for preparing the
foundations within the building area ready
for construction and complying with
Engineering and Local Government conditions. Retaining walls as site plan. P.S.
Refer sheet 7
heading fencing and retaining walls. Note: Site work and
demolition to include in the above provisional sum:
Main earthworks
storeroom and both blocks
New site right
hand, lifting up existing veranda floor
Existing garage,
gazebo, brick build-up, steps, front porch floor, old brick pavers, tip fees and
cartage and machine time”
In the letter of 21 May this was stated as:
“(a) main earthworks to both blocks
(b) storeroom
(c) new site right hand
(d) removing existing veranda floor
(e) old garage
(f) old gazebo
(g) old brick build-up
(h) old steps
(i) old front porch
(j) old bricks
(k) machine time
(l) tip fees and cartage - $10,000.00”
On several occasions during the hearing it was remarked that the trees were
not mentioned. It was uncertain whether this meant that
the trees were not in
the contract or included in the main lump sum. But nonetheless the evidence was
that the trees were removed
without requiring a separate VO.
Meaning of Provisional Sum
There is very little case law on the subject of adjustment of Provisional
Items. The only implication arises from such sums being
so expressed, that in
the event of a large adjustment the contractor or builder will be seen as having
made an unbalanced bid. This
can be noted particularly where there is no bill of
quantities and in the past it arose where the estimate was to be adjusted by
more than the accepted industry practice of 10%. It was undoubtedly for this
reason, that
was enacted, to deal
with a misstatement of the costs to be anticipated. In effect the builder has to
make a reasonable assessment.
That means he cannot just stand on the boundary
and survey the site without undertaking a detailed physical examination. In this
case had the Builder taken
steps they would have included:
(a) A walk over the whole site examining the bush, the vines, the trees etc. As
a result of which action he would certainly have
seen the beehive, he would have
noted the type of trees to be removed, and seen the remnants of the chicken pen
and other debris.
The photographs provided as Exhibits 3, 4 and 5 all indicated
that the site was both small and did not have impenetrable bush. This
all at Nedlands in the city and not in the country.
(b) He should then have brought his subcontractor on site to obtain a fixed
price. Any reasonable examination would have required
the digging of a few test
holes here and there to ascertain the conditions underground including the
prevalence of roots, particularly
in relation to the ficus trees.
(c) A reasonable quote would then have been given which could have been adjusted
up or down by up to 10% or even 15% in accordance
with industry practice where
something unusual such as an unknown underground pipe was
discovered.
It was clear from the evidence that none of this was done because the Builder
said he did not see the beehive, he did not know about
the chicken pen, and he
was unaware of any potential root problem. He went on to say that the Builder
was only required to look at
the surface. Apparently, he did not see the need to
make any test holes to establish the underground conditions, all of which would
not have exceeded a couple of hours work. It was therefore an unbalanced bid
contrary to
Having regard to the first quotation which was mostly provisional sums, it is
apparent that the Builder does not recognise or is unaware
of the difference
between a lump sum quotation and a cost plus contract. This particular item
turned into a cost plus item because
the Builder simply passed on the bills of
the subcontractor. The two main accounts of the subcontractor were $41,984.36
being Invoice
23909 dated 23 September 2009, and $25,193.30 being Invoice 15410
dated 15 April 2010, or a total of
$67,177. There could be nothing reasonable about the difference between that
sum and the provisional sum of $10,000 and it was clearly
an unbalanced bid. It
is noted that the Builder did not produce any notes or calculations to show how
he had assessed the figure
of $10,000. It was just a figure plucked out of the
In accordance with the terms of
, the excessive claims under the provisional sum are invalid as being
contrary to the requirements of the Act and the figure remains
at $10,000. Just
how this figure worked in with the Annexure ‘B’ items 2 and 3 was
not explained, but the item is clearly
a part of the total sum under the Addenda
to Standard Specifications and therefore the Builder’s lump sum total of
$210,375.50
remains the same.
5. ASSESSMENT OF COSTS INCURRED DUE AS A VARIATION
5.1 Had the Builder completed all the works set out in
the contract then he would have been due:
contract amount of $210,375.50 less any work not completed;
(b) plus or
minus the cost of variations;
(c) the cost of
any extras agreed to by the Owner even though a VO was not issued or not signed
by either or both parties. In this
instance the case of Liebe v Molloy
[1906] HCA 67
is relevant. There, an umpire found that the works in question were
extras; that no order in writing signed by both architect and
proprietor was
made; but that verbal orders had been given for some of the extras and the
proprietor had such knowledge of these
extras as might be fairly inferred from
the fact that he was constantly on site and taking an interest in the work as it
progressed.
The High Court held that in such circumstances there was an implied
contract to pay for the extras.
5.2 As to the Variation Orders, there were four of these:
(1) VO 21809
dated 21 August 2009 signed by both parties. There were three items. Items 1 and
2 were paid for under Invoice 281009A
on 28 October 2009 and are not disputed.
Item 3 was listed as a provisional sum $1,000 and related to “removing
excessive vegetation,
tree stump and medium to large tree to boundary as
required over and above items previously included in the contract”. While
the item is very confusing since trees and stumps were theoretically included in
the original $10,000, the tree was just outside
his boundary and the Owner
signed the order. The actual amount was listed in the Invoice 17909 of 17
September 2009. The total therefore
for the VO is $10,282.80.
(2) VO 2909
dated 2 September 2009 apparently signed by both parties. This contained a
number of items at least four of which were
never cited again, indicating no
work was done. Of those items which were referred to in later invoices, the
following applies. See
Invoice 151009. This VO was disputed by the Owner as
having his signature forged on it. This will be dealt with
Item 1(a) – Demolish and earthworks on
east boundary, cut down large rubber tree and remove fence. A provision sum
$1,500 was cited. The invoice was 151009 of 15 October 2009. The price
for this item was $2,175 or a third more in cost. No evidence
was given as to
the reasonableness of that excess and
applies. An amount of 10% is substituted in accordance with the practice of
the building trade making the price
Item 1(c) – Remove existing asbestos fence at east boundary. The cost
of $1,430 was charged in the invoice.
Item 3(1)(a) – Perimeter boundary footings. The amount in the VO for
the eastern boundary was $4,575, but the invoice stated
a lower figure of
Item 4(1)(a) – Perimeter boundary footings. The amount stated in the VO
$5,235 for the south boundary, but the invoice stated a lower figure of
The total amount plus 30% and GST should have been $15,516 with the reduction
of item 1(a) to $1,650.
(3) Item 2 – In relation to VO 2909 there was a further invoice concerning
site safety. The VO at Item 2 quoted $350, however
the actual Invoice 2909 of 16
April 2010 quoted $359.70. The VO is a lump sum quotation not a provisional sum
item. The difference
is roughly $14 so the actual invoice should be $500.
(4) VO 161209 related to two items and was contained in a letter of 16 December
2009. The two items related to:
(a) Upsize of
two concrete soak-wells, one at the front and one at the rear. Both are shown on
(b) Waterproofing
and sealing of the external brickwork to the new
The Owner in evidence stated he had no
knowledge of the upsizing of the soak- wells. The Builder said he had discussed
with him. The problem with this case has been that neither the
Builder nor the Owner called any witnesses to corroborate their evidence.
observation of the two witnesses, it was apparent that the Owner at times was
not listening to the Builder, simply leaving it
to him to get on with the job,
in the firm belief that it would not increase the price, apart from the VOs that
he had signed. Equally
the Builder had an abysmal lack of knowledge of
contractual requirements and took the opportunity of upgrading the work whenever
he could, without following the procedures set out in the contract. The noise
and dust of removing the old soak-wells and installing
two bigger soak-wells
would be difficult to ignore. Furthermore the Owner was in earlier days a
builder himself and in the circumstances
must have been aware of some extra work
and could hardly fail to appreciate the difference in size of the
soak-wells.
5.3 Clause 12(a) requires a certain procedure to be followed for variations. The
Builder has to prepare a VO for the works setting
out the terms and cost of the
variation. The Owner has to sign it and return it to the Builder. The Builder
then signs the VO and
dates it and sends a copy to the Owner. Only then should
the work commence. This is supported by
Section 7(1)(2)
and (3) of the
Building Contracts Act
. Under Clause 5 of Schedule I of the Act, an owner can
apply to the Tribunal for a review of the increase in price. No such application
was made nor was any claim made in relation to the amount of the cost of the
At paragraph 10.7 of ‘Brooking on Building
Contracts’ (4
Edition), the author has this to say on the
absence of written orders and recovery. “The true principle and scope of
the exceptions
is not entirely clear and it may be said generally that it is
often impossible to answer with confidence the question of whether
a contractor
who has failed to obtain a written order will be able to recover the cost of
variations. But the doctrine of waiver
or estoppel may be effective in this
regard as may be the doctrine of unjust enrichment or
unconscionability.”
5.4 In relation to both VO 2909 which was disputed by the Owner as ever having
signed it, the evidence of Mr J McGinn was brought
to dispute the signature of
the Owner as being valid. The expert considered the signature of the Owner to
having been placed there
by electronic means. He was not given the background of
the requirements for copies under Clause 12(a) of the Conditions, and I sensed
some hesitancy on his part as to his conclusions. In those circumstances since
the work was done for most of the items to the knowledge
of the Owner, I
consider that the case of Liebe v Molloy (1906) to apply and the items referred
to above as amended are due from
5.5 In relation to VO 161209 it is noted that the Builder was in breach of the
Section 7(1)(a)
– and the General Conditions
of the contract, Clause 12(a)(i) in that no indication of the likely cost was
given, the work
was done without receiving a signed acceptance by the Owner and
the invoice was sent after the work was completed. If the Builder
prepared to comply with the requirements of the law and the contract, then he
can hardly expect to charge the Owner for his
30% additional fee. Because the
work was done the Owner has benefited and again Liebe v Molloy can be applied to
the works, but in
repayment only of the costs of the subcontractor of $11,712.55
plus GST of $1,171 or a total of $12,883.55.
5.6 VO 18210 relating to the cleaning and sealing of the brickwork was never
carried out and therefore no costs have been incurred.
5.7 The total therefore of payments due under the VOs is:
6. ASSESSMENT OF ANY OTHER EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE OWNER
Sea container
The Owner did
not dispute this cost and paid the amount of $1,705. The only objection was that
the Builder did not remove it at the
end of the contract. However no evidence of
the payment by the Owner of the amount it cost him was produced by a receipt and
amount remains at the figure of $1,705.
Water Corporation and electrical charges
There was no
objection to the amounts incurred and no evidence given in relation to them. The
amounts of $6,500 and $1,431 remain.
Gas line costs
The evidence from the Owner was
confusing. Initially he appeared to say the gas pipeline was in the Lump Sum
Contract, but there is
no mention of it in the Specification. Later in
cross-examination he acknowledged he had not received a VO but an invoice and
happy enough to pay for what he had approved. It is accepted there was no
VO, just an Invoice 281009B for $4,550.25 at pages 11 and
12 of the summary of
invoices. As this was extra work there should have been a VO. However the bill
was paid without protest by the
Owner and accordingly will stand.
Blue pine roof frame
This was agreed and not disputed
as it related to a change to the roof frame of the new store. The amount of $306
was paid without
Water meter charges
It appeared from the evidence that
the water meter had to be moved because of the change in design of the wall at
the road reserve.
The Owner stated in relation to Invoice 3310 that the account
related to Water Corporation costs. If so then the Builder not having
VO and the work having been done as a result of “instigate Water
Corporation to attend to the following” has
no reason or contractual right
to add the Builder’s margin to the bill, since no work of supervision was
incurred by him. There
should have been a VO or a provisional sum as a result of
discussions with the Water Corporation. Accordingly the account should
$450.50 plus GST of $45 gives a total of $495.50.
Fencing infill panels
These were included in the
Specification as item 7 of the section ‘Fencing’ on page 7. It
appeared from the evidence that
the design was altered at the request of the
Owner provided there was no increase in price. The Builder denied that
assertion. There
was no VO specifically to indicate the price and the panels
have not been fixed into place as yet. Nonetheless an account has been
called “VO/Tax Invoice No. 12310” at page 20 of the bundle of
accounts. This can only be treated as the initial
notification of a VO which
required the Owner’s consent before the work could be initiated under
contract. The terms of the contract not having been followed and the panels
not having been supplied or fixed, and the Owner not having
signed a VO, the
account is invalid and is dismissed as a claim. This also means that the
original panels not having been supplied,
the Progress Claim No. 9 cannot be
Brick paving
Item 10 of Annexure ‘B’ shows
that on completion of the paving the Owner would be liable for a payment of
$21,087.55.
The amount has been sent in at page 18 for that amount. However it
is alleged that the Builder took several varieties of colours
to the Owner who
chose one of them which then turned out to be more expensive. The Owner said he
was not advised of the increase
and thought the price would not be varied. In
this instance the Builder used the method of rendering a “Tax Invoice No.
after the work was complete. Under the contract if the price was to
be increased then a VO should have been sent for the signature
and agreement of
the Owner before the work was done. The Builder in evidence referred to the
original quotation at Exhibit ‘H’,
but that did not become the
contract, as the Owner rejected the costings. It is the actual contract at
Exhibit ‘B’ or
Exhibit 1 which applies. At page 7 is the description
“Paving”. It states inter alia:
“Supply and lay maximum 115m
at $40.00 per metre format
standard colour range 200 x 200 paving. Other: brick paving reuse and lay
existing red bricks for paving
to north side of home.
Supply and lay 200 x 200 concrete pavers standard colour range and to
include all sundry materials and cartage.
gate to steps
to side and rear of home up to and including storeroom
This description is also repeated at the second
last page of the explanatory letter of 21 May 2009 as part of the contract. As
9, a rough plan was presented showing where the paving had been
required. The Builder denied it was accurate. In reality this again
was a matter
which required a VO detailing both the change of price for the different bricks
and layout as also a proper description
of where the extra areas which have been
alleged by the Builder to be laid, were actually laid. No VO having been issued
the contract
sum cannot be varied. The Builder needs to realise that he must
follow the requirements of his contracts, if he is to prove charges
and have the
necessary authority to substantiate them. Accordingly Invoice 15310 not having
been issued after the signing of a VO
and no VO having been even considered, the
claim is dismissed. It has not been proved otherwise in a conclusive fashion as
the extra work was alleged to have been done.
Tax Invoice 16410
A tax invoice No. 16410 of 16 April
2010 was issued for bricks to the storeroom. The Specification was vague in that
it simply referred
to “A provisional sum of $550 per 1,000 or Midland
Brick standard red commons and/or a combination of client’s bricks
and Midland standard red”. The Builder in evidence said the Owner chose
the brick presented to him. The Owner’s
evidence was confusing as he
appeared to be talking about solids to the tops of walls and that the same price
would apply. This was
in fact a provisional sum quotation, but the invoice is
unclear as to the number of bricks used and what type. It appears that the
related to the number supplied of a little under 2,000. Whether or not the price
per brick was exceeded is not stated. With
some reluctance, because of the lack
of detail, the claim is accepted as it relates to the number of bricks supplied
in accordance
with the provisional sum item and so is not contrary to the terms
of the contract. The amount of $1,496.90 is to be added to the
sum due to the
Refund of kerb deposit
An invoice No. 16410A for
$1,500 was issued on 16 April 2010 in relation to costs incurred with the amount
required to be paid to
the local authority for damages to the kerb. The Owner
did not consider he was liable. The Specification at page 7 under
refers to Council Crossover Fee but does not insert
‘NA’ which is the usual entry if the fee is not included in the
In the letter of 21 May 2009 at page 5 it includes “New
crossover – a) cutting in of crossover to comply with Shire
requirements”.
Further down the page it says “Existing crossover
– a) cutting out old crossover and reinstate verge and kerbing”.
Conditions of the contract at clause 4 “Builder’s Duties”
state the Builder “shall obtain any permits
or licences that are
required” and then under (b) “shall indemnify the Owner from and
against all monies payable thereunder”.
There was an assertion by the
Builder that the fees were retained by the Shire notwithstanding that the damage
had been caused by
Telstra, but no correspondence or document was put in
evidence to substantiate the involvement of a third party outside the contract.
Accordingly the bill is not accepted as being a liability of the
7. PROGRESS PAYMENTS
All progress payments towards the payment of the
contract sum of $210,875.50 are due with the exception of No. 9 Fencing/Gates -
which have not been provided or fixed on site. The total of the
direct contract sum payable is therefore
$179,244.15. The Owner admitted that the final practical completion payment
had been included in the payment of $45,000 made to the
Builder in settlement of
all amounts that the Owner considered to be due to him and therefore covered any
work not done.
8. INTEREST
Interest was also claimed by the Builder. In view of
the small amount actually due and the failure of the Builder to abide by the
terms of the contract, it is not reasonable to make any such order and the claim
is dismissed.
The Builder has referred to costs. While the Builder
has won a small amount extra, this matter has largely arisen because of the
caused by his ignorance of contractual requirements and in particular
his belief that Prime Cost or Provisional Sums can be treated
on a Cost Plus
basis. He was also ignorant of the provisions of the
. In the circumstances the provisions of Section 38(4)of the Builders’
Registration Act
apply and costs will not be awarded to the Builder.
10. CLAIMS OF OWNER FOR EXPENSES
10.1 This matter was initiated by the Owner but he
failed to give the Builder the appropriate time required under Section 12A(2),
(3) and (3a) of the Builders’
Registration Act
. The notice was issued at
the same time as the Complaint was received by the Tribunal. Even if the
Complaint had been correctly made
with the required notice, the Owner could not
have won any of the sums sought by him. Evidence was given that the value of
had fallen and a loss would have been made on the sale. Since no sale has
been made that is a theoretical claim only and cannot be
proved until a sale at
the lower value is actually made. The quantity surveyor fees are again an
estimate. There was no receipt to
prove the cost of removing the shipping
container and in any event
the original bill said nothing about
whose responsibility it was to remove the container. The caveat fees will not
apply as it is
the Builder who will have to remove it under one of the orders
being made at the end of these Reasons.
10.2 Bank interest claims are dependent upon the prevention of the sale of the
block being a result of the building work and having
a caveat placed on the
title for lack of payment. That power is in Annexure ‘A’ of the
contract. However, no indication
of the powers of the Tribunal to make an Order
for interest repayments was given and it is doubtful if such a power exists. The
were all estimates and at face value the cost of repairing a crack in a
wall at $19,000 is gross exaggeration without clear evidence
of the failure of
the whole wall, which was not given. Nor was any quotation given or photographs
provided to justify the claims
for damage to the brick steps or the down- pipes.
The general ambit claim for cost of completing work not done by the Builder
be sustained, where the Owner has paid up $45,000 including the amount
due on practical completion. Also in evidence he said he did
not want the
Builder to return. In these circumstances he would have found it difficult to
justify his claim, even if he had sent
the appropriate notice before lodgement
of his claim.
Assessment of Amounts
Accordingly, Orders will be made based upon the amounts due as assessed in
these Reasons. Those sums are:
sum of $210,875.50 less Progress Claim No. 9 for fencing and gates not completed
of $31,631.35 or a total of:
$179,244.15
Costs allowed under variation orders of:
Other expenses:
Sea container
Water Corporation and electrical charges
Gas line costs
Blue pine roof frame
Water meter alterations
Bricks for storeroom
The total due is:
(a) Contractual payments
$179,244.15
(b) Variation orders
(c) Other expenses
$234,911.15
Less: Amount already paid
($227,023.76)
(1) In accordance with
(1.1) The Builder is to remove the caveat on the property
within 10 days of the date of these Orders.
(1.2) The Owner is to pay the Builder the balance of $7,887.39 owing on the
building works within 21 days of the date of these Orders.
(2) The claims of the Builder for interest and legal costs are
MR D A FORRESTER
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.18 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (108 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter