URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
F [2022] WACIC 7 (16 May 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2022] WACIC 7
DELIVERED :
16 MAY 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 1073 of 2021
CIC 1074 of 2021
CIC 1075 of 2021
Child taken into care - Neglect and abuse -
Single offence - Single statutory maximum
Legislation:
Child Welfare Act 1947
and Community Services Act 2004
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Trustees Act 1962
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
DWYER DURACK
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[2011] WACIC 10
[2021] WACIC 20
[2009] WACIC 31
[2019] WACIC 16
X v McAllister
[2021] WASCA 3
for Decision
application lodged on 9 June 2021 "F" (the applicant) made a claim through
his solicitors for criminal injuries compensation claiming
compensation pursuant
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Act) for alleged offences which took place between 7 January 1999 and
27 May 2004 (CIC 1073/2021). The applicant nominated
the applicant's
mother (KJ) as the offender asserting she had committed acts of chronic neglect
and physical abuse between 7 January
1999 and 27 May 2004 (the
relevant period). A second application lodged on the same date nominated the
applicant's step-father,
(DE) as the offender as having committed neglect and
physical abuse on dates unspecified prior to 27 May 2004
(CIC 1074/2021). A
third application (CIC 1075/2021) nominated the
applicant’s father (DB) as the offender, also committing acts of neglect
physical abuse of the applicant and physically abusing KJ whilst the
applicant was present between 7 January 1999 and October 1999.
applications were accompanied by a detailed letter of submission also dated 9
applications were supported by a detailed report dated 26 October 2020 from
Dr Danny Shubb, a specialist child adolescent psychiatrist,
as well as a
bundle of documents obtained via the Department of Communities and its
predecessor which are referred to below.
23 August 2021, I wrote to the applicant's solicitors acknowledging
receipt of the three applications and noting the range of
dates concerning the
applicant's claim. I noted the 7 January 1999 was the applicant's
birthdate and 27 May 2004 was when the applicant
was taken into care. I
advised the applicant’s solicitors my preliminary view was the documents
provided and the submissions
made effectively asserted the named offenders had
committed offences under the
Children and
Community Services Act 2004
and its predecessor legislation. I took the
preliminary view that notwithstanding three applications had been made, the
proper approach
was to regard the behaviour of each named alleged offender
during the relevant period as evidencing a continuum of abuse and neglect
throughout that period and accordingly, a single statutory maximum pursuant to
of the Act applied, namely, the maximum payable in this instance
would be $75,000 as the applicable statutory maximum for the most
recent date of
the alleged offences in 2004. I referred the applicant's solicitors to the
decision of the Supreme Court in the matter
X v McAllister
[2021] WASCA 3.
letter dated 25 October 2021 the applicant’s solicitors submitted the
appropriate approach was to regard the applications
as evidencing distinct
periods of chronic neglect of physical abuse and that accordingly it was open
for an assessor to make an award
being twice the jurisdictional maximum for all
of the offences by all of the offenders. Extrapolating those submissions, the
maximum in this case would be three times $150,000.
27 October 2021 I acknowledged the applicant's solicitor's further
submissions noting the applications concerned three distinct
allegations of
chronic neglect and physical abuse by the three named offenders who had the care
of the applicant during the relevant
period. In response to the
applicant’s solicitor’s submissions, I observed in substance the
applicant may have suffered
injury as a result of long-term chronic neglect and
abuse by three offenders who at times were acting separately and together to
harm the applicant. I took the preliminary view that as there was no assertion
there were offences different in nature to the allegations
of chronic neglect
and physical abuse, the appropriate approach was to view this matter as a single
application asserting injury
to the applicant by chronic neglect and abuse by
three persons acting separately and together as part of a continuum of
during the relevant period and therefore
would apply so as to restrict the statutory maximum to $75,000. I did not
consider the behaviours alleged triggered
of the Act.
applicant's solicitors responded by providing further submissions in a letter
dated 12 November 2021. Those submissions concluded
by asserting there
were numerous records of the applicant witnessing incidents of domestic violence
and physical assaults perpetuated
upon the applicant’s mother and
step-father acting alone. Those allegations were not specifically
particularised in any of
the submissions made to me, save for to referring me to
the various materials provided. As noted below, I did not consider there
sufficient particularity in the materials for those submissions to be adopted.
The applicant's solicitors also asserted the
incidents of domestic violence and
physical assaults perpetuated by the father and step-father were capable of
giving rise to separate
claims pursuant to
sections 16
of the Act in
relation to each offender. Accordingly, applying the decision in
, it was open to the assessor to find
Act had been triggered in respect of each of the offenders nominated.
24 November 2021 I made an award in favour of the applicant in respect of
the three applications noted above. The award was made
pursuant to
of the Act in relation to alleged offences which occurred during
the relevant period at various locations. I awarded $150,000 to
the applicant
on the basis I was satisfied there was evidence to trigger
the Act because I was able to take into account evidence of discrete instances
of assault upon the applicant. It is implicit
in the award I did not fully
accept the applicant's solicitor's submissions
was triggered in
respect of each and every offender nominated. The facts upon which the award
was made are set out below arising
from the materials provided by the
applicant's solicitors.
details of the applicant's background are summarised below from the documents
and submissions supplied by the applicant's solicitors.
F is the son of KJ, his
mother, and DB, his father, who separated before F was 12 months old. F
has a half-sibling, SE whose father
is DE and therefore the stepfather of F.
Sometime in 2001, KJ sought assistance with respect to F's behaviours. From
2001 onwards
several agencies and specialists became involved in assisting F and
his mother KJ including:
(a) Princess Margaret Hospital (PMH),
(b) Kwinana Community Mental Health Centre,
(c) Ms Sally Williams (Speech Pathologist),
(d) Dr Elizabeth Green (Paediatrician)
(e) The Disability Services Commission ("DSC"),
(f) The State Child Development Centre ("SCDC"),
(g) The Department of Education and the Department of Communities –
Child Protection ("the Department").
Notably DSC obtained reports which diagnosed F with autism however the SCDC
and PMH did not consider F met the criteria for autism
and viewed F's behaviours
in the context of delayed development and trauma symptomology.
Department first apprehended F on 12 December 2003 (just prior to his
birthday) but returned him to KJ on 29 March
2004. On 27 May 2005 Department again apprehended F and he remained in care
turned 18 years on 11 January 2017 and has since been living
in a supported home with
Life Without Barriers
. Between the age of seven
and 17 years, F resided with foster carers TK and PK, whose surname he
adopted in 2013. On 22 December
2016, the State Administrative Tribunal
(SAT) appointed the Public Trustee of Western Australia to be F's Plenary
Administrator and
appointed the Office of the Public Advocate (OPA) to be F's
Plenary Guardian.
the records provided from various sources noted above, KJ reported to
Ms Sally Williams that DB was consistently abusive throughout
her pregnancy
with F. F was breast fed for 6 ½ months after his birth during which time
DB would often strike KJ on the head
or face whilst she was feeding him.
Consequently KJ feared for F's safety. KJ also reported to the SCDC a history
of domestic violence,
both before and after F's birth asserting F had witnessed
many instances of violence. I note F would have been an infant at this
that KJ separated from DB in October 1999. KJ reported to PMH that when F was
eight months old, she was "hit" and she went
to "a safe place". PMH notes
record generally that F has been exposed to extreme domestic violence in a very
hostile, over emotional
family context from the moment of his birth..." DSC
documents record "[p]revious reports indicate that F both witnessed and
experienced
abusive situations when he was a toddler and young child" and "F was
'[e]xposed to noise, tension and domestic violence for the first
life. Early reports indicate F both witnessed and experienced abusive
situations when he was a toddler and young child.
Likely to have been
psychically abuse(d) and suffered neglect". Likewise, the Department noted
"[i]t has been reported by KJ that
as a young child, F witnessed domestic
violence while KJ was in relationships with his father DB and his stepfather DE.
F was often
scape-goated by KJ and 'put down' by DE, who would call him names to
the effect of calling him 'slow' or 'retarded'...". In October
referred F and/or KJ to Kwinana Community Mental Health Centre noting among
other things:
KJ felt the behaviour had escalated since his adenoidectomy in January 2001. At
that stage he had also been rejected by DE...F had
also been present in the past
when KJ was physically abused by DE and there are concerns that some of this
abuse may have extended
October 2001, PMH also referred F to its Department of Psychology Medicine
"it was obvious that this child has been subjected to a very unsettled early
life with family violence ... The violence was extended
both to KJ and it is
thought to him".
December 2001, Ms Williams opined "having observed him with KJ and his
grandmother today, I believe that the family is greatly
February 2002, KJ reported to SCDC that:
at present the household comprises KJ, DE F and SE. F spends at least three days
a weeks with his grandmother. F and DE were reported
to have a fairly good
relationship until SE's birth four months ago ... KJ feels that DE is now
getting frustrated at F's behavioural
problems and starting to resent him.
May 2002, PMH notes recorded there was a "very disturbed attachment to DE
following early violent & disrupted family life";
and F is being scapegoated
in this family as being the cause of all problems". In May 2002, F was admitted
to PMH for "
social problems
". Admission notes from PMH
REDACTED was very upset at F possible discharge on Monday, wanted us to keep him
'until he was better'...Both REDACTED are very negative
to this boy & he
behaves accordingly.
When discharged PMH Psychology recommended
60 hours day care a week "in view of the severity of the difficulty in the
relationship
between this child and DE and the risk that the difficulties may
escalate and result in harm to him ... It may be that F needs full
fostering". In a Psychological Report dated 20 August 2002, the SCDC noted
F had been referred for an autism assessment however
the report noted F
presents with a complex and traumatic family background with stress that appears
to have impacted on his early development and forming
relationships...F shows significant anxiety and difficulty regulating his
emotions when distressed ... It is possible
these may reflect some earlier
events for which F does not have verbal recall
SCDC notes record
that F did not meet the criteria for autism observing
It was felt that his difficulties were better explained by a significant
language delay and anxiety relate to his language problem,
previous trauma and
difficult family relationships.
24 August 2003, F was taken to PMH's Emergency Department after falling
backwards onto a brick pillar. The PMH notes recorded
KJ reported no loss of
consciousness however there had been "numerous vomits since" and KJ "did not
wait" leaving in less than an
hour after presenting.
12 December 2003, DSC contacted the Department's Crises Care seeking a
placement for F on the basis of "the high level of risk
of harm to the child"
he was to stay in the care KJ. Given that last week she had hit F in
the mouth and split his lip open." DSC records noted: "
during the incident, which precipitated F going into respite, KJ made no attempt
to modify her behaviour despite the fact that there
were three workers present.
DE stated she had hit F across the face and made it bleed". Following this
incident F was placed in
foster care but in April 2004 he was returned to KJ.
Shortly thereafter KJ requested that F be placed in permanent foster care.
2 May 2004, F was admitted to the PMH Emergency Department after a
suspected overdose of dexamphetamine. The notes recorded F
was also five years
behind in immunisations.
4 May 2004, DSC reported to PMH that KJ had begun to hit F again ... had to
'hose him down' on weekend to stop his tantrum". DSC
was of the view that "F
should have already been apprehended".
5 May 2004, DSC noted in a report to the Department F had been disciplined
with a wooden spoon and (as noted above) with a garden
hose when he was having a
tantrum. It noted KJ regarded F as a naughty child with little insight into F's
needs and failed to implement
behavioural strategies, unless she herself was
supervised, but noted that F's behaviour at school had improved with teachers
boundaries for his behaviours. There were still reports of uncontrolled
behaviours when F was under the supervision of KJ. School
reports to DSC noted
concerns KJ was manipulative. F was brought to school on many occasions in
dirty clothes and not washed and
KJ advised she was unable to dress F because of
his tantrums, though at school he was able to be washed and have his hair done
incident. It was noted he would come to school with food on his face,
and on one occasion had come to school un-showered and still
in his pyjamas
smelling of urine. It was noted that KJ said "I feel like hitting him and I
don't really want to have him".
27 May 2004, the Department apprehended F a second time and he remained in
care until 11 January 2017. Whilst in care F continued
under the supervision of a contact worker who noted KJ would not interact with F
unless prompted to do so. On 25
January 2006, F was placed with PK and TK.
grandmother,
though it was noted in Department records that with "weekly contact
with mother – behaviour deteriorate
". Likewise, in May 2008, the
school recorded "[foster] parent reports that behaviour escalates following
the large volume of medical notes and reports provided by the applicant's
solicitors I summarise the various findings.
was noted to have serious delays in language development with only about
10 single words and no two-word combinations at age two
11 months consistent with physical abuse and neglect. He had no
comfortable frame of reference for the first five-seven
years of his life. In
2001 he was diagnosed with Attachment Disorder of Infancy. He was noted to have
severe delays in socialisation
and adaptive behaviours causing frustration and
behavioural difficulties. In 2002 it was noted his behavioural problems were
with an initial diagnosis of Pervasive Development Disorder
attributed to childhood trauma probably related to a depressed preoccupied
often angry mother as well as witnessing domestic violence. Some of those
behavioural issues manifested in eating banana and
orange skins, with
uncontrolled defecation at home and school. A diagnosis of autism has been made
at various times though this
has not been consistently adopted by his various
medical providers. He has been prescribed various medications (including
Dexamphetamine)
following observations he was sometimes violent with other
school pupils. In December 2003 it was noted there was no medical basis
for F's outbursts which were more likely attributed to poor parenting, poor
management of his social environment, favouritism of
his step sibling SE and
rejection by his mother KJ resulting in poor mother-child bonding.
2004 whilst under the care of KJ he was admitted to PMH with an overdose of
Dexamphetamine. After November 2004 when placed in
foster care his school
and Departmental records show improvements in F's overall behaviour. His
behaviour settled and his medications
were reduced. By 2006 the provisional
diagnosis of autism and/or intellectual disability were withdrawn, and
recommendations were
made to reduce his medications, though it was recommended
he continue with psychological and psychiatric care. Contact visits with
however continued to result in escalation of erratic behaviour.
2007 a diagnosis of PTSD was made with mixed anxiety and depressive disorder;
reactive attachment disorder; language disorders
and otherwise mixed
developmental disorders; mixed conduct and emotional disorder. Although there
were concerns in relation to F's
continued aggressive behaviour at school there
was also recognition of his 'huge progress in his academics and his verbal
and articulation'. F was noted to be subject to self-mutilation and
self-criticism and depression and it was "not possible to exclude
[a diagnosis]
of ADHD". Despite improvements at school, following his placement into care, he
was noted to have a low IQ with a
need for ongoing therapies, and needing
teaching aides if he was to continue in mainstream schooling. As at 2008 it was
medications might continue to be needed if there was any dissociative
behaviours. Taking all these matters into account I am satisfied
having regard
to the significant volume of material provided on behalf of the applicant
is probable the applicant was genetically predisposed to psychiatric illness
however his exposure to chronic violence, neglect
and parental abuse, resulted
in profound disturbance of his intellectual and emotional developmental.
has suppressed multiple traumatic memories and is unable to recall many adverse
experiences consistent with PTSD, resulting in
emotional outbursts requiring
ongoing medication and therapy. This diagnosis and resultant developmental
delay was caused or contributed
to by his exposure to violence and parental
a result of the above the applicant is significantly psychologically impaired,
which has affected his emotional and social development
and impaired his
capacity for work.
is unlikely the applicant would ever be able to maintain sustained full-time
employment in the open employment market and as a
consequence the scope of the
applicant's employment has been significantly reduced.
noted above, on 24 November 2021 I made an award in favour of the applicant
in the sum of $150,000. In doing so I noted the decision
of the then Chief
Assessor in
[2011] WACIC 10
, where the Chief Assessor recited
the history of neglect claims with reference to the relevant statutory
provisions under the
Child Welfare Act 1947
Children and
Community Services Act 2004
. Until the decision in
assessors had been reluctant to make awards in relation to claims for neglect
and abuse. Such claims do not fit comfortably into
the general matrix of the
Act (see for example the decision in
[2009] WACIC 31)
assessors have accepted where there is evidence to
satisfy an assessor there has been a breach of either the
Child Welfare Act
Children and Community Services Act 2004
, any injuries
sustained as a consequence are compensable under the Act. In
[2019] WACIC 16
, I noted the
offences described in the
Child Welfare Act 1947
section 31A
its successor constitute a single offence based on a continuum or amalgam of
particularised behaviours either as a single act
or several acts of behaviour
contrary to those provisions. Because the prescribed behaviours constitute a
single offence, the statutory
maximum as prescribed by
Act is a single statutory maximum. Attempts are often made by practitioners to
trigger section 34 of the Act by multiple
applications asserting a variety
of prescribed behaviours to portray those behaviours as constituting separate
and discrete offences
and/or separate and discrete periods of offending. These
matters were discussed in detail in the decision of
[2021] WACIC
at paragraphs 67-72, by Assessor Hafford. I adopt the reasoning of Assessor
Hafford in determining this matter. I note the reasoning
was confirmed in the Supreme Court matter of
X v McAllister
, that is, by analogy only a single
statutory maximum is available where the subject of the application concerns a
breach of a single
charged offence (such as neglect, persistence sexual conduct
or stalking) notwithstanding the multiplicity of behaviours constituting
single charged offence. In practice the Department of Communities and its
predecessors rarely proceeded to prosecution under
sections of the
Welfare Act 1947
Children and Community Services Act 2004
relevant to this application. This is because those provisions are usually
called in aid to trigger applications for apprehension
of children rather than
the prosecution of the carers or parents. Accordingly, there are very few
decisions of the superior courts
save for those matters outlined in
task for the assessor is to determine the nature of the behaviours outlined in
the papers submitted in support of the various
applications lodged. There are
no formal pleadings under the Act and by reason of
section 18(2)
I am not bound by rules or practice as to evidence or procedure. In addition, I
have power to amend an application of
my own initiative pursuant to
of the Act. It follows notwithstanding multiple applications are
lodged and/or multiple submissions are made in relation to the
nature of the
claims made, it is for the assessor to ultimately determine how those alleged
behaviours should be treated with reference
to the relevant legislation. In
effect, the scheme of the Act requires me to determine any claim for
compensation having regard
for the substance of the claim rather than the form.
In this case I have set out above the facts and circumstances of the neglect
abuse of the applicant. From about 2001 onwards the applicant's mother KJ
sought the assistance of various agencies in relation
to F's behaviour. As
those agencies became involved in the treatment and management of F various
histories were recorded which disclosed
levels of abuse and neglect. In terms
of abuse and neglect the most telling evidence relates to the information
obtained from F's
school. They disclose when he presented at school he was
dirty and unwashed and could not be properly dressed because of tantrums.
would often present with food on his face and on occasion smelling of urine. As
a consequence, I accept this was indicative
of systemically poor parenting,
neglect and abuse and this form of abuse was part of a continuum of behaviours
over the relevant
period, which I am satisfied were offences under the
Welfare Act 1947
Children and Community Services Act 2004
At various points it would have been possible for the Department to apprehend F,
prior to his final placement into care. I am
also satisfied there were specific
and discrete instances of assault, such as, the physical disciplining with the
wooden spoons and
other objects by KJ. Having found there was a high level of
neglect and abuse and noting the debilitating impact of that neglect
applicant's development both intellectually and emotionally I found he has
sustained injury as a consequence of the offence
of neglect and abuse. I found
that as well as the pain and suffering experienced, he had suffered loss by
reason of his significantly
reduced capacity to engage in the workforce. That
loss was substantial. Accordingly, I was satisfied the statutory maximum should
be payable for those injuries and losses. I accepted
was triggered by the evidence of the discrete assaults as outlined above. It
was also apparent from the evidence, taken
as a whole, the applicant's mother KJ
was the principal offender and cause of his injuries with DB and DE contributing
to those injuries
over the relevant period of 7 January 1999 and
27 May 2004. Looking at the substance of application CIC 1075/2021, which
DB as an offender together with KJ, I disregarded any contribution by
DB. I took into account the short period of the applicant's
exposure to DB and
the lack of particularity in relation to the allegations of abuse and neglect by
DB. To that extent I disregarded
DB's purported role in the applicant's
upbringing and ultimate neglect. As to the contribution by DE, the applicant's
step-father,
I noted application CIC 1074/2021 referred only to a contribution
to the applicant's injuries 'prior to May 2004'. Upon a close
reading of the
materials provided I likewise noted a lack of particularity in relation to the
contribution of DE as regards the neglect
and abuse of F. I was satisfied he
probably favoured SE and 'scapegoated' F for the dysfunction in the family but
was not satisfied
he made any material contribution to the applicant's injuries.
The evidence supported taking the relevant period as the overall period
offending rather than breaking it into three discrete periods as submitted by
the applicant's solicitors which I considered was
an artificial construct. In
effect the applicant had been injured as a consequence of offences between the
periods 7 January 1999
being his date of birth and 27 May 2004 the
date upon which he was apprehended. Those behaviours which were in the nature
and neglect fell within the parameters set out in the
Child Welfare
Child and Community Services Act 2004.
The applicant
suffered injury principally as a product of the behaviours of the applicant's
mother who I find contributed significantly
to his injuries, with minor and not
material contributions by his father and step-father at various points in time
throughout this
period. Those behaviours therefore constituted a 'single
offence' following the decision of
X v McAllister
noted, I accepted there were discrete offences of assault documented above
referencing the mother KJ in addition to the forms
of neglect and abuse which
triggered section 34 and consequently, having implicitly amended the three
applications lodged to be treated
as a single application, and refusing those
matters as they related to DB and DE, I made the award of $150,000 which is the
allowed having regard for sections 31 and 34 of the Act as at
27 May 2004.
to section 64(3)(a) of the Act I prohibit publication of any particular of these
reasons that is likely to lead members of
the public to identify the
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
R Guthrie, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
16 MAY 2022
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (234 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter