URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MR M BETTRIDGE and MS A LAWES and THE HOUSE RELOCATORS PTY LTD (Decision O.19929, O.20659 and B.20600) [2011] WABDT 65 (11 August 2011)
DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
MR D FORRESTER Deputy Chairperson MR M CORNELL Member
MR P MITTONETTE Member
December 2010, 8 June 2011 and 2 August 2011
ORDERS ISSUED
WRITTEN REASONS
September 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
October 2011
O.19929, O.20659 and B.20600
BETTRIDGE and MS A LAWES Complainants
THE HOUSE RELOCATORS PTY LTD Respondent
Purchase old house for relocation – disputed costs of
operation –
whether claims proven
REPRESENTATION
Complainants
Mr Bettridge Ms Lawes
CASES REFERRED TO
THE DECISION
Not applicable
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. BACKGROUND
On or about the 26 March 2008 the Owners (the
Complainants in the initial Complaint) signed a contract with the Builder
Respondent) for the sum of
$64,750 to transfer a timber-framed fibro-clad house in the Builder’s
yard at Mundaring to the Owners’ block in Mount
Helena in the Shire of
Mundaring. Generally the house was to be cut into three sections and on arrival
would be placed on stumps
and cemented together with an additional section built
in. There were several variations and the final price stated by the Owners
$86,871 of which the Owners said all the monies due had been paid.
However the work did not commence until August 2009. It should have been
completed by January 2009 and so was well behind the contracted
schedule. The
papers indicated that 90% of the work had been completed by mid-September 2009
but in the process a number of complaints
had arisen, in particular the nature
of the imported fill material. A report by Structerre Consulting Engineers dated
15 July 2010
considered that the deep uncontrolled fill was structurally
inadequate to support the house. On 8 September 2010 the Builder supplied
Owners with a detailed list of the suppliers of fill for the site, which list is
at page 23 of our papers.
2. EVIDENCE AT FIRST HEARING OF 8-9 DECEMBER 2010
Ms Kathleen Anne Victoria Evans
Structerre Consulting Engineers gave evidence of what she saw and did when
examining the site for her report of 15 July 2010
at page 8 of our papers. No
compaction information had been provided. It was a Class ‘P’ site
and was considered one
of uncontrolled fill. She had done a couple of bore
holes, one at the rear of the property. She had a lot of experience classifying
sites. One hole was at the rear a metre back and one directly adjacent to the
stump. The loading would be far less with a timber-framed
house. She did not see
anything of concern on the site of the house. In its natural state it would be
an ‘A’ or ‘S’
(clay) site. When fill is brought in it
becomes a Class ‘P’ site. That material then needs to be assessed
and certified.
A compaction certificate is provided by the builder or earthworks
contractor. In answer to questions about removing the house she
said that one
could restump across the rear of the house rather than remove the whole house.
The bore hole number 3 is assumed to
represent the rest of the site. The scope
of their assessment was related to the fill so that testing and possible
relocation of
back stumps would solve the problem.
Mr Justin Strong
, a plumber, gave evidence for the Owners that he had
noticed an asbestos part in the building and had called in the Shire Health
Officer. They had found other evidence of asbestos on top of the site. They had
then spoken to the Owners to await their action.
The asbestos was present in the
bathroom and possibly the fill. Prior to the house being put there he had not
noticed any asbestos
when he had been engaged in placing the tank. The asbestos
in the interior was not too bad but a solid test was needed over the pad
assess whether there was any in the fill itself.
Mr Steve Trlin
of the Shire of Mundaring said he had been to the site
several times, where his concern had been over the stability of the house.
was not aware of the roof line being short but it was required to be a sealed
building and the roof must come a certain distance
beyond the wall. The soil had
a high clay content. The tank would have to be in the ground or the fill built
up around the tank with
sand. They would need core samples taken for the
presence of asbestos. The photos of the Shire
Council were
submitted as Exhibit 01 and the witness circled any pieces of asbestos evident
to him. They had since stopped the relocation
of second-hand buildings because
of dangers of asbestos.
2.4 The Builder interceded one witness, Mr Jonathan Chambers. He said he had
been working with the Builder developing the pad which
had taken three days. It
was reasonably clean fill. The rubble was clean because they took out the
plastic and wood. Most of the
fill had to go to the back because of the slope.
He did not know if they had reached the necessary height when he
2.5 The Owners, Mark Raymond Bettridge and Amanda Lawes, along with the Builder,
Phillip William Carter were then sworn in.
2.5.1 The Owners said that upon inspection of the house they had only had
concerns about the roof. The carpenters had done a good
job. They had got
approval on 8 May 2009. They had put in a pad and then the Builder rang to say
he was putting in the house on a
very wet day. A Shire Inspector had come out
and pointed out some erosion. Not long after that when 80% through the job the
reported problems with the asbestos. He had taken the asbestos off the
walls thinking it was particleboard and placed them outside
where they broke up.
The plumber had to do most of the dragging and was stunned by the amount of
rubble he found. Apart from the
asbestos they were concerned about the potential
for voids under the house. The stumps were put in after the site had been
The rubbish which had not been removed consisted of roof tiles from the
roof and several large limestone blocks. The asbestos was
their responsibility.
The house should be watertight but there were leaks where the veranda had not
been finished. They had lost
a lot of money on the house pad. They thought that
gutters were part of the roof. Their bank statement would prove they had paid
2.5.2 The Builder said that where the leak occurred he would replace the sheet.
There were no gutters on the original house and he
only agreed to relocate the
house as it was. The site was mostly cap-rock and stumping out of that was
impossible. That was why he
had advised the Owners to put in a pad. The initial
cost had been extended. Without stumps at the front, the stumps at the back did
not need to be 4 to 5 feet out of the ground. If there was any movement of the
house he would give a written guarantee. He wanted
the matter to end so he could
be paid and he would rectify the front to make it waterproof. He objected to
paying the Owners’
rent. His engineer had originally judged the site as an
Class ‘S’ site. He thought that roof tiles would be a reasonable
source of fill.
3. ORDERS FROM FIRST HEARING
Attached as an appendix to these Reasons are the
Orders from the first hearing. There was no appeal from these Orders by either
It is noted that no evidence was led of the Owners paying rent or how much
or to whom.
4. SECOND HEARING OF 8 JUNE 2011
4.1 At the second hearing the Builder had lodged a
Complaint Form but had not fully complied with the requirements as to timing. He
had also lodged a report of McDowell Affleck engineer’s inspection of the
site. In that report dated 13 February 2011 the engineers
had said that with a
drain at the front of the house they saw no issues with the ground beneath the
property based on the trial pit.
4.2 The Owners had reported that item numbers 5, 6 and 7 of the Orders had not
been complied with, and they had been informed that
the pit dug for the
engineers’ inspection was too far away from the front of the house. They
had received a quote of
$3,650 +GST to clean up the debris, and
two quotes of $450 and $600 to repair the defective gyprock sheet. There were
large quotes
to repair the roof and they did not want the Builder back on
4.3 Accordingly the matter was adjourned to allow for the Builder to lodge his
claim for payments not received and for the Owners
to lodge a claim about the
roof which was a new matter. Thereafter the matter would be heard for a final
claim on costs.
5. THIRD HEARING OF 2 AUGUST 2011
5.1 The first part of the hearing was taken up with
working out from the various financial records the total contracted amount due
to the Builder and then the amount actually paid by the
5.2 The Owners then confirmed that Order No’s 5, 6 and 7 of 10 December
2010 had not been done and there were quotes in the
papers to perform the work.
The major item now left was the Owners’ allegation that the roof was
faulty. The Owners stated
the roof was open at the top by four inches where
water was coming in, and at the front where there were short sheets. The quote
at page 120 consisted of alternative quotes. The first for minor repairs was for
$4,345 but was not guaranteed. The Owners maintained
that the two prices applied
as they were for different work.
5.3 The Builder stated the roof frame was solid and that the quote obtained by
him as Exhibit 03 was for all necessary work to complete
5.4 The Owners also claimed for the cost of ensuring that the house was located
on solid foundations. They said that the deficiencies
in the pad were noted by
Structerre and no evidence had been given by the Builder to confirm that the pad
was sufficient, other than
in a letter from McDowell Affleck. The Owners said
the report they had obtained was the exact opposite of the letter obtained by
the Builder. They had not wanted the pad in the first place. The second contract
they had entered into was to do the work of completing
the whole roof. They
wanted the ceilings repaired and the roof replaced to get Council approval to
live in the house. They accepted
they were now allowed on site because the
asbestos problem had been solved.
5.5 The Builder said that the Owner in respect to the repairs to the house was
the owner- builder and the pad was simply a method
of reducing the cost of
putting in very large supports for the house. He was not responsible for the pad
as he was not the builder.
He had merely paid the persons to do the
6. DECISIONS ON EVIDENCE
General comments
This matter
was complicated by the Owners taking out the licence to build and then entering
into a contract with the Builder to do
the work of preparing the site for the
establishment on the site of the building supplied by him from his yard in
Mundaring. The
Owners did not have the funds available to build a new house. In
effect, although the Owners had obtained the licence to build, the
contracts or agreements were between the Owners and the Builder for the Builder
to supply the house, transport it to the site,
supply some additional
construction work and a new roof and make it sound and waterproof. There was
nothing in the original agreement
to state that the Builder was responsible for
any painting, only that due care would be taken for the ceilings which were
approximately
50 years old. Where damage occurred to any plasterboard sheeting
this would be replaced by “standard gyprock type sheeting
cornice”. New gyprock sheeting would be installed to lounge, kitchen and
bathroom. Painting was never mentioned.
As to the site it was the Owners’ responsibility to ensure that the
site was “levelled/ ripped/padded and ready for relocation
stumping...the house will be reinstalled on standard 100mm/4 inch jarrah stumps
as previously stumped”. The block was inspected
by the Tribunal and one
factor became clear immediately in that the site was a sloping one and not
level. The Owners tried to say
that they had insisted they wanted it left that
way, but to do so would have meant that the house would require special stumps
the front, leaving the house at a considerable height out of the ground. The
evidence was that there were negotiations about how
to resolve this dilemma, but
there was nothing in writing as to a conclusion and the Builder went ahead with
levelling the site with
fill material. Unfortunately this was a mixture of
rubble, rocks, sand and earth and not finished off particularly well or neatly.
The Owners were upset on this aspect, and alleged it was illegal, but without
any evidence as to what was to be expected or as to
how it was illegal, we were
left with having to determine whether the fill in fact was suitable for the
purpose of taking the stumps.
When we visited the house there was no evidence of substantial cracking
showing that the stumps were unable to take any load. The
Builder has obtained a
report from reputable engineers McDowell Affleck to the effect that the site is
adequate for its purpose.
The Owners therefore have not proved that there has
been any breach of the obligation to provide adequate and competent stumping.
accepted the latest engineer’s report, to that of Structerre made shortly
after the building was completed. No technical
evidence was led to show that the
McDowell Affleck report was in error. The Owners have six years from the
completion of the building
in which to take action should evidence eventuate
that the site is not stable. That evidence is not available at this point of
and there is nothing to indicate any instability.
Specific claims
Non-payment of Builder
From the evidence and
documents in our papers, the Builder had established that the cost of the
project under the various agreements
of the contract were as set out in his
summary at page 110. This showed four amounts were involved:
Original contract agreement
Infilling of 2 x 3 metre sections of house
Construction of office into one infill
Site works relevant to pad
Total contract price
Payments by the Owners were taken from Exhibit 04 and showed an amount of
$82,133 had been paid. However after specific evidence had been adduced to
show that an additional $6,475 had been paid, it was included.
It appeared that
the Exhibit had omitted the payment of 2 September 2009 but this was accepted by
the Builder on the list at page
110 as having been received. The total paid is
therefore $88,608. The Owners therefore still owed the sum of $7,062 to the
Costs of Owners to remedy faulty or missing work by Builder
of rubble (Order Number 5) – It is noted from more recent photographs that
most of the site is now in a much cleaner
state and it is understood the
asbestos has been removed. Nonetheless some work still requires to be done and
the assessment was
based on the cost of a bin at $400 and two persons
$350 each for a day, or $700 for two persons. The
total cost therefore is $1,100.
Order Number 6 provision of roof overhang and also inclusive of necessary
repairs to roof, we note that Exhibit 03 provides a
full summary of all the
repairs required to make the house watertight. Original assessments for separate
parts were difficult to
reconcile although it appeared that he roof overhang
between $1,500 to $2,000. As noted, no evidence was led
to prove that the roof itself was totally inadequate requiring complete
replacement.
Accordingly Exhibit 03 which includes GST was accepted at
to gyprock walls. The quotation at page 86 of our papers for $450 was
the other damaged areas we accepted the quote at page 118 of our papers which
included ceilings and passage area. The cost was
quoted at $850 as a total
The total of these items of $1,100 + $3,520 + $450 + $850
comes to $5,920.
The Owners again in their Complaint Form raised the issue of reimbursement of
rent but provided no information of the amount or to
whom paid, other than a
vague reference to $320. No receipts were produced nor was a definite date given
of renting. At the same
time they were saying that they were living with
relatives. The claim may however be for an order that the Builder pay the costs
of rent when they move out to a rented property. We do not have any jurisdiction
to make an order in anticipation for an undisclosed
amount and the claim has to
be dismissed for lack of evidence of actual payment.
Also the Owners put in a new claim for payment for repairs to the second
bedroom. What these repairs were or how they arose was not
disclosed. The
Builder is certainly liable for any repairs arising out of leaks and the
quotation of $850 refers to “Ceiling
quote – water to
ceilings”. Accordingly this aspect has been covered by acceptance of that
The summary of the costs awarded is as
Owner owes Builder on contract
Builder owes Owner
Balance due to Builder
All other claims are dismissed.
MR D A FORRESTER
Deputy Chairperson
Building Disputes Ti’ibunal
Suite 4. 18 Harvest Terrace, We:
Per II WA 6O OF Telephone (08) 947d 222 • Facsimilfe (08) 94Z6
1223 Email reg
i strar6'bU ilding dispu1es ,wo,gpv.ou
www.bu ilding diSQU
t es.wa.gov.au
OnDsn vo ncusDv
NO. 135/2010-11
The House Relocators Pty Ltd 570 Bambrook 8treet
SAWYERS VALL6Y WA 6074
Mr M Bettridge & Ms A Lawes 21H Jacoby Street MUNDARING WA
Puisuant to a hearing before the Building Disputes Tribunal on 8 & 9
December 2010 the following orders are made under
Builders’ Registration Act 1939
That The House Relocators Pty Ltd rectify the faulty or unsatisfactory building
work at 6 McCarthy Road, Mount Helena aa mend below:
The Biiildei is to provide a certificate from an engineer approving
the suitability of be imported fill material and the
adequacy of compaction in
suppoiting the residence.
2 Su@ect to compliance with order 1 the comJ›laints as to the
removal of fill undo’ the house; the refund of the alleged
$7,300; the relocation of the bio-cycle ancl consequent clAlms for plumbing,
drainage and electrical works are disrriissed.
failure to obtain
an appi’opriate certificate undt?d O1'der I will require
the matter'
to be further’ heard by the Tribunal to consider what appropriate remedial
actic›ri will then i›e required.
4 Order 1 is to be completed on or before 28 Februa • 2014.
The Builder is to remove nil accumulated Builder’s rubble
left on site.
The Builder is to J»c›vide a roof ovwhang at the front
entry consistent
with the remainder o1 the residence, including continuoue single
length rooting sheets, gutter and rainwater pipe.
The Builder is to
suitably repair the damaged gyprock wall lining
adjacent to the front enhy
door and make good,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (112 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter