URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DI LATTE and THE OWNERS OF ADELPHI CENTRE - STRATA PLAN 10934 [2004] WASTR 65 (22 December 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DATE OF ORDER :
22 DECEMBER 2004
PRINCIPAL ORDER
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000107
STRATA PLAN NUMBER :
SALVATORE DI LATTE
THE OWNERS OF ADELPHI CENTRE - STRATA PLAN 10934
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - installation of
letterboxes - common property
Legislation:
Strata Title Act 1985
Application dismissed
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant : Jackson McDonald
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgments(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – PRINCIPAL ORDER
1 The carrying out of works by a strata company on common property.
2 The Applicant is Salvatore Di Latte as the proprietor of Lots 66 & 67
on Strata Plan 10934.
Strata Plan and relevant Act
3 Strata Plan 10934 (“the Strata Plan”) was registered on 7
September 1982, pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
In 1985 the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles Act 1985
(‘the 1985 Act”), which continues to be the relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections
and Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
5 The parcel is known as “Adelphi Centre”. It is situated at
130A Mounts Bay Road, Perth and is described on the Strata
"a concrete and iron multi-level building consisting of 64 serviced
departments and one reception area...."
7 Since registration of the strata plan Lots 1 – 5 inclusive and Lot
65 and have been cancelled and the parts of the parcel
that were included in
those lots, together with or part of the original common property, have been
incorporated into new Lots 66
8 When the Strata Plan was registered, the by-laws of the Strata Company
were, pursuant to s 15(2) of the 1966 Act, the “standard”
contained in the Schedule to that Act.
9 Pursuant to section 42(2), Sch 3 and the
Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995
the by-laws of the Strata Company became the
“by-laws in Schedules 1
10 An additional Sch 1, by-law 16 was recorded on the 8 December 2000 in
Notification H617630 but that by-law has no relevance to
this application.
Orders sought
11 The Applicant has requested an Interim Order and a Final Order in
virtually the same terms.
12 The Interim Order sought is
to stop the installation of letter boxes on common property of Strata Plan
13 Section 83(1) includes a provision which allows a lot proprietor in a
strata scheme to make an application to me for an order
for the settlement of a
dispute or the rectification of a complaint, with respect to the exercise or
performance of, or the failure
to exercise or perform, a power, an authority, a
duty or a function conferred or imposed by the 1985 Act or by a strata company's
Interim Order
14 On 12 October 2004, I made an Interim Order in the following terms
That the Owners of Adelphi Centre- Strata Plan 10934 ("the Strata Company")
shall not, without the authority of a decision of a general
meeting of the
Strata Company, carry out or authorise or permit the carrying out of the
installation of a receptacle for the receipt
of mail or notices on any part of
the common property comprised in Strata Plan
15 Some of the material in my Reasons
for Decision in respect of my Interim Order is relevant to and will be repeated
in these Reasons,
with any necessary additions, corrections or
modifications.
Applicant's submissions
16 The Applicant has supported his application, in relation to the Interim
Order sought, on the basis that he had been “informed”
Strata Company is about to contract a builder to commence the installation of
letter boxes on a portion of the common property
on the Strata Plan.
17 The Applicant contends that this would require a resolution with dissent
at a general meeting of all lot proprietors but that
such a resolution has not
been passed.
18 He advises that he is the only lot proprietor living within the parcel or
receiving mail at the parcel. He states
All mail to lot proprietors including mail from the Strata Company is
directed to their home address
advises that as the Adelphi Centre operates as a hotel, it does not require
individual letterboxes for hotel guests. Hotel
guests’ mail is received,
sorted and pigeon holed at the hotel reception desk as per normal hotel
20 He states that the Adelphi Centre is zoned by Perth City Council as a
commercial property, not residential, and that all rates
and taxes imposed on
the parcel are on the basis that the property is a commercial property.
21 He considers that:
The sanction of residential use rather than the approved use as serviced for
short-term in–transit accommodation, contrary to
the City Planning Scheme
No. 42 and the Town Planning Development Act 1928 and non-compliance is
considered un-lawful, as stated
22 Under my file reference ST2004-000073 on the application of the same
applicant as in this matter, there was a passing reference
of proposed
installation of letter boxes on common property, are those installation being
described by the applicant as “improvements”
I made the following
As to the “improvement” the subject of this application, the
Strata Companies powers under the 1985 Act, do not permit
improvements to common
property. Its powers are restricted by Section 35 to the repair, maintenance,
and management of the common
property, or "necessary" renewal or replacement
permitted in the case of damaged or deterioration...
However, I am advised that all that is proposed is the installation of a
letterbox, property, in respect of each lot. ...In some circumstances
be arguable that in such receptacles in part of the common property could come
within the management of the scheme to the
benefit of all proprietors, but ...
it is not an issue upon which I have been asked to make a
Applicant's
submissions
23 The Applicant, through his solicitors, has made detailed submissions in
support of his application.
24 The Applicant, personally or through his company Rio Holdings Pty Ltd,
owns or leases 33 lots in the scheme. Those lots are used
in the Applicant's
"Adelphi Hotel" business. The Applicant's solicitors submit that:-
... Since the building was first configured in its existing form, it has
been used for the purposes of serviced apartments, short
stay accommodation and
not for long term residences. On any view, it is clear the Building is not
designed for and does not facilitate
long-term residences, there being no basic
facilities or amenities within units, such as laundries etc.
Our client was advised by the City of Perth on 18 December 2001 that the
Council had on 19 April 1993 approved an application for
a change of use of the
'residential units' to 'serviced apartments' including conversion of four units
for a patrons-only bar and
restaurant. On 14 May 2004, our client was further
advised by the City of Perth of the above with the exception that owners can be
granted a change of use from 'serviced apartment' to 'multiple dwelling'
providing compliance with the Building Code of Australia
1996 and Health Act
1911-1970 (Laundries and Bathrooms) Regulations and approval of the Body
Corporate in accordance with the provisions
of the Act. We are instructed that
our client is not aware of such approval being obtained by the owner of any
unit, either through
the City of Perth or the Strata Company.
On II November 2004, the City of Perth wrote to Mr W J Rees confirming that
the Council granted approval for a change of use of the
units from 'flats' to
'serviced apartments' in May I993 and included the establishment of a 'patrons
only bar and restaurant' on
the ground floor. The letter acknowledges Council's
intention was to address the use of all of the apartments within the complex,
but that the approval related only to four. The letter
This being the case, the validity of
the change of use application and of the Council's subsequent decision could be
legally challenged.
We are instructed to commence proceedings to correct the recorded legal use
of the units within the Building to 'serviced apartments
The use of the Building as short stay serviced apartments does not require
(nor would it be advantageous to allow for) the installation
of letterboxes to
common property. The existing dispute between our client as owner and Manager of
Adelphi and various other owners should not detract from the principles which
apply to a development of this kind.
Opposition to the installation of letter boxes
The installation of letterboxes is not consistent with the use of the
Building for the purposes of short stay, serviced apartments.
The installation
of letterboxes can only ·be necessary for long-term residences. Our client
and in turn the owners with whom
he holds leases are concerned about the future
of the Adelphi
business and their respective units as a viable investment because of:
Other owners currently operating their units as a business offering
long-term residential tenancies;
2. A dispute between;
owners seeking
to operate their units as a business offering long-term residential tenancies;
(b) owners who wish to use their units within the Adelphi Hotel business
Moves by various other unit owners to make changes to the common areas of
the Building so as to facilitate the provision of long-term
residential
tenancies within the Building such as the installation of letterboxes within the
stairwell; and
4. Moves by various other unit to change the legal use of their units to
long-term residential tenancies.
The owners with whom Rio holds lease agreements (and the remaining owners)
purchased their respective units in the Building with knowledge
authorised for use as short stay serviced apartments. The owners holding lease
agreements with Rio, entered into such agreements
with the intention their units
would comprise part of the Adelphi Hotel. The majority of the units owned or
controlled by our client
have (sic) owned or controlled by our client have owned
their units or a long period of time, that is, approximately five years or
We are instructed the majority of owners seeking to operate their units as a
business offering long-term residential tenancies
have only held their units for
a much shorter period of time and further, that none of these owners reside
within their units in
the Building.
The introduction of long-term residential tenancies would adversely affect
the quality of serviced apartments that could be offered
by owners who wish to
continue in accordance with the existing permitted use, by operating their units
as short-stay serviced apartments
within the Adelphi Hotel.
Long-term residential tenancies as referred to above, will offer budget
priced, high density, rental accommodation. Such accommodation
will not attract
comparable tenants to those who patronise the short-stay serviced apartments
offered by the Adelphi Hotel. Such
tenants are likely to detract from the
atmosphere of the Adelphi Hotel, reducing its ability to attract prospective
As a result of the above, proposals to change the use of various units within
the Building to provide for long-term residential tenancies
will jeopardise the
Adelphi Hotel and the value of the units within the Building.
The installation of the letterboxes within common property will further
facilitate the introduction of long-term residencies within
the Building, which
will in turn, jeopardise the interests of the other unit holders and our client
The Strata Company's powers under the Act do not permit improvements to be
made to common property. The Strata Company's powers are
restricted by s35 to
the repair, maintenance, control and management of common property. There has
been no resolution without dissent
as defined by s3AC of the Act authorising the
installation of letterboxes within common property. On this basis alone, the
order restraining the installation of letterboxes within common property
ought not to be displaced ...
We are instructed that our client spends a great deal of time within the
hotel for the purposes of his business. As such our client
resides at the hotel
for the better part of each week such that he has bathroom facilities and the
like available. Our client uses
unit No 604 within the building for this purpose
We are instructed that the installation of letterboxes in the stairwell will
require structural modifications to common property and
in any event, they will
obstruct the stairwell, being common property.
Considerations
25 The Applicant has referred to the need for a resolution without dissent
before the proposed works could be carried out. There
is no basis for such an
assertion. If the works are justified, within the financial and other limits of
the 1985 Act, then only an
ordinary resolution would be necessary, if dealt with
at a general meeting of the Strata Company although the provisions of s 44
(which should be read in conjunction with the financial guidelines of s 47) may
be relevant. They include
The functions of a strata company shall, subject to this Act and to any
restriction imposed or direction given at a general meeting,
be performed by the
council of the strata company.
Applicant has made a number of assumptions about the likely effect of the
installation of letterboxes but the Strata Company
has an obligation under s
35(1) to control and manage the common property for the benefit of all the
proprietors.
27 The fact that the proprietors of 33 lots have chosen to use or allow
their lots to be used as part of a hotel business is, in
my view, not a relevant
issue in relation to the installation of mail receival receptacles. It does not
appear to me to be relevant
that some or even all of the proprietors of the
remaining lots do not reside in those lots.
28 Similarly, the zoning of the parcel or parts of the parcel, or approvals
given or to be given by the City of Perth do not appear
to me to be relevant to
the issue of the installation of mail receival receptacles.
29 The City of Perth, in a letter of 13 May 2004 to Mr W J Rees, one of the
lot proprietors, included
It has come to the attention of the City that a number of owners may be
allowing their units to be used for residential use ... any
long term or
permanent residential use of apartment is
30 This appears to indicate that the
Applicant's admitted use of one of his lots may be unlawful, because his
solicitors have advised
We are instructed that our client spends a great deal of time within
the hotel for the purposes of his business. As such our client
resides at the
hotel of the better part of each week such that he has bathroom facilities and
the like available. Our client uses
unit No 604 within the building for this
31 In my view, the Applicant, as
the owner or lessee of approximately one half of some of the lots in the scheme,
is endeavouring
to exercise control over all lots and the use of parts of the
common property. I do not consider that the Applicant has the right
or power to
32 One of the principles embodied in the 1985 Act is the right of a lot
owner to use and deal with his lot without restrictions.
33 For example, s 42(3) provides
No by-law, amendment or repeal of a by-law is capable of operating so as to
prohibit or restrict the devolution of lots or any transfer,
lease, mortgage or
other dealing therewith or to destroy or modify any easement implied or created
by this Act.
34 Whether the proposed
installations are "improvements" or simply part of the Strata Company's
management of the scheme appears
to me to be the only issue. The Strata Company
may need to take advice in that regard. In the meantime, I am not prepared to
the order sought.
Principal Order
35 My Principal Order in this matter is that
The application be dismissed.
DATED 22 December 2004
_________________________________
R J KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (77 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter