URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miller and Winning & Anor [2004] WASTR 51 (10 September 2004)
STRATA TITLES
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
10 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000070
SURVEY-STRATA
PLAN NUMBER:
ALLAN WILLIAM
GEORGE ALEXANDER
LESLEY HAWORTH
Respondents
Catchwords:
property – Strata titles – survey-strata duplex – alterations
to lots – validity of
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also
1 Structural alterations to a lot in a 2-lot survey-strata
2 The Applicant is Allan William Miller, one of the proprietors of Lot 1
on Survey-strata Plan 37548 ("the
Respondents
3 The Respondents are George Alexander Winning and Lesley Haworth Winning as
the proprietors of Lot 2 on the Plan.
and the relevant Act
4 The Plan was registered on 18 February pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
5 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
6 The parcel is a 2-lot survey-strata scheme situated at and as known as 84
Stoneham Road, Attadale. When the Plan was registered,
both lots were registered
in the names of the Respondents.
7 The Respondents transferred Lot 1 to the Applicant and Sandra Janet Miller on
19 February 2002.
Unit entitlements
8 The unit entitlements are as
Order sought
9 The Applicant has sought an Order in the following
“The Applicant applies to the Referee for
the nullification
By-laws applicable to the property 84 Stoneham Road, Attadale 6156, Lot 94 on
the Survey Strata Plan N
37548 passed on the 17
February 2000. Now known as Lot 1 and Lot 2. Reference: Form 21 Notification of
Change of By-laws
Strata Titles Act 1985
Section 42.
Items 15, a, b & c
(Note: the references to "Item 15, a, b, c and 16" are references to by-laws
15(a), (b) and (c) and 16 as recorded in Notification
I018378 to be referred to
Encumbrances
10 The Plan is subject to a restrictive covenant arising from Transfer
12120/1959 ("the Restrictive Covenant").
11 The Restrictive Covenant provides that the proprietor from time to time of
the land, from which the Plan was derived and now
the subject of the Plan, will
not, among other things, allow more than one dwelling house to be erected
thereon. However, as recorded
on the Plan, in Application H366411, the
Restrictive Covenant was modified by the City of Melville in August 1999 to
allow 2 residences
within the parcel.
12 A substantial portion of the boundary between the 2 lots is the centre-line
of a party wall between the lots and the Plan contains
an endorsement which
refers to easements in respect of that party wall:
(a) In favour
of Lot 1 over that part of the party wall that is within the boundary of Lot 2;
(b) In favour of Lot 2 over that part of the party wall that is within the
boundary of Lot 1.
13 The endorsement refers to reg 14G of the
Strata Titles General
Regulations 1996
which sets out in full the respective rights and
obligations of the parties in relation to those
14 Pursuant to
, the by-laws of the Strata Company are those contained
, subject to Notification I018378 which was noted on the Plan on 19
February 2002. It records the addition of the following new Sch
15 and 16, being those referred to in the Order sought:
ground water bore situated within Lot 1 and the television antennae and ducted
vacuum system situated within Lot 2 and their
associated plant and equipment
which is for the use of both Lots on the strata plan will be managed in
accordance with the following.
a. The Proprietors of Lots one and two will grant reciprocal rights of access
for the maintenance and inspection of the plant and
b. Operating costs of individual systems shall be borne by the owner of the
property in which system is located.
c. Costs associated with the upkeep and maintenance of the items listed
shared equally.
16. The appearance of the buildings contained on Lots one and two must be in
accordance with the overall theme of the strata scheme.
Upkeep, maintenance and
changes to the appearance of the buildings is to be determined by unanimous
resolution. Payment of moneys
is in accordance with the schedule of unit
entitlements registered with the Strata Plan".
15 My comments on those by-laws will be set out later in these
Applicant's submissions
16 The Applicant contends that the Respondents' Lot 2 residence has not been
constructed in accordance with the building certificate
provided by the City of
Melville in accordance with Plan 11-05-1989 Licence No 2529-89.
17 His submissions include claims, for example, that
eaves of the Respondents' Lot 2 upper level overhang the boundary of Lot 1 by
approximately 600mm for a distance of 8 metres.
"...allowing the watershed of Lot 2 to flow onto the roof of Lot 1 causing
severe water damage to the ceilings of bedrooms 1, 2 and
3, the two bathrooms
and the family room ..."
(b) The eaves of the
Respondents' Lot 2 overhang the boundary of Lot 1 along the eastern boundary of
a garage by approximately 400mm
for a distance of 6 metres,
"... allowing the water shed from Lot 2 to flood onto the property of Lot
18 Other issues raised touch on the use of the bore and pump and the ducted
vacuum system referred to in Sch 2, by-law 15, quoted
19 Some proposals for the re-location of the bore have been put by the
Applicant to the Respondents.
20 The Applicant considers that Sch 2, by-laws 15(a), (b) and (c) are now
redundant and that Sch 2, by-law 16 is very difficult
to understand.
21 The Applicant advises that in or about October 2002, he approached Mr
Winning and informed him that, because of water problems
in the roof, the
Applicant required alterations and new additions to Lot 1 and asked if Mr
Winning could provide a copy of the building
plans to assist in carrying out the
proposed works.
22 The Applicant reports that he and his co-proprietor of Lot 1 propose to
re-roof the Lot 1 residence by replacing the existing
tiled roof to a
“colourbond” roof,
"...to alleviate the health, safety and damage problems occurring within the
residence of Lot 1..."
23 Mr Winning is reported to have responded by advising
"He could not provide the certified plans although he designed and constructed
the building, being an architect, designer and a registered
24 Mr Winning undertook to provide a sketch of the plans but added, as a
caution, that
"...the present building was not as the submitted
25 Mr Winning eventually provided the Applicant with a sketch plan, but it was
said to have been prepared by Mr Winning "only from
26 In his consultation with builders and architects, the Applicant has
considered demolishing and re-building the Lot 1 residence.
27 The Applicant reports that Mr Winning has expressed the view
"I don't care if you do pull the place down. If it's your property you can do
with it as you wish".
28 However, he claims that in mid-April 2004, when he advised Mr Winning that
renovations were about to commence, Mr Winning’s
"Draw up some details and I will look at them".
29 Plans were then prepared and submitted to and approved by the City of
Melville and to the proprietors of other properties in
the vicinity.
30 A set of the plans was provided to the Respondents and the Applicant reports
that Mr Winning, on behalf of the Respondents,
"...approved of 85-90% of the renovation verbally in front of a Mr Scott
Robinson, and two other council planning office staff members
but would not
approve of box gutters in place of the overhanging eave because he did not like
31 However, the Applicant has taken advice from builders, designers and an
architect. He reports that they have all advised
"...because of the original design, it would not be possible to pitch a roof to
the existing structure without box gutters taking
the watershed back to Lot 2
where it legally should be directed. It was suggested that because the resident
of Lot 2 was a building
architect and designer he should come back with some
alternate design..."
32 The Applicant has listed the rooms within the Lot 1 residence which he
considers are adversely affected by water damage from
Lot 2. Those areas include
three bedrooms, a family room, a passageway, a lounge room and dining room.
33 The Applicant has also referred to what he believes to be other major damp
and health problems, including
"...two extremely large elm type trees approximately 30 metres high growing on
Lot 2 in a northerly aspect and cutting out the majority
of the winter sun
leaving the tiles wet and damp and covered in moss. The trees shed their leaves
en mass and blow up under the eaves
lying in the ceiling cavity wet and damp
throughout winter and are a fire hazard concern during
34 He also refers to fine dusty fibres, from the seed pods of those trees,
being lodged in the ceiling cavity. He would like the
trees to be cut back to no
more than 10m in height but the Applicant has not sought any orders in relation
to the trees.
Response to
application
35 The Respondents have opposed the application on the basis
"...the by-laws ... were put in place to insure (sic) that the intent of duplex
developments maintained – for better or worse,
a constancy or agreed
appearance".
36 The Respondents contend that the application contains numerous errors of
erroneous facts and
"...an underlying desire to change the overall theme of the
development".
37 The Respondents were the original developers of the site. The Lot 1
residence was built in 1961, added to in 1976 and again in
1990 to create the
duplex development. They advise that
"the painted face brick and orange Swiss tile character of the original building
was carried through all stages of the redevelopment
... the three stages of the
development have maintained this character and detail ... particular deciduous
trees were planted in
order to provide a passive solar
38 The Respondents concede that leaf load gutters were omitted from most areas
of the original house and from the additions, on
the basis that a leaf load
lasts for a short period of time only.
39 The Respondents consider the replacement of the existing tiles with
"...a suggestion worthy of
consideration..."
40 In relation to the plans for his Lot 1 residence, Mr Winning reports that
since his retirement from practice, many old records,
plans and files have been
disposed of.
41 He concedes that
"...some minor internal planning alterations were incorporated including wall
and room relocations".
42 He also concedes that there is no brick fire barrier to the underside of the
tile roof between the attached garage but claims
there is a parapet fire wall
extending upwards to the roof plate of the upper storey of Lot 2.
43 He considers that the eaves are built in accordance with the approved
drawings and that the relevant section of roof framing
"...is part of the original building (over 40 years old) and deflection of this
magnitude is not unusual in a low-pitched tile
44 As to the Applicant's plans that have been put to the Respondents for
approval, Mr Winning states:
"The set of plans were offered by Mr Millar (sic) on Wednesday, 26
May for signature and return in 24 hours. I advised Mr Millar that I would look
at them would talk to the Council the following day.
Mr Millar was at the
Council's office when I attended and I was prepared to discuss some solutions
and offer some advice. This was
the first opportunity I had been given and my
letter of June 2
was intended to stimulate such a discussion. The
next communication was from the Strata Titles Referee dated July
Some days before I had approached Mr Millar in his garden suggesting we discuss
the matter but this was declined".
45 Although the brick wall installed by the Applicant was considered to be a
replacement of a perfectly good 1200mm high railing
fence and gate, the
Respondents
"...appreciate that the Millars wanted privacy for their alfresco area which has
been built"
46 I have assumed that the "railing fence and gate" did not form part of the
party wall.
Considerations
47 In my view, the by-laws referred to in the Orders sought are not well
48 By-law 15 does not deal with common property, but with items that are owned
by the individual lot proprietors. In these circumstances,
an agreement (such as
an easement) of the kind that would be entered into by adjacent property owners
would appear to be more appropriate
than a by-law, particularly as the by-law
provides for the costs of upkeep and maintenance to be shared equally, rather
than in accordance
with unit entitlements.
49 By-law 16, as quoted above, is more appropriate as a Strata Company than
by-law 1, but it was, in any event, already largely
embodied in Sch 2, by-law 14
which provides that
"A proprietor, occupier or other resident of a lot shall not, without the
written consent of the strata company, maintain within
the lot anything visible
from outside the lot that viewed from outside the lot, is not in keeping with
the rest of the building".
50 Any structural changes proposed by the Applicant will be subject to
Sch 2, by-law 14 and to s 7A,
(5)(a) and s 7B(3), (5), (6) and
(7) but, as there is no common property within the scheme, the cost-sharing
provisions contained
in by-law 16 do not appear to have any relevance to the
Powers to invalidate
51 Although the Applicant has failed to specify under what section of the
he is seeking an Order, I have assumed it to
which, among
other things, allows me to make an order to invalidate a by-law of a strata
Sections 93(3)
and (5) provide, respectively:
"(3) On the
making of an application under subsection (1) a referee may make an order
under this section if he is satisfied that
by-law or the repeal or amendment
of a by-law —
(a) was made without power;
(b) was not made in accordance with this Act or the regulations or any other
requirement that ought to have been observed; or
should not have been made
having regard to the interests of all proprietors in the use and enjoyment of
their lots or the common property.
does not apply to a by-law of the kind referred to in
that is not an issue in the present case).
53 There is nothing before me to suggest that there was any defect in the
notice for or procedure used for the purposes of the Strata
Company's 17 January
2002 decision to adopt the new Sch 2, by-laws 15 and 16, although
Notification I18378 erroneously refers
their adoption by a "special
resolution". All resolutions adopted in a 2-lot scheme are unanimous
resolutions.
54 If the Applicants wish to carry out structural alterations or additions to
their Lot 1 residence, they must comply with the requirements
. As Lot 1 is not a vacant lot, the only grounds upon which the Respondents
could object are those set out in
55 If the Applicant wishes to make structural alterations or additions to, or
which affect, the party wall, the terms of the Easements
must be referred to and
adhered to as may, in the circumstances be necessary.
56 Conclusion
57 In my view, the adoption of by-law 15 was beyond the power of the Strata
Company because that by-law deals only with privately-owned
assets. The shared
usage of those items is a private issue between neighbours not an issue
involving a dispute under the
It was, therefore, made without power.
58 There is a sufficient basis for the first part of Sch 2, by-law 16,
because it is not inconsistent with Sch 2, by-law
14. However,
do not consider that the balance of Sch 2, by-law 16 is relevant to the
interests of the proprietors
in the enjoyment
of their lots and there is no
common property to which it can relate, I do not consider it necessary or
appropriate
to invalidate
the whole of Sch 2, by-law 16.
59 My Orders are that
1. By-law 15 of the Schedule 2 by-laws of
"The Owners of 84 Stoneham Road, Attadale – Strata Plan 37548" ("the
Strata Company")
is invalidated; and
2. Pursuant to
(4) I DIRECT the Strata Company to lodge
with the Registrar of Titles, by 28 September 2004,
a certified copy of
this Order together
with any filing fee required by the said Registrar in
respect thereof.
DATED 10 September 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (81.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter