URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/157.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HOOPER -v- COCKLES PTY LTD [No 2] [2025] WASCA 157 (29 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- COCKLES PTY LTD [No 2]
[2025] WASCA 157
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACV 60 of 2025
JOHN HENTHORN
CAMERON HOOPER
ADVISORY PTY LTD
CITY ACCOUNTING (WA) PTY LTD
CITY ACCOUNTING PTY LTD
GORDON HUME HOOPER
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COR 186 of 2024
- Practice and procedure - Leave to appeal from orders as to costs only -
Interlocutory applications resolved without determination
on the merits -
Substantive proceedings unlikely to proceed to final determination - Whether
principles in
for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs;
apply to interlocutory
application that is not determined on its merits
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
Court Act 1935
Court (Court of Appeal) Rules 2005
Application
for extension of time to commence appeal
Application for leave to
appeal dismissed
Representation:
First Appellant
M G S Crowley
M G S Crowley
No appearance
No appearance
No appearance
No appearance
No appearance
No appearance
Solicitors:
First Appellant
Mizen + Mizen
Mizen + Mizen
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
22 October 2025 the court sat pursuant to a Registrar's Notice to Attend
issued 17 September 2025 to consider the appellants'
applications for:
(1) an extension of time within which to appeal; and (2) leave to
hearing from the parties we refused the appellants' applications for an
extension of time to appeal and leave to appeal; and
consequently dismissed the
appeal. We stated that we would provide written reasons for those orders.
These are our reasons for
the orders of the court made 22 October
primary proceedings are concerned with the control of the first respondent,
Cockles Pty Ltd (Cockles).
is a company of which the seventh respondent (Philip) is the sole shareholder.
The first appellant (Mei) is Philip's wife.
The third respondent (Davyd) is
Philip's son by an earlier marriage. While holidaying in the United Kingdom in
July 2024 Philip
suffered a major health event. Questions arose about Philip's
capacity to appoint and remove directors of Cockles. The plaintiffs
primary proceedings (Davyd and the second respondent) claimed that Mei and two
others (the second appellant and the eighth
respondent) were not validly
appointed as directors of Cockles. In addition, acting pursuant to an enduring
power of attorney, Davyd
purported to take actions to confirm his and the second
respondent's appointments as directors of Cockles; and also to remove Mei,
second appellant and the eighth respondent as directors of Cockles.
convenience we will refer to Davyd and the second respondent as 'the plaintiffs'
and Mei, the second appellant and the eighth
respondent as 'the
defendants'. There are other parties to the primary proceedings and the appeal.
But those other parties are not
involved in the underlying costs dispute that
provides the subject matter of the appeal. Nor did they take part in the
plaintiffs commenced the primary proceedings on 25 November 2024. They
sought declarations that the defendants had been validly
removed, or had never
been validly appointed, as directors of Cockles. On the same day the plaintiffs
filed an interlocutory process
seeking orders, among other things, to restrain
the defendants from acting as directors of Cockles pending the final hearing of
substantive claim. One of the impugned costs orders the subject of the
appeal is concerned with the costs of the plaintiffs' application
interlocutory process dated 25 November 2024. On 9 December 2024 the
defendants offered undertakings pending the hearing of the
interlocutory
application. The primary judge observed that the undertakings were
substantially to the effect of the interlocutory
orders sought on the
plaintiffs' application (ts 143).
and Philip's family home was Cockles' registered office. The plaintiffs entered
the home - allegedly without Mei and Philip's
permission - and removed items
said to be Cockles' property. The defendants brought an application by
interlocutory process dated
18 December 2024. This sought, among other
things, the interim appointment of a receiver and manager to Cockles, an
injunction restraining
the plaintiffs from entering Mei and Philip's family home
and orders requiring the plaintiffs to deliver up and account on affidavit
the property that had been taken. On 23 December 2024 orders were made to
that effect and the costs of the application were
reserved. The orders
providing for the injunction were expressed as being a permanent restraint. So
too the order for delivery
up was expressed in final terms. By the appeal the
appellants also seek to challenge the costs orders subsequently made on the
defendants'
application dated 18 December 2024.
receiver and manager was later discharged. On 17 February 2025 the primary
judge heard the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
dated 25 November
2024. Judgment was reserved. Philip undertook further medical assessments
after judgment was reserved on the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application. On
8 April 2025 an appearance to the primary proceedings was entered on
Philip's behalf.
This was of significance so far as it was inconsistent with
Philip being a person under disability. Immediately before that, in
early April
2025, extra‑curial steps were taken by Philip (and on Philip's behalf)
providing for Mei's appointment as a director
of Cockles and the removal of the
plaintiffs as directors of Cockles. After Philip entered an appearance the
defendants sought that
the plaintiffs' interlocutory application be dismissed
and that the defendants be released from their undertakings. On 10 April
2025 the primary judge made orders providing for dismissal of the plaintiffs'
interlocutory application and allowing the defendants
to withdraw their
undertakings. Again, costs were reserved.
primary judge then programmed the outstanding costs issues for determination.
The costs in issue concerned the costs of the
plaintiffs' interlocutory
application dated 25 November 2024, the costs of the defendants'
interlocutory application dated 18 December
2024, the costs of the hearing
on 10 April 2025 and the costs of the costs dispute itself.
competing positions as to costs were as
plaintiffs sought that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of and
incidental to the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
dated 25 November
2024, to be assessed on a party and party basis; and there otherwise be no order
as to costs.
defendants sought orders that:
(a) The plaintiffs pay the defendants' costs of and incidental to the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application dated 25 November 2024,
assessed on a party and party basis.
(b) The plaintiffs pay the defendants' costs of and
incidental to the defendants' interlocutory application dated 18 December
with an uplift to the scale allowance for the hourly rate allowable for a
senior practitioner.
(c) The plaintiffs pay the defendants' costs of the costs applications, to be
assessed on a party and party
The decision of the primary judge
primary judge gave oral reasons dealing with the costs issues on 17 June
2025. Her Honour made orders
be no order as to costs in relation to the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
filed 25 November 2025.
be no order as to costs in relation to [the defendants'] interlocutory
application filed 18 December 2024.
be no order as to costs in relation to the hearing of 10 April 2025.
be no orders as to costs in relation to each of the plaintiffs' and [the
defendants'] application for costs.
dealing with the background circumstances, the primary judge observed that the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application dated
25 November 2024 was not
determined on its merits. Her Honour then
The fact that the plaintiffs' application was determined without a hearing on
the merits deprives the court of determining who was
the successful party, this
being the factor that usually determines who ought to be awarded the costs of
the application. I'm not
required to determine the hypothetical application,
especially where in this case there were complex factual matters that required
determination. In my view, both parties acted reasonably in circumstances where
they both held a reasonable belief as to the capacity,
or lack thereof, of
The plaintiffs acted reasonably in making and prosecuting their application, and
[the defendants] acted reasonably in defending and
agreeing to provide
undertakings to maintain the status quo pending final determination. Therefore,
the appropriate order in those
circumstances is that there should be no order as
to costs in relation to the plaintiffs' application
(ts 143 - 144).
primary judge also considered that both parties acted reasonably in relation to
the defendants' interlocutory application dated
18 December 2024
(ts 144). Her Honour stated:
It was reasonable for [the defendants] to make the application, and they
ultimately were granted the orders they sought. However,
I did not find then,
and it would not be appropriate for me to find now, that the serious allegations
made by [the defendants] against
the plaintiffs were made out. In light of the
allegations made against the plaintiffs, it was appropriate for the plaintiffs
oppose the defendants' application.
I did essentially grant the orders sought in the defendants' application, but
that was to protect Philip's interests pending final
resolution of the action.
I did not determine the defendants' application on its merits. It was not
appropriate to do so. Therefore,
the appropriate costs order is no order as to
costs (ts 144).
followed that there should be no order as to the costs of the hearing on
10 April 2025; or as to the competing applications for
their appeal notice filed 25 July 2025, the appellants seek to appeal from
each of the primary judge's orders made 17 June 2025.
However, on the
papers there was some doubt as to the intended scope of the appeal. An amended
appeal notice, filed 31 July 2025,
excluded par 1 of the orders made
17 June 2025 from the orders being appealed from. Later, however, an
appellant's case was filed
that, by ground 1, claimed that the primary
judge erred in law in making no order as to costs in respect of the plaintiffs'
interlocutory
application dated 25 November 2024. The orders wanted in the
appellant's case also provided for the setting aside of par 1 of the
made 17 June 2025.
for the appellants informed this court, at the hearing on 22 October 2025,
that the appellants sought to challenge par 1
of the orders made
17 June 2025. The amendment to exclude par 1 of the costs orders from
the orders appealed from was an inadvertent
error. Accordingly, we evaluated
the application for leave to appeal on the basis that the proposed appeal would
challenge all of
the primary judge's orders made 17 June 2025.
appellants required an extension of time to appeal. The appeal was commenced
24 days out of time. The time for commencement,
as limited by the relevant
rules, was 1 July 2025 insofar as the costs orders were concerned with
interlocutory applications:
Supreme Court
(Court of Appeal) Rules 2005
(WA) r 26(1). The appeal notice was
not filed until 25 July 2025. The application for an extension of time was
supported by affidavits
sworn by solicitors acting for the appellants (an
affidavit of Leo Yuanzhe Ren sworn on 24 July 2025 and an affidavit of Lisa
Kim sworn 21 October 2025). Neither affidavit adequately explained
the delay in commencing the appeal. The appellants' solicitors
were provided
with a transcript of the primary judge's oral reasons on 25 June 2025.
However, it was not until 18 July that Mei
(the first appellant) provided
instructions to commence an appeal. The second appellant did not provide
instructions to commence
the appeal until 22 July 2025. The third of the
defendants - Wei Teo - did not provide instructions to appeal and so is joined
the appeal as the eighth respondent.
are two grounds of appeal. They
learned primary judge erred in law in making no order as to costs in respect of
[the plaintiffs'] application for interlocutory
injunctions made
25 November 2024, by considering only whether the parties had acted
reasonably where the reason the application
was dismissed would also finally
determine the substantive application or overlooking that fact.
learned primary judge erred in law in making no order as to costs in respect of
[the defendants'] application for permanent injunctions
made 18 December
2023 (amended 23 December 2023), by considering only whether the parties
had acted reasonably where the relief was
not interlocutory but final or
alternatively the conclusion that the plaintiffs had acted reasonably was
plainly unjust.
appellants required leave to appeal as the appeal was as to costs only:
Supreme Court Act 1935
s 60(1)(f).
support of leave to appeal, the appellants contended that the dismissal of the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application was in substance
a final determination of
the whole proceeding. This was because, following the extra-curial steps taken
by and on behalf of Philip
in early April 2025 to resolve the composition of
Cockles' board of directors, it was unlikely that there would be any further
in the substantive proceedings. In those circumstances the appellants
complained that they would never be able to obtain an indemnity
for their costs
if leave to appeal was refused. The appellants also sought to make something of
the circumstance that the appeal
would not fragment or delay the substantive
proceedings.
appellants' submissions on the question of leave to appeal were misdirected. In
an appeal as to costs only, an applicant seeking
leave to appeal from an order
denying him or her costs will never obtain an indemnity for those costs if leave
to appeal is refused.
This suggested criterion takes the question of leave to
appeal nowhere. Nor is the absence of fragmentation or delay to the substantive
proceedings a material consideration. The possibility that an interlocutory
appeal may fragment or delay substantive proceedings
is a factor favouring
refusal of leave to appeal. But the absence of fragmentation or delay to the
substantive proceedings cannot
itself justify a grant of leave to appeal; it
constitutes no more than the absence of a potential factor which might lead to
refusal of leave to appeal.
Applicable legal principles - leave to appeal from an
order as to costs only
to appeal from an order as to costs only should be granted if, in all of the
circumstances, it is in the interests of justice
that there be a grant of leave.
In this context the factors that are commonly considered in evaluating the
interests of justice include:
(1) whether the costs decision was wrong or,
at the least, attended with sufficient doubt to warrant its being reconsidered;
whether the application for leave raises a question of general public
importance, an issue of principle or the applicant for leave
can demonstrate
that significant injustice is likely to result (sometimes referred to as a
'reasonably clear injustice') if leave
is not granted; and (3) whether the
likely costs of the appeal are proportionate to the issues at stake.
leave to appeal is in the interests of justice will also be informed by the goal
and objects in O 1 r 4A and r 4B of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
NRW Contracting Pty Ltd v
Cliffs Asia Pacific Iron Ore Pty
Court of Appeal considered the applicable principles as to appellate review of
costs orders in
The court emphasised
this context, as elsewhere,
the requirement for leave to appeal is no mere technicality or procedural
nicety; it serves an important function in the administration
of justice by
discouraging unnecessary appeals [34].
gateway requirement of leave is particularly important in the context of a
litigant seeking to appeal a costs order. Satellite
litigation as to costs
should not be allowed to assume a life of its own, disproportionate to its
significance. It is in the interests
of the parties and the public that
disputes as to costs be resolved as quickly, efficiently and inexpensively as
possible [34].
is seldom in the interests of justice, nor consistent with the goal and objects
enshrined in O 1 r 4A and r 4B of
Rules of the Supreme Court
that a litigant be permitted to challenge a discretionary costs order. Thus,
ordinarily as a matter of fact, a grant of leave to
appeal on a costs issue is
respect of these considerations, counsel for the defendants drew the court's
attention to
Denwest Nominees Pty Ltd t/as Cinderdin
It is appropriate to highlight two statements that were endorsed by the court in
[T]he requirement for the grant of leave provides a mechanism by which the court
can actively discourage the dissipation of further
costs in what will very often
prove to be a futile attempt to challenge a discretionary judgment relating to
costs [119]. (Here
endorsing observations of Martin CJ in
Cardno BSD Pty Ltd v Water
Corporation [No 2]
Consideration of an application for leave 'must start from the premise that, as
a matter of policy, appeals as to costs only are
to be discouraged' [121].
(Here endorsing the observations of Malcolm CJ in
Garner v Rohanna Pty
costs of and incidental to all proceedings in the Supreme Court are in the
discretion of the court or judge:
assessing whether to grant leave to appeal, it ought to be remembered that an
appeal court will not, without strong reason, interfere
with an exercise of
discretion on a question of costs. It is necessary to demonstrate manifest
error or that the order stands outside
the limits of a sound discretionary
Barboutis v The
Kart Centre Pty Ltd [No
By 'manifest error' what must be shown is that the primary court made an error
in principle or acted on a manifestly erroneous view
of the facts or that the
order is unreasonable or plainly unjust:
Spotless Group Ltd v
Premier Building and Consulting Pty Ltd (receivers
In short, the appellant must establish appellable error in a
House v The
express error, an appeal court is not entitled to substitute its own decision
for that of the primary court merely because
the appeal court prefers a
different result or considers that a different result would be more just and
equitable. The test is not
whether the Court of Appeal would have made the same
order but whether there is a ground on which the primary court's order could
reasonably be made
Spotless Group Ltd v
Premier Building and Consulting Pty Ltd (receivers
Disposition - the question of leave to appeal
were not satisfied that the appellants had established that the interests of
justice required a grant of leave to appeal against
the primary judge's orders
as to costs made 17 June 2025. To the contrary, for the following three
reasons, we were positively satisfied
that the interests of justice militated in
favour of the refusal of leave to appeal.
the appellants did not demonstrate that the costs decision was attended with
sufficient doubt to warrant its being reconsidered.
were four components to the costs decision (see [
] above). The latter two components of
the costs decision were not directly challenged by grounds 1 and 2.
Presumably the appellants
contended that, if successful in disturbing one or
both of pars 1 and 2 of the costs order, it would follow that pars 3
the costs order would also be set aside. That may be correct if
ground 1 was upheld and par 1 of the costs order was set aside.
However, success on ground 2, and the setting aside of par 2 of the
costs order, would not result in the setting aside of par 3
of the costs
order. In any case, the grounds of appeal only directly challenged pars 1
and 2 of the costs order.
challenged par 1 of the costs order dealing with the plaintiffs'
interlocutory application dated 25 November 2024. In support
ground 1 the appellants submitted
primary judge applied orthodox principles to a final resolution without a
hearing on the merits whereas the application before
the court was an
interlocutory application.
10 April 2025, before dismissing the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
dated 25 November 2025, the primary judge stated that
in light of the
extra-curial steps taken by and on behalf of Philip, the application for an
interlocutory injunction 'simply cannot
succeed' (ts 149). This, according
to the appellants, was because the plaintiffs' substantive case could not
succeed: the reason
why the interlocutory injunction application failed was the
reason why the plaintiffs' substantive application would fail.
these circumstances the court was not deprived of the means of determining who
had, or would have had, success in the litigation.
primary judge acted on the incorrect principle that the discretion to award
costs was not actuated if neither party acted unreasonably
or alternatively
overlooked the material consideration that the plaintiffs' substantive
application could not succeed.
appellant relied on the decision of Goldberg J in
Lion Nathan Australia Pty
Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd
is readily apparent that the primary judge exercised the costs discretion in
relation to the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
dated 25 November
2024 by reference to the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai
Grove v Grove
[41] the court summarised those principles in the following
While, ordinarily, a successful party is entitled to an order for its costs,
that general rule as to costs following the event is
based on the identification
of a successful party by a hearing on the merits. Where a matter resolves
without a determination on
the merits the court is deprived of the factor that
will usually determine how the discretion as to costs is to be exercised. The
court will not try a hypothetical action between the parties. However, in some
cases the court may be able to conclude that one
of the parties has acted so
unreasonably that the other party should obtain the costs of the litigation.
Alternatively, in a rare
case, the court may feel confident that although both
parties have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain to have succeeded
the matter was tried (for example, the court may be satisfied that one party
capitulated in the face of probable defeat). But,
if it appears that both
parties acted reasonably in commencing and defending the proceedings and their
conduct continued to be reasonable
until the litigation was resolved or its
further prosecution became futile, the proper exercise of the costs discretion
will usually
mean that the court will make no order as to the costs of the
proceedings.
for the appellants submitted that the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
, on which the primary
judge relied, did not apply to an interlocutory application. This, it was
submitted, was critical to the appellants'
case for leave to appeal. Counsel
submitted that the appellants' proposed appeal raised a question of principle -
that being whether
or not the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
applied to an
interlocutory application. Counsel for the appellants submitted that there
should be leave to appeal because the proposed
appeal raised this question of
support of the proposition that the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
did not apply to an
interlocutory application, counsel for the appellants posited a situation where
it was contended that a party
had given false evidence in connection with an
interlocutory application. Such a circumstance, if proven, would gainsay a
that the party had acted reasonably in respect of the interlocutory
proceedings. Counsel suggested that the falsity might not be
determinable at an
interlocutory stage where cross-examination was not allowed. This, it was said,
would mean that the costs determination
of the undetermined interlocutory
application should await the outcome of the substantive proceedings. Hence,
according to counsel's
argument, it could be seen that the principles
established in
Re Minister
for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
ought not apply to
an interlocutory application.
are at least two difficulties with this submission. First, dealing with the
particular circumstances of the example posited,
it presupposes that the outcome
of the substantive proceedings will always determine the allegation of falsity.
That may not be
the case where the allegation concerns a matter that is
collateral to the issues in the substantive proceedings. Or - as indeed
highly likely position in the present case - it might be that the substantive
proceedings would never be determined on its
merits because of the supervening
event which meant that the interlocutory application would never be determined
on its merits.
In those circumstances the consideration raised by counsel for
the appellants would provide no basis for the non-application of the
established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
more generally, the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
admits of exceptions.
The award of costs is a matter within the discretion of the court. The
discretion must be exercised judicially
and is guided by established principles.
But those general principles may, in a particular case, be considered
inapplicable where
in exercise of the discretion as to costs the court is
satisfied for good reason that the interests of justice require a different
outcome as to costs. See generally
Chittleborough v Troy
Group Pty Ltd
is convenient to consider the appellants' proposition as to the inapplicability
of the principles in
Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
interlocutory application from two perspectives. First, whether as a matter of
law the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
ought never to be
applied in relation to an interlocutory application. Second, whether the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
ought not to have been
applied in the circumstances of the present case.
do not accept the contention that, as a matter of law, the principles
established in
Re Minister
for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
are inapplicable
to an interlocutory application. The contention is contrary to authority and
are many decisions in which a court determining the costs consequences of an
interlocutory application that resolved without
a determination on the merits
has applied the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
. See for example
Kelliher v Commissioner
G1PC Pty Ltd v Petstock
Baller Industries Pty Ltd
v Mero Mero Leasing Pty
Re Hawkesbury House Pty
Furnish & Finish Pty
Brindabella Resources Pty
Ltd v Australian Transit Group Pty
Morcom Holdings Pty Ltd v
Mountain Asset Partners Pty Ltd (in liq)
decisions are consistent with principle. What underpins the principles
established in
Re Minister
for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
is that in the
absence of a curial determination on the merits there is no 'event' by which to
apply the general rule that costs
follow the event.
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
recognises that
satellite litigation in relation to costs is clearly to be avoided. The court
will not try a hypothetical action.
To do so would burden the parties with the
costs of a litigated action which by settlement or extra-curial action they had
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
(624). Also
relevant, in that context, is the burden placed on the judicial resources of the
Rules of the Supreme Court
(WA) O 1 r 4B(1)(c) and (e). Those concerns apply
equally where an interlocutory application is not resolved by a curial
determination
on the merits. Accordingly, in principle
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
is equally applicable
where an interlocutory application is not determined on its merits.
from the general to the specific, the primary judge was correct to apply the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
in the circumstances
of the present case. Counsel for the appellants accepted during oral
submissions, correctly in our view, that
the supervening event which meant that
the plaintiffs' interlocutory application dated 25 November 2024 would not
be determined on
its merits meant that it was highly likely that the substantive
proceeding would never be determined on its merits. In those circumstances
there is no doubt that it was appropriate to apply the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
to the plaintiffs'
interlocutory application dated 25 November 2024.
appellants' submission that the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
did not apply to an
interlocutory application, as recorded at [
] above, must be rejected.
Accordingly, contrary to ground 1, the primary judge did not act on a wrong
principle in applying the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
to the costs of and
incidental to the plaintiffs' interlocutory application dated 25 November
2024. What then arises for consideration
is whether, as seemingly argued by the
appellants in the alternative in support of ground 1, the primary judge
misapplied the principles
established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
an interlocutory matter it will often be easier for the court to determine which
party would likely have succeeded had the matter
been argued:
Major v Woodside Energy
That circumstance may, in a particular case, inform the application of the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
ability to determine the party who was likely to succeed explains the result in
Lion Nathan Australia Pty
Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd (No 3)
. This was a case where, unlike the
present case, the claimant succeeded in obtaining an interlocutory injunction.
The defendant
was restrained from proceeding with a shareholders' meeting. The
injunction was discharged when, with the benefit of the court's
reasons for
granting the injunctive relief, the defendant proposed issuing a modified
explanatory memorandum which met the defects
and deficiencies that had been
identified by the court.
claimant sought to discontinue the proceedings on terms that the defendant pay
its costs. Goldberg J characterised the application
for an interlocutory
injunction as being, in a sense, an application for final relief [13]. From a
practical point of view, having
regard to the primary relief sought, the
claimant succeeded in its proceedings [14], [16], [18]. The interlocutory
injunctive relief
which had been granted effectively resolved the issue [17].
His Honour considered such a situation to be a gloss on the category
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
where the court could
feel confident that one party would be almost certain to have succeeded if the
matter had been fully tried.
That was because 'the grant of the interlocutory
injunction effectively resolve[d] the application for final relief' [17].
determined that it was appropriate that the claimant have its costs of and
incidental to the interlocutory application
and otherwise the parties bear their
own costs of the proceedings [19], [21].
understood,
Lion Nathan
Australia Pty Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd (No 3)
provides no support
for the appellants' alternative argument by ground 1. The plaintiffs'
interlocutory application dated 25 November
2024 was never determined on
its merits. The dismissal of the plaintiffs' interlocutory application on
10 April 2025 was brought
extra-curial steps taken by and on behalf of Philip in early April 2025. Those
taken after judgment was reserved following the hearing of the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application on 17 February 2025. This was
case where the resolution of the plaintiffs' interlocutory application meant
that - absent the supervening events - the court
could be confident that the
defendants were almost certain to have succeeded if the matter was tried. Nor,
given the circumstances
which brought about the dismissal of the plaintiffs'
interlocutory application, could the court be confident that the defendants
almost certain to have succeeded on the plaintiffs' interlocutory application
absent the supervening events.
appellants' submission that the primary judge overlooked a 'material
consideration' is dependent on the supervening events.
The suggested material
consideration - ie that the plaintiffs' substantive application could not
succeed - relies on the extra-curial
steps taken by and on behalf of Philip in
early April 2025. The appellants did not contend or seek to establish that the
supervening
events were inevitable.
this is appreciated it cannot be accepted that the primary judge overlooked a
material consideration in the way suggested by
the appellants' submissions and
ground 1. The primary judge had regard to, and acted conformably with, the
principles established
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
in recognising that
the supervening events rendered futile the further prosecution of the
plaintiffs' interlocutory application dated
25 November 2024. That was the
only significance that attached to the suggested 'material consideration'. The
question of the costs
of the plaintiffs' interlocutory application was not to be
adjudged by reference to the position as of 17 June 2025 following the
extra-curial steps taken by and on behalf of Philip. Rather, in accordance with
the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
, the question of
the costs of the plaintiffs' interlocutory application was to be adjudged by
reference to the position when the
application was filed and prosecuted.
these reasons ground 1 was without merit.
challenged par 2 of the costs order made 17 June 2025 - ie it was
concerned with the costs order as to the defendants' interlocutory
application
dated 18 December 2024. The ground was in two parts. The appellants said
that the primary judge erred in law in applying
the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
where the relief
granted was not interlocutory but final. In substance, as we understand it, the
point sought to be made was that
there was a relevant event for the purposes of
a costs determination. Otherwise the appellants said that the conclusion that
plaintiffs had acted reasonably was 'plainly unjust'.
second limb of ground 2 misconceived the relevant
House v The King
error. It conflated implied error - whether on the facts the result was
unreasonable or plainly unjust such that an appeal court
should infer there was
a failure to properly exercise the costs discretion - with an express error that
the primary judge had mistaken
the facts. Whether the defendants had acted
reasonably in the litigation was one factual matter material to the primary
exercise of the costs discretion. It was not, itself, the outcome of
the costs discretion. The relevant inquiry was not whether
the primary judge's
factual finding of reasonableness was unreasonable or plainly unjust but whether
it was correct.
relation to the first part of ground 2, the appellants submitted that the
primary judge granted permanent prohibitory and mandatory
injunctions on the
defendants' interlocutory application dated 18 December 2024. Thus,
according to the appellants, the defendants
obtained final relief on an
application to which the plaintiffs had made admissions in writing and by
conduct. The appellants submitted
that the primary judge should have applied
the usual rule as to costs following the event rather than the principles
established
Re Minister
for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
goes too far to characterise the defendants' interlocutory application dated
18 December 2024 as seeking relief that was final
in nature. For example,
the part of the application that sought the appointment of a receiver and
manager was plainly interlocutory
- the appointment was discharged relatively
shortly after it was made. More importantly, as the primary judge made
abundantly clear
in the oral reasons dealing with the costs determination,
her Honour did not determine the defendants' interlocutory application
its substantive merits. The primary judge did not make a binding judicial
determination of the parties' respective rights and
obligations. The primary
judge did not consider it appropriate to do so. That is understandable given
the short timeframe between
the filing and hearing of the application and the
nature of the issues raised by the application. Rather, as the primary judge
the defendants' interlocutory application was resolved by granting
orders designed 'to protect Philip's interests pending the final
resolution of
the action' (ts 144).
appellants do not, by ground 2 or otherwise, challenge the primary judge's
characterisation of the basis on which her Honour
made the orders of
23 December 2024 disposing of the defendants' interlocutory application
dated 18 December 2024. Accordingly,
the primary judge's characterisation
of the basis on which the application was determined must be accepted. Once
this point is reached
the primary judge was entirely correct to apply the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
in determining the
appropriate order as to costs on the defendants' interlocutory application. The
first aspect of ground 2 fails.
appellants' written submissions on the other part of ground 2 suffer from
imprecision brought about by the misconception in the
statement of the ground.
The submissions are directed to alleged inferred error rather than the primary
judge mistaking the facts.
In circumstances where the primary judge case
managed the litigation, and considered and determined the defendants'
interlocutory
application dated 18 December 2024, her Honour had a
considerable advantage over this court in assessing whether it was reasonable
for the plaintiffs to oppose the application. The appellants have not
demonstrated that this finding was wrong. The second aspect
of ground 2
also fails.
followed, in our opinion, that the appellants had not demonstrated that the
costs decision was attended with sufficient doubt
to warrant its being
reconsidered. To the contrary, having considered the grounds of appeal and the
appellants' written and oral
submissions, we were satisfied that the appellants
had not established appellable error in the primary judge's costs determination.
This alone sufficed to refuse leave to appeal. However, as we have mentioned,
there were two other reasons why leave to appeal was
to be refused.
second reason for refusing leave to appeal was that, properly understood, the
appellants' proposed appeal did no more than raise
the application of accepted
and well settled costs principles to the particular factual scenario before the
court in the primary
proceedings. The proposed appeal did not raise a question
of general public importance. Nor, in substance, did it raise an issue
principle. We acknowledge that in oral submissions counsel for the appellant
insisted that the proposed appeal raised an issue
of principle as to whether the
principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
applied to an
interlocutory application that was not determined on its merits. However, the
way in which the point was argued circled
than principle. In any case, for the reasons we have given, the appellants'
suggested error
of principle must be rejected. It cannot sustain the grant of
leave to appeal.
aside whether the principles established in
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai Qin
ought to be applied in
the context of an interlocutory application, the appellants' proposed appeal
invited this court to apply established
costs principles to the particular
circumstances of the case.
primary judge applied those same accepted and well settled costs principles in
reaching the costs decision sought to be challenged.
In those circumstances
leave to appeal is, ordinarily, only appropriate where a litigant demonstrates a
reasonably clear injustice.
No such injustice was apparent - even more so given
the conclusions we have reached on the merits of the proposed appeal and the
disproportionate nature of the appeal.
and most importantly in terms of refusal of leave to appeal, the costs of the
proposed appeal were disproportionate to the
issues at stake.
appellant's case did not address the potential monetary benefit that the
appellants might secure if the appeal was to be allowed
and the appellants were
to obtain the orders wanted in the appellant's case in substitution of the costs
orders made by the primary
judge. Nor was the likely quantum the subject of
affidavit evidence. It is likely, however, that the monetary benefit to be
by the appellants' proposed appeal could not exceed an amount in the
region of $35,970.
have calculated the $35,970 by applying the upper limits in the
Legal Profession (Supreme and District
Courts) (Contentious Business) Determination 2024
Consolidated Practice Direction
PD 4.7.1.1 to the relevant work as
Plaintiffs'
interlocutory application dated 25 November 2024 (scale item 10(a)
with counsel) - $15,840.
Defendants'
interlocutory application dated 18 December 2024 (scale item 10(a)
with counsel) - $15,840.
hearing on 10 April 2025 (PD 4.7.1.1 item 2.4) - $2,574.
application for costs (PD 4.7.1.1 item 2.10) - $1,716.
appreciate that, as to the defendants' interlocutory application dated
18 December 2024, the appellants' written submissions make
an ambit claim
for indemnity costs. However, there is no such claim in the orders wanted in
the appellant's case. Also, before
the primary judge there was no such claim
(only an unsubstantiated claim for an uplift to the scale hourly rate for a
senior practitioner
that is not advanced in the orders wanted on the proposed
appeal). It was appropriate, in the circumstances, to apply the scale
under the 2024 costs determination. In any case, the amount of $35,970 contains
separate allowances for the hearing on
10 April 2025 and the application
for costs. Prima facie those matters should be incorporated within the costs
allowed on the two
applications. We have, however, provided for separate
allowances given the terms of the costs order.
parties' costs of an appeal to this court are likely to well exceed the amount
of $35,970. Indeed, assuming that the fees for
individuals apply, the filings
fees alone on the appeal notice, appellant's case, appointment to settle the
appeal book index, appeal
books/setting down fee and allocation of a hearing
date amount to $8,674. Putting aside those disbursements, the parties' likely
professional fees for their solicitors and counsel in an appeal in this court
can be expected to well exceed the amount of $35,970.
This is even if, as
counsel for the appellants suggested in oral submissions, the appeal itself
might be determined on the papers.
disproportionate nature of the proposed appeal, in terms of the costs of the
appeal and the costs that might be allowed if the
appellants succeed, is not the
only material consideration. Also relevant is the burden placed on the limited
judicial resources
of the State:
Johnson v Denwest Nominees
Pty Ltd t/as Cinderdin Roadhouse
[118]. Here too the burden of the
proposed appeal is disproportionate to the issues at stake.
combined force of these three matters meant that it was not in the interests of
justice to grant leave to appeal.
Disposition - the question of an extension of time to
commence the appeal
time to commence an appeal will not be extended unless the proposed appeal has
some prospect of success:
The appellants' proposed appeal had no prospects of success where leave to
appeal was to be refused. Accordingly, the refusal of
the application for leave
to appeal meant that there should also be refusal of the application for an
extension of time to commence
the appeal.
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, at the conclusion of the hearing on 22 October 2025 we made
appellants' application for an extension of time to commence an appeal from the
orders made by the Supreme Court of Western Australia
(Whitby J) on
17 June 2025 in action COR/186/2024 is dismissed.
appellants' application for leave to appeal from the orders made by the Supreme
Court of Western Australia (Whitby J) on 17 June
2025 in action
COR/186/2024 is dismissed.
appeal is dismissed.
appellants pay the second and third respondents' costs of the appeal, including
any reserved costs, to be assessed if not agreed.
costs order followed the event.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
29 OCTOBER 2025
NRW Contracting Pty Ltd v
Cliffs Asia Pacific Iron Ore Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 107
Grove v Grove
[2022] WASCA 86
[33] - [37] (subsequently approved in
North West Pilots Pty Ltd
[2023] WASCA 122
Johnson v Denwest Nominees
Pty Ltd t/as Cinderdin Roadhouse
[2017] WASCA 200
[119] - [122].
Cardno BSD Pty Ltd v Water
Corporation [No 2]
[2011] WASCA 161
Garner v Rohanna Pty
[1999] WASCA 178
Barboutis v The Kart
Centre Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2020] WASCA 41
Spotless Group Ltd v
Premier Building and Consulting Pty Ltd (receivers appointed)
House v The
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2011] WASCA 139
Lion Nathan Australia Pty
Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd (No 3)
[2006] FCA 1023
[9] - [17].
Re Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs; Ex parte Lai
(1997) 186 CLR 622
, 624 ‑ 625.
Chittleborough v Troy
Group Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2025] WASCA 4
Fordyce v Fordham
[2006] NSWCA 274
(2006) 67 NSWLR 497
Kelliher v Commissioner
for Main Roads
[2013] WASC 437
G1PC Pty Ltd v Petstock
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] FCA 1056
[23] - [24].
Baller Industries Pty Ltd
v Mero Mero Leasing Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWSC 1067
[18] - [19],
Re Hawkesbury House Pty
[2020] NSWSC 618
Furnish & Finish Pty
Ltd v Hollands
[2020] NSWSC 1593
[15], [34] - [35],
[2021] NSWSC 1268
[62] - [63].
Campbell v Willian
[2023] NSWSC 579
[89] - [94].
Brindabella Resources Pty
Ltd v Australian Transit Group Pty Ltd
[2025] WASC 424
Morcom Holdings Pty Ltd v
Mountain Asset Partners Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2025] FCA 1139
Major v Woodside Energy
[2009] WASC 246
Simonsen v Legge
[2010] WASCA 238
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter