URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/215.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilson and Anor v Western Australian Planning Commission [2004] WATPAT 215 (1 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 239 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 215
Heard: 29 November 2004
Decision: 1 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
GARY WILLIAM WILSON AND DEBORAH JANE WILSON
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN PLANNING COMMISSION
Mr P McGowan
(President)
Subdivision – Rural zone – Drainage reserve – Policy
DC 3.4 – Significant feature – Presumption against
subdivision
– Role of exercise of discretion in decision making
Cases referred to
Ingram and Harrington v Western Australian Planning Commission
[2002] WASCA 77
Appearances
Mr T Houweling (instructed by Cornerstone Legal) appeared for the
Ms L Semeniuk (instructed by State Solicitors Office) appeared for the
The Tribunal:
1. The Appellants are the owners of Lot 502 Gull Road, Serpentine in the City of
Serpentine-Jarrahdale. The full description is
Diagram 98683 and being the whole of the land contained in Certificate of
Title Volume 2215 Folio 294
2. The subject property is 29.9476 hectares. On 4 June 2003 the Appellant made
application to the Respondent for approval to subdivide
the subject property to
create two lots of 9.1022 hectares and 12.8454 hectares.
3. The Respondent refused the subdivision.
4. The Respondent on 27 August 2004 advised the Appellants that upon
reconsideration the subdivision remained refused.
5. The present appeal is brought from that refusal.
6. It was common ground that the subject property has gazetted road access to
Gull Road and is bisected by a Water Corporation drainage
reserve. This reserve
is approximately 20 metres wide. The drainage feature itself is between 2.5 and
4 metres deep and 4 to
metres wide when viewed south from Gull
7. It is part of a series of drainage features (some of them the subject of a
reserve, some not) that cover land in the vicinity
of the subject property
leading ultimately into the Serpentine River.
8. In refusing the application for subdivision the Respondent provided the
following reasons:
“1. The land is identified as rural in the Metropolitan Region Scheme and
the Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale Town Planning
Scheme No.2 where further
subdivision is not supported.
2. Subdivision of this land would be contrary to the planning strategy for the
Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale which seeks to protect
the rural character of the
area and use of land for productive agricultural activity within the area
designated as “Rural Policy
3. Approval of subdivision would set an undesirable precedent for the further
subdivision of surrounding
9. In being asked to reconsider the matter it appears that an additional issue
was raised in relation to clause 3.2.1 of Policy
10. Policy DC 3.4 is a longstanding policy of the Respondent dealing with
subdivision of land in rural areas.
3.1 General
Presumption Against Subdivision
3.1.1 There is a general presumption against subdivision of rural land unless it
is specifically provided for in a town planning
scheme, an endorsed local
planning strategy or an endorsed local rural strategy.
3.2 Subdivision for Specific Purposes
3.2.1 Notwithstanding section 3.1.1, the Commission may approve subdivision of
rural land for the following specific
(a) A significant natural or
man-made feature already physically divides the proposed lots and an undesirable
precedent would not
11. Having had that issue raised with it for the purpose of reconsideration the
Respondent replied as follows:
“Clause 3.1.1 of the
Commission’s DC Policy 3.4 states that “
there is a general
presumption against the subdivision of rural land unless it is specifically
provided for in a town planning scheme,
an endorsed local planning strategy or
an endorsed local rural strategy
”. Clause 3.2.1 of DC Policy 3.4
acknowledges that the Commission may approve subdivision of rural land if
a significant natural or man-made feature already physically divides
the proposed lots and an undesirable precedent would not be set
Commission notes the man made drainage easement which bisects the subject
property, however, is cognisant that there
are a number of these features within
the Shire and that approval of this subdivision will set an undesirable
precedent for further
unplanned subdivision in the region. Similarly, the
management difficulties associated with Gull Road are noted but, do not in
provide a basis for approving subdivision of the land.
The proposed subdivision cannot be construed as completing the existing
subdivision pattern. The proposed lot sizes are smaller than
a number of the
lots in the locality. The lots located directly west of the site were approved
on appeal by a former Minister for
Planning on compassionate grounds and cannot
be construed as setting planning precedent for further subdivision of the area.
and 8 (directly south of the site) were created on appeal to the
Minister of the day. These decisions occurred prior to the planning
initiatives
which established the strategic and statutory planning framework for the
locality. It should be noted that the Town
Planning Appeal Tribunal (Appeal 1
of 2004) dismissed an appeal to subdivide rural zoned land in the immediate
locality, to create
lots approximately 10ha in area. The Tribunal noted, inter
alia, that whilst there have been isolated examples of subdivision in
locality, predominantly the lot size pattern is static and has been for some
12. There was an attempt during the course of the hearing on the part of the
Appellant to argue that provided they could identify
what was involved was a
significant feature and that it physically divide the proposed lots, and that an
undesirable precedent would
not be set, that subdivision as of right would
13. That patently is not the way in which the policy reads or is to be
understood.
14. The starting point necessarily in such a significant policy is to have
regard to the policy objectives. Those policy objectives
“Protect agricultural land resources wherever
possible by ...
(b) minimising the ad hoc fragmentation of rural land”.
15. There is then under general policy measures an indication of a general
presumption against subdivision.
16. The Appellants at one stage attempted to suggest that what was contained in
clause 3.2.1 was in some way an exception.
that is not the way in
which I would have construed this particular part of the policy. Rather it is a
matter, which if satisfied,
at best may go some way to either neutralising or
minimising the general presumption appearing in clause 3.1.1.
17. The application for subdivision will ultimately fall to be determined on the
basis of a consideration of the policy objectives
in Policy DC 3.4 as well
as the Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale’s Rural Strategy
18. Counsel for the Respondent sought to argue that the use of the expression
“undesirable precedent” in clause 3.2.1(a)
necessarily related to
the planning and policy implications of such an approval.
19. It seems to me that the expression is to be understood in a much more narrow
sense. Rather it is the replication of factual
circumstances which provides the
basis for the expression “precedent”. It is that sense in my view
that the expression
is to be understood.
20. The use of the word “significant” seems to me to not be a
difficult concept.
21. In the case of the subject property there is a formal dedicated and fenced
off drainage reserve some 20 metres in width.
reserve has a depth of
between 2.5 and 4 metres. It appears in a horse-shoe shape extending throughout
the subject property.
22. In the course of the hearing it was accepted that this drainage reserve had
been in existence since 1925. It is a man made feature
in order to facilitate
drainage leading, as I have said above, to the Serpentine River.
23. It seems to me that in the way in which I understand the expression
“significant” to have its usual meaning, namely
by reference to
size, that this is a significant man made feature and it does physically divide
the proposed lots in the sense that
the proposed subdivision wishes to use the
boundary of the existing feature for the purpose of separation of the two
proposed lots.
24. Evidence was lead of a pattern of development within the area of which the
subject land forms part. There are three lots immediately
to the west of the
subject property which are between 4 and 8 hectares in area. These appear
to have been created at a time
to the Strategy and appear also to have
been created as a result of appeals allowed to the then Minister for Planning on
compassionate
25. The contention by Mr Wilson in his statement that:
neighbouring lots are all 25 acres in size which is the equivalent of 9 to 10
hectares is simply not borne out by the evidence.”
26. Thus, for example, immediately to the east of the subject property is
Lot 843 which exceeds 21.5 hectares. Further the
himself gave
evidence that he owns Lot 501, which is approximately 20 hectares and
Lot 835 which is identified
as being approximately
30 hectares.
27. The Appellants gave evidence that they operate a cattle farming operation by
the utilisation of each of Lots 502, 501 and 835.
They run approximately 35
head of cattle which they rotate on a full time basis through the three
properties.
28. In order to move stock from the western portion of Lot 502 to the eastern
portion of Lot 502 it is necessary to bring the stock
onto Gull Road and then
cross a narrow bridge on Gull Road over the drainage reserve and then return the
stock to the eastern side
of that property. It is a narrow, single lane bridge.
The road itself was said to create its own dangers, albeit that to the west
the subject property there are only 6 lots that are serviced by Gull Road before
it truncates.
29. Evidence was given that there are drainage features which run through a
number of properties. Thus, for example, the drainage
reserve which has been
identified in relation to the subject property then becomes a drainage feature
passing through Lot 843 before
becoming a formally dedicated drainage reserve
passing through Lot 531 then along Rapids Road and then ultimately passing
Lot 833 and extending to the south. Evidence was given that this
drainage reserve whether it was a feature or a reserve extends
6 kilometres.
30. It does seem to me that the existence of such a feature in the circumstances
described given that it is significant and given
that lots may well correspond
with the boundary of the natural feature would in this particular area, with the
prevalence of such
features and reserves, encourage an expectation of
subdivision based not upon policy considerations but merely because of the
replication
of the factual circumstances which are referred to in clause
3.2.1(a) of Policy DC 3.4.
31. It is in that sense that undoubtedly there would be adhoc fragmentation of
rural land. It would not be driven by a particular
settlement policy or any
particular policy really, but because of the peculiarity of the physical
circumstances to enable applicants
for subdivision to replicate the
circumstances described in clause 3.2.1(a).
32. The appeal Tribunal was bound to consider, as a most relevant factor,
whether, in effect, the subdivision of the land proposed
by the Appellants would
result in the maintenance or loss of land having a productive capacity for
agricultural production:
Ingram and Harrington v Western Australian Planning
[2002] WASCA 77
33. The Appellants called no expert evidence. Somewhat surprisingly reference
was made to certain assessments undertaken by Mr Stephens
in relation to
the quality of the soil and its carrying capacity. No such report was produced.
In fact in re-examination Mr Wilson
indicated the reason for not doing so was
that the report was not favourable to the matters he wished to advance in this
Hardly a persuasive argument.
34. Instead the Appellants rely upon what could only be described as the
observations of adjoining operators. The Appellant, for
example, relies upon
the evidence of Mr Flynn. Mr Flynn has a 9 acre property located some
3 kilometres from the subject
He grows roses hydroponically on a
commercial basis.
35. He has undertaken no assessment in relation to the subject property and the
views that he offered were of little assistance to
the Tribunal.
36. The Appellant also relies upon the evidence of Mr Nussey. Mr Nussey is
employed as the senior policy officer with the Department
of Agriculture. He
also lives as 81 Lyndon Lane, Serpentine which is said to be within close
proximity of the subject property.
He also owns and operates Peel Estate Lot
814 which he has operated since 1986. This is 60 hectares in area. He
breeds beef
and had a small angora goat operation until 1997.
37. The farming business recorded taxation losses each year. Why that is so was
not a matter which was explored during the course
of the hearing. Mr Nussey
undertook no assessment in relation to the subject property of soil capability,
climatology, typography
or any other matter which might be of material relevance
to the Tribunal. He offered what was described as generalised observations
upon the operation of his own property. They can reach no higher plateau than
38. Mr Wilson has operated the subject property for some 16 years.
39. On the other hand the Respondent relies upon the particular planning
evidence of Stephen John Robertson. Mr Robertson is a Senior
Planning Officer
with the Department for Planning and Infrastructure. He has had over 6 years
experience as a planner.
40. He identifies that the proposed subdivision is exactly the type of adhoc
fragmentation of rural land which is rejected by the
1994 Rural Strategy as
revised and by Policy DC 3.4.
41. Mr Robertson also identifies that there is no vector of development and that
the proposal is arbitrary in nature.
42. He points to the fact that approval of this application will begin a trend
towards a settlement lot pattern of a closer non-rural
43. In the 2002 review of the Rural Strategy the following
“A 40 hectare minimum lot size is both reasonable
and defensible ... rural land is not a resource for subdivision into
allotments, unless this is specifically planned for in Council’s
planning instruments.”
44. There is not therefore within the Rural Strategy support for the proposal
advanced by the Appellants.
45. In the circumstances the appeal will be dismissed. It seems to me that
although it is certainly the case that that which is
involved is a significant
feature, the factual circumstances within this particular region do provide a
basis for what could only
be described as an undesirable precedent.
46. In any event against the broad background of the objectives of Policy
DC 3.4 and the Rural Strategy, it seems to me that
is plainly adhoc
subdivision for which there is no proper planning basis.
47. The appeal in those circumstances is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (59.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter