URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRComm/2016/974.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:05:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Raelene Denton -v- Torque Productions Pty Ltd [2016] WAIRComm 974 (30 December 2016)
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
COMMISSIONER D J
WEDNESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2016
DELIVERED :
30 DECEMBER 2016
B 96 OF 2016
RAELENE DENTON
TORQUE PRODUCTIONS PTY LTD
payment of commission while employed - Contractual terms in relation to
commission not disputed - Payment ordered - Claim
for monies owed due to
variation of contract - Variation of contract due to agreed cessation of
employment - Claim disputed - Claimant's
evidence preferred - Payment ordered in
line with variation of contract
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act
Claims allowed; payment
Representation:
Mr A Pitt (Director)
Reasons for Decision
determination of this claim requires decision in relation to two matters as
(1) whether the claimant, pursuant to her contract of
employment, became entitled to commission payments of $4,502.83 for August 2015,
the last month of her employment with the respondent; and
(2) whether the claimant’s contract of employment was varied on
2 September 2015 by insertion into it of a term that she would
the respondent a sum representing a percentage of payments made to the
respondent by clients of the respondent after that
date and despite the
claimant’s employment ending.
claimant commenced work with the respondent pursuant to a written contract of
employment, an unsigned copy of which became Exhibit
proceedings, on or around 7 July 2014.
claimant was employed, according to the contract, for “approx. 30 hours a
week” as the “Senior Sales and Business
Development Person”
and was to be paid a retainer of $39,000 and commission for “sales that
you convert/achieve by way
of an agreed maximum or a maximum of 5-10% of the
total pre-tax sale.”
work in relation to which the claims relate involved selling segments on a
television programme produced by the respondent named
“The West Real
Estate Programme”.
(1) above may be easily disposed of.
was not disputed in these proceedings that during her employment the claimant
was paid a commission of 10% on all sales for “The
West Real Estate
Programme” and I find that, insofar as the contract of employment
contemplated that there would be agreement
in relation to the commission rate,
the agreed percentage was 10%.
2 in these proceedings was a bundle of the claimant’s pay slips and
“Commission Summary Statements” for
the period July 2014 to July
2015 inclusive. The exhibit supported that the claimant was paid commission of
10% for all sales with
which she was associated for “The West Real Estate
Programme” (bar one or two irrelevant exceptions).
3 in these proceedings was a bundle of the claimant’s bank statements
covering the period 17 July 2014 to 31 December
2015 which showed that the
claimant had received payments consistent with the information in Exhibit 2 but
no other commission payments.
was also not disputed that the claimant received no commission payments relating
to the “The West Real Estate Programme”
for charges rendered to
clients in the month of August 2015, the last month of her employment.
6 in these proceedings was a document prepared by the claimant in or around
August 2015 titled “Commission Summary August”
which was in the same
format as sheets the claimant had prepared for each of the months of her
employment and which had resulted
in payments, for the amounts nominated, being
made to her. As mentioned examples of such documents which had resulted in
formed part of Exhibit 2.
6 indicates that an amount of $4,802.83 became due to her by way of commission
for August 2015 in relation to “The West
Real Estate
Programme”.
claimant explained at the hearing that she was aware that one client had paid
$3,000 rather than the $6,000 referred to in Exhibit
6 and she said this meant
she was only entitled to $300 and not the $600 referred to in the exhibit. This
reduced her claim from
$4,802.83 to $4,502.83.
note that Exhibit 6 also shows amounts under the heading “JTF”.
“JTF” stands for “Just the Facts”
and was a separate
endeavour of the respondent in relation to which the claimant says she received
payment and therefore makes no
circumstances where:
(1) it was not
disputed, and I find, that the claimant was paid a commission rate of 10% on
virtually all sales for “The West
Real Estate Programme” throughout
her employment;
(2) it was not
disputed that Exhibit 6 sets out accurate figures for charges made to clients of
the respondent by the respondent for
segments on “The West Real Estate
Programme” (as slightly amended by the claimant as set out above);
(3) it was not
disputed that Exhibit 6 was submitted during the course of the claimant’s
employment in exactly the same way
as previous claims for commission had been
submitted; and
(4) it was not
disputed that the amount of $4,502.83 was not paid to the claimant,
I am satisfied that the claimant had a contractual
entitlement to the benefit of that sum and that benefit has not been allowed to
her by the respondent
Accordingly,
I will be ordering that the respondent pay to the claimant the sum of $4,502.83,
(2) may not be so easily disposed of. This is because while many issues
relating to this matter were not in dispute, there
was a stark clash in the
evidence in relation to the crucial point.
I will deal with what was relevantly not in dispute.
September 2015 it was agreed that the claimant’s employment with the
respondent would be coming to an end. It was agreed
that this was at the
initiative of the respondent and that it was for financial reasons.
was not in dispute that the parties decided to sit down and discuss the terms
upon which the claimant’s employment would
come to end, an exercise which
in my view was very sensible.
was not in dispute that the discussion occurred on 2 September 2015 and involved
the claimant, Mr Troy McGuinness, the respondent’s
Sales Director and the
person to whom the claimant reported from day to day, and Mr Aaron Pitt, a
director of and the controlling
mind of the respondent.
was not in dispute that after the discussion a “Deed of Release” was
signed by the claimant and Mr Pitt which varied
the contract of employment
insofar as it regulated various matters relating to the ending of the
claimant’s employment. The
claimant’s employment ended by her
resignation on 11 September 2015.
deed became Exhibit 4 in these proceedings, although I note that Mr Pitt
questioned whether some of the pages were originals or
copies (even though
ultimately he did not dispute the authenticity and accuracy of the content
whether all of the pages were original
or not) and there was discussion about
whether or not there were before me some of the attachments to the deed as
signed on the day.
was not in dispute that all those present signed a sheet of paper, which was
attached to the deed (and the original of which formed
part of Exhibit 4), that
comprised a table giving figures for “Revenue” and
“Commissions Owed” for the months
September to December 2015.
totals on that page are figures of $207,935.00 for “Revenue” and
$13,915.30 for “Commissions Owed”. The
totals include amounts for
the JTF work which are not part of the present claim.
was not in dispute that one of the matters discussed at the meeting was what
payment, if any, the claimant would receive by way
of commission for payments
made by clients after her employment ended.
claimant wished to discuss the matter of money which, had she remained in
employment, she might have expected to receive for work
already done. That is,
the claimant wanted to discuss the revenue likely to be received by the
respondent in the months September
to December 2015 from clients and whether,
given that had she remained in employment these would have resulted in
commission payments
to her, she would be paid any of those amounts despite her
employment ending.
was also not in dispute that, as part of that discussion, commission summary
sheets in the usual style were provided by the claimant
for the months September
to December 2015. Those sheets relevantly listed clients which had booked
segments on “The West Real
Estate Programme” in those months, the
expected payment for those segments and, at 10%, the commission payments the
would receive if she had remained in employment.
is not in dispute that the contents of those sheets were discussed and notes
made on them to reflect amendments to the percentages
claimed, although there is
dispute about the proper characterisation of those amendments, as I will come to
in a moment.
original sheets provided by the claimant at the meeting were not produced nor
were the sheets as amended at the meeting. What
was produced, and which became,
as a bundle, Exhibit 5 in these proceedings, were four pages that the claimant
said, while produced
later, reflected the amendments made at the meeting on 2
September 2015.
is, however, as far as the undisputed matters go.
was dispute about what had actually been agreed at the meeting on 2 September
2015 in relation to the issue of the payment of
commissions to the claimant for
the months September to December 2015.
claimant gave evidence that each of the items on each of the sheets comprising
Exhibit 5 was discussed and agreement was reached
on the amount that would
be paid to her against each item, assuming that the client made the expected
payments to the respondent.
claimant gave evidence that if she had remained in employment she would have
received commission of 10% for all payments made
in relation to the items on the
sheets but that at the meeting on 2 September 2015, and as part of the
variations to her contract
relating to the cessation of her employment, she
agreed to lesser percentages in relation to some of the clients.
claimant gave evidence that she went into the meeting with a version of the
sheets which became Exhibit 5 showing that she would
have been entitled to a
commission payment of 10% for all the expected payments listed on the sheet but
that she was prepared to
alter the 10% to a lower figure for some clients as
part of the negotiations and that this occurred.
evidence was that while “causation”, for want of a better word, was
not a relevant factor during the course of her
employment, and she was right
regardless of the “source”
of the work during her employment, she
was prepared to discuss causation and to make changes to the usual 10%
arrangement on the
basis of causation to ensure, as part of negotiating the end
to her employment, that she received some commission on payments made
after she left the respondent’s employment.
claimant says the agreements reached during the negotiations on 2 September 2015
are captured by the sheets in the bundle which
became Exhibit 5 in these
proceedings.
I have already noted above, the pages comprising this bundle were not those
which were before the parties on 2 September 2015.
The pages which became
Exhibit 5 were produced after the meeting but, the claimant testified, they
reflect what the claimant and
respondent agreed at the meeting.
example, for the page in Exhibit 5 entitled “Commission Summary
September”, the first entry relates to “Platinum
Group”. The entry records that the commission payable to the claimant in
relation to their payment to the respondent
when made will be “0%”.
The claimant says that at the meeting on 2 September 2015 she agreed that
this was work that
had come to the respondent solely through Mr Pitt and not her
and that the parties agreed that, accordingly, she would receive no
in relation to it.
claimant gave evidence that each of the following entries, which records one of
0%, 5% or 10% against each client’s name,
records the commission it was
agreed at the meeting she would be paid and that agreement reflected an agreed
position in relation
to the proper percentage for her role in generating the
expected revenue.
claimant gave evidence that the table attached to the deed, the last page of
Exhibit 4, was signed by those present at the meeting
to record their agreement
in relation to the amount of commission which was to be paid to her for the
period September to December
2015, subject to the clients making the expected
be clear, the claimant says that each item in Exhibit 5 was discussed, agreement
was reached on the commission payable, the amounts
were totalled up and the
table, the original of which was attached to Exhibit 4, was produced and signed
to record the total that
would be paid.
claimant said that the total given in the last page of Exhibit 4, being
$13,915.30, may be checked against the amounts in the
tables comprising Exhibit
5 for “The West Real Estate Programme” and the “JTF”
clients which total $13,915.30.
I repeat that the information in the tables
for the “JTF” endeavour is not relevant, leaving a claim for
for the “The West Real Estate Programme” clients.
claimant says that is how the figure in the last page of Exhibit 4 was arrived
at. All of the figures in the sheets comprising
Exhibit 5 for “The West
Real Estate Programme” and “JTF”, as amended following
discussion and agreement,
were totalled and the figure of $13,915.30 was arrived
at and included in the last page of Exhibit 4 and the parties present at the
meeting signed that page to indicate agreement to payment of that figure,
subject to the expected payments being made by clients.
The claimant was paid
the “JTF” commissions leaving an amount of $11,381.10 for “The
West Real Estate Programme”
clients unpaid.
claimant gave evidence that it was only upon the basis of that agreement, that
is the agreement that she was to be paid the sum
in the table attached to
Exhibit 4, that she was prepared to, and did, sign the deed under which she
promised to resign (clause 2.2)
and bring no claims against the respondent or
its officers, employees and agents (clause 3.1).
Pitt has an entirely different recollection of the key matters in issue.
Pitt agrees that the issue of commission payments on monies expected to be
received by the respondent in the period September to
December 2015 was
discussed at the meeting on 2 September 2015.
he says, and the respondent’s case is, that no agreement of the type
described by the claimant was reached on 2 September
Pitt gave evidence that all that occurred at the meeting on 2 September 2015 was
that the claimant and respondent agreed on the
maximum commissions that might be
Pitt says there were discussions about each of “The West Real Estate
Programme” clients in the sheets which now form
Exhibit 5 and that the
outcome of the discussions was the claimant reduced her claim in relation to
certain clients, to the percentage
amounts recorded in Exhibit 5, and that it
was not an outcome of the meeting that the respondent agreed to pay those
was agreed at the meeting, Mr Pitt says, is that he would, after the meeting,
investigate each item in relation to which a claim
was made and decide, after
those investigations, whether the claimant’s efforts in bringing the
payments in warranted payment
of the new commission amounts nominated at the
meeting or not.
is, Mr Pitt’s evidence is that at the meeting the claimant reduced the
ambit of her claim and he learned from her why she
thought she was entitled to
commission payments comprising the new ambit but that no agreement that she
would be paid any amounts
was reached.
Pitt placed great reliance upon Item 6 in the schedule to Exhibit 4 which says,
under the heading “Settlement Sum”,
“...you will be paid 10%
commission on new clients signed up by you where the account has been paid in
full by the clients”.
Pitt gave evidence that he applied this in telling the claimant at the meeting
that he would be investigating whether “The
West Real Estate
Programme” clients in Exhibit 5 were new or not.
Pitt’s evidence at the hearing was that his subsequent conduct in relation
to this matter has been guided by his determination
of whether a nominated
client was “new” or not and he says that, as far as he is concerned,
he has acted entirely consistently
with the deed, a document the claimant
Pitt gave evidence that the table that was attached to Exhibit 4 was only signed
by those present to indicate “receipt”
of the claim made by the
claimant and did not indicate agreement to payment of the amount contained in
Pitt gave evidence that after the meeting he investigated each of the items in
Exhibit 5 and turned his mind to whether “The
West Real Estate
Programme” clients were “new clients signed up by [the
claimant]” or not.
relation to most clients itemised in Exhibit 5 Mr Pitt gave evidence that he
decided they were not new clients signed up by the
Pitt gave evidence about each of the clients itemised in Exhibit 5 and explained
why he had come to the conclusion about them that
the main the explanations were that the client had given business to the
respondent because of a relationship between Mr Pitt and
someone at the client
that pre-existed the claimant’s employment or because they had been
clients in one way or another before
the claimant commenced employment or
because revenue had come in from the client because of work he did, and not the
claimant, even
if that work occurred during the claimant’s period of
employment.
was at least one client of the “The West Real Estate Programme”, CDK
Stone, that Mr Pitt admitted had been signed
up the claimant and was a
“new” client. However, he admitted that he made no commission
payment to the claimant in relation
to the income the respondent received from
CDK Stone. In relation to a few other “The West Real Estate
Programme” clients
he thought he may have agreed they were new clients but
he made no commission payments for those either.
Pitt gave evidence that he ultimately decided not to make payments in relation
to CDK Stone and the other possibly “new”
clients because, upon
reflection, he came to the conclusion that the claimant had probably been
overpaid during her employment, in
the sense that she had underperformed, and
was not deserving of any further money from the respondent.
Pitt gave evidence, not disputed by the claimant, that at a meeting at a
café about six weeks after the 2 September 2015
meeting he informed the
claimant that no further payments were going to be made to her.
present claim was brought to the Western Australian Industrial Relations
Commission subsequently.
determining the conflict in the evidence I note that the claim is not for the
all of the various amounts entered in the tables
in Exhibit 5 and as totalled in
the table attached to Exhibit 4.
claimant claims a lesser amount, being $9,954.60, because the “JTF”
payments were made and because, according to her
research, not all the expected
payments were made by “The West Real Estate Programme” clients. The
respondent does not
dispute the revised figure although, of course, it disputes
that the claimant is entitled to any payment at all.
is a clear conflict in the evidence given in these proceedings. However, I do
not consider resolution of that conflict to be
a difficult task having
considered the evidence and the way the parties presented in these
proceedings.
claimant’s version of events is that an agreement was reached on 2
September 2015 by which the respondent got something
it wanted, her quiet
departure from her employment, and she got something she wanted, a promise from
the respondent to pay her certain
monies after her employment ended.
claimant’s version makes sense and has a ring of truth about it.
is not disputed that as at 2 September 2015 the claimant knew her employment was
coming to an end and she accepted this was because
of the financial position of
the respondent. It was plain from the evidence that the claimant was not
told at the time that her
employment was coming to an end that this was due to
misconduct or poor performance.
accept that on 2 September 2015 the claimant entered a discussion in which she
was intending to negotiate the terms of the ending
of her employment in
circumstances where neither she nor the respondent, to her knowledge, wanted
that employment to end and it was
understood that outcome was as result of the
financial position of the company.
was not a situation where the claimant entered the meeting with an understanding
that the respondent had good grounds to dismiss
her for misconduct or poor
performance.
claimant clearly entered the meeting contemplating a negotiation.
is plain that as part of that negotiation the claimant was prepared to resign,
and thereby forego any rights that might emerge
from her termination, and was
also prepared to promise not to make any claims against the respondent, its
employees and agents.
the above it makes sense that, as part of that negotiation, the claimant would
wish to achieve something for herself.
have no hesitation in accepting her evidence that, as part of the agreement to
end her employment, the claimant entered the meeting
seeking, for her part, an
agreement in relation to commissions to be paid to her after her employment
ended. This makes sense.
accept also that as part of those negotiations the claimant was prepared to be
flexible in relation to the matter. Again, given
that I accept that the
claimant considered she was entering a negotiation, this makes sense.
was not in dispute that the usual practice during the claimant’s
employment was that she was paid 10% commission on sales
regardless of the
“source” of those sales and it makes sense that this would be the
claimant’s “opening gambit”
on 2 September 2015.
also makes sense, however, given the claimant was conducting a negotiation on
2 September 2015, that she was prepared to take a
client” approach to commissions and to discuss with Mr Pitt whether there
were circumstances, such as the
“source” of the client and the
proper assessment of her role in bringing in fresh revenue from a client, which
that payment of less than 10% was a fair thing as part of the deal that
would secure her quiet departure from employment.
makes sense given the length of the meeting on 2 September 2015, a period of
several hours, that such a negotiation was done and
also makes sense, in the relevant context, that the last page of Exhibit 4 would
include the total amount agreed to be paid and
that it was signed and attached
to the deed, and the deed signed, to capture the entire agreement reached by the
claimant was giving up her employment and her ability to bring any claims in
relation to it and it would make sense that she would
want something in return
and not resign until she had achieved something in return.
would not make sense for the claimant to give up what she did by signing the
deed without having achieved anything for herself.
the claimant’s version stands out as that which makes sense and is
reasonable. I believe it to be the truth because of this
and also because of
the way the claimant presented when giving her evidence.
watched the claimant give her evidence I was impressed by her intelligent and
calm demeanour. The claimant remained firm in
relation to the key elements of
her version although she made appropriate concessions when required. In giving
her evidence both
in chief and under cross-examination she was candid and
forthright. She presented as being completely unencumbered by considerations
whether any answer she gave would affect her case and I put this down to her
certainty about the truth of the key elements of
claimant, also impressively, was unruffled by having to address Mr Pitt’s
version of events and the questioning this produced.
Pitt cross-examined the claimant on the basis that it was necessary for her to
demonstrate that she had earned the commissions
she was seeking.
the claimant’s point of view this was completely irrelevant as, of course,
her case was that those discussions had been
had and settled on 2 September
2015. However, rather than stymieing the process by repeatedly returning to
this position, as many
self-represented litigants may have done, the claimant
calmly dealt with the issues as raised by Mr Pitt.
the claimant’s version being inherently probable and the claimant
presenting as an intelligent and credible witness I have
no hesitation at all in
accepting it be true.
Pitt’s version is not believable.
Pitt would have me believe that in relation to the issue of commissions all that
was negotiated before the claimant compromised
her position in the several ways
she did by signing the deed was that the claimant agreed to set limits on her
claims and left it
to Mr Pitt to decide whether those upper limits or some other
amount, which could be zero, would be paid.
is not believable that an intelligent person, as the claimant presented to be,
would agree to such an arrangement, during what
was clearly a negotiation where
both parties were seeking outcomes, when it gave the claimant nothing and the
respondent not only
a quiet end to the claimant’s employment but total
discretion in relation to the key matter for the claimant.
is not believable that the parties would have gone to the trouble of producing
the table that was attached to Exhibit 4 simply
to record the upper limits of
the claimant’s possible payments and sign it to confirm that this had been
is not believable that Mr Pitt insisted on “investigating” the
claims after the meeting. This issue is a significant
weakness in Mr
Pitt’s version because his evidence did not tell me much at all about the
investigations he conducted after
2 September 2015 and the new and important
information those investigations brought to light. For the most part the
information
which was said to have resulted from Mr Pitt’s investigations
would have clearly been known to him at the time of the meeting
on 2 September
find that what happened was that Mr Pitt communicated his point of view to the
claimant in relation to each client listed at the
meeting on 2 September 2015
without there being a need for him to investigate anything, that he made the
points to the claimant at
the meeting in much the same way he did in his
evidence, and that he was able to talk the claimant down from the 10% claimed in
Mr Pitt was successful in getting the claimant to agree to no commission, in
other cases he obtained agreement to 5%. Mr
Pitt’s knowledge of his
business and its clients operated at the meeting to have the claimant reduce her
claim from a higher
to a much lower amount, being the $13,915.30 in Exhibit 4.
That is where the issue ended.
various percentage amounts were as reflected by the sheets comprising Exhibit 5
and these were then totalled and included in the
table which is the last page of
Exhibit 4. The signing of Exhibit 4 reflected agreement and not acknowledgment
of receipt.
Pitt pointed to Item 6 in the schedule to Exhibit 4 and its reference to
“new” clients as being the reason why he needed
to investigate
matters and as being a complete answer to the claim. Insofar as Mr Pitt points
to Item 6, I find whatever the sentence
was intended to mean by the author
(which would appear to have been some advisers to the respondent who were not
present at the meeting),
the parties negotiated something different on 2
September 2015 and came to agreement in relation to it.
should indicate that I do not mean by my reasons for decision, and I do not
find, that Mr Pitt was dishonest in giving his evidence
consider there is a different explanation for his evidence and that explanation
gives additional insight into why I believe the
claimant’s evidence in
preference to that of Mr Pitt.
Pitt gave evidence that he employed the claimant without a formal process being
followed after he met her because he was “impressed
with her as a
person” (t82).
said that during the course of her employment his view about her being a good
person never changed.
Mr Pitt said that during the claimant’s employment he began to have
concerns about her ability to earn revenue for
the respondent.
Pitt gave evidence that he made up his mind to dismiss the claimant and invited
her to his apartment to give her the bad news.
However, he did not dismiss the
claimant. Mr Pitt gave this evidence:
“...Rae without
offending you, you were invited to my apartment to be dismissed. I backed out
of it.” (t109)
“why?”, Mr Pitt gave the following
“Because I - as I said, I felt very sorry for you,
that I thought Troy wasn’t giving you the opportunity to succeed. You
invited to my house to be let go politely, in the nicest way.”
Pitt then gave evidence that he found the claimant to be a likeable person and
that she was “a very hard person to be negative
to” (t110).
Pitt said several times throughout the hearing that he was uncomfortable with
the confrontational position he now found himself
in with the claimant.
when Mr Pitt did decide that the claimant’s employment was to end he
relied upon general financial considerations
rather than relying upon, as he
evidently thought he could, the claimant’s alleged poor performance.
is clear to me that Mr Pitt was not “hard-nosed” in relation to his
dealings with the claimant. He admitted as much
in relation to hiring her
without a formal process, in backing out of dismissing her when he had made his
mind up to do so and had
invited her to the meeting at which it was to occur,
and in “sugar-coating” the reasons for her employment eventually
that Mr Pitt found the claimant likeable and evidently felt bad when he
eventually did communicate to her that her employment
was ending, it is entirely
believable that Mr Pitt negotiated in the way the claimant says he did on 2
September 2015 and concluded
a fair agreement with the claimant pursuant to
which she would go on receiving commission payments despite her employment
Pitt’s conduct at the meeting, as I have found it, is entirely consistent
with his own evidence about his view of the claimant
and his past dealings with
is clear to me that subsequent to the meeting and the agreement Mr Pitt had a
closer look at the financial position of the respondent
and was not pleased.
may also be the case that, despite Mr Pitt denying it, he spoke with business
persons who he looked up to as mentors (t90 and 94)
and came to the conclusion
that he had made a bad deal with the claimant on 2 September 2015, either
outright or in the context of
the financial position of the respondent.
any event, after the meeting on 2 September 2015 Mr Pitt clearly did change his
much is clear, even on Mr Pitt’s version, because he admitted that CSK
Stone (and perhaps some others) were new clients and
that the claimant was
entitled to commission at the meeting on 2 September 2015 but at the subsequent
meeting, the one at the café,
he told the claimant she would not be
receiving even these amount because “...I had subsidised her income over
the time of
her employment, and as I looked back at the figures she was
overpaid.” (t89)
there had not been some alteration in Mr Pitt’s position after the 2
September 2015 meeting he would not have done this.
I consider there was in
fact a change in Mr Pitt’s position not only in relation to CSK Stone but
in relation to everything
agreed at the meeting on 2 September 2015.
story which makes sense, and is supported by all of the evidence, is that Mr
Pitt made an agreement on 2 September 2015, in accordance
with his practice of
being accommodating toward a person he liked and felt sorry for, and then,
repenting at leisure, decided to
not honour it.
find, however, that Mr Pitt, by the time he came to give evidence, was largely
unaware of the mental processes that led to him to
give the evidence he did.
find it likely that so disappointed was Mr Pitt in the deal he had done on 2
September 2015, after reviewing the respondent’s
financial position and
with the words of his mentors ringing in his ears, that he has truly come to
believe that there is no way
he could have agreed to it.
agree to it he did.
have no doubt that the claimant and Mr Pitt on behalf of the respondent, by
agreement, varied the terms of the claimant’s
contract of employment and
that it became a term of her employment that she would be paid the amount of
$13,915.30, subject to the
full amounts expected to be paid by clients actually
being paid to the respondent.
in relation to “The West Real Estate Programme” clients, the subject
of the claim, amounts that would generate only
$9,954.60 in commission were paid
I find that the claimant became entitled to payments under her contract of
employment, as varied
on 2 September 2015, in that amount.
completing these reasons for decision I should comment about the failure of both
parties to call Troy McGuinness as a witness.
McGuinness was the other person at the meeting on 2 September 2015 and it goes
without saying that it would have been relevant
to hear his evidence about what
terms of what might emerge from him not being called as a witness I do not have
solid evidence upon which I could come to a conclusion
McGuinness is now in but there was the suggestion that Mr Pitt and Mr McGuinness
are now in dispute.
am content to proceed on the basis that Mr McGuinness was probably in the
claimant’s camp and that, to avoid an inference
being drawn that his
evidence would not have assisted the claimant, it was incumbent upon her to call
him or adequately explain why
she did not do so.
relation to this, the claimant said that she had contacted Mr McGuinness and
that he had agreed to appear as a witness but about
a week before the hearing
date had contacted her and told her that he would be in Brisbane on business on
claimant told me she did not “feel comfortable” summonsing Mr
McGuinness to appear but, making the kind of appropriate
admission that showed
her to be a frank person, said she probably should have done it.
claimant sought an adjournment of the proceedings to enable her to compel
Mr McGuiness’ appearance.
Pitt opposed the application and I did not grant it.
the course of his submissions on the application Mr Pitt told me that he knew
Mr McGuinness to, in fact, be in Perth and he said
“the reason Troy
is not here at the moment is because he decided he didn’t want to go
through the headache” (t125).
all that was said to me at face value, and I have no reason not to, the claimant
made reasonable efforts, given that she is
a self-represented person, to have Mr
McGuinness attend and gave a reasonable explanation for not calling him.
I might have taken a different view if the claimant had been represented by
counsel, given that the claimant represented
herself it would be unfair to her
in all of the circumstances to draw an inference that Mr McGuinness’
evidence would not have
assisted her.
consider the matter to be a neutral one in relation to my decision making.
have found that the claimant was not allowed benefits to which she was entitled
under her contract of employment, as varied on 2
September 2015, for the reasons
above and will be making orders that the respondent pay to her forthwith the
following amounts:
(1) $4,502.83
(less tax) being for commission payable in August 2015; and
(2) $9,954.60
(less tax) pursuant to the variations to her contract agreed on 2 September
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter