URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A [2022] WACIC 9 (19 August 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2022] WACIC 9
DELIVERED :
19 AUGUST 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 1552 of 2020
CIC 1553 of 2020
Neglect - Alleged offences - Assessment of
damages - Burden of proof - Extension of time - Mental and nervous shock -
Maximum for
related offences - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Child and Community Services Act 2004
Child Welfae act 1947
Criminal Code
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Family Violence Legislation Reform
Trustees Act 1962
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
(1994) 11 WAR 481
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
[2018] WADC 148
[2022] WACIC 7
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC 25
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC 93
Houlahan v Pitchen
[2009] WASCA 104
Hunia v Kwan
[2002] WADC 117
[2009] WACIC 31
[2019] WACIC 16
[2010] WADC 6
M v J and J v J (Unreported WASC, Library No 920598,
19 November 1992)
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
, 331 - 332
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
[170] - [171];
(2005) 222 CLR 612
PES v The State of Western Australia
[2013] WASCA 202
[20] - [24]
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
[2017] WADC 76[28]
(1984) 4 SR (WA) 219
Re Jackamarra
[2014] WADC 9
[2014] WADC 92[16]
[2016] WADC 74
[2011] WADC 10
RJE v Bandy (Unreported WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974)
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC 14
SL (by her next friend NL)
[2014] WADC 178
SV v The State of Western Australia
[2014] WASCA 123
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
[2011] WADC 40
Winiarczyk v Tsirigotis
[2011] WASCA 97
X v McAllister
[2021] WASCA 3
for Decision
By application dated
22 July 2020 the Public Trustee on behalf of "A" (the applicant)
claimed compensation for injuries sustained
as a consequence of alleged offences
committed by "K", his mother (CIC 1552/2020) and "S", his mother's partner
(CIC 1553/2020).
On 20 October 2021 I made an award of $75,000 in favour
of the applicant on each matter. On 5 November 2021 the Public Trustee,
behalf of the applicant, accepted the awards made. I subsequently received a
request to provide reasons for my decision, which
support of the application, the applicant provided 117 separate documents which
included extracts from the Department of Communities'
(DoC) file including Case
notes and various medical and care documents after the apprehension of "A", plus
various police incident
reports, and medical reports. Due to the large volume
of materials provided I do not list them separately. In addition, the applicant
provided an Order from the State Administrative Tribunal dated 20 August
2020 which appointed the Public Trustee as his plenary administrator
Public Advocate as his limited guardian; an invoice from Mindstate Psychology,
dated 1 February 2020; a submission containing
a request for an extension
of time and submissions with respect to the claims.
Format of the application
applicant submitted four separate applications as
(a) Alleged offender – "K" the applicant's mother,
between 2001 to 2012 at "a home in WA"; Alleged offence - Failing to protect
child from harm –
Child and Community Services Act 2004
Act) – neglect. This claim was in relation to "K" failing to provide him
with adequate care and effective medical, therapeutic
and remedial
(b) Alleged offender – "K", between 2001 to 2012 at "a home in WA";
Alleged offence - Failing to protect a child from harm –
Act - emotional abuse. This claim was in relation to "K" exposing him to
domestic violence from having a number of violent
(c) Alleged offender – "K", between 2001 to 2012 at "a home in WA";
Alleged offence - Failing to protect a child from harm –
Act - sexual abuse. This claim was in relation to "K" exposing him to sexual
activities involving "K" and various partners
in the home.
(d) Alleged offender – "S", between 2011 to 2012 at "a home in WA";
Alleged offence – Assault causing bodily harm, s 317
The Criminal Code
. This claim was in relation to "S" assaulting
either "A" or "K" at various times.
applications were made pursuant to
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 2003
(the Act). An award of compensation for an alleged
offence can be made if an Assessor is satisfied the claimed loss and injury
and that it did so as a consequence of an alleged
offence. Pursuant to section 3 of the Act 'satisfied' means
'satisfied on the
balance of probabilities'. It must be more probable
than not that the alleged offending
applicant who claims compensation under the Act where no conviction has been
entered bears the burden of proving the
Circumstances giving rise to the claims
applicant was born on 8 September 2001 and is the natural child of "K". He
has two older siblings who were born in 1987 and
1990. Limited information is
available in relation to the applicant prior to him coming to the attention of
the DoC. In DoC records,
the applicant's father is described as being a
long-distance truck driver who the applicant recalled spending time with on a
occasion. The applicant's parents separated and his father subsequently
re-partnered. He was recorded as having eight year-old
twins in 2012,
which suggests his relationship with the applicant's mother ended in or prior to
relationship with his father is unclear over
the period 2001 to 2012, it is not relevant for the purposes of this
application.
records note a family history which was provided by the applicant's older
sisters, "J" and "T", subsequent to his apprehension
by DoC in 2012. They
advised the applicant was primarily cared for by his sister, "J", from the ages
of zero until three years until
she left home at age 17 years. After "J"
moved out of home, "K" restricted "J's" access to "A". The applicant's other
sister, "T",
then took over the care of "A" from ages three to 10, including
supervision, preparation of meals and transport to and from school.
reported between about 2007 and 2011 she had been financially responsible for
the family until moving out of the family
was aged 21 years.
earliest document provided in support of the application was a police incident
report dated 5 September 2007 which indicates
police attended an incident
involving "K" and her then partner, "GS", who was refusing to let "K" leave the
premises and attempted
to cut his throat with a knife to prevent her leaving.
The incident report indicates "A" had been dropped at his father's house
birthday celebration and was not present when the incident occurred. On
3 August 2009 another police incident report records
"A" being in the
company of "K" who was allegedly shoplifting from Big W. Also present was
"GS" who was breaching a violence restraining
order by being in the company of
2009 "A" came to the attention of DoC after "K" contacted DoC seeking assistance
as she was living with the applicant in a tent
at camping grounds and struggling
with her health and finances. She was assisted by DoC to access a refuge. "T"
reported to DoC
(upon interview in 2012) "T" had been staying with friends at
the time as she had a broken leg, but "A" and "K" moved from caravan
caravan park in the Fremantle and Rockingham areas every two weeks and were
living in a tent.
May 2010 "K" was arrested for fraud after purchasing items for herself on a
former employer's account. There is no record in
the police incident report of
"A" being aware of these offences. In December 2011 "K" was arrested after
being apprehended for shoplifting
due to outstanding bench warrants. "K"
suggested "S" be allowed to care for "A" whilst she was incarcerated. A Child
Worker from DoC recorded the following:
CPWs spoke to ["K"] and ["A"] in relation to today's events and placement
options for ["A"]. ["K"] identified her friend as ["S"].
["K"] stated that
["S"] is "really good with ["A"] and added that "["A"] really likes him." ["A"]
interrupted his Mother and stated
"No I don't". When asked to elaborate, ["A"]
shrugged and stated, "I don't like him". When asked if he felt safe in ["S"]'s
["A"] said "no".
"K" was requested to leave the room and
"A" made disclosures in relation to the care provided by "S" noting he had been
living with
"K" and "A" for longer than a year, "S" "swears a lot and get angry
a lot", "S" grabs him around the back of his neck and pushes
him around; he
denied ever being hit by "S" but reported being pushed into his room and "K" and
"S" do not give him "good food".
"A" rated his safety when with "S" as 1 out of
10 (10 being the safest and one being unsafe) if "K" was not around and at 10
of 10 if his mother was present. The applicant was described by CPW workers
as being a "bright and engaging 10 year old who had
no problems interacting
with strangers". No child protection concerns were noted and it was considered
"K" was doing her best to
raise "A". "A" was placed with a DoC carer with the
agreement of "K" and returned to his mother's care when she left custody on
26 December 2011.
anonymous report was made to DoC on 28 December 2011 raising concerns in
relation to "A" being exposed to "K's" self harming behaviour
aggressive and threatening behaviour. Additional reported concerns were "A" was
not being fed, supervised, bathed and
dressed adequately.
an interview with the applicant's older sisters "J" and "T" on 29 December
2011 they reported the applicant attended an Open Learning
School and was
transported to school by school bus. He was reported to have learning
difficulties and delays which his sisters described
as not knowing the
days/months of the year, how to tell time, having delayed speech and few
friends. They noted he was left unsupervised
after school until "K" or "S"
returned to the home. They reported concerns about domestic violence, possible
drug dealing by "S",
possible drug use by "K", and a lack of food in the
3 January 2012 the applicant's sister, "T", reported to DoC she did not
know where her mother and "A" were living as she was too
scared to return to her
former home address to check and when she saw the applicant recently he was
defensive when she asked him
8 January 2012 police attended a domestic violence incident between "K" and
"S", during which "S" was reported to have backhanded
"K", pulled her hair and
pinned her to the bed. "A" was not present during the altercation but later saw
his mother on the couch.
Police recorded "K" had no visible injuries. "K:" did
not want to prosecute "S", but reported the incident to gain police assistance
to remove "S" from the premises.
10 January 2012 the applicant's sister, "J", contacted DoC to advise her
mother and the applicant were homeless due to domestic
violence and she thought
her mother may be "spiralling". On 13 January 2012 the applicant's sister
again contacted DoC to advise
her mother had attempted suicide and had been
hospitalised. She did not know where her brother was as her mother refused to
her and she was concerned about "A's" safety. Records from Sir Charles
Gairdner Hospital indicate "K" presented with a self-inflicted
right forearm
laceration but no longer felt suicidal. On examination it was noted she had
recent track-marks (indicative of drug
use), multiple haematomas over her body
including finger sized bruises. "K" advised hospital staff her son was safe
with school
17 January 2012 DoC were contacted by "W" who had been caring for the
applicant for the past four days. "W" expressed concerns
"K" dropped the
applicant at her house but had not come to collect him, "A" was underweight and
had been dropped off with a single
pair of underwear and a packet of skittles.
"W" also advised "K" had told her the applicant was not safe with her due to
had been sleeping in the park and she was planning to "go on the game".
"W" commented "K's" appearance was suggestive of drug use.
"W" advised she had
spoken with the applicant and he told her he had seen "S" be violent towards
"K". During a follow-up discussion
on 18 January 2012 "W" advised DoC the
applicant had been having nightmares and had disclosed incidents of violence
towards him from
his mother's previous partners.
19 January 2012 the applicant was apprehended and placed in the care of his
sister, "J". On 31 January 2012 DoC sought a protection
order (two year time
limited) which was made on 23 April 2012. The affidavit in support of the
protection order raised concerns
with the applicant's safety and welfare due to
his mother's mental health issues, exposure to domestic violence, exposure to
activities, lack of secure accommodation and failure to obtain
treatment for his developmental delays.
late January 2012 "J" reported "A's" nightmares had ceased and he became a
"more bubbly kid". In May 2012 DoC file notes record
"J" advised "A"
disclosed to her having watched a lot of sex on the television whilst living
with his mother. A similar disclosure
made in April 2014 was "A" had been
allowed to watch pornography by "S".
applicant's placement with "J" lasted for a year whilst long term carers were
identified. He was subsequently placed with relatives
of his sister's partner
in NSW. However, this placement broke down in early 2014 after the applicant
displayed challenging behaviours
including a lack of empathy after hurting
foster siblings or family pets.
23 April 2012 the Children's Court granted parental responsibility for the
applicant to the Chief Executive Officer of DoC until
the applicant reached
a case meeting held on 7 August 2014 "J" and "T" disclosed their
understanding "A" had been exposed to sexual behaviours whilst
living with "K"
including "K" walking around naked, "K" having sexual intercourse "everywhere"
in the house and "A" having slept
in his mother's bed whilst she and "S" were
applicant made additional disclosures of sexual behaviours by the applicant's
foster brother whilst he was living in NSW, but
later retracted these
allegations. There were two reports of "A" engaging in sexual behaviours with
another child in his group home
an interview with a DoC solicitor on 19 November 2018 the applicant advised his
understanding of why he came into care was his
mum wasn't a good person as she
took drugs and worked as a prostitute. He advised on one occasion "S" smashed a
window and forced
the applicant to climb into through the broken window, during
which the applicant cut himself. Upon questioning, the applicant denied
physical scars from that incident. He described on another occasion "S" threw
him off the sofa and chased him when he ran away,
breaking the door of "A's"
room to get to him. He also reported when he was "about 7 years old", "S"
poured gasoline over his face
and eyes. I note "S's" involvement with the
mother did not commence until the applicant was approximately 10 years old.
The applicant
advised "S" and his mother's other boyfriends would regularly hit
him. He described his mother getting her to help him steal for
her and to steal
his own birthday presents. In relation to the incident on 8 January 2012
"A" advised he witnessed "S" assaulting
his mother in 2012, he spoke to his
sister about it and she told him "don't go out there, just stay in here". I
note however when
the incident occurred on 8 January 2012 neither of the
applicant's sisters were residing at the home at that date and so he could
have remained in a room with his sister. It is unclear whether the applicant
has an accurate recall of the various alleged incidents
or whether the passage
of time has influenced his recall. The applicant also reported "K" and "S"
dealing drugs from the premises.
The applicant's injuries
DoC materials contained an undated document entitled "Confidential Psychological
Report". The author of this document was not
identified, but contemporaneous
records suggest it was the school psychologist at the applicant's primary
school. The report was
completed after the applicant began living with "J".
The applicant was reported to have a fragmented educational history and was
noted to be unable to cope with year 4 work, despite being of year 5 school
age. His test results indicated he had very few basic
skills and had an
intellectual disability. It was recommended he be placed in an Education
Support Centre.
Ms Johnstone,
Psychologist, produced a report dated 5 February 2013. "A" had attended upon
her 19 times between May and December
2012. Ms Johnstone noted during
play therapy "A" acted out physical punishment received from "S" and the failure
of "K" to intervene.
His play reduced in aggression over the course of the
a report dated 18 September 2013 Mr John de Laurence,
psychologist, noted an impaired ability to trust, insecurity in his attachments
(which Mr de Laurence attributed to his relationship with "K") and
learning deficits which were suspected to relate to a lack of
stimulation whilst
growing up. He noted "A" was reported to have acting-out behaviours and
required assistance in developing an
appropriate response for emotional
February 2014 "A" presented to Princess Margaret Hospital upon a GP referral in
relation to suicidal ideation.
December 2014 and April 2015 the applicant underwent speech therapy. A report
from Ms Elle Papalia, Speech Pathologist,
dated 12 January 2015 noted
persisting severely delayed expressive and receptive language difficulties which
impacted on his daily
function in both conversation and academically. It was
reported the applicant had attended at least seven, but possibly nine, schools
between kindergarten and year 5. Ms Papalia noted in the absence of
intensive therapy it would be unlikely he would progress to
perform at an
average level for his age and stage of development.
5 April 2016 "A" underwent an assessment by Dr Danny Shub, Consultant
psychiatrist, who produced a report of that same date.
Dr Shub noted the
applicant had a range of psychological symptoms involving both anxiety and
depressive symptoms which included nightmares,
a tendency to ruminate about
traumatic memories, concerns regarding his safety, low self-esteem, peer
relationship difficulties,
a tendency to angry outbursts and significant
problems with respect to his capacity to focus and concentrate in class.
diagnosed Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, significant ADHD and
noted concerning depressive symptoms.
was reviewed by Dr Rick Christie, Paediatrician on 5 July 2016.
Dr Christie referred to an exposure to domestic violence and
physical abuse from his mother's partners including on one instance being thrown
through a plate glass window, resulting
in both physical and emotional scars. I
have no additional evidence of "A" being thrown through a window and therefore
there likely are inaccuracies in the history provided to
Dr Christie. Dr Christie reported "K's' pregnancy with "A" was likely
complicated
by substance abuse and alcohol abuse. He described the applicant as
"clearly quite a disturbed boy who has been exposed to neglect
as well as trauma
in the past" but notes some possible "biologic inputs into his behaviour with a
predisposition to ADHD and emotional
lability". In a subsequent report dated
15 August 2017 Dr Christie reported the applicant had a moderately
persistent low mood particular
after a traumatic break-up with a girl seven
months ago when he threatened to jump off a bridge. Dr Christie noted the
applicant's
school grades had dropped and he had some social difficulties at
applicant attended Dr Julia Charkey-Papp, Psychiatrist in
January 2018. In a report dated 19 January 2019 Dr Charkey-Papp noted
a tumultuous childhood and upbringing with likely significant psychological
trauma. Positive gains were reported by "A" and his
foster-parent in relation
to his day to day functioning since 2015. However, he was reported to have
ongoing issues identifying
his emotions, experiencing internal derogatory
voices, low self-esteem, poor sleep patterns. Dr Charkey-Papp concluded:
In conclusion, ["A"] is a 16 ½-year-old child in state care, currently
living with a foster parent. "A" has intrinsic and environmentally
vulnerabilities. By this I mean that he probably inherited biologically and
genetically determined predispositions to
ADHD and learning difficulties,
whereas the environment and the experiences he has been exposed to have further
undermined his early
and adolescent development".
February 2018 and October 2018 "A" underwent counselling. Issues of
concern noted in the undated report of Mr Nigel Cameron,
Forensic Psychologist included unsettling behaviours such as an obsession with
knives and passive aggressive behaviours
such as leaving a dead rat by his
carer's door. The applicant was reported to experience frustration and low mood
and to require
coaching in social skills and relationships, particularly sexual
relationships.
applicant's solicitors obtained a report from Dr Phil Watts, Adjunct
Associate Professor in Clinical Psychology dated 31 January
Dr Watts described the applicant as a "relatively simplistic boy who lacks
psychological awareness and insight. He has sufficient
skill to function in the
community in a basic fashion and with significant limitation". The applicant was
noted to be reluctant to
talk about the past and did not want to make negative
disclosures in relation to his mother, with whom he was living at the time
the assessment. Dr Watts referred to the applicant's early exposure to
adult sexual behaviour between his mother, her partner
and other people and
attributed this early, premature sexualisation as the cause of the later sexual
acting-out by the applicant.
However, Dr Watts also considered the alleged
sexual behaviours of the applicant's foster brother in NSW as being likely to
caused much of the sexual acting out which was noted after his return to
attributed some of the applicant's ongoing anxiety to his childhood instability
and dysfunction. He reported the applicant
will always be low functioning,
partly as a product of his IQ and partly a product of the childhood environment
which he grew up
in having negative impacts, noting the applicant failed to
develop appropriate emotional and behavioural skills. Dr Watts' ability
assess the applicant was impacted by the applicant's refusal to discuss the
offences. Despite this, he stated:
[I]n my opinion ["A"] has been profoundly affected by the early neglect from his
mother, which included a very neglectful background,
domestically violent
partner, some quite significant violence perpetrated against him, and early
exposure to sexual behaviour on
the mother's part.
Watts considered the applicant would be unable to cope in a full mainstream
situation, and always likely to need a guardian, partly
due to his capacity but
in a large part due to his relatively immature emotional structure. He
recommended at least 20 sessions
of counselling related to his early exposure to
his mother's parenting but acknowledged the applicant did not want to undertake
counselling.
General principles relating to "neglect" claims
Section 101
of the CCS Act states:
to protect child from harm
(1) A person who has the care or control of a child and who engages in
(a) knowing that the conduct
may result in the child suffering harm as a result of any one or more of the
following —
(i) physical abuse; or
(ii) sexual abuse; or
(iii) emotional abuse as defined in section 28(1); or
[(iv) deleted]
(v) neglect as defined in section 28(1);
(b) reckless as to whether the conduct may have that result,
is guilty of a crime, and is liable to imprisonment for 10 years.
(2) In subsection (1) —
engage in conduct
(a) to do an act; or
(b) to omit to do an act;
has the meaning given to that term in
section 28(1).
terms "emotional abuse", "harm" and "neglect" are defined in section 28(1) of
the CCS Act:
child in need of protection
(1) In this section —
(a) psychological abuse; and
(b) being exposed to family violence;
, in relation to a child, means any detrimental effect of a
significant nature on the child’s wellbeing, whether caused
(a) a single act, omission or
circumstance; or
(b) a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances;
includes failure by a child’s parents to provide,
arrange, or allow the provision of —
(a) adequate care for the child; or
(b) effective medical, therapeutic or remedial treatment for the child.
elements of the offence created by s 101(1) of the Act
(a) knowledge by the accused the conduct he or she engages
in 'may result in the child suffering harm' as a result of physical, emotional,
sexual or psychological abuse or neglect; or
(b) alternatively, recklessness by the accused as to whether his or her
conduct may have that
word 'reckless' connotes the offender wilfully or deliberately shut his or her
eyes to, or excluded from contemplation, whether
the alleged conduct may result
in the child suffering harm of the kind specified in section 101(1). If an
offender has actual foresight
or actual awareness his or her conduct may result
in a child suffering harm as a result of abuse or neglect of the kind specified
in s 101(1), then he or she will have engaged in that conduct knowing the
conduct may have that
establish an offence under section 101 of the CCS Act it is necessary to
(1) The alleged offender had the care or control of the
(2) The applicant was a child;
(3) The alleged offender:
(a) omitted to provide adequate care for the child or effective medical,
therapeutic of remedial treatment for the child; and/or
(b) Caused harm to the child as a result of:
to domestic violence;
abuse; and/or
(c) Was reckless as to whether that omission may result
in the child suffering harm as a result of neglect or knew that omission would
result in the child suffering harm.
Section 28(1)
of the CCS Act defines harm as any detrimental effect of a significant nature on
the child's wellbeing, whether caused
by a single act, omission or circumstance;
or a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances. The consequence
of multiple
acts or omissions constituting a single offence is, notwithstanding
such an offence may involve several acts of behaviour or ill
treatment, pursuant
to sections 31 and 33 of the Act the maximum payment available is no greater
than the single statutory maximum
which applies as at the date of the
circumstances where the applicant alleges offences under section 101 of the CCS
Act plus additional offences under, for example,
Criminal Code
as assault, sexual assault or deprivation of liberty,
X v McAllister
applies. This means an applicant can claim for a proved or alleged offence of
neglect, plus those additional proved or alleged offences,
even though the
conduct giving rise to the additional offences may also comprise part of the
offence pursuant to section 101 of the
CCS Act. This permits an applicant
to potentially be eligible to twice the statutory maximum pursuant to
section 34 of the Act.
There is an important caveat however: if the
additional offences arise from the same conduct as the offence of neglect, such
they can be considered related offences, section 33 of the Act applies
and a single statutory maximum is applied.
Amendment to the applications
is common in claims lodged for "neglect", the applicant's solicitors submitted
multiple applications for the same period and the
same offender. This is
clearly an attempt to enliven the provisions of section 34 of the Act by
alleging multiple unrelated offences
by one offender and thus increase the
section 31 of the
Act. On 26 February 2021 I wrote to the applicant's
solicitors noting an offence under
section 31A
Child Welfare Act 1947
(CWA) or under section 101 of the CCS Act refers to a continuum of
behaviours constituting a single offence. Secondly, the significance
breach of section 31A of the CWA or section 101 of the CCS Act being a
single offence is that not notwithstanding such a breach
may involve several
acts of behaviour or ill-treatment, the maximum payment available is no greater
than the single statutory maximum
which applies as the date of the offence
[2019] WACIC 16).
I advised I intended to assess the
applications with respect to "K" as subject to a single statutory maximum. In
responsive submissions
dated 5 April 2021, the applicant solicitors
requested the three separate alleged offences be treated as unrelated offences
to amend the application as follows:
Initial application
Amended application
2001 to 2012
A home in WA
Failing to protect a child from harm – s101
Child and Community
Services Act 2004
(CCSA Act) – neglect
No amendment
2001 to 2012
A home in WA
Failing to protect a child from harm – s101 CCSA Act - emotional
abuse (exposure to domestic violence)
Persistently engage in family violence, s 300(1),
Code Compilation Act 1913
(WA); and/or in the
alternative, Common assault,
Criminal Code Compilation Act 1913
2001 to 2012
A home in WA
Failing to protect a child from harm – s101 CCSA Act - sexual
Child under 13, sexual offences against, s 320,
Compilation Act 1913
(WA); and/or in the alternative, Showing
material to a child under 16, s 204A,
Criminal Code Compilation
b. Dates of alleged offence: 2001 to 2012; and/or in the
alternative, Occupier or
owner allowing young person to be on premises for
unlawful carnal knowledge,
Criminal Code Compilation Act 1913
respect to the amendment to claim "2" I note the following difficulties. The
offence of persistently engage of criminal violence
is a recent amendment to the
Criminal Code
subsequent to the
Family Violence Legislation Reform Act
being assented to on 9 July 2020 and therefore was not in force
when the incidents allegedly occurred. The application was initially
relation to exposing "A" to domestic violence and the offender is nominated to
be "K". There is no evidence "K" assaulted
"A". The amended alleged offences
of persistently engage in family violence or common assault were committed by
offenders other
than "K". Applications have not been brought with respect to
those (unknown) offenders. Whilst based on police records I can be
the incident with "GS" (referred to in paragraph [7], above) occurred, not only
has no application been brought for this
incident, but as "A" was not present
when the incident with "GS" occurred I require evidence of "A" being aware of
the incident and
of the impact upon him of that specific incident before I can
consider making an award pursuant to section 35(2)(e) of the Act (which
permits compensation to a close relative who is living with a victim of an
for me to be satisfied the alleged offences occurred "clear and cogent proof" is
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
Court stated (endnotes and citations omitted):
The ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil
litigation in this country is proof on the balance
of probabilities. That
remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or
fraud. On the other hand, the strength
of the evidence necessary to establish a
fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
is sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been
made to the effect that clear or cogent proof is necessary 'where
so serious a
matter as fraud is to be found'. Statements to that effect should not, however,
be understood as directed to the standard
of proof. Rather, they should be
understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our
society do not ordinarily
engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a
judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the
of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such
and cogent proof of an alleged offence requires more than an allegation various
unknown persons assaulted the applicant or
his mother at various times. It is
not sufficient to simply claim an alleged offence
applicant must establish on the balance of probabilities the alleged offence was
committed. More than a broad statement to the
effect "I was regularly
assaulted" is required to establish on the balance of probabilities an alleged
offence of common assault
incidents particularised in the applicant's submissions refer to "K" having had
multiple violent partners, the incident with
"GS" and an unspecified incident in
2009 which resulted in "A" and "K" staying in a refuge. I have not been
provided with clear
and cogent proof of any offences committed by the multiple
unspecified violent offenders. I cannot be satisfied alleged offences
persistently engage in family violence and/or in the alternative, common
assault, were committed by "K" over the period 2001 to
respect to the amendment to claim "3" the submissions provided particulars of
the applicant's mother exposing the applicant
to sex (seeing and hearing it
regularly) and the applicant having slept in his mother's bed whilst she and "S"
were naked. Again,
there is a lack of particularity in relation to these
offences. For example, "A" may have been unwell or scared and so went to
mother's bed for comfort in the middle of the night whilst she was sleeping
naked with her partner. I cannot draw a conclusion
from the facts presented of
any criminal conduct by the application's mother from this alleged occurrence.
I cannot be satisfied
the alleged offences under the C
riminal Code
did not consider sufficient specificity had been provided in relation to these
alleged offences for either claims "2" or "3" so
as to comprise clear and cogent
proof of the criminal conduct alleged. This may in part be due to the
applicant’s young age
at the time and his difficulty recalling specifics
of the events.
I did not consider there was sufficient evidence to establish the alternate
proposed offences as submitted for claims "2"
and "3", I was prepared to accept
there was sufficient evidence to substantiate "A" had been exposed to domestic
violence whilst
living with "K" and to domestic violence and pornography whilst
living with "K" and "S" and this exposure comprised an offence under
of the CCSA Act.
relation to the categorisation of the offences I adopt the reasoning of Assessor
[2022] WACIC 7
The task for the assessor is to determine the nature of the behaviours outlined
in the papers submitted in support of the various
applications lodged. There are
no formal pleadings under the Act and by reason of section 18(2) of the Act I am
not bound by rules
or practice as to evidence or procedure. In addition, I have
power to amend an application of my own initiative pursuant to section
of the Act. It follows notwithstanding multiple applications are lodged and/or
multiple submissions are made in relation
to the nature of the claims made, it
is for the assessor to ultimately determine how those alleged behaviours should
be treated with
reference to the relevant legislation. In effect, the scheme of
the Act requires me to determine any claim for compensation having
the substance of the claim rather than the form.
a result, I amended the applications lodged pursuant to section 19 of the
Act. With respect to the application arising from alleged
offences committed by
"K" (CIC 1552/2020):
Offender: "K"
Period: 8 September 2001 to an unknown date in about 2011
Location: Various locations in Western Australia
Alleged offence: Failing to protect a child from harm – s101
and Community Services Act 2004
This claim encompasses the child neglect, including exposure to domestic
violence and to sexual behaviours.
respect to the application arising from alleged offences of common assault
committed by "S" (CIC 1553/2020). The particulars
provided in relation to this
claim refer to the incident on 8 January 2012 which the applicant did not
witness but could claim for
pursuant to section 35(2)(c) as having been
personally present immediately after the offence was committed, and also
referred to
multiple unspecified assaults. I was unable to make awards in
relation to those multiple unspecified assaults due to the lack of
cogent proof provided for the reasons set out at [45]-[46], above. However,
given "K's" relationship with "S", he was
resident with "K" and "A", and "K"
advised DoC "S" would supervise "A", I considered "S" had "joint care and
control of" the applicant
whilst he was living with "K". I amended the
application as follows:
Offenders: "K" and "S"
Period: an unknown date in about 2011 to 19 January 2012
Location: Various locations in Western Australia
Alleged offence: Failing to protect a child from harm – s101 Child and
Community Services Act 2004
This claim encompasses the continuing child neglect by "K", including
exposure to domestic violence and to sexual behaviours and
physical assaults by
"S" once he entered into a relationship with "K".
making the amendments I considered the beneficial nature of the Act. I
considered the likely award that would be made to the
applicant for any offences
committed by "S" separately for alleged assaults would be less than an award
which included "K" as a co-offender
and which encompassed an offence under s101
of the CCS Act. I then proceeded to determine the applications on that
Findings in relation to offences
Application CIC 1552/2020
found "K" committed an alleged offence of failing to protect a child from harm
pursuant to section 101 of the CCSA Act as a result
of the following acts or
(a) Sexual abuse:
(i) Exposure to "K's" sexual activities;
(b) Emotional abuse:
(ii) Exposure to domestic violence via "K's" relationships with various men,
including "GS";
(iii) Exposure to emotional harm as a result of "K's" reported mental health
issues and self harming behaviours;
(c) Neglect, comprising:
primary care being provided by his sisters who were respectively 12 years and 14
years when they commenced looking after him;
to criminal activities including shoplifting;
to 'K's" drug taking activities;
of adequate nutrition;
of a stable and secure home, including being homeless, and living itinerantly in
camping grounds;
attendance which was reported to be "fragmented";
of stimulation;
required to care for himself after school;
to obtain treatment for developmental delays.
Application CIC 1553/2020
found "K" and "S", as co-offenders, committed an alleged offence of failing to
protect a child from harm pursuant to section 101
of the CCSA Act as a result of
the following acts or omissions:
(a) Physical abuse:
assaults by "S" including grabbing him by the neck and forcefully putting him
into his bedroom
(b) Sexual abuse:
to pornography;
(c) Emotional abuse:
to domestic violence;
to emotional harm as a result of "K's" reported mental health issues and self
harming behaviours;
(d) Neglect, comprising:
to criminal activities including shoplifting;
to 'K's" drug taking activities;
of adequate nutrition;
of a stable and secure home, including being homeless, and sleeping in a
attendance which was reported to be "fragmented";
required to care for himself after school;
to obtain treatment for developmental delays.
Extension of time
to section 9(1) of the Act an application for compensation must be made within
three years after the date on which the offence
to which it relates was
committed or, if it related to more than one offence the date on which the last
of those offences was committed.
However, an assessor may allow an application
for compensation after the three-year period if he or she thinks it is just to
last of the offences against the applicant was in 2012 and his application was
required to be lodged prior to 2015 but was lodged
on 24 July 2020.
Accordingly, the applicant requires an extension of time within which to bring
his applications.
Hansen v Bolton
[2017] WADC 25
[14], Herron DCJ
Factors that may be relevant to the
exercise of the court’s discretion under s 9(2) include (
[2014] WADC 9
[2014] WADC 92[16]):
(a) the history of and background to the proposed application;
(b) the length of the delay;
(c) the reasons for the delay;
(d) the nature of the proposed application;
(e) the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of an extension of
time, including the extent of any prejudice to the
respondent;
(f) the prospects of the compensation application succeeding; and
(g) whether injustice will be suffered if an extension of time is
applicant's explanation for the delay in bringing his application was he was a
child when the last offence occurred and subject
to a protection order which
gave the Chief Executive Officer of DOC parental responsibility. On
22 August 2019, shortly after upon
attaining adulthood, the applicant was
made subject to an order by the State Administration Tribunal appointing the
Public Trustee
as plenary administrator.
applicant was aged 18 years when the application was brought. The delays
in bringing the application prior to the applicant
attaining adulthood cannot be
attributed to the applicant's conduct. In
it was accepted the applicant's youth resulting in an inability to
understand how to deal with the matter at the time, and being a
child at the
expiry of the limitation period were reasons to support an extension of time. I
considered if the extension is not
granted the applicant would be denied
compensation. That on its own does not justify granting an extension of
. However I
considered, for the reasons set out above, the prospects of the applicant
succeeding on a timely application would have
been high. I considered leave
should be granted to bring the applications out of
Method of assessment
of the Act sets out the general powers of an assessor. It provides 'on
application in respect of injury suffered by a
victim as a consequence of the
commission of an offence, an assessor may award such compensation that the
assessor is satisfied is
just for the injury and for any loss also suffered'.
Under Section 3 of the Act, 'satisfied' means 'satisfied on the
probabilities'.
assessing the amount of compensation I should have regard solely to the injury
suffered by the applicant in consequence of the
commission of the offence. The
amount of compensation is not to be fixed as punishment of the offender or as an
expression of sympathy
correct approach to adopt in assessing the amount of compensation under the Act
is to apply the ordinary tortious principles
for assessment of damages, subject
to the limitations imposed by the definitions of 'injury' and 'loss' in the Act,
and to the jurisdictional
limit of the
Assessment of the applicant's claim
to making an assessment of the applications, I had regard to the comments of
Stevenson DCJ in
SL (by her next friend
The issue of assessment of damages for loss and injury suffered by a young child
at the commencement of her schooling and life is,
particularly when the
compensation is for mental harm as opposed to direct physical injuries, a
complex task:
[2011] WADC 40
[94] (Sweeney DCJ):
The recognised and well documented long-term effects of child abuse,
particularly chronic child abuse by a family member, however,
are such that it
would be quite impossible for this court to attempt to disentangle the long-term
effects of any offending behaviour
from any possible long-term effects from
other childhood factors and the vagrancies of life generally, even if it were
appropriate
to section 12 of the Act a victim who suffers injury as a consequence of
the commission of a proved offence may apply for
compensation for the injury and
any loss suffered. 'Injury' is defined in section 3 of the Act as 'bodily
harm, mental and nervous
shock, or pregnancy'.
amount of damages for injury must be fair and reasonable compensation for the
injuries received by the applicant and the disabilities
caused, having regard to
current general ideas of fairness and
moderation.
amount must be proportionate to the particular situation of the
regard to the medical evidence outlined above, I found, as a result of the
offences, the applicant suffered from a psychological
injury comprising
post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and depression, which at times included
suicidal ideation. In addition,
I found the applicant's learning difficulties
which arose from his intellectual disability and ADHD were exacerbated by his
interrupted
schooling and the failure for him to be engaged in appropriate
therapies (such as speech therapy) at a younger age. Further, I found
applicant suffered from a disorganised attachment (disinhibited type) which
resulted in difficulties with attachment to others,
impaired his relationships
with others on an ongoing basis and impacted his ability to develop appropriate
emotional and behavioural
skills. A further impact on the applicant was the
impact of his early exposure to pornography and to his mother's open sexual
resulted in premature sexualisation and was considered to be
responsible for the applicant's later sexual acting out. I noted Dr
conclusion the applicant had sufficient skill to function in the community in a
basic fashion and with significant limitation.
I considered the impact of the
psychological injuries upon the applicant to be significant. In addition, I
noted the applicant
had been subject to physical harm at times, including being
assaulted by "S" and by "K's" previous partners and was noted to be hungry
underfed. I considered an appropriate allowance for the applicant's injuries to
be $130,000. Having regard to the time span
of each claim, and the additional
impact of the failure to undertake therapies and to have provided intermittent
schooling upon the
applicant's learning disabilities I apportioned $80,000 to
the claim against "K" and $50,000 to the claim against "K" and
Loss of earnings
applicant is entitled to compensation for 'loss of earnings as a direct
consequence of the injuries' he
earnings includes loss of earning
reported the applicant attended school until year 12 but did not graduate,
which he considered to be in accordance with
the applicant's intellectual
functioning. He reported the applicant was capable of doing menial work which
is highly structured,
but did not comment on his likely capacity for employment
but for the injuries. The applicant has been looking for work but has been
unsuccessful to date.
considered by reason of his intellectual disability the applicant has a limited
capacity for employment, irrespective of the injuries
sustained. However, I
found the impact of the applicant's intellectual disability was further
exacerbated by the failure for him
to undertake therapies and by his
intermittent schooling. His psychological injuries and behavioural and
emotional skills also impact
on his ability to engage with others and would
therefore impair his ability to gain and maintain employment.
a claim for loss of earning capacity is proved, the compensation to be assessed
is essentially a matter of judgment and often
cannot be proven by precise
considered an appropriate allowance for the impact on the applicant's employment
to be $100,000 and I apportioned this $75,000
to the claim against "K" and
$25,000 to the claim against "K" and "S".
Report fees
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that arise in obtaining any
report from a health professional or counsellor
in relation to the injury
suffered by the
applicant incurred the cost of obtaining the medical report from Dr Watts
in the amount $3,300. I apportioned this fee equally,
being $1,650 to each
application.
Future treatment expenses
applicant is entitled to compensation for expenses that are likely to be
reasonably incurred for any treatment the applicant
is likely to need as a
direct consequence of the injury suffered by the
Dr Watts recommended the applicant undertake at least 20 sessions of
psychological treatment related to his experiences with his
mother, but noted
the applicant was unlikely to do so. Despite this, noting the applicant's young
age, I considered there to be
a possibility as he matured he may seek assistance
and made an allowance of $3,000 (apportioned equally to each claim) for future
psychological treatment.
Summary of assessment
assessed the applicant's injury and losses as
Injury or Loss
CIC 1552/2020
CIC 1553/2020
Report expenses
Future treatment expenses
Loss of earnings
with respect to each claim, pursuant to section 31(1) of the Act the
maximum compensation payable is $75,000, and I therefore
assessed the
compensation payable in that sum. As my assessment on both matters exceeded the
any monies for future treatment
pursuant to section 48 of the Act and on each application ordered the sum
of $75,000 be paid to the
Public Trustee.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
18 AUGUST 2022
[2016] WADC
(1984) 4 SR (WA)
(1995) 12 SR (WA) 330
Hill v Clarke
[2015] WADC
WADC 76[28].
SV v The State of Western Australia
[2014] WASCA 123
v The State of Western Australia
[2013] WASCA 202
[2019] WACIC 16
[2021] WASCA
[2002] WADC 117
Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
[170] - [171];
(2005) 222 CLR 612 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron
[2009] WACIC
9(2) of the
[2018] WADC
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
, 549 (Toohey & Gummow
(1989) 6 SR (WA) 79.
(Unreported WASC, Library No 920598, 19 November
1992).) (Scott J);
RJE v Bandy
(Unreported
WASC, Library No 1365; 31 May 1974.) 3 (Burt J);
[2011] WADC 10.
(Braddock DCJ);
Robertson v Baker
[2014] WADC
[12] (Stone
SL (by her next friend NL)
[2014] WADC 178
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
(Barwick CJ, Kitto & Menzies JJ);
[2009] WASCA 104
[107] (Newnes JA with whom Pullin
& Miller JJA agreed);
Winiarczyk v
[2011] WASCA 97
[71] (Judgment of the
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
(1994) 11 WAR 481
[2010] WADC 6
s6(2)(a)(ii).
The Act, s6(2)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (452 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter