URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PREITZ -v- PGQW PTY LTD (FORMERLY BOXLINE INDUSTRIES PTY LTD) [2025] WADC 70 (3 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CHAMBERS
PREITZ -v- PGQW PTY LTD (FORMERLY BOXLINE INDUSTRIES PTY
LTD) [2025] WADC 70
PRINCIPAL REGISTRAR MCGIVERN
18 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
3 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 3572 of 2021
JOSHUA DENNIS PREITZ
PGQW PTY LTD (FORMERLY BOXLINE INDUSTRIES PTY LTD)
BRADLEY SHACKLETON and LARELLE SHACKLETON (A PARTNERSHIP)
Third Party
AAI LTD t/as GIO
First Fourth Party
IAG LTD t/as CGU INSURANCE
Second Fourth Party
Practice and procedure - Application to amend
defence in third party proceedings - Principles to be applied - Whether proposed
embarrassing - Whether application should be dismissed for
non-compliance with rules of court - Whether leave should be granted in
interests of justice
Legislation:
District Court Rules 2005
(WA), r 6, r
22, r 43(3A), r 48A
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Tortfeasers'
Contribution) Act 1947
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA), O 1 r 4A, O 1 r 4B, O 21 r 3, O 21 r 5, O 59 r 3(3)
Application to amend allowed
Representation:
Not applicable
Mr J J Sheldrick
Third Party
Mr R R Cywicki
First Fourth Party
Not applicable
Second Fourth Party
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Stephen Browne Lawyers (South Perth)
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
Third Party
First Fourth Party
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
Second Fourth Party
McCabes Lawyers
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Argosy Strata Plan SP 21513 v CHU Underwriting Agencies Pty Ltd [No 3]
Frank Jasper Pty Ltd v Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (a firm)
[2006] WASC 24
Hightime Investments Pty Ltd v Lungan [No 2]
[2010] WASC 296
Hooper v Cockles Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 143
Kernel Holdings Pty Ltd v Rothmans of Pall Mall (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 557
217 ALR 171
Koolan Iron Ore Pty Ltd v GHD Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2022] WASC 442
Lister v Romford Ice & Cold Storage Co Ltd
[1956] UKHL 6
[1957] AC 555
Mann v Bankwest - A Division of Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2020] WASCA
Munting v Pollard
[2024] TASSC 30
Reliance Capital Pty Ltd v Caratti [No 6]
[2024] WASC 21
Voli v Inglewood Shire Council
[1963] HCA 15
(1963) 110 CLR 74
Water Corporation v Cardno BSD Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 212
REGISTRAR MCGIVERN
decision concerns the application of the third party, Bradley Shackleton
and Larelle Shackleton (a partnership) (
the Partnership
leave to amend its defence in the third party proceedings (
application is opposed by the defendant
grounds that:
(a) two of the proposed amendments are defective or
embarrassing; and
(b) the application itself is defective by reason of the Partnership's
non-compliance with the relevant rules of court (
dealing with the application, I will consider the following
(a) What are the circumstances
of this application?
(b) What rules and principles apply?
(c) Should leave to amend be given and, if so, on what terms? More
specifically:
(i) What is the extent of the delay?
(ii) Are the procedural objections made out?
(iii) Are the disputed amendments defective or embarrassing?
(iv) Is it in the interests of justice that leave be granted?
the reasons that follow, the application is allowed on
What are the circumstances of this application?
has recently been observed, an application to amend a pleading is not assessed
in a vacuum:
necessary to consider the individual circumstances of each case, including in
relation to the relevant procedural
this case, the application is brought in the context of an action in which the
plaintiff, Mr Preitz, claims that in the course
of carrying out work as a
sheet metal worker on 21 November 2018, his clothes caught fire when he
turned on a welding torch, resulting
in personal injury and mental harm.
20 September 2021, Mr Preitz commenced:
(a) this action
against the defendant, PGQW, as his employer at the time of the incident;
(b) another action
against the Partnership which, he claimed, was responsible for his
'supervision, management and occupational, health and safety'
in the course of
his employment with PGQW at the time of the incident.
Mr Preitz's
action against the Partnership has effectively stalled, before any exchange of
pleadings, while the plaintiff has advanced
his claim against
has admitted that, as Mr Preitz's employer, it breached the duty of care
that it owed to him, resulting in Mr Preitz suffering
April 2025, PGQW was granted leave to join, and joined, the Partnership as
a third party to this
TPP pleadings
filed a statement of claim in the TPP on 15 May 2025. In broad terms,
it alleges against the Partnership that:
(a) at all material times,
there was a contract of services between PGQW and the Partnership pursuant to
which Bradley Shackleton
was to provide his services as a manager of PGQW
Management Contract
(b) the Management Contract was partly written, partly oral and partly to be
(c) by reason of the Management Contract, Mr Shackleton owed to PGQW's
employees (including Mr Preitz):
(i) a common law duty of care to discharge his obligations as manager
competently so as not to expose them to unnecessary risk of
injury; and
(ii) a statutory duty of
to take such
practicable measures as to ensure that persons at the workplace were not exposed
to hazards;
(d) Mr Shackleton breached those duties, including by failing to:
(i) implement safe systems and procedures of work in connection with the use
of flammable substances and welding;
(ii) adequately train and supervise Mr Preitz in connection with the use
of flammable substances and welding; and
(iii) train and instruct workers on the location of fire extinguishers;
(e) if PGQW is liable in damages to Mr Preitz then the Partnership is
liable to indemnify PGQW in respect of those damages or, alternatively,
contribute to them as a joint
tortfeasor.
summary, by its defence filed in the TPP on 9 June 2025,
the Partnership:
(a) denies the Management Contract asserted
against it;
(b) pleads that from or about 1998, Mr Shackleton was employed by
(c) says that in about 2004, the principal of PGQW proposed that the
Partnership be created and that the Partnership then enter into
a profit share
agreement with PGQW;
(d) says that despite the Partnership being created and occasionally
rendering invoices to PGQW:
(i) the Partnership never received a share of profit from PGQW;
(ii) Mr Shackleton continued to work for PGQW as an employee; and
(iii) PGQW did not relinquish control or supervision to Mr Shackleton or
the Partnership;
(e) pleads that PGQW owed its employees duties pertaining to the health and
safety and processes and procedures in the operation of
its business, and did
not delegate those duties to Mr Shackleton; and
(f) says that PGQW is not entitled to be indemnified by, or to claim a
contribution from, the Partnership.
16 June 2025, PGQW filed a reply to the Partnership's denial of the
Management Contract in terms that Mr Shackleton admitted he
was the manager
of PGQW when, in 2021, he entered a plea of guilty to a charge under s 55
of the OSH Act.
Proposed amendments
the present application, the Partnership seeks leave to amend its defence in the
proposed amendments are set out in a minute of proposed amended defence filed on
19 August 2025 (
), as to which:
(a) subpars 4.5.8
and 4.5.9 contain minor proposed amendments, which are not
contentious
are not addressed in these reasons;
(b) the substantive proposed amendments are contained in pars 8.7, 8.8, 10,
11 and 12 of the Minute;
(c) subpar 8.7 is to the effect that PGQW held Mr Shackleton out as its
manager when it knew or ought to have known that he had no
qualifications or experience in that role (and particulars of the alleged
knowledge are given);
(d) subpar 8.8 is to the effect that PGQW knew
that Mr Shackleton had no training, qualifications or experience in
occupational health
and safety role (and particulars of the alleged knowledge
are given);
(e) par 10 is to the effect that:
(i) at all material times, Mr Shackleton acted on the instructions of
(ii) at all material times, it was an implied term of the contract between
PGQW and Mr Shackleton that PGQW would indemnify Mr Shackleton
negligent acts in carrying out those instructions; and
(iii) in the circumstances, pursuant to s 7(1)(c) and s 7(2) of the
Contribution Act
, PGQW is precluded from recovering from the Partnership
and/or the Partnership should be exempt from making any contribution;
(f) par 11 is to the effect that, if Mr Shackleton was an employee
of PGQW then he is entitled to be indemnified under a workers'
compensation and
employer's liability policy held by PGQW;
(g) par 12 is to the effect that, if Mr Shackleton was not an
employee of, but was a manager of, PGQW, then the Partnership is entitled
indemnified under a 'Business Pack Policy' held by PGQW; and
(h) PGQW has raised objection to the amendments proposed in pars 8.7 and
10, but is otherwise silent as to the substance of the proposed
amendments.
What rules and principles apply?
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
) apply to cases in this
court, subject to any inconsistency with the
District Court Rules 2005
RSC O 21 r 3 provides that a party may, without leave, amend
any of its pleadings up to seven weeks before the start of
, DCR r 48A(2) modifies the operation
of RSC O 21, such that leave to amend a pleading is required after the
earliest date on which:
(a) a certificate is tendered under
DCR r 43(3A)(a)
on behalf of
in the case; or
(b) the case is listed for trial.
DCR r 48A(3), an application for leave
to amend a pleading must be accompanied by an affidavit of the party (or
the party's legal
representative) making the application, or the legal
practitioner representing the party, that sets out the
(a) that have arisen since the time expired for amending a
pleading without the court's leave; and
(b) that ground the party's or the legal practitioner's argument that the
amendment is necessary.
RSC O 21 r 5
provides that, if leave is
court may at any stage of the proceedings, allow any party to amend that party's
pleading, on any terms as to costs or otherwise
that may be just and in the
manner (if any) that the court may direct.
of the above rules of court must be construed and applied in a manner that best
ensures the attainment of the objectives of
contemporary case management and the
elimination of
Those objectives:
(a) impose responsibilities, not just on the
court, but on legal practitioners to assist the court so as best to ensure the
of the objects in the conduct of
litigation;
(b) are relevant to the exercise of discretion, in the interests of justice,
to grant leave to amend pleadings under
RSC O 21 r 5.
Aon Risk Services
, the High Court identified a range of
considerations relevant to the exercise of the court's discretion in this
context, which were
summarised and applied in
Hightime Investments Pty Ltd
v Lungan [No
(a) the effect of an amendment on the court and on other litigants is
(b) there is no right to amend to introduce an arguable case and it is wrong to
say that only in extreme circumstances would a party
be shut out from litigating
an arguable case;
(c) justice requires that parties have a proper opportunity to plead their case,
but limits may be placed on repleading when delay
and cost are taken into
(d) a just resolution does not mean that a party will always be permitted to
raise any arguable case at any point in the proceedings,
on payment of costs,
even indemnity costs;
(e) the inevitable strains of litigation must be taken into account in weighing
the adverse consequences of delay - this applies
to natural persons and other
(f) the nature and importance of the amendment to the party amending must be
taken into account;
(g) attention must be given to the extent of the delay, and the costs associated
with it, the prejudice which might reasonably be
assumed to follow from it and
any prejudice that is shown;
(h) the point in the litigation relative to the trial may be an important
consideration;
(i) where a discretion is sought to be exercised in favour of a party, an
explanation will be called for;
(j) the point can be reached where a party has had a sufficient opportunity to
put its case.
going to the adequacy of a proposed pleading were usefully summarised in
Frank Jasper Pty Ltd v Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (a firm)
court will not grant leave to amend a pleading into a form which is liable to be
struck out - that is, where it is vague, ambiguous
or pleaded at too great a
level of generality so as to leave the other party in doubt as to how to respond
to the pleading;
(b) however, the approach to be taken to objections to proposed pleadings
requires a degree of flexibility and must be directed to
the attainment of the
objectives set out in RSC O 1 r 4B; and
(c) while it is necessary that a pleading set out with reasonable clarity and
detail the case that the other party must meet, the
focus must be on
whether the pleading is sufficient for the fair and proper disposition of the
case, not whether it complies meticulously
with the rules of pleading.
summaries are not exhaustive. The ultimate question must always be what is in
the interests of justice in the circumstances
Should leave to amend be given and, if so, on what terms?
What is the extent of the delay?
commence by noting that, although the action was listed for trial on 7 July
2025, the need for the Partnership to have leave to
amend its defence arose
before that date.
is because of the operation of DCR r 48A(2)(a) and that, in this
case, prior to the listing conference, pleadings certificates
were filed. More
specifically:
(a) although the certificate of the plaintiff's
counsel was filed on 30 June 2025, that certificate is expressly confined
to the pleadings
as between the plaintiff and the defendant;
(b) on 4 July 2025, counsel for PGQW filed a certificate in terms of
DCR r 43(3A)(a); and
(c) accordingly, pursuant to DCR r 48A(3), I find that leave to
amend any pleadings in the TPP was required after 4 July 2025.
the extent that there has been any 'delay' on the part of the Partnership, it is
very minor because:
(a) although the action has been on foot since
2021, the TPP have only been on foot since 28 April 2025;
(b) the only party opposing the application is PGQW, and the plaintiff has
made no submissions in relation to delay, and so the issue
of delay is properly
assessed in the context of the TPP;
(c) PGQW filed and served a statement of claim in the TPP on 15 May 2025
and the Partnership, having sought and been refused an extension
of time to file
its defence on 9 June 2025;
(d) the need for leave to amend arose on 4 July 2025 upon the filing by
PGQW of a pleadings certificate; and
(e) the application was brought on 19 August 2025 (being around two
months from the date of the defence and a little over a month
from the date
that leave became necessary).
uncontested affidavit evidence that:
(a) on 27 May 2025 the
Partnership's lawyers wrote to PGQW's lawyers seeking a modest extension of time
(from 29 May to 20 June 2025)
within which to file a defence, citing
various steps that it sought to take; and
(b) on 29 May 2025, PGQW's lawyers responded in terms that that request
was declined on the basis that:
(i) the Partnership had 'been on notice' for some time and had consented to
third party directions (which included the time for filing
a defence); and
(ii) the plaintiff's solicitors had resisted any delay;
(c) although the action against the Partnership had been commenced in 2021,
there were no pleadings or discovery in those proceedings
and the Partnership
was not copied into the pleadings or discovered documents in the present
proceedings until it was
(d) PGQW's list of discoverable documents was served on 7 July 2025 and
inspected on 28 July
(e) the Partnership's lawyers took further instructions from
Mr Shackleton, related to the proposed amendments, on 10 July
those circumstances, I do not consider that there has been any meaningful delay
in bringing the application, or an absence of
explanation for doing so.
Are the procedural objections made out?
contends that the application is defective because the Partnership has not
complied with the relevant rules of court in that:
(a) contrary to
DCR r 22(1) - r 22(2), the Partnership did not confer and has not
filed a certificate of conferral in relation to
application;
(b) the affidavit evidence does not state the grounds for the application 'as
required by
RSC O 59 r 3(3)'
- although I note that, in the present context, that requirement is contained in
DCR r 48A(3)(b).
Is the affidavit evidence non-compliant?
support of the application, three affidavits of the legal representatives of the
Partnership have been
thrust of the affidavit evidence is that:
(a) the Partnership was
joined relatively recently to the action and, prior to that time, had not been
served with the plaintiff's
statement of claim and PGQW's amended defence in the
(b) at the time of filing its defence, the Partnership:
(i) had requested copies of insurance policies held by PGQW at the time of
the incident, which requests had been refused;
(ii) had requested an extension of time to file its defence, which request
was refused by PGQW;
(iii) filed a defence based on the evidence available to it at that time;
(iv) had not inspected the documents listed in PGQW's list of documents
(which was served on 9 July 2025);
(c) the Partnership has now inspected the
documents listed in PGQW's list of documents, a limited number of which were
directly relevant
to the TPP; and
(d) the Partnership has made a claim of indemnity under policies of insurance
held by PGQW at the time of the incident.
affidavit evidence extends, as required, to matters that occurred on and after
4 July 2025.
although not explicitly identified in the affidavits, the grounds for the
application appear with reasonable clarity when
the affidavit evidence is read
with the Minute. That is, that the Partnership:
(a) seeks to raise
a defence in terms of pars 11 and 12 of the Minute, but did not have the
relevant policies of insurance at the
date of filing its defence; and
(b) seeks to raise a defence as to the nature of Mr Shackleton's role
with PGQW, and the implications of the asserted nature of that
role on the
respective liability of the parties in the TPP, but did not (and does not) have
all the documents relevant to that issue
at the time of filing the defence.
the reasons above, I am not satisfied that the affidavit evidence is so
deficient as to warrant dismissing the application on
that ground.
Has there been a failure to confer?
is uncontentious that the Partnership did not file a certificate of conferral in
relation to the application, and has not therefore
complied with
DCR r 22(1).
have regard to the following considerations in dealing with the consequences
that should flow:
(a) PGQW was on notice from 27 May
Partnership considered it needed more time to file a defence because it sought
(i) seek further and better particulars of the statement of claim in the
(ii) make further enquiries about the policies of insurance held by PGQW;
(iii) issue fourth party notices (against the relevant insurers);
(b) at the listing conference on 7 July 2025, and in a subsequent
pleadings certificate filed on 16 July 2025, the Partnership again
the issue of amending its defence. Accordingly, PGQW could not be taken by
surprise by the application, although it was also
not given the opportunity to
consider the particular amendments before the application was brought; and
(c) given PGQW's attitude to extending time to file a defence
(in circumstances where the basis for the request was articulated and
the Partnership had only recently been joined), I do not consider that
compliance would have averted the need to make the
application.
balance, although the requirement for conferral is important and should not
generally be (and is not) waived, I consider that
the objectives set out in
RSC O 1 r 4B do not favour dismissing the application on
this ground alone.
Are the disputed amendments defective or embarrassing?
has raised objections only to the amendments contained in pars 8.7 and 10
of the Minute (
Paragraph 8.7
proposed amendment is in terms that:
The Defendant held Bradley Shackleton out as the Defendant's Manager when
at all material times the Defendant knew or ought to have
Bradley Shackleton had no training, qualifications or experience in that
contends that par 8.7 is embarrassing because it
(a) inconsistent with the Partnership's denial that
Mr Shackleton was a manager; and
(b) unsupported by material facts.
dealing with that objection, I observe that the proper basis for assessment is
not whether the proposed amendment gives rise to
a good defence; but rather,
whether that it gives rise to a reasonably arguable
not otherwise improper. I also direct myself to the principles summarised at
reason that a proposed amendment might not be reasonably arguable is that it is
inconsistent with the party's pleaded
do not consider that the proposed amendment in par 8.7 of the Minute is
inherently inconsistent with the Partnership's pleaded
Partnership denies par 5 of the statement of claim in the TPP, which is in
the following terms:
At all material times, there was a contract for services between the Defendant
and the Third Party, the terms of which included that
Mr Shackleton would
provide his services as Manager of the Defendant in consideration for which the
Defendant would pay the Third
Party the fixed sum of $6,600 per fortnight
including GST.
effect of a denial of that plea is not a denial that Mr Shackleton was a
manager, but rather a denial of the asserted basis upon
which he performed any
such role. Indeed, even if the Partnership did deny that Mr Shackleton was
in fact a manager, such a plea
is not inherently inconsistent with the
contention that PGQW held him out as such.
Accordingly,
I do not consider that the amendment proposed in par 8.7 of the Minute is
embarrassing by reason of being inconsistent
with par 3 of the defence.
second limb of PGQW's objection is that the proposed plea is unsupported by
material facts, and is a 'bald
conclusion'.
There is some merit to this complaint although, in my view, the real deficiency
is that the proposed plea is not particularised.
pleading that is conclusory is not always improper because a conclusion may
be itself regarded as a material fact. Whether the
deficiency is fatal is a
question of degree and
this case, while particulars of PGQW's asserted knowledge are provided, there
are no particulars of the assertion that PGQW 'held
Bradley Shackleton
out' as its manager.
my view, the Partnership's case in this regard is sufficiently pleaded to enable
PGQW to answer it, subject to the provision of
particulars of the 'holding out'
in par 8.7.
Accordingly,
I would allow the amendment proposed in par 8.7 of the Minute, but in terms
that require that particulars of the 'holding
out' to be provided.
Paragraph 10
proposed amendment is in terms that:
10. The Third Party further states that: -
10.1. At all material
times Bradley Shackleton was acting on instructions from in the
10.2. At all material times, at law, it was an implied term of the employment
contract between the Defendant and Bradley Shackleton
that the Defendant
would indemnify Bradley Shackleton for any negligent acts which arose from
carrying out those instructions;
10.3. Pursuant to
Law Reform (Contributory
Negligence and Tortfeasors' Contribution) Act 1947
, the Defendant is
precluded from recovering contribution from Bradley Shackleton or
Larelle Shackleton in respect to any liability
to the Plaintiff; and
10.4. Further and in the alternative, by reason of the matters pleaded in
paragraphs 4 and 8 above, the court should exempt Bradley
Shackleton and
Larelle Shackleton from liability to make any contribution, pursuant to
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Tortfeasors'
Contribution) Act 1947
object that par 10 is embarrassing because it is:
(a) vague and
overly general; and
(b) does not disclose an arguable defence.
oral submissions, these objections were directed more specifically to subpars
10.1 and 10.2.
objection that par 10.1 is 'also a bald statement of
conclusion'
not, in my view, made out. Taking account of the principles outlined in [22]
hereof, and reading the proposed amended defence
as a whole, the case in this
regard is discernible. The Partnership pleads a number of facts in
pars 4 and 8 of the defence which
go to the issue of whether
Mr Shackleton could be said to have been acting on the instructions of
key plank of PGQW's opposition to the application is that the implied term
asserted in par 10.2 is not arguable at law, by reason
of being 'contrary
to long-established
authority'.
its submissions, the Partnership has pointed to various features that it says
distinguish this case from the authorities relied
is enough in those arguments for me to be satisfied that there is a triable
issue in relation to the proposed defence.
Is it in the interests of justice to grant leave to amend?
each of the specific objections to the proposed amendments raised by PGQW are
addressed above, it is important to return
to the fundamental consideration:
whether it is in the interests of justice to grant leave to amend. That
question properly includes
consideration of the overarching circumstances of the
case and the context in which the application is brought.
nature and importance of the proposed amendment to the applicant is
this case, proposed amendments go to the nature of the relationship between
Mr Shackleton (and through him, the Partnership) and
PGQW, and the
implications of that relationship for:
(a) the respective
responsibilities of PGQW and the Partnership for the safety of Mr Preitz;
(b) PGQW's claim for indemnity or contribution in relation to its liability
to Mr Preitz arising from its admitted breach of the duty
it owed to him.
has previously been
application of the key provisions of the Contribution Act are 'far from easy to
understand'. The proposed pleadings go squarely
to factors that the Partnership
says should carry weight in this
In my view,
and without forming any view of the strength of the case, the amendments give
rise to an arguable case.
proposed amendments raise matters that have significance for the scope of the
evidence and arguments that may be put at trial.
If leave is refused, the
Partnership will lose the opportunity of having those parts of its defence,
which I have found to be arguable,
tried. The considerations supporting
such an outcome would need to be weighty.
the avoidance of delay is an important factor, the nature and cause of any such
delay and the surrounding circumstances
ought to be considered.
this case, it is of note that PGQW:
(a) has been a party to the
action since 2021;
(b) has, throughout the proceedings, known of the identity and involvement of
Mr Shackleton;
(c) filed its defence on 19 October 2021;
(d) some five months later, on 22 March 2022, filed an amended defence;
(e) some three years after the action commenced, sought leave, and less
than three months before the action was listed for trial,
obtained leave, to
join the Partnership as a third party on the basis that it was in the interests
of justice that the issues between
them be tried in the
way of contrast, the Partnership had:
(a) at the time it brought the
application, only been involved in the action for around three months;
(b) having been joined to the proceedings, but before having been served with
the statement of claim in the TPP, consented to the
third party directions;
(c) following receipt of the statement of claim in the TPP, requested and was
refused a three-week extension of time within which
to file its defence.
the circumstances, the grounds upon which PGQW refused the Partnership's request
for an extension of time within which to file
a defence are difficult to
understand because:
(a) the uncontested affidavit evidence is that
the Partnership had not received the pleadings in the action before it was
(b) although the Partnership knew of the action and the circumstances giving
rise to it, that could not put it in a position to know
the pleaded cases of the
plaintiff and defendant in the action, let alone the case that would be put
against it by PGQW;
(c) when the Partnership consented to the third party directions, it had
not yet been served with the statement of claim in the TPP;
(d) although the interests of the plaintiff in progressing the action are
clearly relevant, it is difficult to see how the need to
file an incomplete
defence on 9 June 2025, and then make the present application to amend it,
has assisted.
identification by the Partnership of the need to better consider and respond to
the case against it, made at an early stage in
the TPP, is a significant
factor. This is not a case where a party has had ample opportunity to file, and
has filed, detailed pleadings
and has then delayed taking steps to inform its
position and meet the case against it.
objectives set out in RSC O 1 r 4B are not directed to
shutting a party out from the opportunity to properly consider and respond
the case against it. Rather, they are directed to achieving a sensible
balance between the avoidance of delay and the efficiencies
to be gained by
having all issues properly ventilated before the court, including by granting
modest extensions of time or leave
to take steps, where the circumstances
warrant it. That balance falls in favour of the application.
my view, it is in the interests of justice to allow the application.
conclusions in relation to the disputed amendments; and
(b) the absence of particular objection having been raised as to the balance
of the proposed amendments, and my conclusions in relation
to the procedural
objections,
I am satisfied that leave should be granted to amend the defence in terms of
the Minute, subject to the requirement to provide
particulars.
will hear the parties as to the precise terms of the orders that should be made,
including as to costs.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
Associate to Registrar
6 OCTOBER 2025
In these reasons,
PGQW refers to the defendant and its predecessor, Boxline Industries Pty
Reliance Capital Pty Ltd v Caratti [No 6]
[2024] WASC 21
Reliance Capital
Bankwest - A Division of Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2020] WASCA 35
District Court
No. CIV 3573 of 2021.
Affidavit of
Alison Frances Hagan, made on 9 September 2025 (
Second Hagan
), par 17; third party's outline of submissions filed
11 September 2025 (
TP Submissions
), pars 7 - 8.
Defendant's
amended defence filed 18 March 2022, pars 2.9 - 2.11.
Service of the
third party notice was effected on 28 April 2025: Affidavit of Alison
Frances Hagan made on 16 July 2025 (
First Hagan Affidavit
Pursuant to
s 22 of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act 1984
(WA) (ceased)
Pursuant to the
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Tortfeasors' Contribution) Act
Contribution Act
Subparagraphs
4.5.8 and 4.5.9 of the Minute: Defendant's outline of submissions filed
11 September 2025 (
Defendant's Submissions
certificate that the legal practitioner who will appear at trial for the party
has reviewed the pleadings and is satisfied
that they adequately define all the
issues of fact or law that the party contends will need to be determined at
subject to RSC O 18 r 6, r 7 and r 8 and
O 20 r 19(2) - r 19 (5).
O 1 r 4A - r 4B.
v Cockles Pty Ltd
[2025] WASCA 143
[14] - [16].
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Hightime Investments Pty Ltd v Lungan [No 2]
[2010] WASC 296
Jasper Pty Ltd v Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (a firm)
[2006] WASC 24
Frank Jasper
) [11] - [13], with authorities cited
Water Corporation v Cardno BSD Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 212
First Hagan
Affidavit, pars 13 - 14.
Second Hagan
Affidavit, pars 13, 17, 25 - 26 and 35.
Second Hagan
Affidavit, pars 34 and 39.
Second Hagan
Affidavit, pars 36 - 38.
Defendant's
submissions, par 7(a) - 7(b).
Defendant's
submissions, par 7(c).
In support of
the application, the
Partnership has filed the First
Hagan Affidavit, the Second Hagan Affidavit and the affidavit of Natasha Simone
Barton made on 19
August 2025 (
Barton Affidavit
First Hagan
Affidavit, pars 18 - 24; Second Hagan Affidavit pars 34 -
Hagan affidavit, pars 13 -
Argosy Strata Plan SP 21513 v CHU Underwriting Agencies Pty Ltd
[2015] WADC 37.
Defendant's
submissions, pars 9 - 11; ts 12 - ts 15.
Iron Ore Pty Ltd v GHD Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2022] WASC 442
Reliance Capital
Frank Jasper
[16] - [17];
Kernel Holdings Pty Ltd v Rothmans
of Pall Mall (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 557
(1991) 217 ALR 171
Defendant's Submissions par 10, citing
Lister v Romford Ice &
Cold Storage Co Ltd
[1956] UKHL 6
[1957] AC 555
Voli v Inglewood Shire Council
[1963] HCA 15
(1963) 110 CLR 74
Munting v Pollard
[2024] TASSC
ts 8 - ts 9.
Third party
submissions, pars 20 - 26.
application was supported by the affidavit of Zan Bosman, filed on
28 November 2024, setting out the inquiries and investigations
application.
As set out in [49] - [51] hereof.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (383 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter