URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/461.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
APACHE FINANCE PTY LTD -v- QUADRANT ENERGY PTY LTD [No 3] [2025] WASC 461 (5 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
FINANCE PTY LTD -v- QUADRANT ENERGY PTY LTD [No 3]
[2025] WASC 461
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 2602 of 2017
FINANCE PTY LTD
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE II SARL
RAVENSWORTH CORPORATION LDC
OVERSEAS LLC
ACQUISITION CORPORATION LDC
ENERGY PTY LTD
ENERGY AUSTRALIA LTD
ENERGY PTY LTD
Plaintiff by Counterclaim
ENERGY AUSTRALIA LTD
Plaintiff by Counterclaim
FINANCE PTY LTD
Defendant by Counterclaim
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE II SARL
Defendant by Counterclaim
RAVENSWORTH CORPORATION LDC
Defendant by Counterclaim
Defendant by Counterclaim
OVERSEAS LLC
Defendant by Counterclaim
ACQUISITION CORPORATION LDC
Defendant by Counterclaim
and procedure - Pleadings - Whether leave required to withdraw an admission -
Whether withdrawal of an admission should be
struck out - Turns on own
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) O 4 r 1A,
r 1B, O 21 r
Application
to strike out pleadings
Representation:
First Plaintiff
Mr B Luscombe
Mr B Luscombe
Third Plaintiff
Mr B Luscombe
Mr B Luscombe
Fifth Plaintiff
Mr B Luscombe
Sixth Plaintiff
Mr B Luscombe
First Defendant
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Solicitors:
First Plaintiff
Third Plaintiff
Fifth Plaintiff
Sixth Plaintiff
First Defendant
Herbert Smith Freehills
Herbert Smith Freehills
Counterclaim
First Plaintiff by
Counterclaim
Mr B Luscombe
Second Plaintiff by
Counterclaim
Mr B Luscombe
First Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Second Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Third Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Fourth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Fifth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Sixth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Ms J K Taylor SC and Mr N L
Solicitors:
First Plaintiff by
Counterclaim
Second Plaintiff by
Counterclaim
First Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
Second Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
Third Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
Fourth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
Fifth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
Sixth Defendant by
Counterclaim
Herbert Smith Freehills
referred to in decision(s):
Introduction
plaintiffs in this action, (whom I will refer to as the
Apache Parties
), have applied for an
order that paragraphs 19 and 21
Contested Paragraphs
Defendants’ (whom I will refer to as the
Santos Parties
) Consolidated and
Substituted Defence and Counterclaim
Consolidated Defence
4 June 2025 be struck out (
Application
). The Pleadings Application was heard on 27 October
Apache Parties had applied for a stay of the action, which was also dealt with
at the hearing on 27 October 2025. However, without
opposition from either
counsel, I adjourned the stay application to no earlier than 30 June 2026 with
costs reserved. The intent
is that at any time after 30 June 2026, counsel for
the Apache Parties can inform the court that the Apache Parties wish to press
their stay application. I will then list the action for a directions hearing at
which the hearing of the stay application can be
programmed. In the meantime,
the intent is that the parties will progress with their pre-trial
preparation.
relation the Pleadings Application, counsel for the Apache Parties read and
relied on two affidavits in support:
(a) Ernest van Buuren, a partner with the lawyers for the Apache Parties,
affirmed 30 September 2025 (
(b) Amy Siegfried, the Managing Director of Tax at Apache Corporation, affirmed
30 September 2025 (
for the Santos Parties read and relied on an affidavit by Richard Heggart, a
partner of the lawyers for the Santos Parties,
affirmed 17 October 2025
Heggart Affidavit
Apache Parties filed written submissions on 3 October 2025
Apache Submissions
). The Santos
Parties filed written submissions on 17 October 2025
Santos Submissions
the reasons which follow, I decline to strike out the Contested
Paragraphs.
proceedings concern a sale and purchase agreement dated 9 April 2015
By the SPA, the first defendant in the Proceedings, then known as Viraciti
Energy Pty Ltd, acquired (amongst other assets) all the
shares in Apache Energy
Limited who is the second defendant in the Proceedings. The first defendant and
the second defendant subsequently
came under the indirect ownership of Santos
Limited. Viraciti Energy Pty Ltd was renamed Santos WA Asset Holdings Pty Ltd
short time in between being named Quadrant Energy Pty Ltd
Quadrant Energy
)). The second
defendant was renamed Santos WA Energy Limited (with a short time in between
being named Quadrant Energy Australia
to the SPA, the Apache Parties sold their Australian oil and gas extraction
business, excluding certain assets which were
sold separately to different
purchasers. By these sales, the Apache Parties exited their involvement in the
oil and gas industry
in Australia. The base purchase price was just in
excess of US$2 billion which, after adjustments, became in the order of
clause of the SPA in issue for present purposes is SPA s 9.16(a). It
provides for the purchaser (now effectively the Santos
Parties) to pay to the
vendor (effectively the Apache Parties) certain moneys received from the
Australian Taxation Office (
This payment was over and above the base price.
Specifically:
9.16 Franking Account Related Adjustments.
For the avoidance of doubt and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
(a) Any refund of income Tax received by the head company of the AEL
Consolidated Group or the Purchaser's Consolidated Group in
respect of the
income year ended 31 December 20 I 4 must be applied to the fullest extent
against any franking deficit tax liability
arising after the Economic Transfer
Date as a result of the payment (if any) of fully franked dividends by the AEL
Consolidated Group
between 30 September 2014 and the Closing Time. To the extent
there is any surplus of such refund remaining after fully satisfying
franking deficit tax liability, Purchaser will promptly pay an amount equal to
that surplus to the Vendors (in proportion
to their respective entitlement to
the Purchase Price);
is also necessary to refer to the definition of 'Taxes' in SPA cl 1.1,
which is in the following
' means taxes of any kind;
royalties; levies or other like assessments; and customs, duties (other than
Duty), imposts, charges or
fees, deductions, withholdings, compulsory loan, in
each case, assessed, levied, imposed by or payable to or collected by any
Governmental
Authority, including:
(a) income, goods and services, gross receipts, ad valorem, value added, excise,
real or personal property, asset, GST, sales, use,
license, payroll,
transaction, capital, net worth, franchise, withholding, employment, social
security, workers' compensation, utility,
severance, production, unemployment
compensation, occupation, premium, windfall profits, PRRT, tax related to the
franking of dividends,
and transfer and gains taxes;
(b) fees or penalties payable to a Governmental Authority in respect of
insurance premiums, other governmental taxes or required
instalments thereof;
(c) any interest, penalties, or additions to tax attributable to any such
Apache Parties claim that the Santos Parties received over $80 million from
the ATO which they are liable to pay to the Apache
Parties pursuant to SPA
s 9.16(a). This claim is part of a wider series of claims and
counterclaims which it is not necessary for
me to summarise for the purposes of
determining the Pleadings Application.
in parallel to these proceedings are a series of taxation objections lodged by
the second defendant (Santos WA Energy Limited).
These are described in some
detail in the Siegfreid Affidavit and the Heggart Affidavit. The objections
relate to the 2014 and
2015 taxation years, and arise after the ATO took issue
with the tax returns filed by the second defendant for those years. For
purposes, it is sufficient to note Ms Siegfreid believes that the Santos
Parties' claim for damages for alleged breach of
the SPA is not able to be
quantified until these objections have been dealt
This is because the SPA contains a tax indemnity granted against the Apache
Parties, in favour of the Santos Parties, in relation
to tax or duty liabilities
not provided for in the accounts upon which the sale price was based.
objections are in effect being pursued by the Santos Parties at the direction of
This followed a determination of a trial of a separate issue in the proceedings
by Justice Chaney in
The effect of this decision was that the SPA required the defendants (then named
Quadrant Energy and QEAL) to take 'disputing action'
at the direction of the
Apache Parties in relation to the positions taken by the ATO. Mr Heggart
informs the court that the resolution
of the taxation issues, including any
appeals, may take up to a further three
was a second significant interlocutory decision in 2019. This was a decision by
Justice Smith to decline an application by
the Apache Parties for a second
separate trial of
However, on 9 August 2019, her Honour made orders, by consent, staying the
proceedings until 30 September 2020 or further order.
The stay was extended by
further consent orders until 25 October 2024. The purpose of the stay was to
give the parties an opportunity
to settle the disputes by
negotiation.
It was extended in the hope that the ATO would have completed its
On 30 October 2024 orders were made, by consent, setting out a timetable for the
filing of amended pleadings.
proceedings now comprise three separate actions:
(a) CIV 2602 of 2017, commenced in September 2017 by the Apache Parties;
(b) CIV 2796 of 2018, commenced in October 2018 by the Santos Parties, and
consolidated with CIV 2602 of 2017 pursuant to Orders
of Justice Smith on 6
December 2018; and
(c) CIV 1225 of 2025, commenced in March 2025 by the Santos Parties,
consolidated with CIV 2602 of 2017
Consolidated Action
) pursuant to
orders which I made on 8 May 2025 (
May 2025 Orders also resolved certain third party proceedings and another
counterclaim, and adjusted the parties to the Consolidated
Action. The May 2025
Orders also provided for the parties to file substituted and consolidated
pleadings in the Consolidated Action.
to the May 2025 Orders, on 16 May 2025 the Apache Parties filed a Substituted
Statement of Claim filed 16 May 2025
Consolidated Claim
). The Santos
Parties also filed an amended writ of summons dated 15 July 2025, with the
amendment taking effect from 4 March
Consolidated Defence containing the Contested Paragraphs was filed on 4 June
mentioned, the Contested Paragraphs are paragraphs 19 and 21 of the Consolidated
Defence. The pleadings to which these paragraphs
respond are paragraphs 18 to
26 of the Consolidated Claim:
17 August 2016, the second defendant received a credit to its running balance
account with the Australian Taxation Office (RBA)
in respect of the 2014 Tax
Year in the amount of A$80,463,566.00 (Tax Refund).
credit of the Tax Refund to the second defendant's RBA constituted a 'refund of
income Tax', within the meaning of section 9.16(a)
of the SPA, in the amount of
A$80,463,566.00 that the second defendant 'received' within the meaning of
section 9.16(a) of the SPA.
the following dates, the second defendant received a further two credits to its
RBA in the following amounts in respect of the
2014 Tax Year:
(a) on 21 October 2016, A$2,432,217.55;
(b) on 25 October 2016, A$3,869.29, (together the
credit of the Interest to the second defendant's RBA constituted a 'refund of
income Tax', within the meaning of section 9.16(a)
of the SPA, in the total
amount of A$2,436,086.84 that the second defendant 'received' within the meaning
of section 9.16(a) of the
is not, and has not been, any Relevant Franking Deficit
Breach of contract
or alternatively, pursuant to Section 9.16(a) of the SPA (referred to in
paragraph 10(h) above), the defendants, alternatively
one or other of them, was
required to pay to the plaintiffs, in proportion to their respective entitlement
to the Purchase Price
under the SPA:
(a) promptly upon receipt from the Australian Taxation Office of the Tax Refund,
an amount equal to the surplus of the Tax Refund
after first applying the Tax
Refund to the satisfaction of any Relevant Franking Deficit Liability; and
(b) promptly upon receipt from the Australian Taxation Office, an amount equal
to the surplus of the Interest after first applying
the Interest amount to the
satisfaction of any Relevant Franking Deficit Liability remaining at the time
the Interest was so received.
or alternatively, in the premises of paragraph 22 above and in breach of Section
9.16(a) of the SPA, the defendants, alternatively
one or the other of them, have
failed to pay promptly to the plaintiffs, in proportion to the plaintiffs'
respective entitlement
under the SPA to the Purchase Price or at all, an amount
equal to the Tax Refund and the Interest.
19 and 21 of the Consolidated Defence, then provide, again in
to paragraph 18 of the SoC, the defendants:
(a) admit the paragraph; and
(b) refer to the matters pleaded in paragraphs 62 to 73
to paragraph 19 of the SoC, the defendants:
(a) deny the allegations in the paragraph;
(b) say that:
(i) for the purposes of the SPA (including Section 9.16(a)), 'Taxes' means taxes
of any kind; royalties; levies or other like assessments;
and customs, duties
(other than 'Duty'), imposts, charges or fees, deductions, withholdings,
compulsory loan, in each case, assessed,
levied, imposed by or payable to or
collected by any 'Governmental Authority' (Section 1.1 [definition of 'Taxes']);
(ii) 'pay-as-you-go' (PAYG) instalments paid to the ATO in respect of estimated
and anticipated income were not 'Taxes' as defined
in the SPA;
(c) say that credits applied by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to the
second defendant's running balance account with the ATO
(RBA) as a result of a
difference between:
(i) the amount of the PAYG instalment payments made by the second defendant for
an income year; and
(ii) the second defendant's liability for income tax for that income year, were
not a 'refund of income Tax' received by the second
defendant within the meaning
of Section 9.16(a) of the
defendants admit paragraph 20 of the SoC.
to paragraph 21 of the SoC, the defendants repeat paragraph 19 above and deny
the allegations in the paragraph.
defendants admit paragraph 22 of the
D. ALLEGED BREACH OF CONTRACT
defendants do not admit the allegations in paragraph 24 of the
defendants deny the allegations in paragraph 26 of the SoC.
version of the statement of claim which immediately preceded the Consolidated
Claim was the Further Amended Statement of Claim
filed 30 October 2018
). Paragraphs 20, 20A, 21, 21AA
are in substantively the same terms as paragraphs 18, 19, 20 and 21 of the
Consolidated Claim.
version of the defence which preceded the Consolidated Defence was the Fourth
Further Amended Defence and Counterclaim filed
4 March 2025
Fourth Defence
). Paragraph 20A of the
FASOC (corresponding to paragraph 19 of the Consolidated Claim) was
admitted in paragraph 20A of the Fourth
Defence. Paragraph 21AA of
the FASOC (corresponding to paragraph 21 of the Consolidated Claim) was
admitted in paragraph 21AA of
the Fourth Defence. It is the withdrawal of
these admissions which the Apache Parties now take issue
Construction issues
issue raised by the Santos Parties in the Contested Paragraphs is one of the
proper construction of SPA s 9.16(a).
position of the Apache Parties is that the interpretation of SPA s 9.16(a)
which is advanced in Consolidated Claim paragraph
19 is clear on the face
of the words in s 9.16(a): the credit of the tax refund to the second
defendant's RBA constituted a 'refund
of income Tax' within the meaning of
s 9.16(a) which the second defendant 'received' within the meaning of
s 9.16(a). Likewise,
in paragraph 21: the credit of interest to the
second defendant's RBA constituted a 'refund of income Tax' within the meaning
s 9.16(a) which the second defendant 'received' within the meaning of
construction advanced by the Santos Parties is that, on the proper construction
of the SPA, the credits applied to the second
defendants running balance account
were not a 'refund of income Tax' that was 'received' by the second defendant
for the purposes
of SPA s 9.16(a).
for the Santos Parties informs me that an argument of this kind was considered
and accepted by Justice Ball in
The PMI Group, Inc v QBE
Holdings (AAP) Pty
It is instructive to consider this case in some detail.
were that by
a Share Sale Agreement dated 14 August 2008
) between the second plaintiff, PMI
Mortgage Insurance Co (
defendant, QBE Holdings (AAP) Pty Limited
), acquired from PMI all of the
shares in a company then known as PMI Mortgage Insurance Australia (Holdings)
Pty Limited (
PMI Holdings
under US$1 billion. PMI Holdings through a subsidiary known as PMI
Mortgage Insurance Limited (
) and a related company known as Permanent LMI Pty Limited,
carried on in Australia and New Zealand as a mortgage insurance business.
and the companies through which it carried on business are together referred to
in the SSA as 'the
Consolidated
. PMI Mortgage had both Australian and New Zealand operations.
The Australian operations comprised the bulk of the operations of
Consolidated Companies. The trial judge, Justice Ball, referred to the
relevant plaintiff companies as
to SSA cl 16.19, QBE was required to pay an amount 'in addition to' the
purchase price where it received a credit, rebate
or refund in respect of 'Tax'
(as defined in the SSA) that had either been paid relevantly to the ATO prior to
30 June 2008 or had
been provided for as at that date in the 'Unaudited
Financial Statements' for the six month period ending 30 June 2008 which were
annexed to the SSA.
Holdings received a refund from the ATO in the amount of just over
A$22 million, which was more or less the total of two PAYG
instalments paid
on 21 April 2008 and 21 July 2008. The issue in dispute was whether
QBE had to pay PMI an amount equal to the refund
pursuant to SSA cl 16.19.
Justice Ball held that QBE was not liable to pay PMI any amount under this
clause and dismissed the action
It is worthwhile noting the finding of his Honour that between 30 June 2008 and
the date of completion PMI Australia suffered substantial
losses. Those
losses were not anticipated at the time of sale and arose largely from events
connected to the global financial
is instructive for present purposes to quote both SSA s 16.19 and the
definition of
The Purchaser must pay to the Vendor an amount equal to any credit, refund,
rebate, reimbursement or other form of relief allowed
by or received from a
Taxation Authority in respect of:
(a) any Tax or Duty paid by the Company or the Company Subsidiary before the
Effective Date or provided for in the Unaudited Financial
Statements except to
the extent that the credit, refund, rebate, reimbursement or other form of
relief is already provided for (to
the extent such provision exists); or
(b) any Tax or Duty paid by the Company or the Company Subsidiary after
Completion to the extent the Purchaser has received an amount
under a Tax
Warranty for such Tax or Duty, in which case, account must be taken of the
amount by which the Purchaser was subject
to Tax or Duty in respect of the
amount received under a Tax Warranty.
Any amount paid by the Purchaser to the Vendor under this clause 16.19 will be
in addition to and an increase in the Purchase Price.
(a) means a tax, levy, impost, fee, deduction, compulsory loan, charge,
withholding or duty of any nature, including, without limitation,
Tax, value added, consumption or goods and services tax (including GST), gross
receipts, franchise, withholding, unemployment
insurance, social security,
sales, use, excise, real and personal property, municipal, payroll or workers'
compensation tax, or any
liability for any of the foregoing (including all
fines, additional tax, interest or penalties) which is assessed, levied, imposed
or collected by a Governmental Entity under the Tax Act or any other statute,
ordinance or law, in Australia or elsewhere;
(b) includes any Liability for the payment of any amounts of the kind described
in paragraph (a) as a result of being a transferee
or successor or a party to
any agreement or any express or implied obligation to indemnify another person;
(c) excludes
position advanced by PMI Australia reflects that of the Apache Parties in the
present case. The refund received by PMI Australia
in January 2009 was
said to be a refund from a Taxation Authority 'in respect of' the PAYG
instalment amounts paid in April and July
2008. The April instalment was paid
before 30 June 2008. There was a provision in the accounts for the July
instalment. Consequently,
under SSA cl 16.19, QBE was required to pay PMI
an amount equal to the amount of the refund plus interest (under another clause
position was first that there are available interpretations of the clause or
characterisation of the events that have happened
which, if accepted, lead to
the conclusion that SSA cl 16.19 does not apply. Second, QBE contended
that one or more of those interpretations
or characterisations should be
preferred to the one advanced by PMI because the result for which PMI contends
lacks commercial logic
and is so at odds with the commercial purpose and object
of the SSA that it could not have been intended by the
J considered the second argument first. His Honour made the following
observation about the effect of the construction contended
Leaving cl 16.19 to one side, two points may be made about that outcome. First,
from the point of view of PMI, it obtained the benefit
of the income earned
during the period 1 January 2008 to 30 June 2008 but bore the burden of the tax
referable to that income. Second,
from the point of QBE, it (subject to a minor
adjustment under the SSA arising from a diminution in the value of PMI
Australia's
investment portfolio) bore the full amount of the loss suffered
during the period 1 July 2008 to 22 October 2008 but obtained the
full amount of
the tax benefit associated with that loss, partly as a result of having carried
forward tax losses and partly as a
result of a return of tax that had been paid
provisionally by PMI Australia. QBE submits that those results are entirely
with the allocation of risk under the SSA. However, if it is required
to pay PMI an amount equal to the tax refund received by PMI
Australia, PMI will
receive both the benefit of the profits earned between 1 January 2008 and 30
June 2008 and the tax referable
to those profits. On the other hand, QBE will
have to bear the loss incurred between 1 July 2008 and 22 October 2008 but will
receive any tax benefit in respect of that part of those losses which are
set off against income earned prior to 30 June 2008. Moreover,
because PMI Australia suffered a loss which must be borne by QBE that PMI is
entitled in effect to a refund of tax. QBE
submits that that is not what the
parties could have intended and that it produces a result which is perverse in
the context of the
bargain they struck.
Honour did not accept the arguments of PMI Australia to the contrary, observing,
among other
It makes no commercial sense for PMI to receive more because and only because
the value of what it sold declines between the date
of sale and the date of
settlement, which is the effect of cl 16.19 on the interpretation for which it
[H]ere the parties have specifically chosen to base the purchase price on the
value of the net tangible assets of the company being
sold and to include a
mechanism for adjusting that price in the event that a tax refund is received.
On the interpretation contended
for by PMI, that mechanism produces a windfall
because PMI receives both the benefit of the profits earned and the tax payable
those profits. Moreover, it only receives that windfall because the value of
what it sold went down. In my opinion, cl 16.19 should
only be given that
interpretation if the words used admit no other.
of the interpretations advanced by QBE turned on what had been provided for in
the 'Unaudited Financial Statements' (as referred
to in cl 16.19). These
had been prepared in accordance with USGAAP. Consequently, the parties adduced
expert evidence on the application
of USGAAP. As this issue turned on the
particular wording of cl 16.19, I do not need to consider it further for
present purposes.
I observe that there is no issue in the present case (like
the application of USGAAP) which would require the parties to adduce
for present purposes, Ball J ultimately concluded that a PAYG instalment was not
a 'Tax' as defined, providing detailed
This is essentially the submission which the Santos Parties want to make in the
present case. For present purposes, it is sufficient
for me to find that the
submission which the Santos Parties want to make is reasonably
Withdrawal of an admission
Consolidated Defence was filed pursuant to the May 2025 Orders consolidating the
actions. There is no specific power in the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
) to the effect that a party may
not amend a pleading to withdraw an admission without the leave of the court.
Donyette Pty Ltd v
Toplodge Nominees Pty Ltd
Corboy J left open the issue as to whether
the power to amend in RSC O 21 r 3(1) without leave permits admissions
to be withdrawn
In the present case, the amendment was pursuant to an order giving the Santos
Parties general liberty to file a substituted and consolidated
pleading. It
could perhaps be inferred from the context of the order that the leave was
limited to the amendments required to consolidate
the actions, and did not
extend to leave to make substantive changes. That would bring us back to the
power in RSC O 21 r 3(1) to
amend without leave (no trial dates having
been fixed and no order requiring the parties to obtain leave to amend having
been made).
To add an exception to O 21 r 3(1) 'unless the
amendment seeks to withdraw an admission' adds words to the rule that are not
For this reason, in my view, RSC O 21 r 3(1) permits an
amendment to withdraw an admission. The Pleadings Application can be viewed
an application by the Apache Parties pursuant to RSC O 21 r 3(3) to
strike out the amendment. The Contested Paragraphs stand
unless stuck out by
the court pursuant to RSC O 20 r 19. This is the same approach as
that adopted by Beech J in
EC Dawson Investments Pty
Ltd v Crystal Finance Pty Ltd [No
it is necessary for a party to seek leave to amend their pleading to withdraw an
admission, the principles to be applied were
summarised by the Court of Appeal
court has a broad discretion to permit or refuse an amendment which has the
effect of withdrawing an admission; the ultimate question
must always be what is
in the interests of justice in the circumstances of the case.
it is a serious matter to make an admission in a pleading and ordinarily a party
should not be permitted to withdraw an admission
in a pleading without good
determining whether or not to permit an amendment to withdraw an admission,
relevant considerations will generally include:
(a) the circumstances in which the admission was made;
(b) the reason it is sought to be withdrawn;
(c) the significance of the admission;
(d) the time for which it has stood on the record; and
(e) any prejudice that is likely to be suffered by the other side that cannot
appropriately be compensated by an order for costs.
De Kauwe v Cohen [No 2]
An amendment to withdraw an admission will not be permitted where it would
cause irremediable prejudice to the other party. The
party applying for the
amendment bears the burden of persuasion that the amendment will not cause such
prejudice, while the party
opposing the amendment bears an evidential onus of
adducing evidence on the question of prejudice.
Those comments were again made in the context of an application
for leave to amend a pleading pursuant to RSC O 21 r
the principles set out in
will inform
the exercise by the court of its powers in RSC O 20 r 19(1) to strike
out a pleading, at least on the basis that the pleading
may prejudice, embarrass
or delay the fair trial of the action or is otherwise an abuse of the process of
principles in
were given before RSC O 1 r 4B was amended to its current form
(though the rule was broadly similar). That rule now provides:
4B. Case flow management, use and objects of
(1) Actions, causes and matters in the Court will, to the extent that the
resources of the Court permit, be managed and supervised
in accordance with a
system of positive case flow management with the objects of
(a) promoting the just determination of litigation; and
(b) disposing efficiently of the business of the Court; and
(c) maximising the efficient use of available judicial and administrative
resources; and
(d) facilitating the timely disposal of business; and
(e) ensuring the procedure applicable, and the costs of the procedure to the
parties and the State, are proportionate to the value,
importance and complexity
of the subject matter in dispute; and
(f) that the procedure applicable, and the costs of the procedure to the
parties, are proportionate to the financial position of
O 1 r 4A is also relevant (which was in force in these terms when
was handed down):
4A. Delays, elimination of
The practice, procedure and interlocutory processes of the Court shall have as
their goal the elimination of any lapse of time from
the date of initiation of
proceedings to their final determination beyond that reasonably required for
interlocutory activities essential
to the fair and just determination of the
issues bona fide in contention between the parties and the preparation of the
the centrality given by the Court of Appeal in
to 'what is
in the interests of justice in the circumstances of the case', the guidance
given in that decision is entirely consistent
with RSC O 1 r 4A and
factors provide guidance as to the relevant considerations. What RSC
O 1 r 4A and r 4B do is to make it clear that the interests
justice comprise both the interests of the parties and the wider public interest
in the due administration of justice by the court
as a whole.
interaction between the principles in
RSC O 1 r 4A and r 4B was considered in
Kenneth Martin J. The situation in that case is not dissimilar to the
present case as the withdrawal of what was said to be an
admission was done in a
substituted pleading filed in accordance with a timetable set by the
His Honour was of the view that, in the circumstances of the orders made in that
case, leave was required to withdraw the
His Honour approached the issue primarily from a case flow management
perspective:
In any event, I prefer to approach the whole issue of changed plea on the basis
of modern case flow management principles enshrined
for the Supreme Court under
RSC O 1 r 4A and 4B. Irrespective of an exercise in disputed
legal characterisation of admission or
otherwise, the force and significance of
the change in plea is such that, applying principles articulated by the High
Aon Risk Services
Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
239 CLR 175
which were recently re‑emphasised in
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 360 ALR 184
[80] - [83] (Gageler J),
as regards case management and the importance of an explanation for a change and
the public interest in
litigation being conducted efficiently as well as fairly,
I would as a matter of discretion evaluate this changed plea as being so
late and so significant in its forensic implications for the trial that an
explanation is required before it can be allowed: see
Attorney‑General of
Botswana v Aussie Diamond Products Pty Ltd [No 2]
[70] (Murphy J, as his Honour then was).
Leave to amend was
propose to deal first with the factors set out in
regard as a logical order for the purposes of this case). I will then address
whether the Contested Paragraphs should
be struck out on the basis that they may
prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action or are otherwise an
the process of the court. In doing so, I will have regard to caseflow
management considerations.
to the circumstances in which the admissions were made and the time which they
have stood on the record, the allegations now paragraphs
19 and 21 of the
Consolidated Claim were first made in the FASOC filed 30 October 2018. The
admissions were first made in the Third
Further Amended Defence and Counterclaim
filed on 3 December 2018. The admissions were in place when the decision
Apache 2019
However, as I have set out at [14], for most of the intervening period the
action was stayed. I can discern no step that was taken
by the Apache Parties
in the action in particular reliance on the Contested Admissions. In this
regard, I observe that discovery
has not yet been undertaken.
to the reason why the admissions are sought to be withdrawn, this rises no
higher than there has been a change of lawyers and
There is no suggestion that the admissions were made in the first place because
of some error or
misunderstanding.
The admissions do not relate to an issue of fact to which new or different
evidence has come to light. Nor is it a case in which
the factual issues were
complex and the point may not have been immediately
Rather, those representing the Santos Parties simply appear to have changed
their minds about the manner in which they now wish to
In this regard, in
Corboy J noted the following of the decision in
Water Corporation v
the Court of Appeal
indicated that it was a serious matter to make an admission in a pleading and so
ordinarily, a party will not
be permitted to withdraw an admission without good
cause. Generally, a change in counsel and the difference in forensic
perspective
that almost inevitably follows would not be a sufficient cause to
justify, by itself, the withdrawal of an admission. Indeed, I
Water Corporation v
the Court of Appeal stated in the course of analysing the evidence
of the applicant for leave that there was nothing 'to suggest
that the admission
of the BSD contract was a tactical move on behalf of the respondent or that the
respondent had changed its mind
case' [27].
The import of that last comment is obvious. It would defeat entirely the
principles on which case management in this Court operates
if parties could
simply make and withdraw admissions on forensic whims.
major argument advanced by the Apache Parties is that the Santos Parties should
not be able to withdraw the admissions due to
the prejudice which they will
suffer if they are required to deal with the case now being put in relation to
the construction of
SPA s 9.16(a).
van Buuren Affidavit sets out the numerous and varied tasks which the Apache
Parties say they will have to undertake in order
to locate potential evidence
relevant to the issues raised by the withdrawal of the admissions.
Specifically:
it will be necessary to locate and review the files of documents held by the
Apache Parties in connection with the negotiation
of the SPA at and prior to
April 2015 (the date of execution of the SPA) specifically relevant to the
provenance of the words used
in section 9.16(a) and also the provenance of the
definition of 'Taxes' used in section 1.1 of the SPA. Because these allegations
were previously admitted and these issues were not in issue, that work has not
yet been undertaken by the Apache Parties.
it will be necessary to locate and review the documents held by the Apache
Parties regarding the second defendant's payments
to the ATO of PAYG instalment
tax made in the period January to August 2014. This will include documents
relevant to the internal
treatment of those PAYG instalment payments and also
correspondence to and from the ATO in 2014 regarding those PAYG instalment
Because the allegations were previously admitted, and the dates and
times of the second defendant's PAYG payments were also admitted
these issues
were not in issue and therefore that work has not yet been undertaken by the
Apache Parties.
it will be necessary to locate and speak to present and former Apache employees
involved in the SPA transaction and in particular,
involved in the negotiation
and drafting of the words used in section 9.16(a) and also the definition of
'Taxes' used in section
1. 1 of the SPA. If these paragraphs had not been
admitted by the Santos Parties, then that work would have been undertaken
As these allegations were admitted and these matters were not in issue,
that work has not yet been undertaken by the Apache Parties.
it will be necessary to locate and speak to present and former Apache employees
involved in the second defendant's payment
of the PAYG instalments of tax to the
ATO. If these paragraphs had not been admitted by the Santos Parties, then that
have been undertaken already. As these allegations were admitted and
these matters were not in issue, that work has not yet been
undertaken by the
Apache Parties.
it will be necessary to seek production of documents held by the counterparties
to the SPA transaction relevant to the negotiation
and drafting of the words
used in section 9.16(a) and also the definition of 'Taxes' used in section 1.1
of the SPA. These counterparties
were a consortium of private equity owners
which acquired the second defendant from the Apache group of companies in 2015,
consortium subsequently sold the second defendant to the Santos group
in 2018. In light of the consortium's sale in 2018 and the
time that has elapsed
since the SPA transaction in 2015, they may not have retained the documents. If
these paragraphs had not been
admitted, then that work would have been
undertaken already. As these allegations were admitted and these matters were
not in issue,
that work has not yet been undertaken by the Apache Parties.
it will be necessary to research the legal meaning of 'Taxes' under the laws of
Western Australia, which are the governing
laws of the SPA (see in that regard
section 1.2(e) of the SPA), including whether or not PA YG instalment payments
of tax made in
2014 were then considered taxes. If these paragraphs had not been
admitted, then that work would have been undertaken already. As
allegations were admitted and these matters were not in issue, that work has not
as yet been undertaken by the Apache Parties.
it may be necessary to obtain expert accounting evidence regarding the meaning
and effect of the credits and debits applied
by the ATO to the second
defendant's running balance account with the ATO over 9 years ago (when the
Quadrant Parties controlled
the second defendant). In this regard, I have
attached to this affidavit and marked 'EVB-1', a copy of the second defendant's
balance account summary provided by the Santos Parties to the Apache
Parties in these proceedings, which, by way of some examples,
following various credits and debits that will require expert
(a) a credit of $80,463,566 processed on 17 August 2016, with an effective date
of 1 June 2016, and with the transaction description
'Tax return Companies -
Income Tax - Consolidated Group for the period from 01 Jan 14 to 31 Dec 14';
(b) a debit of $21,146,975.60 processed on 17 August 2016, with an effective
date of 1 June 2016, and with the transaction description
'Tax Return
Companies-Income Tax-Consolidated Group for the period from 01 Jan 15 to 31
(c) a credit of $2,432,217.55 processed on 21 October 2016, with an effective
date of 21 October 2016, and with the transaction description
'Interest on
overpayment for Income Tax - Consolidated Group for the period from 01 Jan 14 to
31 Dec 14';
(d) a credit of $3,869.29 processed on 25 October 2016, and an effective date of
25 October 2016, and with the transaction description
'Amendment to interest on
overpayment for Income Tax - Consolidated Group for the period from 01 Jan 14 to
31 Dec 14'; and
(e) a debit of $59,077,591.24 processed on 25 October 2015, with an effective
date of 28 October 2016, and with the transaction description
'EFT refund for
Income Tax - Consolidated Group for the period from 01 Jan 14 to 31 Dec
van Buuren goes on to depose as to the practical difficulties which undertaking
these tasks will entail. This includes difficulties
in locating ex-employees
who may be potential witnesses.
my assessment, the difficulties outlined by Mr van Buuren are
significantly overstated.
issue raised by the Contested Paragraphs is one of the proper construction of
SPA s 9.16(a). The principles by which a court
construes a contract
were recently summarised by the Court of Appeal in
Nickel Ltd (in
liquidation)
(receivers and managers appointed) v Mining Standards International Pty
There was no issue between the parties concerning the applicable principles of
contractual construction. There have been many recent
decisions in this court
outlining the general principles for the construction of commercial
instruments... often by reference to
Electricity Generation
Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
Mount Bruce
Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
. Nothing useful would be gained by yet
another exposition of those principles. It suffices to adopt what has been
stated in those
recent decisions.
In summary:
construction of a contractual clause involves an objective determination of the
meaning of the words of the contract by reference
to text, context (the entire
text of the contract) and purpose.
starting point for the proper construction of a contractual clause is the
language used in the clause - one must identify the
possible meanings that the
words chosen by the parties can bear.
determining the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract it is necessary to
ask what a reasonable business person would have
understood the terms to mean.
That inquiry will require consideration of the language used by the parties in
the contract, the circumstances
addressed by the contract and the commercial
purpose or objects to be secured by the contract. The instrument must be read
a contrary intention in the contract, the court approaches the task of giving a
commercial contract an interpretation on the
assumption that the parties
intended to produce a commercial result - one that makes commercial sense. This
requires that the construction
be consistent with the commercial object of the
agreement. Similarly, a commercial contract should be construed so as to avoid
making commercial nonsense or working commercial inconvenience. However, it
must be recognised that business common sense is a topic
on which reasonable
minds may differ.
the words used are unambiguous the court must give effect to them. The court
has no power to remake or amend a contract for the
purpose of avoiding a result
that is considered to be inconvenient or unjust.
Finally, a contract should be construed practically so as to give better effect
to its commercial purpose. The law seeks to uphold
commercial contractual
obligations and the expectations that derive from them. The court should not
adopt a narrow or pedantic approach
to construction, particularly in the case of
commercial arrangements...
Black Box Control Pty Ltd
v TerraVision Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal provided a slightly more expansive summary which is
instructive for present
(1) The process of construction is objective. The meaning of the terms of an
instrument is to be determined by what a reasonable
person would have understood
the terms to mean.
(2) The construction of a contract involves determination of the meaning of the
words of the contract by reference to its text, context
and purpose.
(3) The commercial purpose or objects sought to be secured by the contract will
often be apparent from a consideration of the provisions
of the contract read as
a whole. Extrinsic evidence may nevertheless assist in identifying the
commercial purpose or objects of the
contract where that task is facilitated by
an understanding of the genesis of the transaction, its background, the context
market in which the parties are operating.
(4) Extrinsic evidence may also assist in determining the proper construction
where there is a constructional choice, although ...
the question of whether
matters external to a contract can be resorted to in order to identify the
existence of the constructional
choice ... [has not been determined].
(5) If an expression in a contract is unambiguous and susceptible of only
one meaning, evidence of surrounding circumstances cannot
be adduced to
contradict its plain meaning.
(6) To the extent that a contract, document or statutory provision is referred
to, expressly or impliedly, in an instrument, that
contract, document or
statutory provision can be considered in construing the instrument, without any
need for ambiguity or uncertainty
of meaning.
(7) There are important limits on the extent to which evidence of surrounding
circumstances (when admissible) can influence the proper
construction of an
instrument. Reliance on surrounding circumstances must be tempered by loyalty to
the text of the instrument. Reference
to background facts is not a licence to
ignore or rewrite the
the parties meant to say.
(8) There are also limits on the kind of evidence which is admissible as
background to the construction of a contract, and the purposes
for which it is
admissible. Insofar as such evidence establishes objective background facts
known to the parties or the genesis,
purpose or objective of the relevant
transaction, it is admissible. Insofar as it consists of statements and actions
of the parties
reflecting their actual intentions and expectations it is
inadmissible. Such statements reveal the terms of the contract which the
intended or hoped to make, and which are superseded by, or merged into, the
(9) An instrument should be construed so as to avoid it making commercial
nonsense or giving rise to commercial
inconvenience.
it must be borne in mind that business common sense may be a topic on which
minds may differ.
(10) An instrument should be construed as a whole. A construction that makes the
various parts of an instrument harmonious is
preferable.
possible, each part of an instrument should be construed so as to have some
(11) Definitions do not have substantive effect. A definition is not to be
construed in isolation from the operative provision(s)
in which the defined term
is used. Rather, the operative provision is ordinarily to be read by inserting
the definition into it.
This summary has been adopted by the Court of Appeal on multiple
statements of principle limit the scope of the evidence that would be allowed to
be adduced if the Contested Paragraphs are
allowed to remain. As the Court of
Appeal makes clear in
of statements and actions of the parties reflecting their actual intentions and
expectations is inadmissible. The issues
in dispute more generally will already
require a detailed consideration of the circumstances addressed by the SPA and
the commercial
purpose or objects to be secured by the contract. The
construction issues in relation to SPA s 9.16(a) will not, in my view,
add to this evidence.
inquiry as to whether the interpretation proposed by the Santos Parties does not
make commercial sense or works a commercial
inconvenience can readily be the
subject of submissions. With one significant exception the issues at trial will
be similar to those
dealt with by Ball J in
The significant
exception is that I can discern no issue on which expert evidence will be
required. Significantly, the analysis by
Ball J of QBE's argument that the
construction for which PMI Australia contended 'lacked commercial
is based on what appears to me to be the objective consequences of uncontested
prejudice to the Apache Parties is limited to having to address another
reasonably arguable legal issue. It is difficult to
see any prejudice to the
Apache Parties which even requires compensation by way of an adverse costs
to caseflow management considerations, allowing the Contested Paragraphs to
remain will not require dates set down for trial to
be vacated. Rather, the
action is far from being ready for
The lengthy delays in the action to date have largely been the result of the
agreed position of the parties to try and negotiate
a resolution of the action.
The parties have not yet undertaken discovery. The withdrawal of the admissions
will not, of itself,
add to the delay until the action can be listed for trial.
Nor will it materially add to the costs of preparing the action for
or undermine the efficiency or timeliness with which the court can dispose of
this action. I recognise
The point may be reached where a party has had a sufficient opportunity to plead
his or her case such that it is too late for further
amendment so as to do
justice to the other party and other litigants.
We are far from this point in the present case.
balance, in my view, the interests of justice in the circumstances of this case
require the Contested Paragraphs to remain. The
Santos Parties should be given
the opportunity to make a submission, which I regard as reasonably arguable, as
to the proper construction
of SPA s 9.16(a). This is necessary to
promote the just determination of the issues in dispute in the action. The
Apache Parties
have not identified any, or any sufficient, prejudice that should
prevent the Santos Parties from having this opportunity. I am
not persuaded
that the Contested Paragraphs may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial
of the action or that they are otherwise
an abuse of the process of the court.
will hear from the parties as to costs.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
4 NOVEMBER 2025
A copy of which is Attachment RNH-1 to the Heggart
Heggart Affidavit, page
Heggart Affidavit, page
Siegfried Affidavit, par
Heggart Affidavit, par 35.
Apache Finance Pty Ltd v
Quadrant Energy Pty Ltd
[2018] WASC 68
Apache 2018
also: Heggart Affidavit, par 28.
Heggart Affidavit, par
Apache Finance Pty Ltd v
Santos WA Asset Holdings Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2019] WASC 101
Heggart Affidavit, par 10, attachment
Heggart Affidavit, pars 11 to 14, attachments RNH-3 and
Pursuant to paragraph 5 of the orders made on 4 August
The PMI Group, Inc v QBE
Holdings (AAP) Pty Limited
[2016] NSWSC 673
Water Corporation v Cardno
BSD Pty Ltd
[2009] WASCA 212
[30] (judgment of the court)
Donyette Pty Ltd v
Toplodge Nominees Pty Ltd
[2010] WASC 388
[42] - [43] (Corboy J)
As did Kenneth Martin J
Rural Bank (A Division
of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Limited (ACN 068 049 178) v Mammoth Investments Pty
[2019] WASC 409
EC Dawson Investments Pty
Ltd v Crystal Finance Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2011] WASC 8
[1], [4] (Beech J)
[32] (Kenneth Martin J);
Bernard Henricus Lamers as
trustee for the Ben and Debra Lamers Family Trust v Arvind Pty Ltd
[14] - [15], [64] (Principal Registrar
De Kauwe v Cohen [No 2]
[2021] WASC 248
[37] (Le Miere J)
Westgem Investments
Pty Ltd in its own right as trustee for Hossean Pourzand and Jenny Maria
Pourzand atf The Helen Trust v Commonwealth
Bank of Australia Ltd [No 5]
[2015] WASC 310
[95] - [98] (Tottle J);
Lamers as trustee for The
Ben and Debra Lamers Family Trust v Arvind Pty Ltd
[2018] WASC 347
[64] - [65] (Strk PR).
[29], [48];
Apache 2019
(e) and (g) (Smith
Santos Submissions, par 39(c).
Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed) v Mining
Standards International Pty
[2025] WASCA 82
- [116] (judgment of the court). Referring to:
Electricity
Generation Corporation trading as Verve Energy v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[35] (French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan & Kiefel JJ);
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd
v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
[46] ‑ [52] (French CJ, Nettle & Gordon
Black Box Control Pty Ltd
v TerraVision Pty Ltd
[2016] WASCA 219
[42] (reasons of the court)
(references omitted).
See for example:
Pharmaceuticals Ltd v Ian David Brown
[2022] WASCA 66
[57] (judgment of
the court);
Chevron (TAPL)
Pty Ltd v Pilbara Iron Company (Services) Pty Ltd
[2021] WASCA 193
(judgment of the court).
Hutton v Meston
[2004] WASCA 178
[24] (McLure J, with whom Murray and Templman JJ
Mann v Bankwest - A
division of Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2020] WASCA 35
[79] (judgment
of the court) (references omitted).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (466 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter