URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PRASANEE SIMCOE, ARTHUR SIMCOE and MATTHEW SIMCOE and THE ESTATE OF KERRY HEGNEY (Decision O.20301) [2011] WABDT 75 (26 September 2011)
BUILDING DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
CORAM: J R CRIDDLE (Deputy Chairperson)
15 APRIL 2011
ORDERS ISSUED:
26 SEPTEMBER 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
23 SEPTEMBER 2011
COMPLAINT NO.:
BETWEEN: PRASANEE SIMCOE ARTHUR SIMCOE and MATTHEW SIMCOE
THE ESTATE OF KERRY HEGNEY
CATCHWORDS:
Abatement of S12A Claim on death of Builder
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
No Appearance
CASES REFERRED TO
IN DECISION:
Woolworths Ltd v Crotty
NSW Tafe v Finis
2 NSW LR 385
Bham v Medical Board of WA
(2007) WASC 90
Minister for Justice & Customs
[2001] FCA 1769
REASONS FOR DECISION
Simcoe, Arthur Simcoe and Matthew Simcoe (“the Owners”) entered into
a lump sum contract with Kerry Hegney (“the
Builder”) on the
October 2007 for the construction of 5 town houses at 32 Hampton
Road Burswood for a contract price of $2,470,979.00.
work was due to commence within 28 working days of the date of contract with the
time to complete the works being 360 days.
the course of construction the Builder became ill and on the 6
October 2009 gave written notice to the Owners of his inability to
complete the building works.
August 2010 a preliminary notice was sent by the Owners
seeking compensation for the Builder’s failure to complete the contract
and making a workmanship claim in the following terms
“2.1 The progress claims were made to lock up stage
but there was on (sic) only small progress payment of $150,000 remaining
complete that does not cover the additional expenses.
2.2 The job was left at the unsatisfactory condition as
works of plastering on internal and external walls
- Painting:
the splash of dried cement and liquid nails over walls
- Plastering-uneven
surface of plastering
leakage from ceilings at various positions from top to bottoms
flooring installations: splash liquid nail all over the floors
- Inco-ordination of the scope of works eg: prefinished wooden floorings,
tiles installed before the completion of ceilings, and the
installation of
kitchens cabinets and bathrooms.
- Unfinished cabinet work.
installation of the electrical wirings without the permit from the Western Power
and now still awaiting for the approval of
the power supply application. And it
has been reported that the leaks caused by
the holes drilled the electrician that allowed water to leak to the
downpipes in different positions.
-Unauthorised works were carried without the approval of the council eg:
the change of the colour of roofs, doors, door frames that
caused further delays
of remaining works during the procedure of the council approval and
complaint form was issued by the Owners against the Builder on the 5
January 2011. The workmanship issues set out in the complaint were
“1. Unfinished the ceiling works.
the cabinet works.
electrical works.
flooring works.
problems and photos. See attachment 2.”
claim sought contractual relief under the following headings
“1. Unauthorised works carried out without Council approval
(15/Dec/2009).
Court action were taken to resolve the issued that caused further. delay and
bank and interest charges in additional costs of
Tribunal has been advised by Taryn Browne the Executor of the Estate of Kerry
Charles Hegney that the Builder died in 2010.
Complaint came on for hearing before me on the 15
April 2011. The
Owners appeared at the hearing and there was no appearance on behalf of the
Estate of the deceased Builder.
contract price for the lump sum building contract between the Owners and the
Builder was $2,470,979.00. The value of the contract
accordingly exceeded the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to contractual matters.
relation to the workmanship claim the Tribunal would ordinarily have
unsatisfactory workmanship pursuant to
Section 12A
Registration Act 1939
the hearing the Owners sought a declaration that the Tribunal had jurisdiction
to deal with the workmanship issues notwithstanding
the death of the Builder and
sought an order substituting the Executor of the Builder’s estate as the
Respondent to the proceedings.
THE POSITION AT COMMON LAW
common law rule was that a personal action died with the person, whether the
Plaintiff or Defendant. That rule appeared to be
modified to allow for a
personal representative to sue for all debts due to the deceased and for all
covenants and all contracts
which the deceased breached in his lifetime. See
Latham J. in Woolworths Ltd v Crotty
[1942] HCA 35
STATUTORY AMENDMENTS TO COMMON LAW RULE
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
abolished the common law
rule and provides
that on the death of any person all causes
of action subsisting against or vested in him shall survive against, or as the
be, for the benefit of his estate.
18 Rule 7(1) of the Rules of the Supreme Court provides that where a party to an
action dies but the cause of action survives,
the action does not abate by
reason of the death. Order 18 Rule 7(2) of the Rules provides
“where at any stage of the proceedings in any cause
or matter the interest or liability of any party assigned or transmitted
devolves upon some other person, the Court may, if it thinks it necessary in
order to ensure that all matters in dispute in
the cause or matter may be
effectively and completely determined and adjudicated upon, order that other
person to be made a party
to the cause or matter and the proceedings to be
carried as if he had been substituted for the first mentioned
The statutory right provided to an aggrieved person under
Builders Registration Act
is not a cause of action within
Section 4(1)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
and accordingly that provision has no application in the present case.
THE STATUTORY CONTEXT
question of whether a statutory right (as distinct from a “
survive death depends on the intent of the legislature. See
Mahoney J in NSW Tafe v Fines 3 NSW LR 385 at 388, BHAM v Medical Board
Western Australia
[2007] WASC 90
(2007) WA SC90
at paragraphs 24 and 25 and Kalejs v Minister
for Justice and Customs
[2001] FCA 1769
paragraph 21.
Builders Registration Act
provides a statutory right to relief in the
form of an Order directed to a person who has carried out building work to
(a) remedy the faulty or unsatisfactory
building work within such time as is specified in the Order; or
(b) pay to the owner of the building such costs of remedying the
building work that is faulty or unsatisfactory as the Disputes
considers reasonable in which case any costs so ordered by the Disputes Tribunal
constitute a debt to the Owner and are
recoverable by him in a Court of
competent jurisdiction.”
(1b) provides that the provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (1a) apply to and
in relation to building work carried out by any person,
whether a builder or
not, and whether registered under the Act or not.
question for determination is whether the statutory right given to a Complainant
Section 12A
Builders Registration Act
survives the death of
the person who carried out the building work
benefit of the person for whom the building work was carried out.
Section itself does not purport to extend the liability of “
who carried out the building work”
to encompass his or her personal
representative in the event of death.
Statutory right granted to the owner of the building to receive payment under
Section 12A(1)(b)
or the person for whom building work has been carried out
Section 12A(1a)
is not an absolute right being subject to the issue of a
Complaint within the limitation period in
Section 12A(1aa)
and subject to the
issue of a preliminary notice under
Section 12A(3)
of the Act.
provides that “
Nothing in the section has the effect of
limiting, restricting or otherwise affecting any right or remedy a person would
had the Section not been enacted but in hearing and determining any
matter in which a builder or other person against whom or which
an order has
been made under this Section and a person for whom building work has been
carried out are parties, a Court may have
regard to any Order made by the
Disputes Tribunal under this Section.
INTERACTION BETWEEN THE HOME BUILDING
CONTRACTS ACT
REGISTRATION ACT
3 (1)(b) of the Builders Registration Board Act provides that
Section 12A and 12B apply throughout the State to building work
that is homebuilding work as defined in the
Section 3(1).
which relevantly provides
(a) constructing or reconstructing a dwelling including an existing
dwelling and/or strata titled dwelling;
(b) placing a dwelling on land;
(c) altering, improving or repairing a dwelling, including a strata titled
dwelling; or
(d) constructing or carrying out any associated work in connection with
(i) any work
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b); or
existing dwelling, including a strata-titled
17(1)(a)(i)
shifts the focus of faulty
and unsatisfactory building work from the contractual arena to the practical
remedial arena by providing
that contractual relief is not available under the
when an Order may be made under
Section 12A
Builders Registration Act 1939
has set up a mandatory insurance scheme which
obliges a builder under a residential building work contract to insure that
or that person’s successors in title against inter alia the risk of
being unable to take advantage of an entitlement to, or
to enforce or recover
under, a remedy under
Section 12A
Builders Registration Act 1939
reason of the insolvency or death of the builder.
is my view that the legislature in setting up the insurance provisions of the
granting a right to claim under this statutory
policy by reason of the death of the builder, assumes that rights and
entitlements
under Section 12A abate on the death of the builder.
that were not the case it would be open to an insurer to deny a claim under the
statutory policy unless and until a claimant under
Section 12A
Registration Act
have exhausted potential remedies against the personal
representative of the builder.
regard to the focus of
Section 12A
being the undertaking of remedial work by the
person who originally performed the work and given the insurance provisions
which provide
an alternate monetary remedy where the death of the builder
results in an aggrieved person being “unable to take advantage
of an entitlement to or to enforce or recover, a remedy under
I can discern no legislative intention for the statutory right
to be maintained against the estate of a deceased builder. I consider
insurance scheme set up by the
confirms the
legislative intent that a claim under
Section 12A
Registration Act
abates with the death of the builder.
found that a claim under Section 12A of the Builders Registration Board Act
abates on the death of the builder the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to
substitute the personal representative of the builder to enable the complaints
to proceed.
will accordingly be an Order that the Complaints be dismissed for want of
J R CRIDDLE
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (463 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (98.7 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter